MATRIMONIAL HONOR: OR, The mutual Crown and comfort of godly, loyal, and
chaste MARRIAGE. WHEREIN The right way to preserve the Honor of Marriage
unstained, is at large described, urged, and applied: with Resolution of sundry
material Questions concerning this Argument.

ALSO An Appendix, added to the Treatise, describing the just and terrible
judgments of God upon all that dare violate the honor of Marriage.

To which is added an Alphabeticall Table, very necessary for the Readers
understanding, to find each several thing contained in this Book.

Set forth for the good of all such as either are to enter, or are already
entered into this Honorable estate.

By D. R. Batch. in Divinity, and Minister of the Gospel.

1 Thessalonians. 4. 4. And, that every man may know how to preserve his vessel in
holiness and honor.

LONDON, Printed by Th: Harper for Philip Nevil, and are to be sold at his shop
in Ivy Lane at the sign of the Gun. MDCXLII.

To the Right Honorable, and his very good Lord, ROBERT Earl of Warwick,
Baron of Leez, etc.
The AUTHOR of this TREATISE wishes all Health, Honor, and Happiness.
Right Honorable:
WHen I was first intended this Discourse (being some years si^ce) me thought
I felt in my self a desire of some intermission from former Arguments of
deeper exercise, and more spiritual nature: as conceiving that a Moral Theme
might, another while, both revive my wearied spirits, and perhaps delight the
Reader with variety. Hereupon I considered wh^t Object in this kind might most
fitly sort with my thoughts; and after some inquiry, both the many complaints
of the married, and daily questions moved unto me by such as intended
marriage^ as also secondly those notorious errors and corruptions which
(through sin and Satan) have insinuated, nay pierced the very entrals of this
State; and lastly (which is worst of all) those infinite pollutions of body and
mind, in all degrees of men both natural and unnatural, moved me with
resolution to fasten upon this Argument. But notwithstanding the pregnancy of
these inducements, the Theme seemed so weighty, that I was forced to search
what furniture I had stored up for such a work. And at last I found the case
to stand with me, as it does with two friends, who through discontinuance, or
absence, have waxen strange each to other; until by some fair occasion of
meeting they h^p to renew their acquaintance. So stood the case between my
self and these Meditations, which gave the first draught of the Treatise
ensuing; which since my first preaching thereof lay long by me, as half
forgotten; but now seemed to present themselves to my view with double appetite
and savor, as promising to be material and useful for the bettering of
public manners, and helping to redress the corruptions of the time.
Accordingly therefore shaking off the dust and soil of my Papers, I have
bestowed some pains to contrive them into some such order and expression, as
might (if not satisfy the curious, yet) profit the desirous of counsel and
resolution in cases of this nature.

You see (Right Honorable) how bold I am to draw you from your deeper
occasions, to listen a while to these private notions of mine: which I presume
(out of your facility to give best construction to things) you will not
disdain to do. To proceed then: Alas! How evident is it, by men's practice,
that although all confess they ought to be religious (and who now adays is
otherwise?) yet few will admit the yoke of God upon their neck, in the wise
undergoing of those relations wherein they stand obliged? Among which this of
marriage is a rooted and fundamental one, as being in order before the rest;
and such an one as either affords influence and sap to them (both Family,
Polity, and Church) or else inferres a blemish and aspersion upon them all. So
that, if men would derive the savor and power of godliness into this estate
of life, seasoning it with the graces of self-denial, and faith, and
holiness; they should (doubtless) enjoy it in a far more sweet and
contentfull sort then now they do, while they detain this truth in
unrighteousness, separating the thing: which God has united.

Men tell us, they will hear Preachers (while they keep their bounds) while
they teach them only faith and repentance; but if they will ^eeds meddle with
a more close and near search of their l^ves and relations their callings,
companies, tradings, liberties; or if they will pry into their more retired
ways, their closets, chambers and marriages, then, as he who raged against
Elisha for the discovering and defeating of his plots to the King of Israel: 2
King 6. 13.
so these recoyle at the Minister, and threaten they will give him over. They
tell him they can teach him as good passages and rules of experience as
himself can. So far are they from standing to Gods Bar in these points* and
say, They knew them ere he knew what his Books meant; they are near a kin to
that lascivious Poet, Catull. Epigr. Castum esse decet, and pium Poetam, Ipsum:
versic^los nihil necesse est.
who being told of his unchaste Epigrams, answered thus, Its true indeed, its
meet that the Poet him self be chaste, but as for his verses, let them have
their course, to show the Authors wit and skill, it matters not what they be.
So say these, We grant all, that we must be honest folk, but that our
marriage actions should run in the stream of Religion we deem it nice, and
more then needs. Subtle men (we say float a often and dwell in universals, but
bring them to the particular, Camerar. fab. (...).
show them Rhodes, and the stage whereon they should dance, and then they are
at a set, their great skill suddenly fails them.

Howbeit, if we look into the Scriptures* we shall meeet with some whose very
marriages have been cast into the mould of obedience. Not to urge the rules
which Paul gives to husbands and wives, both for their entrance upon, and
cohabitation in that condition; Luc. 1. 6.
we read of Z^chary and Elizabet, both which were just, walking before God in
all his commands without reproof: that is, they practiced piety,
righteousness, and soberness, in the state of marriage. How could they walk
in all Commands, b^lking the fifth, which urges Religion in our particular
state of life? But what say men to this? Surely as the Papists tell us,
^ssurance of salvation belongs to Peter and Paul, and such as had special
revelations, but its no ordinary man's case. So say these, such as Zachary and
Elizabet were eminent persons* masterpieces, above the common size: objects of
admiration, rather then imitation. But alas! This mist is not th^cke enough to
escape in: all of us under the Gospel are under the some law which they were,
we are a royal Priesthood tied to as str^ct a rule as ever they were, of
chastity and holiness.

I doubt not ^Right Honorable) if the question might be decided by your voice
but you are of this mind; and desire to be of the same practice Now yet why I
devote this Treatise to your name, many may wonder, as deeming many other
subjects more worthy and proper to present your Lordship withal. But (my good
Lord) such is the estate of fra^le flesh in this veil or misery that there is
no condition of l^fe, whether Ministry, Magistracy, single or married state
wherein counsel may not do well for the rectifying of such errors as through
humane infirmity break into all. Each state has his several temptations, and
a well ordered course in marriage (as long experience of a double marriage can
te^ch you) is no easy Theme. ^gaine that sweet and mutual accord which God
has vouchsafed twixt your Honor and your worthy Consort, may serve to turn
my Ded^cation into a Gratulation. (...).
And indeed, though the Book be much under the value of such a personage as
your self (a m^n not only of Noble descent but of great and deserving acts
both for our Church and Commonwealth both formerly and of late) yet I presume,
Act. 24. 2.
that if a draught of muddy w^ter presented in the crown of a hat, Nunquam
bibi^su vio em, etc.
was so welcome to a potent Monarch: then doubtless your honorable spirit
will not reject a Scholars Mite, offered with as deep respect unto you, as
that was: you will not despise small things, since there may be a blessing
therein. Scal. de art Poetic.
Not always in a great thing there is good, but in a good there is ever great,
and that which may agree with greatness, (...).
as one tells us out of a Greek Poet. All helps shall one day cease, yet
every book of use may serve as a little walking-staffe to further us in our
travel home.

Moreover it may become the best Scholar of us all to learn that lesson which
Paul, (...).
and from him my Book urges; The time is short (wrapped and folded up, 1 Cor.
7. 29, 30 Eccles. 3. 1. etc. 5.
as the Text is) Let them that possess, be as if they possessed not, such as
weep, as if they wept not, such as rejoice, as if they rejoiced not, such as
marry, as if they married not, such as use the world, as if not using it: for
the fashion of it passes away. Matthew. 22. 30.
A time for all things, and so a time for the married to embrace, and a time to
be far from embracing. Seek therefore that place where all these relations
shall cease, (for so I think, though some think otherwise:) where there shall
be no marrying, nor giving in marriage, for the Spouse shall be wholly
spiritual, like her husband, at least like the Angels of God. In which desire
I rest, craving a blessing from heaven upon your Honor, your virtuous and
Noble Lady, and posterity: as also upon the perusal of this your Book: and so
humbly take my leave, resting

At your Honors command in the LORD, DANIEL ROGERS.

To the READER, All health.
Judicious and religious Reader, this Wheel of our Conversation, whereof this
Book treates, (Marriage I mean) including many lesser wheels in, and under
it, all subject to the motion thereof, and each of them requiring a due order
and direction, that both might be regular, and according to knowledge; how
should I think any other, but that I have lighted upon this point of Marriage
by a special Manuduction of Providence? Desirous we are sometimes that the
matter we have by us in readiness, might be seasonable also for the times
wherein we live: But, when indeed the manners of our present age seem to give
a life to that which we have before prepared, (for thou know Occasion is the
life of a Thing) then doubly it appears seasonable, yea as Apples of gold, and
Pictures of silver. Howbeit further musing of the matter, sundry other smaller
cords concurred to draw me on to this endeavor: whereof I will make thee
partaker, (as counting it none of the smallest mercies that I may give an
account to the Church of God, for the improving and redeeming of my seasons) in
these sad times; wherein that good God, who allows us any the least protection
and liberty, requires that we spend it not in vanity and froth, but to the
best advantage, if not as we would (for he is wiser then man, 1* Cor. 1. 25.
yea his foolishness and weakness exceeds the best wisdom and strength
which is in us) yet as we may for the better making up of our reckoning, at
his coming, when the use of our Talents shall be examined.

Machiavel and his master the Devil it is, He that would bear rule, Si vis
imperare, divide.
let him sow discord and division. This one wheel then being of so maine
importance; what need is there that the spokes and staves of it be sound, and
well compact, according to the rule of the Sanctuary? This was one motive.

Psalm. 50. ult.
rather in a moral way of good affections, zeal, and duties, then in the
particular relations of life, in which they live, as of marriage; yea, being
ignorant of that which should either inform their judgment, or order their
will thereunto; alas they never attain the Tithe of comfort, and content which
this estate might afford them. How great pity were it then to defraud such
people of directions, who if they might enjoy it, would not be wanting to
improve it? How many full of knowledge, yet live, (and in marriage especially)
as if they had none? By so much the more its pity that such should want it, as
would gladly enjoy the fruit of it? And considering, that without knowledge the
heart is not good; and that good intentions without rule, are as a goodly Coach
without a skillful driver; I conceived I should do them acceptable service,
and some glory to God, in casting this Platform of Direction for them, out of
Gods Word. This seemed another inducement.



2 Timothy 2. 3. 5.
and worship (in the memory of man) accompanied with so much wickedness? or
when had Popery bettery color to traduce our Gospel for a doctrine of
licentiousness? And while men have leisure enough for every other thing, who
looks at reforming of ill manners? And how justly does God leave men, who will
not be as they ought, (with Hazael) to prove worse then they seemed? What
argues this, that men living in a practice of drunkenness and uncleanness,
dare prease upon a Minister of Christ, for comfort to their souls, as
imagining it to belong to them? Is it not a sign of a spirit of giddiness
reigning in the world, out of deep doting upon their prayers and hypocritical
worship? Has such a Baalamish conscience ever appeared, and so commonly as now
it does in all places? Dare Usury, drunkenness, covetousness, swearing,
(which are more infamous and hated) openly proclaim their shame: and do we
think that more secret sins, which love the dark, are not much more
generally practiced, as sodomy, fornication and wantonness? For which sake the
wrath of God justly comes upon the children of disobedience! And this fourth
was my strongest reason.

Now then as my endeavors want not due motives, so it lies in thee for whose
sake I have written, to look to thy self, lest it be undertaken in vain! If
there be little hope that my Physic (not mine, but Gods) will work any great
Cure, yet I wish it may prove preventing to such as yet remain untainted? What
the success is like to be, lies not in me nor thee to determine! At least
this I desire, that they who are entered, or are to enter the estate of
Marriage, may find these rules somewhat advantageous to further them in their
choice, or to guide them in their course! I shall be happy in my design, if
either of these be obtained: to the effecting whereof, I commend all to his
grace, who has by his providence brought this Treatise to an end, both for me
to publish, and for thee to peruse.

Thine in the Lord, D. R.

A Table describing the several Contents of the Chapters of this Treatise, and
the Appendix thereto.
Chapter 1.
Contains the Analyze of the Text: The first point handled, viz. Marriage is
honorable. Chap. 2. More full Explication of the specialls in which the honor
of Marriage consists: (being the ground of the Treatise ensuing:) viz. in
entrance and continuance: Entrance first, that is, Marrying in the Lord,
handled. Chap. 3. The second requisite unto a good Entrance handled: viz.
Aptness and Sutablenesse. Chap. 4. A first digression: Touching Consent of
Parents, with sundry Questions and Objections answered. Chap. 5. A second
Digression, touching a Contract: what it is, and sundry Quaeres about it
answered and resolved. Chap. 6. Return to the first Argument: The second part
of the Marriage honor to be preserved, to w^t in the Married condition: and
that both general and special; in general by some mutual Duties concerning
them both. Four of them named. The first handled. viz. Joint consent in
Religion. Chap. 7. The second joint Duty of married couples handled, to wit,
Conjugall love. Chap. 8. Treats of the third joint Duty of the Married, viz.
Chastity. Chap. 9. Contains the fourth and last Duty of jointnesse in
Marriage, viz. Consent. Chap. 10. Proceeds to the personal offices of either
party. And first of the Husband. Three several duties named. The first of
them handled, viz. That he be a man of Understanding. Chap. 11 Goes on to the
second personal Duty of the Husband, to wit, Providence. Chap. 12. Treats
of the third and last special duty of the Husband, viz. Giving Honor or
Respectivenesse to the Wife. Chap. 13. Handles the second sort of special
Duties, to wit, of the Wife. Three of them named. The first of them handled,
viz. Subjection to her Husband. Chap. 14. Proceeds to the second Peculiar Duty
of the Wife, viz. Helpfulnesse. Chap. 15. Treats of the third and last Duty
of the Wife, which is Gracefulness: wherewith the former Use of Exhortation,
to honor Marriage is concluded. Two other uses of the point added, and so the
whole Treatise finished. Chap. 16. Is an Appendix to the Treatise. Gods
judgments against the defilers of Marriage, terrible. The point handled.
Reasons added. A Question answered for explication of the Doctrine. Some Uses.
Of Terror. Admonition. Chap. 17. The maine Use of Exhortation to ensue
Chastity. Sundry means and counsels propounded at large. And so a conclusion
of the whole Book.
The end of the Contents of the Chapters.
Matrimonial Honor: OR A TREATISE OF MARRIAGE.
HEBREVVS 13. 5. Marriage is honorable, and the bed undefiled: but
Whoremongers and Adulterers, God will judge.


CHAP. I.
The Analyze of the Text. The first point handled, That Marriage is honorable.

WHAT the peculiar aim of Saint Paul in this Epistle might be, The scope of
the Text.
in the enterlacing of a solemn praise of marriage between the fourth and the
sixth verse of this Chapter (which are of another garb and nature) may perhaps
seem questionable to a Reader, not observant of the circumstances of times and
persons. Sure it is, that the Apostles scope is very orderly and familiar. For
having in the former Chapter propounded the Doctrine of justification in the
causes thereof, both matter and form; and having also very effectually built
thereon that great exhortation, to believe, and to live by faith. In the
chapter before this, he proceeds to the urging of obedience and holiness,
Chap. 12.
in the general: and in this 13. chapter he proceeds to particularize and
instance in some special, and some personal offices and acts of Christian
practice. But for the question moved, what should cause the Apostle to think
this argument of Marriage as weighty as the rest, and to equal it to other
Doctrines handled in this place; may be supposed, not to be from a common
notion, swimming with other things in his mind, and uttered by course: but,
probably from some occasion of real and present necessity moving him. I will
propound what seems to me the truth. There were at the time of writing this
Epistle, two sorts and practices of men very rife, and that of contrary
intention; the one of heathenish profaneness, the other of Jewish
superstition: the Heathens, as they thought single fornication no sin at all
(as appeared by their common practice of it;) and adultery it self, none of
the greatest sins; so, they slighted all denunciations of Gods wrath and
judgment against either; and snorted securely in the practice of both. The
Jew, on the contrary extreme, comes in with his Superstition, as thinking
there is no way to control this impiety, save by maintaining a flat
contrariety unto it, viz. That Marriage it self is unlawful. Jew confused in
his conc^^t of Marriage.
Paul himself taxes such false teachers, Forbidding to marry, that is,
crossing Gods own ordinance, provided for the safeguard of chastity. Much like
the Papists at this day, 1 Timothy 4. 3.
sundry of whose positions favor of no other strain, then to oppose one
error by a far worse. As, because they see men's lives very barren of good
works, they have no other way to draw men to be forward in weldoing, then by a
false Doctrine, that works are meritorious. Likewise, finding fault with men's
backwardness to Mortification; in Policy, they devise such Penances of the
flesh as God never ordained, to whip themselves with cords beset with needles,
and sharp pricks, or to stand up naked to the chin in cold water, or to fast
from all kind of flesh, to go barefoot on pilgrimage, to renounce the world,
sell all, and live in a Cloister. This mystery of iniquity wrought early, even
here in the minds of superstitious Jews and false teachers, who found no way
to alay the flame, save by quenching the fire: and therefore, to quash
heathenish contempt of marriage by whoredom, or the corrupting thereof by
Adultery, they affirm no marriage or carnal knowledge at all, to be allowed
to Christians; which remedy is much worse then the disease; as if the life of
Devils (adultery) could be overthrown by the doctrine of Devils, 1 Timothy 4. 1,
2, 3.
which is, defiance of marriage. We see this stopping of the stream, has in
all ages doubled the rage of all kind of uncleanness. Here therefore, the
Apostle, that he might oppose both these extremities: first, the superstition
of the Jew, tells him, Marriage is honorable; and therefore an ungodly thing to
disanull an ordinance. And the bed is undefiled: there is no necessity of
making our selves Eunuchs, to avoid unchastenesse. And on the other side, to
the Heathenish, or lately converted from Pagan profaneness, this he adds,
But Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge: Heathens opinion of fornication.
q. d. Let no man strengthen himself in his adultery or filthiness, under
pretext of the lawfulness of carnal knowledge: for why? whether men go to
common harlots, and defile virgins more openly, as Whoremongers; or go to
work more covertly, shrowding their sin by the Married estate; although for
a time, they may defile or be defiled, without fear or check: yet, they must
know, that the God of marriage and pureness, will one day in person sit upon
them, and show his detestation of such ways, by plaguing them, be they great
or small, high or low, Princes or Pesants. As once Latimer, that holy Martyr,
upon an handkerchiefe with a book wrapped up in it, and presented to a King,
wrote this very text for a posie, Fornicatores and Adulteros judicabit Dominus.

The words then contain in them a Discretive proportion; The Analis of it.
the which divides it self into two truths; either an assertive, or denouncing
truth: only there must be conceived to be a secret defect of the words in them
both, which must be supplied for the making up of a full meaning. Touching the
Assertion first, its two fold; the one concerning the Ordinance it self,
Marriage is honorable; the other respecting the use of it; And the bed is
undefiled (for so I read it according to the Text and scope.) The second truth
denouncing, divides it self into two parts; either a Threat, or the object
thereof: the Threat is against the corrupters of marriage, God will judge them.
The object is double; first, fornicators, such as mix unlawfully with the
single, either harlots or virgins, making these whores, or nourishing them that
are so, in their trade. Or else Adulterers, who (although either of the parties
married, cause adultery) yet being married, do link themselves with other
men's wives, for the concealment of their villainy, and so of bastardy. Both
these, the one for his manifest and open, the other his subtle and close
uncleanenesse, shall be adjudged by God himself. The conceived defect of the
sentence, lies in the opposition of the parts, thus, viz, Marriage is
honorable, the bed is undefiled, and blessing is upon all that so preserve it.
But Whoremongers and Adulterers are dishonorable, debauched ones, and God will
curse and plague them. I will go through both the parts, God assisting: and
first of the first.

The first point Marriage is honorable.
Marriage is honorable: and that for four respects: first, in the parts of it:
secondly, in the nature of it: thirdly, in the use of it: fourthly, in the
quality or sacredness of it. For the parts of it, How? in four respects.
if the marriage is best where the parts of it are so (in concreto at least)
the wife and the husband, both precious pieces. Of the wife we have sundry
Scriptures for her honourablenesse: The first respect.
she is called the gift of God: its the use of the holy Ghost to style
excellent things, Gods things, as the Mount of God, the city of God, the house
of God, the garden of God: because excellency cannot own any thing which is
base: Gods greatness gives no common gifts, so that a wife is no common
blessing: Woman honorable.
she is Gods woman, not only made by God, as she is his creature alone (so by
sin she both lost her own, Prove. 19. 14.
and her husbands royalty also:) But, as she is made up again by Gods grace,
to a better image then she lost; and so, honorable by a second creation: yea,
restored to man with advantage, much better then she first brought unto him in
Paradise. By this mean, she becomes an help instead of a snare, a true gift
of God, an excellent piece, for which a man may bless God while he lives.
Marriage is from God, yea in innocence, and he still orders it: see Psalm. 68.
6.
This, I say, in the first place, as the chief ground of her honor: and yet
this is not all; she is called the crown of her husband, both by Solomon
(using that word) and by Saint Paul, calling her his glory, who before was his
utter shame. Crowns, we know, are very precious things and honorable, God
sets solitary ones in families.
serving to grace things of chief eminency, Emperors, Kings and Princes:
Crowns are made of the purest gold, Pro. 12. 4.
embellished with the costliest Pearls, set in with curious workmanship. So
again her price is said to be far above Rubies: Pro. 31. 10.
yea, Wisdom her self, and a good wife, are not far different in their
descriptions; no jewel is to be compared to her, far above silver, yea, the
choicest gold. Happy is he upon whose head such a crown is set, to whom heaven
has given such a gift. The other party is the Man; Man honorable.
we know the man does especially resemble the image of God, and in that respect
is the Wives head: 1 Cor. 11. 7.
and although by her sin, he came to lose his honor, yet if he be a good
man, he is a man of understanding, and of an excellent spirit; Pro. 17. 27.
yea, better then his neighbor. Not a Ruben any longer, Gen 49. 3.
whose dignity is gone, but as Nebuchadnezzar, restored again to his former,
yea greater glory; Dan. 4. 34.
as Job, whose latter life was better then the former; in whom the majesty, Job
42. 12.
authority and wisdom of God does shine. Conclude then, if both the members of
this body are so honorable, what must the whole be? If each of them be so
precious, what is the compound? if a ring alone be rich, what is it with a
richer pearl enclosed in it? As we see when a Prince and heir of a crown
marries a Princess do wager, how glorious is their union? how honorable their
concurrence? This may serve for the first of the four.

But, The second respect of honor. The Nature of Marriage.
least any should allege, that the Text speaks not of those that make
marriage honorable; but says, Marriage (as such an ordinance) is honorable:
therefore let the parties go, and come to the nature and kind it self of
marriage. The Greek word here used, 2 Pet. 1. 2.
is the same which is used 2 Pet. 1. 2. and may as well be translated Precious,
or of worth and value, a costly thing: and so it well befits Marriage; for why?
Its precious in the nature of it. A Prince is a precious piece in himself; 2 Samuel 18. 3.
Thou art worth ten thousand of us (say the people to David) without any other
respects; he is the delight of his Subjects, an object of natural contentation
and esteem. The light of the Sun (though considered apart from the use) a
pearl, gold, skill and cunning in Arts, have a peculiar splendor, grace and
nobleness of nature in them, and do eminently exceed other things. So
marriage in the nature of it (although never so much stained with the unjust
aspersions of Popery, and their comparisons with virginity) is a precious
ordinance in her nature. How men by their sin make it, is not the question
(for a crown may be cast into the dirt) but how it is. I speak not now, how
general consent and opinion has settled it in worth, graced it with
privileges, disgraced single life (which yet I approve not) and granced
immunities to marriage far above it, both in war and peace (as the Romans
law of the claim of three Sons shows) but I speak of Gods own institution
of it; for that's only honor which a King gives, who himself devised it; yea,
and that not as a relief of man fallen, but an addition of perfection to his
creation, before ever sin entered: for the order of it, after all other
creatures were made to entertain and grace their Lord and Lady, yea, the guard
of heaven to usher them into Paradise; even the Father, Genesis 1. 28. and 2. 18.
Son and holy Ghost, consenting to propagate man created, and not ceasing to
create, till the woman was created: more especially, the Lord Jesus himself
(when he needed it not) yet would grace it, by being the Son of a married
Virgin, and choosing to be Joseph's reputed Son: not to speak of that honor
he cast upon it, when he did yield to do his first divine Miracle at a
Marriage. John 2. 5.
Now that which a God of pureness ordaines by a perpetual decree of
pureness, in an estate of pureness, how can it choose but have an engraven
character and formal nature of preciousnesse and honor in it? This for the
second.

The third respect is yet more for the honor of it. Third respect: the use of
marriage.
We say it bears prick and price, which contains sweet and good, price and
use in one. For why? The very pleasing pure luster of a pearl, would make it
precious of it self, though it had no virtue or quality for use in it.
Marriage then is also honorable for the use of it. If the Sun be excellent
for her pureness, what is it then for his influence and life, the very heat
and vegetation of the Creatures? what should the world be, save a dungeon
without it? And what were it but an emptiness and vanity without the
usefulness of marriage? If light be so precious for the pureness of it, what
is it for the useful direction of it to do the world of work which it daily
affords? If a Prince be so honorable for his nobleness, what is he for the
use, to be a Father to his People, to rule them with all godliness and
honesty, to feed them in Jacob and Israel? usefulness is the varnish and
luster of honor, grounding and establishing it, as colors set in oil. Now
then what is equal to marriage, for the being or well being of life? I say,
the being, ornament or defense of it. Its the prop of mutual content, the aid
of nature, the perfection of health, wealth, beauty, learning, honor and
experience, youth, manhood, old age, whereof none is sweet, where marriage
supplies not the lack. It serves not only for the necessity of generation
(for how can there be warmth to one, but if two lie together, they have
warmth?) but for the relief of such as are past it, looking at the safeguard
of the stock, and comfort of life? Marriage is the Preservative of Chastity,
the Seminary of the Commonwealth, seed-plot of the Church, pillar (under God)
of the world, right hand of providence, supporter of laws, states, orders,
offices, gifts and services: the glory of peace, the sinews of war, the
maintenance of policy, the life of the dead, the solace of the living, the
ambition of virginity, the foundation of Countries, Cities, Universities,
succession of Families, Crowns and Kingdoms; yea (besides the being of these)
its the welbeing of them being made, and whatsoever is excellent in them, or
any other thing, the very furniture of heaven (in a kind) depending thereupon.

Fourthly, The fourth respect of honor, viz. the sacredness.
its also honorable for the solemn sacredness of it; I mean not hereby
spiritualnesse; for I know its a civil ordinance; and, although for the better
witness, our Marriages are finished in Churches, yet marriage properly is no
Sacrament. But I mean, that God generally has planted a reverend esteem of
it in man, and put a deep awe of it into our minds (as all those Laws do
testify, which have so strictly maintained the repute of it:) but especially,
that divine sanction by which pure marriage is blessed: and all that dare
defile and dishonor it, the Lord threatens to dishonor and destroy them. 1
Cor. 3. 17.
Him who defiles the Temple of God, by the pollution of this ordinance, God
will also destroy. The anointing of a King, though it be not properly a divine
spiritual act, yet its sacred, and the Consecration of him, an act of solemn
and high reverence, most religiously obliging the Subject to all due service,
Romans 13. 5.
as to his liege Lord, Psalm. 105. 15.
for conscience sake. Touch not mine Anointed, (says God) and do my Prophets
no harm: 1 Samuel 26. 9.
and therefore David trembling at Abishai his bloody motion to kill Saul,
(though a tyrant) says, God forbid I should lay mine hand upon the Lords
anointed, viz. lest God should lay his hand upon him with vengeance. Even so
sacred a thing is this Marriage: not in the jealousy only of revenging man
(whose heart cannot be pacified with gifts, Pro. 6. 34.
in case of such violation which argues a sacred depth of thoughts upon such an
injustice,) nor only in the punishments inflicted by humane laws thereupon
(some whereof make the wronged party his own jury, judge, and executioner.)
But especially the just hand of the God of marriage, going out against all
offenders in this kind, against chastity (which should be kept in this sacred
Cabinet) and not only against the party offending himself, but also his name
and posterity. As the text it self adds, and we shall prosecute in the end of
this Discourse; But, whoremongers and adulterers God will judge. Sum up
therefore all these respects in one, and conclude, if marriage be so solemn
and precious in her parts, nature, use, and sacredness, then doubtless it is
true both in the nature and use of it, That Marriage is honorable, and the bed
is undefiled. So much for the opening of this first point. I come now to the
Use.

Terror to the dishonourers of it.
as directly or indirectly, by doctrine or practice, openly or secret, by
thought, word or deed, dare violate marriage; whatsoever they are, Epicures,
Papists, Protestants, unmarried men or married, do deface marriage, either
really or occasionally, casting their dung upon it, they are all guilty.
Against Papists.
who have dared so many times to dishonor marriage, and so many ways to
defile it. Their Clergy, forsooth, are all cut off at one blow from it, yea,
though it be a Sacrament. How just is it, that such should be left to the
spirit of giddiness, that they should with the same mouth be compelled to
magnify that with most holiness, which yet they debar their most holy order
of Priesthood from? or rather secretly confess, what a polluted order it is,
which disdaineth the use of that, which (though erroniously) they call a
Sacrament? The state of marriage is with these impure ones, an estate of such
as live in the flesh. Better were it (says their Champion Bellarmine, Papists
have personal Sacraments.
) for a Priest to defile himself with many harlots, then to be married to one
wife. When the trumpet gives so certain an alarm and sound of defiance to
marriage, who should dare venture upon it? These children of the purple whore,
scorn that their great revenues should serve to maintain the honorable
offspring of marriage; therefore God leaves them to be more filthy, and to let
such a filthy offspring maintain none, save the children of fornication.
Marriage was honorable in the Church, not among Laymen only, but (in the old
Testament) with the high Priest, and all his Tribe (which yet were typical of
the pureness of Christ himself) and Moses himself, a man who was conversant
with God, and spoke to him face to face, was married: after Christ, with the
Apostles themselves, notwithstanding their travels, Saint Peter their grand
Patron (and Paul had the same power) with the Evangelists, and many religious
Bishops and Overseers of Christ's flock, from their times to many generations
following. Till the mystery of iniquity, which long before had bin laid as
leven, and began to work, was grown at length to open Doctrine of Devils, 1 Timothy 4. 2.
in rejecting of marriage, and practice of Devils, in playing the Sodomites and
whoremongers; for generally this taint has run through them all (if Histories
may be believed) from the head to the foot. See our learned writers. Centur.
And although I deny not, but many votaries among them, abstain from
uncleanness, some more, some less; yet their Doctrine frets like a Canker, 2 Timothy 2. 17.
to defile and dishonor this honorable Ordinance. Away ye hypocrites, and
vanish at the light and luster of this truth! your works in secret are such,
that it is a shame only to name them, the Sun blushing at them: your
Cloisters of both sexes, vaults, privies, fishponds, and the like, have
witnessed sufficiently (by the confession and sanction of a great Pope and
Proctor of your own) what hellish abominations do swarm under the shroud and
veil of your defiance of Marriage.

How justly has the Lord (by giving over such, The life and practice of
Papists justly punished by God
both to sins unnatural and unlawful) disabled them of credit and ability,
to dishonor that which they so abhor? so that their words against marriage,
which they nickname, a living in the flesh, are no slander to it. For as the
Proverb says, Clodius accuses whoremasters, and Catiline Ceth^gus, to be a
traitor. This error of theirs, never past without contradiction, from first to
last in the Church, notwithstanding their violence have brought it to this. As
Saint Paul of those Jews, 1 These. 2. 15.
so I of these, God they opposed, and man they disregarded; hateful and hated
of all men. Revel. 18 2.
God has said, It is not good for man to be alone, Genesis 2. 18.
for snares sake. They say, its not good to be married, 1 Cor. 7. 1.
for Devotions sake; abusing that Text, Its not good for a man to touch a
woman. As Austin said betwixt Donatus and himself, Whether of the two believe
you? so say I between God and these. And, man they control; for here the text
calls marriage honorable [among all] poor and rich, simple, learned, noble,
base, minister, people; all men. What then are these? men, or beasts in their
likeness, with women's faces, lions qualities, or rather Devils in the flesh.
That which they raise up as high as a Sacrament among men, they beat down and
anathematize to hell among themselves. But I leave them to the discovery of
their own sect sometimes, Luther and others, who upon the experience of them,
loathed them; and therefore (though at their parting Satan fomed and raged)
even out of horror of conscience, departed from them. No wonder; for who could
endure the society of such thieves, as have robbed the earth of men, men of
honesty, and heaven of Saints, as a learned man speaks. Popish magnifying of
virginity confuted.


As for their deifying of virginity above marriage (which partly they color
over with Saint Ieroms preposterous zeal against Vigilantius) let me answer
with that wise towneClerke of Ephesus, Acts 19. 35.
speaking to the tumultuous people, Who knows not that virginity is precious?
But grant it be so. What? can it not be praised without the disgrace of
marriage? Is the eye of the one evil, because the other is good? Can no
oblation pacify the one, but the honor of the other depraved, and a sacrifice
of the heads of married men? does she not cut down the bow she stands on, yea
break her own neck, in destroying marriage? To be sure, none are so unfit to
commend or defend her, as they who confute marriage by the same uncleanness
whereby they defile virginity. Virgins, I confess, have their honor, yea,
those Eunuchs who have made themselves spiritually so for the kingdom of God,
Mat. 19. 12.
are praise worthy. And, as that Demoniacke said, Acts 19. 15.
Jesus we know, and Paul we know, but who are ye? So we, marriage and true
virginity we admire, but as for you, what, or whence are ye? If you speak a
good word for it, it were meet (as they at Athens were wont in the Senate to
do) to take it out of your unvirgin-like unseemly mouths, and put it into the
mouth of honester persons. Praise stinkes in the mouths of such as do
reproach more by deeds, then their mouths can commend. As the Poet once said
of the cold Poetry of them who commended fasting with their bellies full: so
may I say of you, who praise virginity, your selves having bodies debauched
with uncleanness; your breath is not sweet enough for this work, nor your
words strong enough, to make you believed. None but Orators can praise
eloquence, nor any, save chaste virgins, single life, whether married or
unmarried. One once said of the great Turks horse, that no grass grew after
where he had once trod; so, neither did ever virginity thrive upon your
praises. As Locusts eat up all before them, so does your unbridled lust; and
the more, by how much its veiled with the vow of that Chastity, which becomes
the greatest snare of uncleanness, to them that make it. Thus much for the
first branch.

But to leave these, 2. Branch of terror against all prophaners of marriage.
I would also apply this truth to a second sort of men, for their dishonouring
of marriage. Such I mean, as do (though not by Popish, yet) by their unclean
lives and practice, defloure and disgrace this Ordinance. The most real and
chief offenders in this kind, who by their manners do not only impute, but
infuse (in a sort) a blot and shame into marriage, causing it to stink by
their sin, which God has honored and blessed. And these are the successors
of Hophni and Phinees, 1. Sam. 2. 23.
whose open and shameless pollutions by whoredom and adultery does corrupt
it. A course in these days so common, that not only among the viler sort its
thought nothing (for there be of the ignorant and baser sort of people who are
free from it) but even of them of the better fashion also (where grace rules
not) of whom in the end of this Treatise I shall speak more. But besides
these, how do the lives of such as live in this estate of marriage cause men
to vow the grosest uncleanness, rather then they would be so married? As once
an Heathen said, If this be the practice of Christians to eat their God, and to
kill their King, let my soul be with the Philosophers. So say I, the base
cursed life of many professors, who brawle, scold, fight, and live at defiance
with each other, causes many ungodly ones to prefer a single life, though
besmeared with all sorts of lusts contemplative, practical, natural,
unnatural, with wives, harlots, or as they can, rather then to marry! that is
to say, Let my soul be with the adulterers. I say to such married persons,
stumbling blocks and eye-sores; perhaps you may be guiltless of this sin your
selves; but verily, many by your occasion, are as deeply tempted to uncleannes,
as others are by the entisements of bawds and companions of harlots. Well, as
odious as you are, yet is Marriage honorable in her self: you do as much as
in you lies (and shall answer for it, as well as if it were in your power) to
defile it; but yet you cannot defile that which God has enstamped with honor.

To see some married couples, how they bring up their brats to all filthiness
of manners: 1 King 21. 25.
to see Ahabs and Iezabels both combining together in villainy: to see the
woeful confusion of bad wives with good husbands, Sam. 25.
or them with as bad wives, Marriage abhorred by the base life of some couples.
drawing in a most unequal yoke: Nabals and Abigails, Moses and Zippora's;
would it not cause men to stop their noses at the stinch of marriage? Should
this be, if men kept the honor of marriage unstained? If they were jealous to
suffer any eye to behold their unseemelinesse, Exodus 4. 25.
least marriage should be dishonored? To see the separation of such in the
Country of all sorts, as depart from their yoakefellowes, abandoning each
other by Law, or lawless divorces, from bed, board, and affection (I mean by
wilful separating themselves) would it not cause men to irke marriage? To
behold varlets and monsters openly, and in the face, Number. 25. 6. 14
and defiance of Courts and Laws, without penance or due pursuit and
punishment, to do as Zimri and Cozbi did (though with contrary success) to
bring their whores and the bastards they have begotten by them, not only into
their houses and under their wives noses, but to lay them in their beds, to
force them to afford them like nurcery and equal terms with their own:
would it not make Heathens themselves to spue us out? To see great men to
relinquish and cast up their chaste and wel-deserving Ladies, (whom they at
first loved and sought with the greatest ambition) and to give themselves to
vagrant and libidinous courses; would it not fray men from marriage, and say as
they did, If the case stand so, it is not good to marry? To conclude, to see
but the base Mart that is now made of marriages, how men look only at the
prize and the best game, how they may take in, or put off their children, in
and at the best vantage (as cattle in a market) for wealth and portion, be they
never so debaucht, drunkards, or light huswives; would it not provoke men to
vomit such marriages? A worthy wife cannot be sufficiently prized, a man cannot
tell what to ask for such a pearl; Prove. 31. 10.
and a bad one deserves no price, being the worst of wares: the one is above
this line, the other is under it, neither ought to be bought and sold: I say,
these, and other the like abuses, as the perpetual jealousies between some
couples (not the worst persons, yet bad in marriage) their sinister conceits,
melancholic distempers, how do they make this commodity of marriage, yea and
a better too, even religion it self (which too many such profess) to be badly
spoken of. But in the mean time, by these rents and disorders the innocent
Ordinance hears ill; as if, by her default, such evils were committed.

Admonition to prevent the dishonor of marriage.
or else can entire and unstained. Sundry are the fears and griefs I know of
the weaks (though religious couples) when they look back to their beginnings:
some to consider how rawly they entered into this condition at first, and since
having found God to be more gracious, to reclaim them home, or the husband and
wife that before was a verse: yet when they also think, how unthankefully they
have requited God for it, waxing light, wanton, worldly and loose; they cannot
choose, but they must be in bitterness for it. Others, although they have
entered into this estate with much zeal, resolution, and consent of heart, to
honor God to their uttermost in it: yet alas, when they come to weigh
seriously how many days, months and years are come over their heads in a
most unprofitable sort; gray hairs being upon them, without any impression of
fruit, and growth in good; able to say little for themselves, either for
religion, walking between themselves, praying for and with each other, joint
care in education of their children; yea, that they have humored each other in
their base corruptions, bolstred each other in worldliness (which has eaten
up their stock) not suffered grace to revive but to decay; serving their
turns each of other, only for common and vanishing ends of their own: spent
Sabbaths carnally, and little delighted in them for Gods cause, fruitless in
hearing, and Family duties: oh! much cause of grief must needs be to such. Be
therefore admonished, slight not the care of maintaining of Religion in your
marriage, with all solicitous carfulness, shunning that which might weaken
it, the honor and comfort of it. Crowns of honor are tickle things; and
look whatsoever it be that has much honor put upon it, has withal much
care, anxiety and burden annexed. Beware then: scum not off the fat and sweet
of the honor and content of marriage; but as for the burden and service of it,
to seek God, to worship him jointly, to shun all occasions of ease, carnal
occasions of jollity, unchaste company, you are loath to take the pains:
surely, you shall find at last that repentance will be the best fruit of such
sleghtnesse: it is strange how little this is believed at first, till
experience have taught it: Marriage no buckler to sense our selves in bad
courses.
but men think marriage to be a buckler to fence off all blows: so long as
they love one another (as they thank God, that they do heartily, though with
a rotten love) that will hold them in, as the cornerstone does the sides of an
house. Others take marriage to be an estate of loose liberty, to live as they
list, and therefore observe no caution, nor fear any danger, till at last they
be wail their folly, when they see how by their rash improvidence, they have
brought a snare of poverty upon themselves: others, an habit of pleasures and
expense, till, both time, thrift, and heart be all lost and past recall.

Others there are, who by their froward, peevish carriage have provoked each
others to weariness, impatience and discontent: others, have drowned
themselves in lust, and led each others by base example to follow them; and
instead of complainers of each others, to be as deep in and overshooes therein
as the other, thereby heaping diseases and needless sorrow upon their heads.
And whereas for lack of mature regard and prevention, they have pierced
through themselves with the fruit of their sin; then they cry out too late,
wishing they had bin wiser to keep this crown entire from stain and
dishonor! Kings and Emperors have so slighted the due care of their crowns,
that they have brought ruin and misery upon themselves, by running into
excess of contempt: as in the example of Rehoboam we see. But when as for
their loose exorbitant ways, they have come to see those sad effects which
followed, they have wished their crowns again, upon condition of improving
their honor with ten times more temperance and wisdom. How much more then
have married persons cause to abhor their carelessness in this kind, and to
bind sare, if they look to find sure; that is, to prop up the honor of this
ordinance, if they will enjoy the quiet fruit of righteousness, by their good
behavior. If a Minister or Magistrate havi^g more honor put upon them in
their places then others, should carry themselves the more disdainfully, and
bear themselves so upon their places, that they care for no man, nor baulke
any bad courses, do they look their honor should bear them out? should not
God say to them, 1 Samuel 2. 30.
Those who honor me, I will honor; but such as reproach me, I will make vile?
If private persons excelling others in gifts, shall not attend to humility and
fear of themselves, shall not their glory end in their shame, their gifts in
barrennesle, and their profession in revolt? Even so is it here; such as care
not, regard not their demeanor in marriage, both to God, themselves, and their
families, by shunning offenses, jealousies, loss or alienation of affections;
but think it will always be hony-moone, and a merry world with them, is it not
just, that their unseasonable ruins should teach them repentance too late?
Therefore let all married onc^ be warned hereby, Conclusion.
to be sober, heedfull, advised, moderate in their affections, loves, and
liberties; rather walking on this side the brinke, then otherwise: always
fearing a change, and saying, What if my follies breed in my wife (by Gods
secret vengeance) a loathing of me? a fire of contention in my bosom? a
continual dropping upon my head, my content at home, my repute abroad? God
keep me within such bounds of marriage 'as I first ^owed to keep at my
entrance. Thus much for the Admonition.

Next, Comfort to good couples, who honor marriage.
I proceed to comfort all such godly couples, as have labored to enhanse and
uphold the honor of this Ordinance. Try your selves then; no doubt you shall
meet with uncomfortable thoughts, for your manifold failings: and no doubt you
think few religious marriages so ill managed, and so poorly carried as your
own! the many breaches and flawes of your marriages, do cause you to mourn
and complain, saying, If indeed I had so inured and acquainted my self and my
wife to prayer and close worshipping of God; if I had wisdom and understanding
enough to be Gods voice to my wife to guide her: if I had abstained from the
snares and occasions laid in my way by Satan to overthrow me and my peace; had
I preserved both body and soul in that chastity and honor that was meet,
nourishing love and amity, abhorring all occasions to the contrary, I might
behold the face of God with comfort I but now my burden is increased by my
errors in marriage; viz. that with a slight, heedlesse and regardlesse heart,
I have carried my self in a business of such consequence; upon which the well
or ill fare of my life depends. Well, there is no doubt, but, as in all
other, so in this part of the wheel of our conversation, to wit, of marriage;
we all sin many ways, and our errors are infinite. But now, sift thy self
more narrowly, and leaving thy faults, examine thy self in intentions, in all
the wanderings and swervings of thy course. Wants of weak and religious couples
shall be pardoned.
Can thou say, that as in all other, so in this part of thy course, thou have
sought better to be informed, what that good and accepted will of God is? Rom
12. 2.
and accordingly, with simplicity of heart have quit thy self to thy
companion, not for thine own base ends and ease, but that marriage might have
her honor preserved, offenses might be prevented, God worshipped within, and
honored without doors; a peaceable life in all godliness and honesty
preserved? I ask not whether there have bin staggerings, weariness of the
yoke, and desire after more liberties, (for who is there that sins not? as
Solomon said, 1 Kings 8.
) but, I ask this; Have thou denied thy self, and curbed thy base heart, to
stoop to God in drawing this yoke; not sought thy ease, sleshly content,
letting the honor of God to sink or swim? Have thou humbly bowed thy neck and
stooped to the ordinance, acknowledging how much its changed from the first
Creation, and by sin filled with sundry sorrows, distempers and
bitter-sweets, hardly to be avoided? I say, have thou under all these, abased
thy self before the Lord, craved pardon of thy stout heart and proud stomach,
loath to yield, and thine impotency of thy passions, desiring to testify thy
obedience in bearing these annoyances, as justly inflicted for sin? Have thou
acknowledged the Lord most wise, in so ordering the matter for thee, that
because thy heart is haughty and insolent, therefore he has tamed thee by this
bridle; and has by it exercised thy faith and patience, and brought thee to
the bent of his bow? so that for the avoiding of far worse snares, and for
the comforts and liberties accruing by marriage, thou can willingly yield
obedience to the rules and duties thereof, not dividing burdens from
privileges? and thou can correct all thy licentiousness in seeking sleshly
content only in marriage? Surely, if in some comfortable sort thou can
speak thus in the ears of God, begging a pardon of all wants, and a release
of all deserved penalties; then I say (according to infirmity) thou have sought
the honor of marriage; and to prevent the just stain and aspersions thereof
by thy watchfulness; yea, thou have sought the honor of the ordainer thereof,
for thy singular comfort, which thou might ill have wanted.

What remains therefore, Application of the comfort
but that I comfort thee from God, and encourage thee by his promise, not only
against the fear of thy dishonouring God, but also toward a more hearty
endeavor to honor him further? Surely, thou have need of no less. Thy
journey is long, thy obedience difficult! its not for a day or a month, but
for life; its not for a sodering up of breaches for a while, to break out so
much the worse after: M^rriage is no loose nor idle, way of service.
its no work of an outside, to set a good face upon the matter abroad,
nourishing still the disease within; God is not mocked, and sins in this
kind are like oil in the hand, which cannot be hid. But this obedience is a
perpetual, yet an ingenuous, humble and holy subjection to the will of the
subjecter; who by it tryes men, and shows them all which is in the heart: so
that, I dare say, a true obedient in marriage, is a good servant in all.
Therefore, as thou need encouragement from God (as who does not in difficult
duties) so, Encouragement to religious couples.
take it into thy bosom as thine own, chew upon it and digest it: its the
Lords will that thou should; I say unto thee, that as the Lord has put
honor upon this ordinance, so thou have sought to maintain it, and who so
honors God, shall be honored of God. God can and will turn all the
impediments and encumbrances of this estate into blessings: thou shall find
this estate made honorable to thee; thy self shall find acceptance with God
in all thy suits; success in enterprises, honor and esteem among his people:
he shall crown thee with old age, and good report in the way of
righteousness. Thy wife shall be a blessing, no snare; thy liberties shall be
pure unto thee, and thou shall visit thine habitation without sin, as Job
speaks; Job 5. 24.
thou shall dr^nke of the stoods of milk, and butter and honey. Job 20. 17.
Thy children shall honor thee in the gate; and shall be thy crown in thy
age; Prove. 17. 6.
they shall stand about thy table as olive plants; Psalm. 138. 3.
yea, although any of them should prove irregular, yet that should not condemn
thine innocence. In a word, God shall bring upon thee all the blessings
promised to such as honor his ordinance, even to love thine, Esaias 59. 21.
for many generations. His word shall not be taken from thee and them for ever:
Ezra 8 9.
he will continue thee a name upon earth, Psalm. 128. 6.
and a nail in his temple, and peace upon Israel.

Nay, Miseries shunned by good couples.
I add, that thy very obedience alone in it self shall be a blessing unto thee.
Do thou preserve thy body in holiness and honor? thou shall a void hereby
those infinite woes and miseries, which befall the unchaste, as proverty,
baseness, a rotten body, a worse soul, a ruined estate, both in this world
and in the world to come. Do thou nourish love and amity between thy self
and thy wife, that so the peace of God thereby may the better rule thy heart
and mind? Lo, how infinite many garboiles and miseries thou avoydest of
wrath, debate, envy, raylings, quarrellings and discontents, which bad
marriage causes. But can thou say, that besides these ordinary duties of the
married estate, Married couples must serve God in their time.
thou and thy wife have also closed with God in the special service of the
time, and (with good Vriah and Mephibosheth) moderately used the comforts of
this life, 2. Sam. 19. 24.
(during the sorrows of the Church) and bin married, Amos 6. 6.
as if not; remembering the afflictions of Joseph, making them the due and daily
matter of thine Humiliations and Requests before God? Joel 2. 16.
have thou often, with Ioel's Bridegroom and Bride, come out of thy feasting
Chamber, Esaias 26. 20.
to hide thine head in thy fasting chamber (as our Savior tells us, when the
Bridegroom shall be taken away, Luke 5. 34.
they shall mourn in those days, Zach. 12. 17.
) the husband apart, and the wife apart, for sincerity, or both together for
fervency? Or with the Psalmist, Do thou desire thy tongue cleave to the roof
of thy mouth, Psalm. 137. 5.
except the joy of Jerusalem be above all thy joy, even marriage joy it self
(which yet is allowed to be great.) Surely then, I say, thou have honored
marriage indeed, and as thy share in the duty has bin greater, so shall it be
in the blessing: Esaias 4. ult.
The Lord shall give thee an hiding place in the day of evil, and because thou
have kept the word of his patience, Revel. 3.
in bad times, he shall also deliver thee in that hour of temptation, which
shall come for a trial upon all flesh. He shall uphold thee in six troubles,
and the seventh shall not come near thee: The floods of great waters, Psalm.
32. 6.
with all those plagues which God has denounced against these, shall not come
near thee. Be cheerful in the Lord therefore, and still, thou and thy wife,
cleave and cling to him; deny your own wills and carnal reason, and trust to
his eternal strength; buckle with the work of God faithfully, Isai 26. 3.
and walk in his ordinance humbly, till he come; and then he shall bring
healing in his wings at last; Malac. 3.
and in the mean time, he shall cause a voice to sound behind, saying, This
is the way, walk in it: He shall order your paths, resolve your doubts,
prevent dangers, and so preserve the souls of his Saints, that thousands shall
fall at his right hand, Psalm. 91. 7.
and ten thousands at your left, you going safe in the midst, and so be
brought safe and well through all extremities at last. So much for Comfort, and
for this first Chapter.

CHAP. II.
More full explication in what the honor of marriage consists (being the
ground of the Treatise ensuing) viz. entrance and continuance. Entrance first,
in marrying in the Lord, handled.

BUT because there be many more Uses to be made of this point, ere I come to
them, I desire further to open this truth, and in particular to show what the
honor of this marriage is, and in how many things it consists. Honorable we
see it is, Quest. How may married couples attain this honor?
by that which has bin said; but the question is, How married couples may
attain this honor? To which I answer, by two maine duties: First, procure it:
Secondly, preserve it. Procure it first, by laying the foundation of it in
honor; Answ. By two things; first, by good entrance: secondly, continuance
for as the root is, so will the branches be, either honorable or
reproachful: seek therefore to enter into that estate according to God and
his rules. And then secondly, having entered well into it, manage it well also,
nourish the honor of it carefully and warily, for its no whit less virtue to
keep well, then to seek aright; and many begin with great show of honor, who
yet end in shame.

Touching the former of these, The former part: to marry in the Lord.
there is a double rule of the word; first, to marry in the Lord: secondly, to
marry aptly in the Lord. This is the ground of an honorable marriage, when as
thou art content to be taught by him who first put honor upon it, to maintain
it. For the former, to marry in the Lord, Entrance requires goodness and
aptness.
is to use our uttermost discreet diligence, to seek out such companions, as
(in charity and likelihood) are either already espouzed to the Lord Jesus,
their husband by faith; and in token thereof, sit close to him in obedience; or
an endeavourer thereto; that is, such as are in a fair and hopeful way of
inclining to it. These two (I confess) differ; but be ware lest thou attempt
any marriage, in which neither of these can be perceived. To marry in the Lord,
what?
To open my self a little; they that are indeed actually married to Christ,
have bin truly drawn to him by his Elezier's and spokesmen, by whose
embassage God has treated with them, 2 Cor. 5. 20.
about this spiritual union, between himself and them. They have well
digested the offer, Marks of it.
and with Abigail (when sent for to be David's wife) confess themselves to be
so far from worthiness, 1 Samuel 25.
to be his Consorts, and to taste of his marriage contents and benevolence, The
first sight of unworthiness of this favor.
that they are unworthy even to be fellow servants with his children,
doorekeepers in his house, or to wash and wipe the feet of his household. So
vile God has made them in the sight of their own eyes; showing them by his
pure Law, the baseness of that conversation of theirs, wherein they have
walked (as the door always rolling one way upon her hinges) so they always
living in the same vices, soked upon their old dregs; that hereby he emptieth
them of themselves, dasheth that pride and vanity which puffed them up before:
so that alas, they rather think, that he is throwing them out of his presence
for ever, then marrying them in faithfulness to himself. By this humiliation,
The second: they see a reconciliation.
they come to be further acquainted with his pleasure; That even to such woeful
ones, who have defiled their fathers bed worse then Reuben, yea, defaced his
image; yet to these most forlorn harlots and children of adulterers, he is
willing to be reconciled, yea, to seek them out, Judge. 19. 3.
as that Leuite did his concubine, yea, after just cause of Divorce, Jer. 2. ^.
Iorem. 2. 1, 2. to admit them to his bed again; themselves seeking no favor,
but fleeing from him, as she from her Lord. The third; their hearts^re broken
hereby
By this unheard of love, he has broken their whorish hard heart and forehead
of brass, melted them into tears, to see his bottomless and causeless
compassions, as Zachary in chap. Zach. 10. 12.
10. ver. 12. calls them: especially while they by rejecting or sleighting it,
yea shutting him out, and abhorring his love, deserved to have his heart
hardened, and love to turn jealousy against them. And now, they consult
whether they were better perish in their desolate courses, The fourth: they
being convinced of Gods ends, believe it.
or venture upon his love for a second reconciling. At length, seeing his scope
to be, to get himself a name in turning an harlots heart (as bad as Mary
Magdalen) to her husband again (a thing which no man can do to an whorish
wife) yea, to make her more loyal and tender to him, then she ever was ere she
forsook him. I say, at length, she is convinced, and casting her self down
at his feet, as one that is loath to dishonor that love which she so much
abused; with a trembling and selfe-despairing heart, begins to touch the hem of
his garment, to apprehend him to speak as he means, and so becomes one again
with him, nearer in covenant then ever; bone of his bone, and flesh of his
flesh. The fifth: From hence they are encouraged to obey.
Striving from that second renewing of love toward him, to draw mighty
encouragement and resolution, not only never to be faithless to him, in her
conjugall affections any more; but also, to return the fruit of his dear love
into his bosom again, to walk in all subjection to his lore and will, Psalm.
45.
to delight in denying her self, that so she may be wel-pleasing in his sight,
whether in doing or suffering for him. Thus abiding faithful to him in the
uttermost service she can do, she waits patiently for his coming, that he may
find her in peace and well occupied at his coming, and then make her glorious,
Ephesians. 6.
and like himself, without spot or wrinkle.

This is a short description of a spouse of Christ, M^^kes of a lower degree.
and a son or daughter of Abraham: and such an one (in measure more or less)
is each soul married to Christ: and of such no question needs to be made, but
they are Job 33. 23.
counting him one of ten thousand, comparing selves with such as are married to
him, think themselves far inferior, wish their case were so happy; abhor
their own treachery, Zach. 9. 9.
count the feet of such beautiful, as woo them to Christ, think highly of
the offer, love to be such friends of the Lord Jesus, Cant. 3.
and children of his Bridechamber, full of tears, affections and desires after
it. Even these are not to be excluded neither, there is hope of such, that they
may come to be married to Christ in due time; therefore it were unequal that
for mere lack of time and training, they should be rejected: rather, if
better fail (in ordinary providence) there being sufficient ground to hope,
that their little is in truth: I dare not deny, but a contract with such may be
lawful, and the Lord may cover defects in mercy; especially if the more
forward party be industrious to improve a little to a greater measure, in the
other, if the weaker party be teachable, and in either of both there be a
selfe-denying heart (if God cross their hopes) to lie down meekely at his
feet, humbled for sin (the cause thereof) and patiently taking up and bearing
their cross, till God amend it.

By all this it appears, that Marrying in the Lord, requires good
consideration; Reasons of this first branch
and that they who so marry, have laid the foundation of future honor
beforehand. And who doubts but it had need be so? for what hope is there, that
they who never sought it before, The first: Rash matches unblest.
should ever light upon it after? Honor requires good breeding, and it is a
stud, which except it subsist upon a good ground-cell, will soon lie in the
dust. Rash and sudden attempts in this kind, do but make way for shame and
reproach; only marrying in the Lord, prepares the soul for the work: it has
her tools in readiness to fall to the trade, whereas the contrary is still to
seek; yea, the very method of the Apostle in this Epistle, shows no less, for
he speaks of no marriage business, before he have fully opened the doctrine
of faith, he lays that for the bottom, and then comes in, and tells such,
their Marriage is honorable: Faith then is the hand and wheel, which must
frame a vessel for honor, prepared, as for all other, so for this work of
marriage. And in truth, as it is all Religion (upon point) so it is the
marriage ring, which makes the soul one with the Lord; and this ring is beset
with many rich jewels, all of them serving for the honor, that is, the well
carrying and discharge of marriage duties. The jewels of the marriage ring.
Faith and humility.
which makes it fit for nothing but it own will and ends* but this grace
levels it to the obedience of this ordinance. Peace.
Ephesians. 6.
that it can bear any affronts: even as the shoes or brass boots of the
Soldier can walk upon rocks or pikes, and feel no hurt; so an heart well a
paid in the Lord, is calm, and able to clear the coast of all distempers; and
to go through discontents and crosses, such as an unquiet spirit cannot.
Purity.
Righteousness.
that is, the fellowship with Christ's holy nature, by which the soul partakes
the properties of Christ, qualifying it with wisdom, influence, strength,
meekness, patience, holiness, cheerfulness, long-suffering and compassion;
which graces, as they make him a meet head and husband for the Church, so they
make married couples meet heads and helpers for each other. Faith, I say, does
draw from Christ all such abilities and graces, as may prepare the soul to all
the services which the marriage estate calls for. Even as the spokes or staves
of the wheel strengthen it, for the good motion of it, so does faith
strengthen this great master-wheele of conversation, which is Marriage.

Trials of mriage many.
when the mind is free and impartial, how should it be like to be provided
for in marriage it self? Alas! marriage has her handsful of trial, what grace
is already wrought in the soul, marriage will find a gracious heart work
enough at the best; for it i^ given to exercise grace. It is not given to work
grace (without singular mercy do occasion it) but to exerci^e it; for what
abundance of other distractions do there fall out in this estate, which (as
the Apostle tells us) keep off the soul from sitting close and comely to God?
1 Cor. 7. 35.
The necessity of marriage-occasions are such, as compel the parties each to
please other, in the matters of this life. So that, except single persons have
well bethought themselves, and fitted themselves with a stock to live upon,
they will find it an hard thing to act a true part on this stage upon the
sudden: rather they are like to find (except God alter it) marriage to pull
them from God, to carry their spirits to worldliness, unsetlednesse, cares,
fears, temptations, lusts, sometimes on the right hand, by baits, to carnal
ease and jollity; and otherwhiles on the left, to snares and distempered
passions, of anger and impatience, neither of which extremity favors religion,
but kills and damps it; taking up all the time and leisure of the soul, from
attending the best things, or at lest causing it to attend them lesser; as good
never a whit (as we say) as never the better.

God is ^eldom found out of his own way.
he will be found of us, in ours? How just is it for him to forsake us, and
give us over to our own by-ends and respects in our marriages, and to suffer
us to defile our selves more and more, that as we entered badly, so we should
live worse, and end worst of all? As Paul says, 2 Timothy 3. 3.
The wicked wax worse and worse, deceiving, and being deceived; so may the
Lord plague ungodly marriages by themselves, and scourge them with their own
whip; so that the husband should be deceived with the bad qualities of the
wife, and she by his; one defiling the other more, and neither doing any good
to the other. We see it thus daily, unclean men do but teach their wives
their trade, that they might match them in their kind; carnal, proud and bad
wives draw their husbands to the like evils, one must please another by
concurring with their humors, and all for a penalty upon such as slighted
Gods ordinance, to marry in the Lord: that so the thing they sought might be a
snare unto them. True it is oftentimes, the Lord orders it otherwise (for the
elect shall be brought home by one mean or other, be they never so ill
married) the Lord can turn poison into a medicine, if he please, and sin to
good. But it is ever best, to seek God in his way: the question is not what
God can do, but what he does, or will do ordinarily. Sure it is, ordinarily,
these doubtful, irreligious and clandestine matches, are as basely carried, as
entered upon; repentance it self being hard to get for the sin at first^ much
less amendment of errors, but rather an hardened heart, an unsavory going
through-stitch, swallowing up much sorrow, and none to pity them that pitied
not themselves, in hasting sorrow upon them.

Grace levels all disproportions.
I confess it to be the way of God, that such equality as possibly can be
attained, should be in this condition, as of years, education, disposition,
breed, estate, and the like (as in the next point shall appear.) But what is
more common, then disparity in all? young are married to old, rich to poor,
untaught to well trained, harsh to amiable, and the like. How shall this be
levelled? Surely no way, except religion compound it. I do not always say it
can; for Religion it self has no warrant to enter upon unequal marriage,
howbeit, if it be so, religion can best set all straight and eaven, or else
nothing can. It is not her wealth, which can procure content with a profane,
froward wife; it is not a good nature which will purchase love to a wastefull,
improvident, wanton woman; that plaster is not broad enough for the sore. No
outward complement can ease or level an inward unequalnesse; only grace can
do it, if it may prevail. Grace will say thus, Thy wife was but poor, but
she is loyal, chaste, wife, provident, saves her portion in seven years: that
which makes her thus, shall go for her portion. Thy husband is but a plain
man, has no great learning, is none of the sweetest tempers, but harsh and
rough: But religion shining through these clouds, makes the best of an hard
bargain: both of them, perhaps, are passionate and sudden, but because Gods
bridle is presently in their mouth, their wants are the easilier endured. And,
as I say this of marriage in general, so in particular of second matches;
wherein, either encumbrances by former marriage, children, or the world
frowning, or suspicion of fraud either way; or, in a word, unsuitable success
to expectation; if in the throng of these, religion step not in, to media^e and
moderate the controversy, how endless may the breaches be?

Objections and doubts answered.
But for all this, Truth cannot want cavils or queries: for first, do we not
(say some) see very many couples do very well, who never observed any such
strict course, but hap't by better chance, then good skill upon one another? I
answer: you have lighted so, perhaps rather in a negative way, that you are
free from many evils which pester others, then in an holy positive way of
grace: or if so, its rather a lot of mercy, then any good forecast of your
own: if it be as you wish, thank God who has borne with your sinful tempting
of his providence, and swerving from his way: howbeit, one swallow makes no
summer, neither ought it to prescribe a president unto others: ten miss where
one hits well. And secondly, I say, all honor and success in marriage, must
not be esteemed by outward league and peace together; 1 King. 21. 25.
Ahab and Iezabell accorded, but how? in mutual combining for wickedness and
idolatry. Still swine eat up all the draffe sometimes: and, if outward peace,
attended with wealth, ease and welfare, cannot hinder a profane heart,
contempt of the Ordinances, Sabbaths and ways of God, what advantage is it for
a good marriage? But it is objected, put case, that God converts them to
himself? I answer, his mercy is the greater, but yet so free, that it cannot
certainly be rested upon. The grace of God which turns all to their good, whom
he has eternally loved, must be no pretext for sin.

to speed well. Walk in his way, and then indeed, no time past: God may, yea,
and will convey his grace to a poor soul that waits for him.

Shunamite: 2 Kings 4. 27.
but they have peace in their endeavor, and therefore have no cause to give God
over, but to hang upon him still, to find mercy in another way, that is, in
the bush burning and not consumed: that is, that by your prayers, God has
reserved mercy for them, and means to grace their enterprises at last, doing
that for them in marriage, which he did not before. If the Lord please to hear
them at last, it shall be well; and to such this free grace of his belongs, who
though they have bin disappointed a while, yet it is in their obedience, and so
includes an hope of further audience and supply from heaven. But I conclude, if
any careful ones have yet miscarried; surely, ten times more have done so for
lack of it.

Luke 23. 31.
Answ. If this be done in the green tree, what shall be done in the dry? what
shall become of such as without restraint, Mat. 12. 35.
even out of the abundance of their evil heart, bring forth such fruit with
full purpose? Add to this, their evil qualities come not from religion, but
because they are not religious enough to bridle and mortify their lusts. Its
because they drown the power of their religion in their own sensuality and
will; detaining the truth in unrighteousness: Romans 1. 13.
and no doubt such would be much worse, if religion did not now and then step
out to moderate.

them, and light upon such as are the Lords. As for these, you shall not need
to take thought for them; our rules will not much hinder their marriages, like
will to like, do we what we can, and the dead will bury the dead, Luke 9. 60.
the world will love their own, and that to their mutual sorrow; and all to
teach us to love such the rather whom the Lord loves. 1 Cor. 5. 10.
What have we to do to judge them that are without? no, we speak to no other
but the willing people, Psalm. 110. 3. who will stand to be judged at Gods bar.

Answ. Then forbear a while, till all means be tried for the parties
bettering, and so venture upon them. Object. Instan.
But I cannot so far deny my self. Answ. Thank your self, God forces no
such necessity upon any, if they will be ruled. If not, their snaring
themselves with a needless necessity, cannot make Gods command of no effect.
If you can make to your selves such a necessity, as must break a charge of
God, then try how well you can endure the fruit of it, when sorrow, repentance
and shame shall come upon you, Pro. 24. 34.
as the necessity of an armed man. Is not as good reason, that you digest this
gobbet, as that the Lord digest the other? yes surely.

Answ. Set not Gods providence and his command together by the ears; as if he
charged you to marry only in the Lord, and yet debarred you from it in
practice; so that either you must be forced to marry with all sorts, or else
must not marry at all. No: God puts no such snare upon any: look you to your
selves, that you be such as you go for, and the Lord will not deceive you; he
has good in store for the good. Its one of heavens works to make good
marriages: 2 Cron. 19. 11.
and he who has bad women in store for sinners, that they may fall by them;
he has also good ones for the good, Eccles. 7. 26.
that they may honor marriage and him thereby: yea, and he has wisdom,
discerning of spirits, of the subtle shows and guizes of all sorts, both
hypocrites and other bad ones, so that (as subtle as the world is) they who
loathe to be cheated by their dice-play, Ephesians. 4. 14.
shall not want wisdom to judge, and savor to relish the good in the midst
of the bad; they shall hear a voice behind them, Esaias 30.
saying, This is the way: and withal, giving them an ear to hear, and an
heart to obey, and walk therein.



Uses of the point.
First, this is terror and reproof to the marriages of this degenerate age;
wherein this duty of marrying in the Lord is cast off at large. 1. Terror and
repr^ofe.
As Rehoboams yonkers carried that weighty business of his Kingdom, Bran. 1.
and overthrew it: so do the unruly and rebellious humors of most youth
miscarry this. P^opnane scorners to m^rry in the Lord, terrified.
They knit and combine themselves together, as if they were right grave
Counselors, wiser then their parents and ancients, disdaining that any should
overruled their rash and rebellious appetites; 1 Kings 12. 10.
and so with rash resolutions and fury of undeniable passions, they rush
themselves upon the pikes of eternal misery. If once their parents be dead,
then most of these hot-spurs have made sure enough, for the honor of marriage:
for by that time they come of years (if not before) most of them have embezeld
their patrimonies. But if not, yet in this point of marriage this is their
resolution* Give me her, Ju^g. 14* 3.
for she pleases me well: (she may please well for a moment, Josh 23. 29.
though she be a prick in the eye, and a goade in the side for ever after.) And
so for a vanishing content, to a vain humor, what do such, but enthrall
themselves to a wanton, wastefull and wilful ungodly companion? And as the
Heathen said of a bad bargain, it vexes the foolish buyer more with the
continual upbraiding, then the loss of the money, so may I say of this: and
as Sampson found this at leisure, for the wilful mind he bare to have Delila:
so do these. But alas! there is no season for such as he was, to believe it
(being intoxicate with the cup of enchantment, disabling them from taking
better counsel.) But why then speak I this? Surely, because I see religion
among young couples, for the most part, is the first of those respects which
are last thought of. Desperate and stolen waters are sweetest to such; Prove.
9. 17.
like those of the Benja^ites, who rushing into a company of dancers, Jedg ult.
in their jollity, snatched up each man his wife, as she came to hand, prove
well or ill, for better for worse: for why, they sought wives, not good ones,
and that any way, so they had them. What a merry world were it for our
debauched drunken youth in these our days, if they might choose their wives in
such a lottery. To catch (among a drove) each one his own marrow pell-mell: o^
what a brave thing were it? There is a pleasure in doing that which is
forbidden, to our cursed nature, even because it is so: and if it were not so,
they would dye upon a swords point, ere they would attempt it. And
notwithstanding the woe of such marriages, both against Gods word, law of
reason, consent of parents, yea, the general experience of such as are gone
before them; yet, who may speak to such? Surely such matches are made in hell,
like are fallen upon like by the Devils spokesmanship: as I confess, better
one house troubled with such, then two. But what a sad thing is it to think,
what a cursed posterity such are like to hatch: I say such, as whereof one or
two might poison an whole neighborhood? As Genesis 6. 2, 3
Druken meetings, marriages, revellings, Marquets, Fayres, Tavernes and
Alehouses, being the places wherein such choose their companions. But of this
enough.

A second sort coming here to be reproved, 2. Branch of terror.
are not so debauched as these, and yet reproved for their carelessness to
marry in the Lord. Marriages with them that are only civilized, unsafe.
Many, not grossly profane, yet because but civil, trusting to their wit and
policy alone, thinking themselves secure enough, although they go not so
spiritually to work, as to marry in the Lord, are to be taxed by this
doctrine. So long as they can marry morally, such as are free from gross
crimes, uncleanness, riot, alehouse-haunting, and the like: such as are of a
sweet carriage, fashionable, and complete, brought up well to a pleasing and
outwardly graceful behavior; especially, if there be any means to live
competently in the world, good husbandry and housewivery; oh, they think their
choice is excellent; yea, when children themselves stagger for conscience sake,
at such offers, yet their parents are earnest for the match, and vex
themselves to see their children so precise. And indeed no wonder, when
Morality (in these times) is counted preciseness. And yet, tell me, what odds
is there between those Benjamites I spoke of, Gen* 6. 1.
and those children of God marrying the daughters of men, the posterity of
Sheth with idolaters? what woeful impes proceeded from such a mixture? And the
truth is, even such as profess religion are grown to make such matches
without any check. The common question now, not only among great ones, or
among profane ones, but even among the ordinary sort, and such as profess
religion, is, What shall she have? What is she worth? What jointure can he
make? Psalm 4. 8.
who will show us any good? As if men were selling of cattle in a marquet? Not
thus; What is the woman? how brought up? how qualified with knowledge, love of
Gods Church, meekness, modesty, or other fruits of faith and the spirit?
which yet are the only ornaments of wealth and beauty, yea, more in price with
God, then all they possess, who enquire so little after them. But by that
time, some of these, by had example, and for want of the fear of God, grow to
be bad companions, others uncleanness, others spendthrifts, and the like; then
their parents (who so shunned religious ones before) can wish they had matched
them with religious ones too. But its just that they pierce themselves through
with cares, who seek religion out of season, rather out of their own ends then
for her self. Hence it is, that such solemn marriages in the world, as begin
with great hopes and honor; yet within a few years turn to misery, beggary,
imprisonment, defiance of each other to the pit of hell. Why? Surely because
they sought other things as chief, money, and beauty, and the like, but not
religion; just it is with God to forsake them and leave them destitute, not
only of that they sought not, but also of that which they over-chiefly
cove^ed. Not to speak of those base and wicked shifts, which some of them are
faint to come to, as flattery of their betters, unclean relations,
banquerupt-like ways, to borrow what they can, and leave men in the lu^ch. Ill
marriages are one cause of banquerupts, though not the only; for many streams
there are, that cause this bank to overflow so excessively now a days. So
much of this.

Thirdly, Branch 3.
this is reproof, and that of two sorts: first, such as whereof neither party
is religious: Reproof.
secondly, whereof only either of the two is such. Touching the former, we see
a woeful pattern of Ahab and Iezabel, Of such in which either party is bad.
of whom neither was better (though perhaps the one less ill) but conspired
together, and set forward each other to mischief. And indeed so it commonly
falls out, 1 Kings 21. 25
that if both be bad, the woman proves the went. Its much what, in this sex,
as in the inferior natures of creatures, cap. 21. ver. 7.
the shee-Beare, Lioness or Wolf, is the most savage and fierce: so here, the
impotency and unbridelednesse of the sex, makes her more subject to rage,
unrighteousness, revenge and wickedness then a man: not to speak of the
natural perswasivenesse of such, incensing to evil forcibly, ever since Eve
tempted Adam. I^zabel provoking Ahab to be far worse then himself, 1 Kings
21. 7.
by saying, Art thou now King of Israel? and lie thou upon thy bed as a
fool? Com^, and I will give thee the vineyard of Naboth, etc. The corruption
of best is worst; and when she who by her kind, should have bin the most
modest, becomes bold, she commonly keeps no bounds of immodesty. Two are
better then one (says Solomon) and woe to him that is alone: Eccles. 4. 9.
but here we may sadly invert the words, and say, One were better then two;
Judge. 11. 38.
and woe to those couples who are both bad: better had it bin for such to have
lived in the mountains, to bewail their virginity, yea, to dwell with the
foxes and wild beasts, in extreme solitariness (where no other then misery
can be looked for) then to enter into an hoped condition of welfare, to double
and treble their own sorrows, sin and judgment; making each other much more
the children of Satan then before. Mat. 23. 15.


And verily, it is the usual destiny of the most Families, to be pestred with
such couples, whereof neither is religious, but both rude and profane, and
studying who should excel the other therein. If the one dare lie, the other
dare swear to it: if the one slander, the other will avow it; if one be bad,
the other will be worse. And this pleases him that brought them together, on
life; that by their vying and outvying each other in evil, they should approve
their thank and service unto him: joining to moral sins, the omitting or
despising of Gods worship and Ordinances within doors or without, as Word,
Sacrament, prayer and duties. Alas! put case that bad couples are not combined
in open ungodliness and malice, but only in a mere, civil, form^ll and
saplesse religion, keeping of Sabbaths barrenly, or mutual complacence in each
other, for the raking up of money, making great portions for their children,
ill brought up, and like to spend it as prodigally, and mock them for their
labor (as one lately did, who after his fathers death, having found out his
hoord of money, A villainous speech.
cried out, Oh faithful drudge!) and so waste it out in bravery and fashions,
pride and pomp of life. Or put case they live in a mere harmlesnesse of
course, spending out their days in working, eating, sleeping, neither doing
good nor gross evil, welcoming and visiting neighbors, living courteously
(wihch I confess is the best of such) yet alas! what a miserable life is this
in comparison of the true gain and sweet of a marriage religiously carried?
But yet the worst is behind.

For why? Admonition to such.
rarely do we see couples thus married to repent themselves of their course;
but wanze away like shadows, except they dye like beasts, without sense; and
even as they have entered basely, and lived worse, so the last act of their life
is worst, and they dye impenitent. Oh then! in Gods fear, let me speak unto
you, and be admonished ere it be too late, (ere either the one of you be swept
from the other, or both to destruction,) to consider your sin at the first,
humbling your soul for it, and much more for the long thread of your former
course, which you have spent amiss. And if neither of you will at all profit,
by either word or works of God, while you live together, but go on hardened in
your mutual wickedness; yet when God shall separate the one from the other, by
death, crying out lamentably of his or her sinful course; oh, let the
survivour be yet gastred out of his den, and with that third Captain of fifty,
cry out to God, and say, Although thou have parted us Lord, and my companion be
dead in sin, yet let my life (I pray thee) be precious in thy sight: 2 Kings
1. 13.
unsettle me from those lees upon which I am settled, (for want of roling) that
I may break off my long profane, fruitless conversation, and seek thy face,
and recover my self, Psalm. 39. 13.
ere I depart and be seen no more! Oh! it were better (I grant) if the Lord
were so pleased, that as both of you have bin partners in sin, and one
corrupt flesh; so you might both together repent, and become one spirit in the
Lord, both of ye might be rouzed by his terrors out of your dead sleep; that
the one being humbled, might gaster his fellow, and say, husband, wife, see
thou not that Gods hand is out against us, and his wrath is upon us; we are
under all adversity, our bodies, souls, children and affairs, nothing
prospers: oh, we have made use a long time each of other, for the devils
vantage, Job 20. 11.
till our bones be full of the sin of our youth: except we return in time, God
will be avenged on us, and send us to our place and long home of misery: Alas!
we have never honored marriage, as other holy couples have done; its strange
patience that yet we are on this side hell: let us now join together, and
turn to the Lord, that if possible, all may be forgotten and forgiven. Oh!
happy you, if ever you should live to see that day! happy your poor children
and family, whose souls you should snatch out of the fire, and be instruments
of pulling them out of that misery unto which you have bred them. But I
forbear.

But there is a fourth sort of marriages, Branch 4.
whereof either party only is religious. Admonition to the religious married
to the irreligious Bran. 1.
These also are to be humbled for their ungrounded attempt, the one for
ventring upon an irreligious yokefellow; the other for irreligious entrance.
Zachary and Elizabeth are commended, Luke 1. 6.
that they were both just; therefore it is a stain to such marriages, as
wherein either party is good, 1 Samuel 18. 27.
the other opposite to it. Example whereof we have in Scripture; 1 Samuel 25.
David and Michal, Nabal and Abigail, Job and his wife. Job 1* 8, 9.
The Lord who forbad to sow one field with diverse seeds, D^^^. 22. 11.
or to wear a garment of linsey-wolsey, much more abhors that the marriage bed
should be defiled with persons of diverse religious; 2 Cor. 6. 15.
for we know no opposition is so strong, as that which is spiritual; and how
then should there be amity and love, where the seeds of greatest enmity abide?
What a tempting of God is it, to draw the yoke of God with one that draws in
the yoke of the Devil? O^ (as Paul speaks in the like case) What fellowship is
there between Christ and Belial, the believer and the infidel? what is such
an union, save a monster compounded of diverse natures, by an adulterous
mixture? What a noisome thing were it for a lively and healthy body to walk
with a dead ca^casse bound to it, back to back? How long could it continue?
how should it avoid putrefaction? as appears by the manner of that
punishment, in some cases inflicted, among the Heathens; as that image of
Nebuchadnezzar, which had the body made of metals, D^n 2 32.
and the feet of clay, could not abide long without dissolution; so neither can
that temper which consists of such contraries. And hitherto add that (which
one well observes,) that when good and bad join together, seldom is the
worse bettered by the good, but often the better is marred by the worser party.
The brown bread in the oven will be sure to fleece from the white, not that
from it. How can it otherwise be, in this so near a knot of marriage? since
its seldom seen, but its so in all other fellowships? when the one party is
patient, devout, meek, sober, a lover of the Word, conscionable in Sabbaths,
and the use of means; the other careless, froward, unchaste, intemperate and
profane? what a corrasive must the one needs be to the other? and instead of
an helper, Prove. 19. 13.
what a continual dropping? was it a savory thing (think we) to Job to hear
his wife bid him Curse God and dye? Job 2. 9. 12.
himself being so armed with patience, as to say, Shall we receive good
things of God, and not evil?

When David danced before the Lord, and in the height of zeal brought home the
Ark of God, was it a pleasing thing to hear Micol to call him fool for his
labor? 2 Samuel 6. 23.
and although they are not so gross as to scoff at their husbands or wives,
yet what a cross is it, to have such lying in our bosoms as are of a diverse
mind? what complaint is so usual in these days as to hear the complaints of
good husbands, of ill wives, and wives of husbands, through this desparity?
Some making their moan for the churlishness, straightness, maliciousness,
restraint from use of means; others, for other eye-sores, of which sort
unequal marriages are infinitely fruitful? So rare are those couples, of whom
it may be said, They draw mutually and equally in one yoke; Luke 1. 6.
as Zachary and Elizabeth, both just, diligent hearers, zealous worshippers,
lovers of God, of good men, and the like! And hence it is, that there is
oftentimes little difference between those families in which both be bad, and
those in which only either party is good; because commonly the better party
makes himself but a prey to the other. Religion must always be the disadvantage
of the party, and the irreligious must bear the chief sway: Luke 15. 28
even as the elder brother will domin^^e over the younger, because of his
birthright; so, the better party must ever look to be the underling. As we
say or a syll^^^^^^, (...) the conclusion ever follows the weaker (...) Ala^!
where both parties are as they ought, how (...) is done? ^o many cro^^es,
business^^ of the world, debts and temptations by sin and Satan come
between, that even the comfort of such marriages goes near together: what
good is like to be done, when the one is always thwarting the other, in the
duties of the family, or lesser occasions? I say, when the maine is crazie, how
shall the rest be sodered? But enough of these.

To pass therefore to another sort of couples: Branch 2.
how many husbands are of this rank, disaffected to their religious wives, and
yet for some by-respects and ends of their own, will tolerate them in their
profession of religion, and use of means? But alas! full ill is it against
their wills, if by any counsel, benefit or persuasion they could be withdrawn
from it, how glad would they be? Diverters of their wives from religion to
other matters, reproved.
Nay, if they could divert their affections from this way to any worldly way of
feasting, jollity and companionship, how much rather would they choose to be at
double or treble cost to maintain it, rather then at a single one, to nourish
the other? So that, if they permit them not their religion with gibing and
geering them openly, yet with a secret disdain. If (say they) our wives will
needs be precise, let them: why? Is it because you love it in them? No: for
then they should have your company, and you would be like them: (whereas now you
suffer them by a kind of connivence, winking at them, and looking between the
fingers:) But why? perhaps they being men of a more indifferent and gentle
nature, and convinced by the secret grace which breaks out in their wives,
Connivers only at the religion of their yoke-fellows, not approvers thereof,
taxed.
which they cannot smother; and now and then (especially in the time of their
fear of death) acknowledging their state to be better then their own:
besides, beholding sundry graceful qualities in their wives, which tend to
their own honor and credit in the opinion of others, beholding them to be in
esteem with some of their betters; and themselves accepted the better for
their sakes: sometimes also stirred in conscience to desire they were as they
are, Commenders of religion in their wives for others re^pects, not for
religion, blamed.
though when their pangs be over, their lusts do again surprise them: I say,
by such second motives many men (not being Nabals and base blocks) being
persuaded better of their wives, then others are; as se^ing their estates to be
the more prosperous, by their frug^ll housewifely, and wise managing thereof;
they grow more indifferent toward them, and especially their persons and sweet
innocent behaviors gracing them in their eyes, And by such means, many women
unequally yoked, live at better terms then others do.

But alas! 1 Pet. 3. 1.
how few of such husbands are drawn to God (as the Apostle says) by the
conversation of the wives, or wives by such husbands? but put it off with a
trick; you see (say they) what our wives affect, they must have their wills, we
must not cross them, for then all were out of order; let them alone and run
their course, as poor silly women may do: but as for us, who are wiser, and
have greater affairs to look after; 1 Cor. 1. 25.
we must play the good husbands at home, and hold in matters together. 1 Cor.
7. 16.
Well, take heed you wise fellows, lest you be taken in your own snare, Luke
10. 42.
beware lest God pull ye not down from that pride and jollity, Scorners to be
drawn by their wives religion, faulty.
by which you look over religion, as a mean thing, under your worth and
employment. The wisdom of man is but foolishness with God, and when the
glory of this world shall be abased, and bid you farewell, then Gods matters
will bear some price, and Mary's portion may hap to be wished. Oh therefore
(as Paul says) what know thou, O man, whether God have appointed thy wife
to occasion thy conversion? Oh, its death to many a bad man, to think, that a
woman should bear stroke or sway with him in the cause of God? they will not
yield so far, as to grace their wives with such a victory? Its well, if her
ornament prove not her greatest detriment, and she have not much sour sauce to
digest her sweet meat. But as for following her steps to heavens, oh! it were
too great honor to the wife? well, you shall wish you had esteemed it your
own greatest honor! Mean time, the greater shall her thank be with God, by
how much her religion has cost her the setting on: if she suffer not her zeal
and grace to quail by any discouragements, till she see better things at last,
after her long patience, to be wrought in her husband. Oh thou unequal
husband! art thou content to pocket up all the commodities and contents of a
good wife, and to take all which religion affords thee in thy wife, for thine
own ends, never looking whence this mast falls? will thou love the daughter
thrift, modesty, subjection, sobriety, teaching of thy children, and carest
thou not for the mother, religion, which bred them all? How base is it to love
the effect, and to dislike the cause? to desire that these good qualities were
in a wife without religion, rather then by them to behold the beauty thereof?
Take heed, resist not the light, stop not your eyes from beholding that Sun
whose beams you are so much beholding too.

I conclude this fourth branch (being a very material one) with an admonitory
ca^eat to such persons, Counsel for such as draw in an evil yoke Genesis 41. 9.
whose wisdom will be (as I take it) to make a virtue of a necessity, either
in drawing the backward party to a better pass, or themselves to a more
patient bearing of their burden. 1. Rip up thy state to God.
First therefore, let such say with Pharao's Butler, I remember my sin this
day, 2. Redeem old errors, and pray for pardon
the sin of rash entrance into marriage, my sensuality and yielding to mine
appetite, without consulting with God. These and other sins of thy youth,
open before God, that he may cover them. Redeem thy former neglect by present
diligence, in humbling thy soul, and praying to God for pardon; it is never
out of season to do so, if the fruit be not as thou desire, yet it shall be
some supply of thy want of good marriage, and an ease of thy sorrow. As for thy
companion, pour out thy soul to God for him, as Abraham for Ismael, Genesis 17.
18.
Oh that he might live in thy sight! If conscience move thee not, yet let
self-love do it, for thou art like to enjoy the good. And with spiritual
means, join suitable practice, commend whatsoever is praiseworthy in thy
companion (for the worst have some good parts) that it may appear, that thou
art loath to bury good under the clod of evil, and would be glad to commend
for somewhat: for so God himself does, Deuteronomy. 5. 28.
Deuteronomy. 5. 28. etc. infirmities pass by, and mark not (for who speaks of a
scar, when the body is crooked? 3. Pass by ordinary faults.
) grosser evils so observe, as waiting thy season to reprove them, and that
with all mercy and meekness, lest thou exasperate instead of mending; join
especially a convincing and winning conversation, for this glass will say more
then all thy words; 1 Pet. 3. 1.
nay (if Saint Peter may be believed) more then the word it self sometimes.
And they are no men nor women, whom such a carriage will not win in time. But
put case God still answers not thy desires: fret not against thy lot (which is
Gods providence) nor by comparison of worser folks better success. 4 Fret not
at thy lot.
But possess thy soul with patience, bear this indignation a while, Luke 21.
19.
till the evil be overpast; thou drinkest of no other cup, Esaias 26. 20.
then that which thou have filled for thy self. Moderate such pangs and
melancholique passions of discontent, as do attend such a condition, and be
not froward with the froward, knowing that the Devil is seldom outshot in his
own bow. Especially thou woman (if it be thy lot) beware of it, let not fly
against either marriage or procurers thereof, lest religion bear the reproach
of thy folly. Luke 5. 40.
No man puts new cloth into old garments, lest the breach be worse. 5. Conceal
grievances so long as is possible.
And (if I might advise) I would wish such rather to conceal their grievances,
then to open them much, especially to strangers: and it requires great wisdom
to do it to any, most of all with ripping up all grievances before witnesses:
for hereby, as secrets become reproaches, so, that which might have bin healed,
is quite made incurable, by over-deepe search and exasperating. However the
issue prove, Heb. 12. 13.
wax not desperate, still hope; the name of the Lord is a strong tower, Prove.
^8. 10.
the righteous flee to it, and are preserved. Thou art not alone in thy grief,
live by that faith whereby Job, Abiga^l, others lived and do live, and thou
shall see what end the Lord shall make; keep still thy humility, Prove. 10. 29.
care and diligence: The way of the Lord is straight to him that walks
uprightly, though there were no other. 6. Justify not thy own errors, by
others
Above all, beware of justifying thy base heart, under color of thy companions
more apparent sinfulness: play not the hypocrite, as many do, who promise
great matters, if free of the cross, who yet being set at liberty, discover
themselves to be wanton, worldly and carnal: sometime stumbling at the same
stone which before gave them a fall, and becoming worse in good marriages then
they were at the first in bad. And thus much for this first Use, with the
Cautions thereof.

to esteem and judge what is the most excellent object for the married to
behold in each other. Instruction.
And that must needs be sound religion; What the best object of the ma^ried is.
very heathens could say so of their virtue, that she is desirable for her
self: how much more we of this? No other things are so; they have their
desirednesse, 1. Respect.
yet for that they are in order serving to better ends, rather then for ought
in themselves. And as wisdom it self usually in Scripture is spoken of in
this kind, that she is better then Rubies, Job 28. 18.
the Topaze, the treasures of the East, no gold is like her: Prove. 8. 11.
so is a good woman furnish^ with this grace, more precious then all pearls.
Even as also an husband is: birth, education, means and wealth, greatly
conduce to a compleatnesse and contentment of marriage: but as for making it
happy and honorable, they reach it not: only religion can do that. They are
as the second sort of worthies of David, which attained not to the first. Many
daughters have done well, 2 Samuel 23. 19.
but thou have the birthright, and surmountest them all. There is an honor of
complement, and there is an honor of substance: the former may stand in
externals; the latter only in religion. Salomons words will express the
point; Prove. 19. 22.
That which is desirable in a man is his goodness: no man is praised for that
which is out of him, but for that which is within him. 2. Respect.
Secondly, there is no comparison betwixt the graces of the mind, with outward
abilities; for the one is of absolute necessity, the other not. It being not
absolutely necessary, that a man should be well bred or wealthy: but its
necessary that he be religious: without the one he may live, and maintain the
honor of marriage (though in the other there is usefulness) but without the
other he cannot. 3. Respect.
Lastly, in respect of the absence of either: better want a pound of the one
(if want must be) then a dram of the other. Wealth and parts will not
recompense the lack of religion (for they are under it in their kind:) but
she can supply theirs with an hundred fold. The conclusion is, learn we to
settle our judgments solidly upon this truth; that so our eye be not bleared
with the false and erroneous opinions of the world; which (as in all other
respects, so) in this point, forsake the rule of God, for vain shadows and
emplinesse; and having embraced them all their life time, seeking in the
creature, that which is not there to be had: (for as apparel cannot feed, nor
meat cloth, nor any thing exceed his own sphere; so neither can beauty reach
beyond that is in her, nor riches above that is in them:) they cry out at last,
taught by experience of fools, we have lost the body for the shadow, embraced
vanity and forsaken mercy: Jonah 2. 8.
All is vanity! So it was at the first, but you saw it not.

Ad monition against some errors herein.
which might destroy the honor of marriage. Imagine not, that profit and
pleasure can do the work of honoring marriage. The first.
An Heathen could say, These are but by-respects in a lower contract of
friendship: how much more here? when sweet and profit are once worn off, as
the nap from the fine cloth, nothing remains behind save thred-barenesse: as
when the leves are blown off the rose, nothing is left save the prickle. Not
so here: for although she begin with some soreness, yet she is durable and
outlasting. The second.
Secondly, be not gulled with the rashness of such brainsicke idiots, as
think marriage to be magic, that look what defect so ever there be in
couples, yet marriage will accommodate all suddenly. Marry them (says one) and
all will do well enough. Can marriage make all errors vanish? Is any man so
mad as to think, that because he has a great sum to pay, therefore he may
convey twenty slips into it, and not be discarded? shall not each piece come to
the weights? Surely that which in the several is naught, cannot do well in
the compound. Once (as our English story mentions) there was in the English
Court a very sweet Lady, called Iane-make-peace; which no sooner perceived any
little difference among the Nobles or Courtiers, but she would accord them
presently. But this office is only in religious marriage, not marriage only:
nay, rather marriages ill entered upon, are commonly so far from sweet accord,
that rather afterward they prove worse; for then does the devil present more
baits of liberty, to an unbrideled heart, then before. The old speech is,
Magistracy makes not the man, but discovers what mettell is in him. Gal. 6. 7.
Be not deceived, God is not mocked: as a man sowes, so shall he reap; of
wheat, wheat; of darnell, darnell; and he were mad who would look for other.
3. Branch.
Thirdly, neither let any think, that in unequal marriages, the religious
husband (as the stronger) may better adventure upon an irreligious wife, then a
christian woman upon an husband of that strain: for my part, I have seen
small odds in the bargain; Salomons words prove too true here, ^ecles 9. 11.
Victory is not always to the strong: its ill grapling by strong hand with an
headstrong woman. She should be the weaker vessel, but when she is perverted,
she proves the stronger in mischief. The sum of all is, let none that fear
God venture upon those that do not: and let all seek for their parts, to be
in the Lord, before marriage. Above all, let second marriages beware of
adventuring in this kind, upon each other for advantage sake (an error very
rise in this kind) for enhansing themselves for jollity, and a braver and
fuller life, then formerly they were content with: for it falls out commonly,
that by one appendant or other; as charge of children, perfidiousnesse in the
valuing of their estates, costlinesse of diet or apparel, or by some
unexpected canker, wasting the apple at the core, God cuts their comb, fills
their new hopes with new sorrow, and makes them wish that they were but as they
have bin, forfeiting all their felicity for naught. So much for this.

Exhortation to marry in the Lord in 3. branches*
an exhortation at all times necessary: but so specially necessary in these
gulling and cheating days, that who so should reject this counsel, were
worthy to give it himself too late, upon costly experience. And truly I less
blame them, who are of good estate, fearing God, for their buying good wives,
by forsaking greater worldly contents: which commonly are joined with greater
peril (for great portions commonly go with great stomachs, high spirits,
costly fashion, and great expenses.) They therefore who can deny a little
pomp, may buy much peace, and redeem both their own and their childrens
safety, with a little self-denial in outward respects, whenas they are fure
to gain it in spiritual. But I digress not. Still I press the point, Marry
in this Lord: concerning the which, Three branches of it.
I would commend three duties to the well-affected. The first concerning youth
before their entrance into this estate. The second more closely concerning such
as purpose to change their estate. The third concerning them upon their
contract.

Touching the first, The first: Youth must redeem her golden season for this
end.
the duty of young ones growing up toward this estate, is this, That they
redeem their golden opportunity of youth and single life: improving all such
helps either public or private; all such counsels of their ancients; all
examples of such as are commendable in this kind, especially any such motions
of the spirit in the ordinances, whereby they are inclined to seek the Lord to
be their portion, in pardon and grace. Remember this is your season of getting
about you such a stock of provision, as may hereafter stand by you. This is
your golden time; each period following will prove worse downward, even brass,
iron, and clay. Mark how the greater sort of youth dally out their precious
time, never setting their hearts to Remember their Creator in the days of
their youth: Eccles. 12. 1.
but to lick up the common scurfe of the times, to learn fashions,
complements, carriage (which a veil little for the maine) to stand upon their
great births, portions or hopes, and so to live bravely. But how to be fit for
such a solemn change (I speak not of death (for that is out of thought, out of
season for youth) but of marriage, if God bring them to it; that so out of the
treasure which they have gotten, they may bring forth direction, Mat. 12. 35.
how to order themselves, or make their estate honorable and comfortable, its
furthest from their thought, What? do you hear, that the chief way to honor
marriage, is, entering with the Lord? and do you not conclude, that so weighty
a matter will cost you a great deal of preparing? What should you then do
beforehand? Surely, as your parents are busy about providing your portion
(which is their work) so, Luke 10. 42.
be you busied a better way, about that one thing necessary, to get the pearl
in the field, to seek the Lord while that he may be found. Heathen Poets bring
in Virgins upon the stage, professing that they take no thought for their
matches, they look at modesty and good report. The less you are busied about
things less needful, the more may you attend that one thing, which shall
never be taken from you. Except in these days of your youth, wherein each
thing is sweet, the maine work be thought of, the days are coming (and that
perhaps long ere old age) of which you shall say, you have no pleasure in such
objects: there may come a day of uncomfortable marriage, Eccles. 12. 1.
losses of estate, death of husband, of wife, sorrow of heart for your ill
matching, and then how will you do? Is it not just to such, as set the chief
things behind? yes verily.

Remember our Saviors words to Peter, John 21. 18.
When thou wast young, thou girdedst thy self, and went whither thou
would; but when thou art old, another shall gird thee, and lead thee whither
thou would not. Thou may (perhaps) meet with an unpleasing girdle; thy
great charge of children, calling for thy care and maintenance; the world
frowning upon thee, and not answering thy hopes; a riotous and spend thristy
husband, or waspish and untoward wife (for so it may be, Single life not like
marriage in point of troubles, but more free.
when thou have sought the greatest prevention of it, if God will so try thee)
debts, diseases, reproaches pursuing thee: in the midst of all these, little
leisure to wait upon the Ordinances, which should infuse the grace of support
into thee: and perhaps (which is worst) as small an heart after it. Then, when
all these have made they life unpleasant, and thy conscience coming upon all,
Read Prove. 5. 11. 12.
with a worse stream, and causing an overflow of sorrow unto thee; what shall
thou do? God has dealt righteously in it, because thou contemnest all helps
in thy youth, and therefore in thy trouble, sends thee to thy idol beauty,
money, will, laughing at thy misery: how will thou then wish thou had but
that former liberty granted thee, to marry in the Lord? John 3. 8.
Oh! how eagerly are things loved, out of their season? Alas! the spirit blows
where it lists, time and tide must not stay upon thee; thou had them, and
would not use the watchwords thereof wisely: why should the spirit any
longer strive with thee, but rather suffer thy sails to stand still for ever?
Genesis 6. 2.
If this then be the time of girding thy loins with grace for time to come,
gird them with that precious girdle of knowledge, sincerity, selfe-denyall,
faith, patience, and the like: learn to wear the yoke of God from thy youth,
Lam. 3. 23.
and it shall not pinch thee in thine age. By this girding of thine own soul,
thou shall be fit to admit of Gods unpleasing girdles for time to come, crosses
(if they come) shall befall thee in thine innocence, so as thou shall know how
to defray them, and the Lord shall be afflicted with thee in thy afflictions,
Esaias 63. 9, 10.
and teach thee how to pass thy marriage with comfort. But if this counsel
will do thee no good, but perhaps thou have learned to do as the world does,
that is, to welter in thy sorrows, and to bear them off with head and
shoulders, so that thou can go on through a second, or a third marriage (if
it so fall out) with as graceless an heart, as through the first. Certainly,
there remains nothing for thee, save that thy end prove worse then thy
beginning, because thy troubles brought thee not upon thy knees for thy former
sin, Mat. 12. 45.
but rather thou walk on still in the frowardness of thine heart. Esaias 57.
17.


I proceed to a second duty, The second branch of Exhortation in many
particulars.
when thou intendest a change; that is, be sure thou do nothing rashly, but
use all possible wisdom, that as thou have sought the Lord, so he would bring
thee to a suitable companion. A great work, I grant, and thou will ask how it
may be effected. Duty 1.
I will labor to satisfy thy desire with these advis^s following.
Self-denial and trial what Gods mind is about our estate.
First, deny thy self, renounce that carnal wisdom, presumption and will of
thine own, which ascribes so much to it self, as if it needed no advice:
submit thy self to the Lord, do not at first rush thy self upon marriage by
a necessity of nature, Mat. 16. 24.
or by custom of the world, 1 These. 4. 4.
or because years require it, or out of base ends, to give way to thy lust:
but let it be thy care to preserve thy vessel in holiness and honor:
abstain from all provocations to lust, be much in prayer for a sanctification
of every age and condition of life, perhaps the Lord has appointed thee a
single life, which may be much better for thee then marriage to honor God in;
perhaps thou art not a meet man for marriage; but it would prove incommodious
for thee: however, its thy duty to try what God has for thee in store, and
many repent them for their yielding to the first pangs of unbrideled youth, and
wish they had not given way so soon to an impotent humor; nay, many who at
the first intended no other save marriage, yet by their more wary and temperate
diet, company, and by subduing their flesh by fasting and prayer, Mat. 21. 17.
meditation, and close attendance of study, calling, or the ordinances of God,
have obtained such a gift of chastity, that they see it is rather the way of
God, they should not marry All receive not this gift.
. There are some (says our Savior) who are Eunuchs borne: marriage were a
snare to such (notwithstanding their frothy concupiscence) and some have made
themselves so for the kingdom of heaven. Mat. 19 12.
Chastity is a peculiar gift of God, all will grant; and God will have it
appear in some, that grace has more strength then nature has, as against
lusts, so above lawful liberties: and he who advises continence to some, 1
Cor. 7. 8.
in times of danger, especially in which marriage might prove a clogge; and
otherwise also for a more close cleaving to God, without marriage distractions;
there is no doubt, but he has grace suitable to frame some men and women, 1
Cor. 5. 5.
for this very purpose. And sure it is, Continency being'a gift of God, must be
sought for.
where such a gift is, God is highly honored with the pure and undivided
spirit of such as serve him in that condition. Therefore all due means must be
used for the attaining of it, till the mind of God be known in this kind; 1
Cor. 7. 35.
and no man ought to forestall providence in that respect: weigh well thy
strength or thy weakness in the balance, lay before thee the burdens and
service of marriage; thy bodily or spiritual abilities or imperfections, play
not the part of a fool, to say after marriage, I never thought it such a
state, I see now I am not meet for it: that should have bin thought of before:
inform thy self duly of the conveniences and inconveniences of each
condition, the single and the married; and when all is done, if God incline
thee to a private state, reserve thy self to it; I say not to thee, vow it,
No vows of single life w^^ranted.
for who knows but thy mind and body may alter, and require a change? but so
long as by thy abstinence from all provocations, and watchful eye over thy
self, thou can keep thy self chaste, and prove it by the contentation of
thy spirit, without noy somenesse, and neglect of the duties of thy place: thou
may gather the will of God by the sign, and so thou art to yield thy self
to a single life; wherein although there cannot but fall out some petty
discommodities (in some kind) yet they ought to be digested meekely, for the a
voyding of worse, and the attaining of the benefit of a single estate. For when
God is in a condition, that shall be tolerable to one, which would be
burdensome to another; and there is no state wholly free from trouble in this
world, only that is to be embraced (as near as we can) which is free from the
most. And having once understood the way of God, go not out of it wilfully,
nor dally not with him, in such weighty purposes: if it please him to alter thy
mind, thou shall understand it by signs easily, and may without sin,
follow him, so thy sin be not accessory. So much for the first counsel,
which I desire may be conceived of discreetly, and not mistaken.

The secondly, The second.
if notwithstanding this trial, thou shall find, Sound judgment, and
subduing of a rebellious heart.
that God has allotted marriage to thee, know, its a lawful condition of life,
be resolved it is so, be not snared with fear, melancholy, or any distemper;
although it be joined with many troubles, yet they shall be the lester when God
tells thee, its best, and thy gain shall be above thy loss; cast thy self
upon the ordinance in such a case, to make it sweet. And therefore prepare thy
self for it, deny thine own rebellion, pride, passions, will and lust: know
that marriage is no state (as many think) of licenciousnesse, to live at ease,
and as a man list. They who are of that mind, need no other plague then their
own error to vex them, when they meet with the contrary. No, no, this estate
is not for an untamed heifer: as soon may thou force an Unicorn to plow with
thy Oxen, Job 39. 9, 10.
as thy rude spirit to draw in thy yoke of marriage. Learn therefore
self-denial betimes (its as essential for a married life as for a single)
humility and wisdom, and how hardly this hard Theme will be handled, till the
heart be subdued and meekened before. For all unbroken ones are like to find
sorrow in the flesh, double and treble. 1 Cor. 7. 38.
If it be so in the green tree, how much more in the dry? If it be unavoydable
to the best, how much more to them who seek it? Luke 23. 21.
So much for the second.

Thirdly, Duty 3.
be warned against the common difease both of error and practice, Error of the
time to be abhorred.
which has overflowed the world, and so bleared the eyes of men, that they can
see nothing, save the outsides of things. Suffer not beauty, breeding, portion,
personage, education, with complementall behavior, fashionablenesse, and the
like, so to bribe thy judgment, and forestall thine affections, that religion
should come too late, and be thrust out from consultation. Beware of
covetousness, pride of life and jollity, ambitious and aspiring thoughts, to
count none meet for thee, save such as are transcendent. The world is now a
days become a great snare; each young one, scarce out of the shell, tickles
himself with the proposal of great hopes to himself, and telling him, His
fortunes are great, and he may marry in so and so high a degree, and what is so
high but his hopes may equal? And thus, not looking at his base beginnings,
and unlikelihoods of any thing, but puffing up himself with offers, with
conceit of his own worth, he grows to think the world too narrow to choose
in. And never, I think, was the spirit of the male-sex so vast, as in this
age, wherein the multitude of the female sex, and the contempt thereof, has
brought it to pass, that every boy new out of his prentiship, values himself
by the scores and hundreths, although scarce worth a groat besides his
occupation. And the most men deem none, be they never so religious (which in
our Fathers days would have bin counted rich matches) fair or good enough for
him. except beauty and wealth in an higher degree then common make them so. In
so much, that except parents overstraine and half exhaust themselves to dowre
their daughters, be they otherwise never so well brought up and deserving, they
lie by as no body.

a portion for you, (without your politic ambitious seeking) and such an one,
as whose portion in grace equals her estate, yea such as in judgment desire
you for your religion, although you are inferior otherwise, I deny not, but
(friends consenting) it is lawful; God has brought such a vantage to your
hands. But what is this to men's covetous and proud desires? As one once said of
his second match, I will now have a gallant, whatsoever it cost me; and so he
had such a one as he fancied. But by that time he had wintred and summered her
a while, his bladder was so pricked, that he sadly wished he had one of his
former wives sise and fashion, as plain as he then thought her to be. I
conclude thus, overweene not your selves (when there is little worth in you) to
equal the meanest women, or husbands; but moderate your spirits, and marry in
the Lord. Nothing hinders but the Lord and outward means may concur (as the
case may stand) and then the question is ended. But if it be so, that a match
of 500. pounds be offered with the Lord, and another of seven or eight hundredth
without him, or at least, without any apparent hopes of him, what then shall be
done? I answer, other conditions being concurrent in any tolerable proportion,
despise the greater offer, and take the lesser, counting the miss of thy gain
happy, and the gain of her grace with that loss, more happy. Buy thy wife in
such a case, Grace must be preferred to we^l^th, in marriage.
if thou be wise, and let it appear, that Gods oracles are no ties with thee.
If her price be above pearls, I trow, thou who wilt not part with a little
gold or silver for it, art well worthy, for thy betraying her for a little
pel^e, to betray thy self to sorrow; and to have bag and baggage and all. Tell
me, in what marquet could thou traffic so well, as to game a pearl for a
little silver? doubtless, thy silver would not recompense thy loss, if thou
should choose it, with a far less bargain. The times have bin, wherein
the man was to bring a dowry to the woman (though I think they held not long) I
am sure Christ's marriage is such to his beloved: 1 Samuel 25. 18.
) think thy self to be the man, and ask thy self, if not what thou would
give, yet what thou would forgo for a good companion? I think the days
were never so rare for marriages in this kind, Good marriages must be bought.
as now: and yet the sorrowful fruit of the contrary, should bring this choice
into date again. Its a custom (we know) for men ambitious to buy honor,
rather then want it, yea, glad they are, if they can so come by it. Do you so.
Marriage is honorable: buy it whatsoever it cost you, and be glad you can get
it so. Let bad customs be no prescriptions, and set a good one against a bad.

Fourthly, The fourth: pray hard for good marriage: pay and pray too.
let the Lord be much solicited by prayer both ordinary and extraordinary for
this blessing: beg hard for it, rather then want. I said before, pay for it,
and now I add, pray for it, pay and pray too, and think it worth it. Let the
Lord see that your soul is deeply in love with it, and will not be denied,
seek to honor him for ever for it, and count it not every man's case; and you
shall see, what answer he will make you. If prayer will not get it, try if
importunity will prevail: Mat 15. 18.
come for a wife as she Mat. 15. came for her daughter, and refuse any nay,
this is the way to get it: God will grant it thee, rather then be wearied (and
yet he loves it) with importunity. Either God will hear you, or else give you
a reason which shall satisfy you: which I add, because I believe that
exceeding good marriage were not good for some that seek it; it would puff
them up and hurt them; they rather need exercising marriages. But this know,
God will not part with his jewels so easily, as not to be sought to for them:
this blessing is like to that, Ezekiel. 36. end.
Ezekiel. 36. which the Lord so promised to give his people, as yet he would
besought too by them for it. Commit thy way to Iehova, Ps. l. 37. 5.
and he shall effect it. If thy wife be to thee as Samuel was a son to
Hannah, 1 Samuel 1. 27.
a wife of prayer, thou may the more rejoice in her, Genesis 33. 5.
and say with Jacob, Lo the wife which the Lord in mercy has given his
servant. Tit. 1. 15.
To the pure all are pure: each gift is sanctified by prayer: else, if thou do
only light well by accident, 1 Samuel 25. 1.
as Nabal upon Abigail, she shall be but a dry morsel to thee, without favor
or favor: thou shall find her as he did, a snare to thee, (...) helpless
helper (God depriving thee of the staff of ^read, the true good of a good
wife) not only a dry pit, but even an increase of thy judgment. It is said
Abraham called Eliezer his servant, in this weighty business of choosing a wife
for his son Isaac, bidding him to put his hand under his thigh: (a solemn
adjuration) for assurance, that he would not choose him an heathenish wife, but
one of Terahs family (the best which then could be had, though not as it ought)
beyond the river: how much more ought thou to put thy hand under the Lords,
in this case of thine own marriage, vowing, that if he will provide a Rebecca
for thee, and make thy voyage prosperous, thou will discern as real a
providence as Eliezer saw in meeting of her at the well. Is there never a wife
for thee (said the parents of Sampson) but thou must needs go among the
uncircumcised? Judge. 14. 3.
Vow it, that if God will betrust thee with one that is religious, though
another should be laid against her, yet thy lodestone would draw the former.

Fifthly, Duty 5.
add hereto the advice of the most judicious and impartial friends, Advice of
the most judicious and impartial friends requisite for good marriage.
that thou canft come by: for though two eyes are too few, yet he that will
advise in this case, must only judge with one, that is, a single eye, and
look but one way. Such is the subtilty of sutours now a days, that though
their merit be never so small, yet they will so go to work, that their credit
shall be good; forestalling the truth by their interest, either in a good
Minister, or man of note: if they be but moral, they will engage them by
gifts: if religious, by seeming devotion, to think well of them. Its a sad
thing to think, what bad matches have bin made by the mediation of the best
men; being first deluded. Alas! how easy is it, to make charity and credulity
to be on men's sides? the best have bin deceived about this business. But the
third person (who neither sows nor moweth by the bargain) is fitter to judge
of this game, then parties are. And be assured that true intelligence is not
easily come by, in these interblending days: yet, as I have said, thou have a
promise, that God will hide no secret from thee, Joh. 14. 14, 15.
if thou be his friend; so that thou do not pervert thine own way, and
stumble at the offense which thou layest before thy self: 1 Samuel 16. 6.
to think with erring Samuel, that the anointed of the Lord is before him,
when its no such thing, but thy carnal conceit: we easily believe that to be,
which we would have to be. The judgment of the Church, either is infallible in
this kind, or else its safter erring with it, then hitting well without it.
Great is the cosenage of dissembling parties, when they set themselves to sale,
by religious semblance. Machiavels maxim is all in all, viz. soundness of
religion is difficult to be had, and quits not the cost in the worlds esteem:
shows are easy, and will serve the turn even as well. Hence it is, that few
walk humbly and plainly, most are content with shows. As that Scholar of
Cambridge said, If I may get my degree, I have that I came for; let learning
go where it will: so these, I am now upon sale hill, if I be once sold, I have
enough. And I should offend many honest hearts, if I should discover what I
know touching the humors of some malcontents in this kind, especially of the
female sex, basely pretending that their conscience is the ground, whereas its
but a stalking-horse, serving to scrue themselves into some good opinion for
marriage: whereas, their turns not being served, but their ends crossed, they
have bewrayed themselves in their colors, to be but counterfeits. A spirit for
the nonce, is needful in this discerning work; therefore let inquistion be
narrow and wise, among them that are neither nearest the blood, nor to the
advantage, by such a match.

Sixthly, Duty 6.
be very observative and careful in your mutual parlies together, Observing
the sp^ttis of each other, meet for such as would marry in the Lord.
to mark the spirits of each other, having first begged of God an
understanding heart. The ear (says Elihu) tries words, as the furnance does
metals; the fool believes every thing, but the wise ponder sayings. So do
you. And as I said of the help of other men's eyes and wits: Establish thy
thoughts by counsel, Job 34. 3.
for in the multitude of councillors there is peace: Prove. 15. 22.
so I say to your selves, trust not so to others, (...). 1. 5.
as to put and dash out your own eyes and brains; ^ob 32 8.
but consult with wisdoms oracle, and ask it of him who gives and upbraides
not. There is a spirit in man, but the inspiration of the Almighty gives
understanding: as Paul* 1 Cor. 2. 15.
says, the spiritual man judges of all things, and is judged of none: so
here; only add this, They who have bin very wise in and for others, yet in
their own case, and this of affection especially, have failed much; and the
proverb is verified here, Once, all men have doted. Put difference therefore
between smooth words and neat passages of wit, or conceits that come only
from the brain, and between sound grounds planted in the heart. Out of the
abundance of the heart the mouth will speak, to a wise hearer. Its hard for a
barren heart to dissemble fruitfulness, or for a well-seasoned to seem
unsavory. Question each with other, not concerning persons, but things: not
about preachers or Sermons, or duties of religion, or circumstances only of
abuses and corruptions of time: (for who is not up to the ears in this now
adays?) but concerning the real work of the Word by name, how the Law has
quelled a proud heart, and stopped the course thereof in evil: how it is brought
so low and to such a tamenesse, as to crouch to God for the crumbs that fall
from his table: to be low in her self, and lay aside all her ornaments, Exodus
33. 6.
glad to be equal to them of low degree, and the like. Look not at the gifts
of each other, but try whether a mean opinion of our selves increases, Romans
12. 16.
as knowledge increases: ask each other, what the nature of a promise is,
wherein the nature and life of faith consists. Also, Acts 15. 15.
how faith purifies the heart, kills the strongest lusts and passions, quickens
the heart by a principle to all holiness, meekness, patience, mercy to the
distressed, and sorrow for the sins of others. If these seeds be planted in
the spirit, they will subdue it unto God; yea, they will set a new frame
within, Prove. 17. 24.
and make the countenance to shine. And whereas its objected, and modesty. Esaias
65 8.
Despise not a little, if these two be, for (as the Prophet says, Zach. 4. 10.
) There is a blessing in it. Observe also how providence swayeth your minds,
to or against each other; observe each others disposition, parts, natural
guises, and behavior; that which one thinks comely, another distasts, and some
disproportion and unsympathy herein, may cause religion to be meanly thought
of. And to end, remember that this business borders much upon the outward man;
beware therefore that neither outward defects do weaken, nor their abilities
do forstall thy judgment either way, from the due weighing of the best things
in the balance, to or fro. Slight defects will soon be supplied by religion,
where love is entire, but want of religion is not easily recompensed with
externals: be wise not to stumble too much at the former; neither let heat of
affection snare and cosen thee in the latter. So much for the means to be
used for marrying in the Lord.

And to this issue pertaines all this discourse: Conclusion of this second duty.
therefore still I so conclude, as I began. And because no bad marriage befalls
any, where the husbands sin is not chief, either because himself is bad, or
erreth in judging the wife: (the woman having only a refusing voice, The man
has the leading hand, therefore ought to be wary.
not a choosing, but the man having the prerogative of choice, as the leader of
the business:) therefore let the man especially look to himself. Its not for
the modesty of the woman's sex, to play the suitour, Women woers threaten woe.
to put forth her self toward the man, but to wait till God offer her an
object of consideration: and I seldom have noted matches very succesfull in
this kind. I remember the answer of a wise man to a Gentlewoman, which told
him, she could love him before any man: he answered her, but of al others, I
dare not venture upon you for my wife. He considered, that such pangs in that
humorous sex cannot come from judgment, because they thwart an ordinance: and
as a sudden torrent of passion or heat causes them, so they suddenly fall as
fast, and leave the channel dry: when the humor is over, then cool blood
succeeds, and checks the party for rashness, works a dislike of the choice,
and a very indifferent spirit to the husband; thinking him to be too mean for
them; and so little joying in him, waxing dark, and far from that sweet
temper of amity and subjection which a wife should bewray. Therefore ye
husbands be not gulled with easy matches; they are not so easy to forgo as
to get: the furthest way about, is the nearest way home. There is a
pleasingnesse in show, to be fancied by a woman, to be offered that estate which
I could never have expected: Touching marrying in the Lord: three questions
answered.
but when all is said that can be, it is too easy to prove happy: what it may
prove I cannot say, but since its not of God, and is against the modesty of
that sex, I can see no great hope of it. This by the way. I end my counsel
with a twofold question. 1. Question answered.
One is this: if (say some) we stay till these choice marriages be offered us,
we may wrong our hopes, passing the time of our virginity and youth vainly
away. To whom I say (I speak to none in this kind save to the religious; let
the rest move in their own sphere:) commit thy way to Jehovah, Psalm. 37 5.
and he will effect it: where there is truth of grace, it cannot lie hid; some
way or other the Lord shall provide, and the labor of thy love shall not be
concealed: fear not the worlds fears, cry not a confederacy, where they cry
it; 1 Pet. 3. 15.
but wait, and there will always be some men, who will be as jealous as women,
to plunge themselves into a cross marriage, as glad of thee as thou of him:
its a reciprocal case, and he who believes, makes no more haste then good
speed. Thy worth shall break out as the light, Psalm. 37. 6.
and thy patience and modesty as the noone day.

Another is, 2. Question answered.
whether should we go to find out such? for we see the families of such as
had name of religion, are now degenerate, and empty of such choice. None do
more degenerate to pride, vanity and profaneness, then the children of many
Ministers and professors, which have bin religious; yea, many towns anciently
of note for such, yet are now become as barren as any other. To whom I answer:
when the people came and told Samuel, that his children walked not in his
ways, 1 Samuel 8. 5.
it was not so much from any offense at their sin, as for their own ends, to
make them a King: many upbraid good families, because they are willing to balke
them, and to look otherwhere. Sure I am, that families are not so wanting of
good matches, as the good matches who are in them are disregarded. But further,
be it true, Gods rules are slighted in all places now a days, and religion
was never thicker sown, nor come up thinner then now: what wonder, if sin
carry this duty down the stream of contempt, as well as others? yet I say, is
religion gone quite out of all families? Though it be entailed to no one, yet
cannot free grace plant it self where it lists? if it leave one, can it not
choose another? religion (for ought I see) may lie long enough, except excess
of portion smell her out. Oh! follow not the stream, conform not to the
fashion of this world: God is tied to no places, families, congregations, he is
no accepter of persons; but in all places where his name is feared and called
upon, there will he bless. Such shall not need to distrust God: he makes none
a soon of Abraham, Act. 10. 34.
but he makes a daughter of Abraham also meet for him; use means to find them
out, and having so done, prefer pearls before pibbles, and the Lord shall
bring the good to the good, 1 Cor 14. 33.
for he is a God of order, not of confusion.

Gen ^ ^.
but that grace that made Lot eminently good, Noah excellently righteous in
their sinful times, Genesis 19. ^
does even more abundantly requite that blemish, with the select religion of
some one among them. I blame no man, if with a good wife he would be glad to
marry to a good family and stock: but in another respect, I would account that
grace which is unstained with so much ill, being in the midst of it, more
approved and tried with the touchstone, then that which grows up together with
the grace of a family, for company. Its some grace to a Lilly to grow among
thorns; and a Rose looks the more beautiful among thistles: contraries set one
against another, are the more orient. I should not refuse a truly virtuous
companion for the cause. And this be said of the second maine rule, for such as
are upon entrance of marriage. I go to the third.

The third duty concerns the two parties, The third duty preparation between
the contract and the marriage, necessary.
after their Contract, viz. to spend that space between it and marriage (as a
more due and solemn season) for a preparation of themselves to the estate and
conversation of marriage to come. But because I foresee that the Reader will
expect that somewhat be said in this Treatise, touching a Contract: I will
therefore suspend this third advice till I come to that argument in the fifth
chapter, at the end thereof. Thus much for this Chapter.

CHAP. III.
The second requisite unto a good entrance, viz. aptness or sutablenesse.

NOW then I come to the second general thing, The second general for
entrance, is, to mairy aptly.
pertinent to good entrance, and that is, to marry aptly in the Lord; that is,
to join all circumstances of equality and sutablenesse to religion. And in
this (as I conceive) as well as the former, consists the entry upon an happy
and honorable marriage. It is not for nothing, that the Lord brought Adam a
meet helper for him; that is, not only one created in the same image of
holiness as he; but made of himself, flesh of his flesh, and bone of his
bone: woman of man, equal to him in dignity; not of his head, nor his feet or
lower parts, but of his fides and ribs, in token of one that was to fide with
him, and agree with him in the married estate: The Apostle uses a phrase about
husband and wife, 1 Cor. 7. 35.
the which is translated thus [For that which is comely;] the original word is
an equal siding, or sitting close to the side, with comeliness: so should it
be with the married: there should be such an aptness in the choice (so far
as may be) that the one might seem to be a true Jugai^s.
fellow in the yoke, well met (as we say) and suitable each to other. Hence
marriage is called a Match, to signify, that couples should be peers, and
like each other, true matches. Otherwise, a manifest disproportion causes not
only a fulsomenesse, in the judgment of others, but to the affections of each
other. And this the Lord would have us take notice of, as foreseeing the
inevitable inconveniences, which must needs follow upon mismatched couples.
Cattle of uneven cize and stature, strength and proportion draw very ill in one
yoke, and untowardly. This I add, lest any should mistake my former speech,
viz. That religion is the true level of all other inequalities. I meant this,
that if it be the lot of any to enter marriage unequally, then there being
religion to moderate, it will make a better level then any other thing can,
when religion is absent. I did not justify unequality but accommodate it, when
it is. Here I add moreover, that when other conditions and respects are
unequal in any great degree, religion can do no more then she can do.
Marriage consists of a carnal piece one way, as well as a religious another
way; and we may say of it as of the belly, she has no ears. When I say, the
unequality of couples is apparent, it is as the clashing of a glassie body
against a groser metal. When a poor party meets with a rich, a well-bred one
with a rude and illiberall, a courteous with a froward, a bountiful with a
miserly, a noble with a base; one from the Court with another from the cart or
the shop; a proper and personable, with a deformed, crooked or dwarf, what a
disproportion does it cause, and a kind of loathsomeness? We say of the same
body that its an uncomely sight to behold a sweet face, and a crooked back: if
it be such a jarre in the same, how much more in two persons, which can better
view each other behind and before, then the same eye can see her own
crookedness? but especially when two religious ones meet, the one whose
disposition lies on the left and, to frowardness, melancholy, sullenness,
teachinesse in an eminent degree; the other's to meekness, courtesy and
amiablenesse; what a continual vexation is it? what a discord of sounds does
this cause? An instrument out of tune, unapt to play upon, distempereth each
lesson, and displeases every ear.

Who are unapt
but they can allege one thing or other for themselves. Old women marrying
young men, justify themselves by this, that they will maintain their husbands,
and that shall make up the flaw, and levels that valley. Deformed ones marrying
fair or personable, allege, they are penny white: and kitching-maids marrying
Gentlemen, may say, They are good nurses, and deny themselves as much another
way. Exceptio^s against the (...) of (...) aptness, many
nothing hinders why there may not be sweet accord between a very provident
wife matched with an improvident husband, when the husband counts that gift a
supply of his defect; because its only a defect in accident or quality, not
real. Difference also in estates, may cause a kind of necessity of
disproportion. It falls out that some impair or crack of brain lessens the
repute of a Gentleman well descended; this disableth his hopes of any great
marriage. Shall one defect infer a worse, a deprivall of marriage wholly? no
verily, a woman much inferior to him in birth and means, or years, should
yet be thought a very good, yea apt match for such an one, and that with
reputation and honor to her humility, if she be faithful. A gain, a man has
by a former venture, a great charge of children, which are like to lie upon the
hand of a second wife, both for education and attendance; in such a case, a
woman of an hundred or two hundred pounds worth, who is willing to requite that
defect with love and painfulnesse (being otherwise competent for her honest
parentage and fashion of life,) may be as equal a match, as perhaps one of a
thousand pound estate, without that encumbrance. Again, in the judgment of
men, defect of honor may sometimes be recompensed with wealth and estate: as
if a man nobly descended, yet grown to mean estate, has need of such a
supply, though perhaps he fail of some degree of the other: I say, if both
concur, its best; but if the defect do lie in honor, it may be equalled with
estate; and it were a shame for honor to quarrel with such a wife for
unequalnesse; for then may she say, she has bought her honor at a sad rate,
and upon dear terms.

Besides, More exceptions.
it falls out, that two marry, the one a man whom present honor and favor with
his Prince has advanced beyond the rank of his family; or perhaps, honor
has gone along with swifter pace toward him, then with some other house, who
yet may be as honorable in times past, and more ancient, then they are
presently, though not with such titles: if now the one match with the other,
shall present honor contest with such an one as inferior? No sure, if the
root be as good, the match is not unequal. Lastly, in case of persecution for
religion, or of going voyages of hazard, by sea to foreign plantations: in
which cases, strict equality is not to be mentioned: now in such cases, the
woman being to fly or transplant, needs the aid of a wise head, or the man the
help of a discreet woman: they cannot match themselves in their due ranks, as
otherwise they might; therefore looking at the maine point, that is, at
religion, and integrity of report, they match as near their condition as may
be: although it prove very much inferior, yet it is not to be counted a
dishonorable marriage. Master Fox in the story of Queen Mary's persecution,
reports of a worthy religious Duchess of Norfolk, which married to a godly
Gentleman, one Master Berty, (far under a Dukes state) with whom she fled the
Land, and in that most wearisome flight (as it proved) found him a most
faithful and loyal husband to the death. So then, if there be a general
proportion of aptness, so that the disparity lie only in a degree, not in
kind, it must not be censured: all cannot lie under the Equator, under the
same line and latitude; some may admit many degrees off. The truth is, in this
confusion of all things, its not to be expected that marriage should keep
quarter with exactness more then other occurrents of life: in some cases, we
must abate and yield of rigor, left we split all: Men are grown to enhase
their degree to an higher pitch then formerly; and it will be hard to convince
high stomachs, of means or unequalnesse; their ambition has too high a pitch.
Those persons are fitter to observe this rule, who are mean in their own
eyes, and equal themselves to those of lower degree. To leave them therefore
with their great hearts and hopes, let me yet yoke them with Paul's counsel,
Phil. 4 8.
Whatsoever is pure, honest, just, of good report, that ensue; adhorre that
which is base, uncomely, and absurd. But if it appear to the judicious, that
your carnal, covetous reaches and aspiring spirits have exercised themselves
in things too high, Psalm. 131. 1.
for ambition, state or worldly ends; let the issue be what it may (as commonly
it is repenting) I pronounce such matches to fall under this second rules
censure; they are unapt, therefore dishonorable.

Instruction. No cur^^si^y to mar^y aptly.
then hence it appears, that its no curiosity for any to regard aptness: Men
count this direction to be frivolous; imagining that marriage has a gift of it
self, either to find equals, or to make such (as the old proverb speaks of
friends:) and to wash off at once all eye-sores; nay, it will be hard for such
to fray away sorrow, and so shall you say when you have tried. One would have
thought Pharaoh might easily have kept out frogs from his Privy-chamber, Ex^d.
8. 3.
but it would not be. I dare promise none of the equallest marriages, that they
shall be free; but as for humors, rashness, base and by-respects, they never
did so find it. Those that catch up wives all at once suddenly, Judge 21. 23.
must repent them at leisure. Be instructed then, to think no care sufficient
in this kind; stay not till mistress Experience convince you of your folly,
in condemning others, but falling into the pit your selves. So much for this
first.

Admonition against overweening our own strength, in unapt marriage.
as thingking it sufficient to bind Bears (as the Proverb is) and to defray
any unaptnesse whatsoever without trouble. Oh, says one, let but my turn be
satisfied, and fear not me; if I have once pitched my affection, I am not so
soon unsettled again: Alas, you judge your selves by your present pangs, which
over-beare inferior dislikes; but who are weaker to digest inequality, than
such as think themselves wisest and strongest? Many have said as you say, If I
may have state sufficient, no bodily blemish shall trouble me. Another, If I
can get a religious wife, one hundred pounds will content me as well as three.
If I may marry one whom I love, I care not for portion, etc. but alas poor
green heads, before a few years be over your heads, when you have scummed off,
and licked up the upper sweet of your marriages, then your thoughts will go to
work, I have deserved portion, and religion and beauty too; and what not? Then
will your unstaid eye fasten upon others, whom you see to exceed you in
portion, birth, sweetness of nature, feature, and the like; then your carnal
part will lowre, and vex at your lot, and then, Oh, I might have been wiser;
and so you must either bite in all as ashamed of your choice, or else utter
your discontent, to make your lives uncomfortable. When you behold your parents
to wax estranged, your kindred aloof, your means decaying, charge increasing,
and the devil throwing in baits of such and such men and women, so personable,
rich, brought up, then will it appear upon wise terms, you have rejected the
counsel of apt marriage: and yet many fools (who are appointed to it) cannot
beware the second time, but rush themselves into as unmeet matches as before,
if not worse. Therefore acknowledge your weakness, hearken no more to such
Spokes-men, as are apt to prompt you with wives of their own fancying: (which
is the ruin of many ridiculous men, to take wives upon other men's trust)
ascribe not too much to your own wisdom; rather think your selves of all
others, likest to be deceived by your eye or affections. Say thus, A man I am,
and but a man, and nothing of a man is strange to me. I am as like to snare my
self, and as unable to endure a snare, as another, therefore I will prevent it
betimes. I embrace Gods allowance, as well to please my self with aptness, as
with religion: God is the God of order, as well as goodness. Nothing hinders
why other accomplishments may not be sought with grace, (so that be chief) and
it had need please well, which must please ever, or be an eyesore for ever.
Surely, if God give me my liberty, I dare not snare my self. And I see, that
as there are many wives, who for want of religion are a snare; so there are
also many religious, who for want of other accommodations, make every vein in
their husbands hearts to ache ere they die. Thou art not made of brass, but of
flesh, as others are, and have affections equally disposed to the like
distempers: its thy wisdom to know thy self.

And surely, Terror to affectors of unequal matches.
he who would but weigh the odious fruits of unequal marriages, might easily be
drawn from them. What an imputation is it for a Minister, young in years, to
match himself with some old woman for what she has? How meanly is his
discretion esteemed; and how basely does his covetousness hear always after?
How should such a man persuade others to trust God, when all men see the
bastard of his own unbeleese carried at his back? What vile affections are
bred in secret in many such, desire of the death of their companions being
grown decrepit; irksomeness of spirit, in tedious bearing the sickliness,
unhelpfulnesse, and unsociablenesse of each others bodies? How many have we
known, who being discontent with their lot, seek to other younger ones, and
defile them: some within their own dwellings, polluting themselves with their
servants? How many murders have unequal matches caused, of infants so
begotten and borne? Nay, how many have been the cursed attempts of poisoning
each other, to be rid of the loathed party, husband or wife? What one Assize
passes without such presidents? I do not know any one thing in the coversation
of man, which causes more disasters than unequal matches do, directly or
indirectly. Some being ashamed of their foolish choice, care not what they
attempt to be eased of them. Others crossed of that lust, which (like the
belly) has no ears, and will not be curbed, will venture any joint to satisfy
it: and to say truth, no tongue of man can sufficiently express the misery of
spirit (which many, otherwise not of the worst) do endure, through conflicting
with their own ill lots, and corrupt spirits in this kind: and the
wearisomnesse of inequality in one kind, forces them to as bad in another.
Men's first wives being forty years elder than themselves, when they have
buried them, partly through eager desire of posterity, partly longing after the
other extreme, marry a wife forty years younger, and so are lasht with their
own whip; and as much loathed by the later, as they loathed the former.
Fools, to shun one extreme, incur another.

Reproof.
either in first or second matches, which always aim at that which is most
contrary to their conditions. I have noted, that if there be any apparent
defect in a man or a woman, Branch 1.
they are so far from humbleness under it, or giving themselves content in
such as are defective in the like, Corruption always affects a contrariety to
the Ordinance.
or other kinds (which yet is equal) that rather they itch after and covet
such yoke-fellowes, as do exceed as much on the contrary, and are of the best
perfections. How ordinary is it for men to affect better than they deserve, to
cover their own defects, and to satisfy their lusts? and how wear some does
it prove? For as Solomon says, Prove. 30. 23.
The earth cannot bear the burden of unequal marriages, as of one that is heir
to her Mistress, that is, upstarts become impotent and insolent, scorning to
take it as they have done. On the other side, he who takes an inferior party,
thinks, that she should pay for her preferment, and become so much the more
subject and dutiful. Now when both parties find it otherwise, to wit, that
the one waxes proud, and the other thinks himself neglected, what a confusion
grows hereby? Nay, such poison I have noted to break out of some baser
parties in marriage, that because they are privy to themselves of unequality,
therefore they are jealous of their husbands respect and love, think
themselves despised, as not worthy to hold quarter with them, and when there is
of all other least cause, yet then come they in with their irksome suspicions,
and they imagine their husbands to show more affection to strangers than
themselves. Now equality would remove such misprisions. But to return, why
should a country plain man, affect the neatness of a nice Citizen? Or a
crooked, affect a person eminent for comeliness? Were not a country woman bred
for a Farm, more equal? Were it not better like went to like, that so neither
might despise other? Why should a low bred one affect a brave gallant? or a
poor one a wealthy? Why should a meek and gentle one, defile himself with a
shrewish spirit? Is it not the next way to sorrow? Does not unaptnesse cause a
division at last? Therefore this is a fruit of old Adam, to covet most
ardently, that which is forbidden unto us, and against us. What folly and sin
is out of measure sinful, if this be not? and who pitties such as plunge
themselves into misery, and need not? It is a kind of delight (in the
obliquities of men, who no other can punish) to see fools to punish
themselves, and lash themselves with their own rod, it satisfies indignation,
(where charity abounds not) but deserves no compassion, Do not such sigh in
secret, (for their complaints are but rare to others, because the error comes
back upon themselves) and wish they had married as deformed, as poor and meanly
bred as themselves. Do they not envy the ease and welfare that equal couples
enjoy, such as make much of each other, by the sympathy of each others
defectivenesse or parity.

Another branch of reproof concerns them that despise the rule of equal
matches. Branch 2.
Now what comes of these unequals, Reprose.
that widows of estates must marry their horsekeepers, Contemners of equal
marnage reprooved.
and Gentlemen their cook-maids, but this, that to cover over their baseness,
they must lay out their means to buy arms, and titles of honor: or if not,
yet enhanse their Farms, rack their rents, rake and scrape all they can get
(whereas their predecessors lived nobly upon their means, and kept good
houses) and all to purchase estate, and purchase equality. What is this, save
to become the scorns of the Country? Is it not due penance for violating the
sacred condition of equality? I might here inveigh against the usual matches
now adays made between boys and girls, scarce yet out of their shells: but
better occasion will offer it self afterward.

Exportation.
to whom I sing the former song, Marry in the Lord, Affecters of of unequal
marriages learn to be wiser.
still, but marry aptly, and lay the ground of honor in this entering with
aptness. Be not led away with that error, which you set up as an idol, in
your conceits: bless not your selves with your supposed happiness, as if you
were by so much the more honorable, then others of your rank, by how much you
have gotten a richer match they they; or because your marriage has pearkt you
aloft, above your own condition, or theirs of whom you descend. No wise Parents
joy in their childerns unequal marriages: let the model of such as are the
most modest in your rank and order, be presidents for you. I am not so weak
as to think, that education, breed, learning and gifts, (although there be no
great means) deserve not good marriages, religion concurring: but set not up
your top-sailes, and do not bear up your selves above your worth, in this
respect; but wait upon God, and be modest, lest he pull you down as fast: Romans
12. 16.
dwell at home, affect not high things; if God have indeed a blessing for you
in this kind (for else a great match may prove too hot and too heavy to
manage) let God lay it in your lap, ere you affect it, and let your goodness
find you out, while you lie hid. And when its offered you, yet swell not, say
with David, marrying Michal, Seems it small? had I not need to look well
about me? and with David, marrying Michal, Seems it small? had I not need to
look well about me? and with Abigail sent for to David, Let me wash the feet
of the servants of my Lord! 1. Sam. 18. 23.
go from the dignity to the burden, take thought how to live with such an one,
of greater breed and estate then your selves: consider what affronts may meet
with you (the best will save it self: 1. Sam. 25. 41.
) are you fit to drink of this bitter cup, if discontents should come into the
place of peace and love, whiles the one is loath to stoop to the others
lowness, and the other fears offense if he should suffer it? Better it were
to desist early, Matt. 20. 22.
then to bring a perpetual vexation upon your selves too late: beg of God
humble and wise demeanure, even all unequalnesse by religious carriage, and
self denial, lest your preferment prove a penalty, rather then a privilege;
otherwise, as he said of his Diadem, he would not have it for the taking up (as
being fuller of care then comfort) who knew the sorrow of it.

Secondly, Branch 2.
to them who already live under this yoke of inequality, Counsel to such as
are already unaptly married.
I advise the same which I did to them who are under an inequality of religion;
look back to that Section, and read it. Only this let me add here; since
your unsutablenesse came from your own wilfulness; do that now which you
ought before to have done (somewhat out of season perhaps, Iam. 4. 10.
but better late then never;) humble your selves under Gods afflicting hand;
remember it is unjust you should fret against Providence, and your lot in that,
which out of your own choice and free will, you have brought upon your selves.
Keep to your selves that straitness and pinching, which is only or chiefly
known to your selves. To live like malcontents, upbraiding each other, and
quarreling with God, is not only most sinful, but a disease worse then the
remedy it self: seeing the time was, wherein you seemed each to other, the
most precious of all; its reason that now you make the best of a bad bargain,
and of each other. If then beauty, wealth, or the like objects, so bleared your
eyes, that you forgot the rule of equality; reremember you have finned not only
against your own souls, but even against them whom you have unequally married,
who in another equal way, might perhaps have lived much better and
contentedlier, then now they do; with companions of their own fashion: so
that you should doubly wrong them by your discontents. Rather look up to God
by faith and repentance for your error, that it may be covered, and that Gods
anger being removed, you may find your yoke as tolerable as an unequal one
may be. And as once a grave man said to one in this case, if God ever offer you
a new choice, beware least you stumble at the stone, which once foiled you. And
so much of this second general also, and of the whole direction serving for
the entrance into an honorable marriage; now we proceed to that which remains
in the next Chapter.

CHAP. IV.
A Digression touching consent of Parents, and sundry Questions and Objections
answered.

I should now proceed to the second general head, Occasion of this digression.
whereof I made an honorable marriage to consist: viz. Continuance therein in an
holy manner. For handling of Consent of Parents, and a Contract.
But I am occasioned to stop my course a while, for the space of this, and the
next chapter: because an hint of new matter being offered in the former
discourse, touching consent of Parents, and the contracting of the Couples: it
will be looked for, that somewhat be here said, about both, e're I wade any
further in this Argument. Of the former thereof in this fourth, and of the
latter (if God please) in the fifth, Consent of Parents necessary for marriage,
and why?
and then we return. Touching this former, consent of Parents, if I should go
about to make any set proofs of so generally a confessed truth, which all
ages, nations, histories, laws both divine and humane, common, civil, yea
cannon too (though with exception) with one voice have averred: I might seem
not only to add light to the Sun, but to weaken that which I would
strengthen: yet for order and forms sake, a word or two may be premised for
the necessity thereof, I say necessity in a way of God, though not absolute:
for this business of marriage without parents consent is one of them, which
ought not to have bin done, yet being done, must avail, for the avoiding of
worse consequences: that is, consent is not so essential to marriage as some
other things are, that the non-concurrence thereof should disanull it again.
But in a moral and meet way, its necessary that marriage be attempted with
consent of parents. And surely, if those heathen Laws seemed just which
yielded unto parents power of life and death, over their children (supposing
perhaps that love might well enough be trusted) and thought it meet enough,
that they who were the instruments of giving children their natural life,
might be permitted to be Judges of the same children, in taking it away; or
perhaps rather choosing, that a parent might kill a vicious child for some
offenses, then the child kill the heart of a parent, by his dissoluteness:
then surely much more may it be yielded to parents to have power to give life
or to mar their marriages. I do not by the way justify the former law, but
rather think it was a dangerous snare, and betrayed the lives of many
innocents, into the hands of the unmercifull; and no doubt, if it were in force
among us, it would provoke many profane and malicious persons, to shed the
blood of better children then themselves. But I plead the far greater equity
of this law, that parents may claim a right in the choice of their childrens
marriages. Must parents have the worst of it, and be debarred from the best?
bear the burden of the whole day; the providing for their children, all
means of support, education, either ingenuous or machinall, help them to
Arts, Stocks, trades, which is but to be their drudges, if there were no more
but so; and shall they leave them just at the point of marriage, and betake
them to their own wisdom and counsel? No surely, it is good cause they share
in the honor, as well as the labor.

It it true, Parents cannot do as they would in matching of their children.
God makes matches, and parents cannot (as they desire) in such a world as this
is (wherein all are for their own ends) provide for their children such
contentfull matches as they desire, but that's not their fault. God must help,
or else they cannot, with the barn and winepresse. But yet in such matches as
are offered, parents must bear sway and stroke with their children: though it
is not in their power to afford them such as they wish, yet this must not cause
them to give up their Authority to their children to marry as they lift,
against rules, mentioned. And that which I say of parents themselves, Guardians
and governors are to look to their orphans, as well as parents to children,
in point of marriage.
I say of Father or Mother in laws, Gardians and Tutors, who by them, or by the
law, are left to oversee and order the ways of Children, not yet able to guide
themselves; yea although they be of such years and discretion, as perhaps a
parent, at least a step-father, might permit them to themselves. Yet it were
the duty of such a child, to take less rather then more upon himself, and to
advise seriously with them (ere he finish ought) whether he have been well
guided or no about marrying religiously, or aptly: Some parents, I grant, have
exceedingly wasted their Title, and infringed their Prerogative: for, such is
their ignorance, and injudiciousnesse in such affairs, (having in truth never
understood, in any degree, what their own marriage meant, much less are fit
to guide others:) also many are so vicious, and so debauched with sin, that
they have lost all ability to advise, either in this, or in any other weighty
business; but yet neither are these to be despised, but to be honorably
handled, and especially, if they shall desire to see and judge with other men's
eyes and brains; their children are to yield thereto as well as to themselves.
What special reports do the Scripturs make, See these texts Deuteronomy. 7. 3.
of that care which holy and wise parents had of their childrens marriages? How
did Abraham adjure his servant, Ier. 29 6.
to go to the house of his fathers, to choose a wife for Isaac? Genesis 24. 3, 4.
How does the holy Ghost brand Esau for matching without Isaac and his mother
Rebecca their consent, Exodus 22. 16.
to the heartbreake of them? How does Isaac and Rebecca charge Jacob to meddle
with none of the Heathens? And, if any prerogative might have exempted any,
then might Sampson a Judge in Israel, Judge. 14. 3.
have been exempt: who yet was not: for although it came from God that he
should marry that uncircumcized Philistin; yet he would have his parents give
their consent, Give me her: and when they saw the way of God, they ceased. But
til then, they argued as parents should do, what? is there no wife to be chosen
for thee out of any of the families of Israel, but thou must seek among the
Philistines? Verse 4, 5.
Not so much as Hagar that bond woman, but it is said, that she took a wife for
Ishmael, out of the land of Egypt: Genesis 21. 21.
as if the holy Ghost should take it as granted, that none of the Church should
question it. If a son might not alienate his fathers goods, without his
consent, there least of all himself.

I say, Further proof of the point.
the Scripture testifies from the beginning, that this authority did reside in
the parent, from God. God himself the father of Adam, Luc. 3 vlt. brought Eve
to him: he did not seek her himself. A great and leading ground to the point.
And this prerogative God derived to parents (notwithstanding the fall and
forfeit of Adam) for ever. See Deuteronomy. 7. 3. Thou shall not take to thy sons,
any wife of their daughters. I^rem. 29. 6. Give your children wives. And Paul,
He who gives his virgin to marriage does well. etc. Neither is it sufficient
which Bellarmine, (the chiefest Papist of all who opposes this truth in his
19. cap. of Matrimony, and that out of the Council of Trent, Session 14. for
most of other Papists do oppose him in it) replies, that this text only
implies, Marriages ought not to be made without the privity of parents: for
Gods charge does not only show what ought to be done, but, that else the
Marriage is frustrate, as appears Exodus 22. 16. Where it is left to the parent
to deny Marriage in a case of uncleannes, which else urged Marriage. Much more
then in cool blood. See also Numb. 30. 4. If a parent might frustrate a vow to
God, much more a private civil act of his child to marry. Neither is this
meant (as Bellarmine dreams) of a Maid under years, but simply of one under
covert: though of 20. years old: and so the Ebrew word [Nagnar] is taken Job.
1. 19. and so another Jesuit upon this text confesses, a parent might
frustrate any vow whatsoever. Cornel. a Lap.
See Gal. 4. A son differs not from a servant, being under his father: he can
dispose of nothing in the house, of his fathers goods, without consent: how
much less himself, who is the foundation of the family, as in the Ebrew word
[Ban] notes? Another Papist, Espencaeus in his book of clandestine marriages
professes the like against Bellarmine in the last Chapter save one. Heathens
have constantly been of this mind. Genesis 34. Sichem craves of Hamor to get him
Dinah. Catullus, Plautus, Terence, Latin Poets, Sophocles a Greek one, all
both Comic and Tragique, who speak the customs of their times, do intimate
the same. One of them brings in the father distasting his son for a
clandestine marriage, Terent. Andr. Scen. 3.
thus, Callst thou me thy father? Needst thou me for a father? Have thou not
found thee out, a family, a wife and children against my mind? The son
answers. I yield up my self (father) to thee, impose any task, command me what
thou will; Will thou have me divorce the wife I have? Will thou have me marry
or not? I will bear it as I may. Justinian shows the meaning of the civil
law, lib. 1. Instit. Tit. de Nuptiis. Then are marriages good, when made by
consent of such, as whose power they are under: it is Beza his speech, in his
Tract of Poligamy and Divorces: Civil laws about necessity of parents consent,
are more known, more clear, more holy, then that any man can be ignorant of
them, can darken, or can abolish them. Paulus the Civilian in his Title,
touching the right of marriages, says, Marriages cannot consist, except all in
whose power the parties are, consent. Hottoman a famous Civilian speaks the
same, in his book of chaste marriages, part. 4. The Council of Eliberis,
mentions the judicial law of Moses, confirming it: If a Damosel have bound her
self by oath or promise in her fathers house, and he gainsay it, it is
frustrate. A Canon of Basil adds, marriages otherwise made, are counted but
whoredoms. I conclude with Erasmus, no Scripture, no Testimony of value can be
alleged against this Truth. If it be asked, whether upon the fathers
consenting, the mother dissent from the marriage: or contrary wise* what is to
be said? I answer, The mothers consent makes for the better being, but the
fathers for the being it self thereof: for he is the head of the wife and of
the family.

Bellarmine, and the Council of Trent (his Idol, Confut.
which its like he so adored, that against Scripture and all Laws he defends
it) who does so stervingly maintain the lawfulness of Marriages against
parents consent, that there need be no more to confute him, then the
barrenness of his own defense, in which he always returns to his old song,
that though Nature teach Parents right, yet, not the disanulling of Marriages
upon non-consent. Touching which I answer, Many reasons may enforce the
continuance of a thing done (especially in so weighty a case as this) which yet
argues not the well doing; that is all the question. He urges the examples of
Jacob and Tobija: whereas the one (although sixty years old at his marriage)
yet did nothing without his father and mothers consent. Tobija (if the Text
were Canonical) had an Angel with him to guide him extraordinarily. Indeed
Esau's example he may plead for it (with an ill handsell) who its like went
against Isaac and Robecca's charge. Much good do him with it. He alleges a
Decree of Clement, A son is not compelled to follow his parents choice. Who
doubts it? But, does this follow, A parent may not compel his children to
marry against their will: Therefore a child may marry contrary to the Parents?
No surely. That which he adds out of Ambrose, she may choose her husband,
ought she not to prefer God in her choice? comes to no more then this, That a
Virgin has power to choose (at least to refuse her husband) but yet with
parents consent. The argument he brings from the validity of the marriage of
slaves against their masters consent, and that, upon the ground of the
institution and ends of marriage, is doubly answered: first, that it is true,
Masters cannot bar their slaves of marriage, but yet they may limit the right
of Nature, by appointing them wives, for avoiding wrong to their own estates.
Secondly, the case between masterlike power, is not like to parentall: for the
power of the former is only civil, and therefore may be restrained by law;
but the other is natural, and therefore need no restraint: since its to be
supposed that parents desire the posterity and marriages of their children,
much more then masters need do of servants. As touching that objection, that
after copulation marriages are necessary; this proves not, that the power of
parents is dissolved, (for what absurdity is it for one to think, that his
second sin should favor and justify his former offense?) But that, for diverse
inevitable consequences upon the breach of a marriage already made, it is
better for a parent not to use his right, then to use it. Its the voice of the
Law, Fieri non debuit, sed factum valuit. So much for this.

Yet as there is no rule so general, Exceptions against this general rule.
but it admits exceptions, so does this. One is, the bar of Gods law, in case
of uncleanness committed by the parties before marriage: Exodus 22. 16.
in which respect God forbad that they should by any means be parted: so that
here parents consent was, though not wholly, yet partly prevented, not in
right, but in point of honesty, by their lewd children, who forced a necessity
of marriage upon themselves, being become as outcasts, not worthy of such care
of parents to be cast upon them: besides it was to prevent beggary of the
bastards, and the defiling of the land by fornication, if they had been
permitted to cashiere such as they had defiled, and to marry chaste persons:
for, its better one house be troubled, then two, (since one must be) let them
eat of the fruit of their own labors, and thank themselves. The law is
mentioned by Moses, If a man finding a maid, defile her, he shall surely marry
her, because he has humbled her. Another case is, the supine neglect of
parents, when as they see offers made to their children: to wit, when as they
permit parties unknown, and pretending to be such as afterward they prove
not, but tainted with lewd qualities, and of no such estate as is made show of:
I say, when as, through foolish credulity they believe all shows, or use not
means to enquire thoroughly after their manners and deserts, but are cheated by
their dissembling and hypocrisy: but all this while they harbor them, or
seeing that their children are forward in their affections toward such, so,
that they are ensnared: and yet the parents suffer matters to pass on, and
hold their peace: then the rule of the word ought to be observed, That consent
is employed by their silence: and why? because he, in whose power it is to stop
evil, and yet does not, seems to command it. Not only if there appear no
more cause of breaking it off, then at first, (for then it is only the
headstrong will of the parent, unjustly discontent) but, although there should
break out more hideous and odious crimes against the party. For it was the
parents duty to have used all diligence to have searched out the truth of
things at first, Duty of parents toward children unwisely suffered to link
themselves.
and to have made all other matters clear, before such time as liberty be
given to the parties themselves to ensnare themselves. For by this means it
may so fall out, that extreme danger may ensue, both to the party deserted,
and to them that desert. Yet this I add, that all means be wisely used, to
unstitch and dissolve that league by degrees, which has long been in
knitting, rather then to do it rashly. Let parents present to both the parties
their deep dissimulation, persuading them, between themselves, rather to
break off, then incur a tolerable vexation by marriage; and live at
perpetual feud with them, who seek their best welfare. But, if nothing will
prevail, I say, as sad as the necessity is, yet the parent comes in too late
with alleging his prerogative. If (says the holy Ghost) a virgin has vowed a
vow, Number. 30. 4.
(say it be a purpose to marry such a man) much more if such a likelihood be
daily presented to his eye; and he forbid it, then he does no more then his
authority may claim, for he is a parent, and may disanull it: but if he let it
pass, and do not gainsay it, he is supposed to resign up his right in
refusing, and so to establish it.

Another case is, Another exception.
in second marriages of children, men or women. For although there be a
difference of judgment in sexes, yet, in this both are reputed to have equal
liberty to match themselves, and to be discharged from the power of the parent.
The first marriage made the parties one flesh, and divided them both from the
parents house and authority. So that in such a case the rule holds not. Paul
does not extend the power of a parent over a widow, as to a virgin. In the
latter, he always yields to a father his liberty: if he give his virgin to
marry, or refuse to give her, he does well both ways: that is, foreseeing the
danger of persecution, and withal knowing the strength of his virgin, 1 Cor.
6. 36.
that she is not necessitated to marry, he may refuse, or otherwise he may
yield; he offends in neither. But after one marriage is expired, the widow is
not so tied, because providence has settled her upon her own right. Howbeit,
for the weaker sex, the case so falling out that she may stand in as much
need of counsel at last as at first, yea of more: this I say. That it were the
part of such widows to remember that they are children, and to ascribe a
reverentiall and honorable esteem of their parents counsel, out of wisdom
and discretion, although a precise command of God do not absolutely urge it.

Lastly, Parents must observe the condition of their children.
parents must still look at the maine point, that is, the condition and state
of a childs both body and mind. For a parent understanding the case to be
such, that a child cannot without deep discontent of spirit, and
inconvenience of body, propending strongly to marriage, and shunning those
continual and noisome vexations, which would attend the contrary; I say,
cannot abstain: then, his authority not being allowed him, for the tyranny and
hurt, but the good and welfare of his child, he ought not unseasonably and
rigidly to dispute his right, or to hold it; but tenderly and wisely to release
it, at the childs humble instance. And this I might also press in other cases
as well as this. But because they will occur better upon objections brought
against this point: I will stop two gaps with one bush, that is, both lay down
the extent of this exception, and also answer a question, both in one.

For why? Childrens objections against parents carelessness in their marriages,
answered.
here it is objected by sundry children (as I touched before) that, as near as
they can, they observing the rules of God, in religious and apt choice, and
being now to strike up the match, they say, The parents or guardians (at least
of one side) wilfully withdraw their consent. To whom I must answer with much
caution, for the safegarding of a parents honor: First, ye children beware
lest you put any unjust affront upon your parents, that may cause this rigor
you complain of, and open their mouths against you. For if you do, their
cause must be heard when you must stand by. Put case that it fall out that your
match be not faulty, after your trial of each other: howbeit you upon the
presumption thereof have been your own carvers, and carried all with your
own wits, leaving your parents to serve your turn after: and hereupon the
parent being offended, looks not so much at the fitness of the match, as at
his own contempt: who can in such a case justify you? In this case,
especially if the parents be irreligious, and unable to value the price of a
good husband or wife, I see not what course you should take, but to humble your
selves for your offense, considering in your own case, how unwilling you would
have been to be so served. Parents, I grant, should not only hearken to, but
run and ride to seek out good matches for their children, if any occasion be
offered, and yet many of them are so stout, peevish, selfe-willed and envious,
that of all other matches, they will cross them most which are the best. But
yet, you children, cross not them, by forcing unequal conditions upon
parents, in consenting to your marriages. Although you be granted to be
religious, yet it becomes not you to think so well of your selves, that being
unequal in state and stock, or in other respects, you will force the marriage
of one that has great means, under color of religion. For in this case a
parent is not bound, but has his excuse. If God should move a parent in this
case, considering how few are religious or thrifty, to match their children
under-foot for the world in respect of grace, it is well and good: embrace
their good will thankfully. But to obtrude your own worth upon their
affections, Counsel to such children.
you ought not: whether the parents be religious or not. The like I say, if
the disproportion lie in any other kind: This by way of digression; that
children be sure of it, that their matches be consonant and agreeable to the
rule; for they may be godly, and yet not apt matches. But to answer the
question, as it lies, If I say your matches be truly equal, yet your parents
will not yield: Then, first, Let such children count it the cross, that they
are fallen upon such parents; let them not domineere over them, and outshoote
the devil in his own bow, of resolution and stomach; but humbly submit to the
parents, as parents in general, seeking by all means to win their love and
respect, first or last, by your obedience and well-pleasing: that they may see
it and say, My child ^s as careful to give me content, as to serve his own
turn. And (if need require) let such friends be used by way of mediation, as
may best alay their opposite minds, showing them the ill consequents thereof:
And lastly set on the Lord also to encounter their untractable hearts, humbly
supplicating that he would turn the hearts of fathers to the children, Mal. 4.
ult.
to melt them, and to give them the eyes of Doves, instead of Crocodiles. If
all these prevail not, then (the discipline of the Church being in force)
course ought to be taken to make complaint of such wrong, Parents obstinate in
consent, to be curbed.
viz. that a parent abuses his or her authority to hurt, and therefore implore
the aid both of the Church and of the Magistrate, to reduce parents into due
order: for they themselves must know, that they are under Authority, and no
further made the Judges over the children, Matt. 8.
then as they can answer to God for their good carriage therein. And so also to
require such a childs portion from them, as in such case is fit: But, if
children cannot meet with such relief, I leave them under the cross which God
has cast upon them, to take it up meekly and bear it, Mat. 16. 25.
till God ease their chain. But, if the father consent and the mother only be
obstinate, they may with good conscience notwithstanding proceed, yielding all
due respect to her. So much for this.

Another question here moved is this. Questions about Parents consent,
answered.
Put case that two parties have got the affections of each other, but the
father on his deathbed, dissent and forbid the marriage: whether is the
conscience of the child absolutely so tied by those irrevocable words, that he
or she may not dare to attempt marriage? I answer, that child which out of an
honorable respect shall wholly forbear, for fear of after scruples; or shall
piously incline to forbear, doubtless they bewray a very awful heart to the
counsel of their parent, especially if they be convinced of an overruling
providence determining the business. But to affirm directly, that a child is
always bound to obey in such a case, I dare not. Many circumstances must be
observed, next to the rule: and therefore first I shall think it fit in this
business, that the parties resign up themselves to the judgment of some wise
and impartial men, who (without playing booty) may judge whether such a
marriage be according to God, or not. If not, they ought so much the rather to
dissolve it, as being not only contrary to parents will, but Gods rule also.
And then there is no more to be said in it: for a pious child ought not to
violate such a band as this, upon any affection to the other party, or like
pretense. But if the marriage be found good and equal: then ought it not to be
broken off, through the parents refusal at his death: But the will of God
being conceived to be for it, the parents will must not contradict his. And
hereto add, that it must indifferently be enquired, first whether the parent
were a man truly judicious to pronounce such a sentence? else sure its a deadly
snare. Again whether in his life he permitted the parties to consort in
ordinary, till they had won each others heart: for in that case, his denial
is doubly injust: especially if he have actually given consent during life, and
changed it without ground. Also whether he were not alike various in other his
conversation, easily drawn to or fro by small persuasion: Likewise whether he
have not in other of his childrens matches, been hardly drawn to consent, no
real cause of his dissent appearing: whether refusal might not proceed from
some other sinister cause, and not the dislike of the match it self; as from
privity to his weak estate, loath to disburse much, ashamed to come short of
the worlds expectation for discredit sake, or the like. If probably these
things do appear, I think the bare religion of the fathers last sentence,
ought not to prevail against more forcible reasons to the contrary: and upon
the weighing of these cases, the parties ought to think that they hear the
voice of God, to bear down the parents: Although the dead parent, cannot
alter his words, yet it may be supposed he would have altered it, if he had
lived, because he ought. For this so much. If any more questions arise, I will
handle them in some of the uses following, which now I hasten unto. And whereas
they do concern both children in point of duty, and parents in point of
dignity, first of the first.

Reproof.
as have not only digressed from, but directly transgressed against this rule.
Terror to all rebellious Children, who marry against their Parents consent.
If the duty of children be so manifest, how is it, that so many children do
at once break through this divine edict, as great flies through cobwebbes, by
the stronger laws of their own wills? Do you so degenerate (Oye impes) from
all modesty and obedience? That whereas you might marry, not only within the
rank of your education, but also of religion, and the fear of God; now
through your wilful contempt of parents, not only you choose you unequal
husbands among Ostlers and Scavengers, (for these are honest trades according
to their places) but to graceless ones, and such as are deservedly by-words of
reproach for their swearing, drunkenness and all profanenes? Is this a parents
requital at your hands, that when there is no other trouble, that should bring
the gray hairs of your parents to their graves, then the treachery of those
which came out of their Ioines and wombs should do it? For, as for the beggary
you bring upon your selves, who should pity them, who wrong themselves
willingly, and choose themselves such a portion? Oh! but (say some of these) we
did it in a sudden passion of love, and is not that to be pitied? I answer,
considering what constant misery, your short passion has procured you, your
selves are like to have the worst of it: it were well, if others would learn
to be wiser by pitying your folly. But, there is more in it then passion. For
why? How many of such rebellious ones do we meet with daily, who contrary to
all their parents counsels, letters, running and riding after them, threats if
they venture, promises if they obey, notwithstanding all the fears and
jealousies, warnings and watch-words of their parents, Cavills of such Children
answered, as will be loose in du^ty to their Parents consent: yet will have
their parents tied to them, in means and maintenance.
yet with deep dissembling and lies, count it their chief happiness to keep
off the suspicion of that from their notice, which yet all on the sudden they
dare rush upon, the most clandestine and desperate matches that may be! yea,
after they have engaged themselves to their parents by vows and obtestations
to the contrary, that they thought they might rely upon them, Esa. 63. 10. as
children that will not lie, yet then have they broken through all bands; Isay,
what is this, but the depth of subtilty and villainy? But still they object, The
business was so suddenly brought to pass by persuasion, as we could not
prevent it. Why? Do you wonder that your way should be so smooth, having such a
factor of hell as you consult with, to promote it? Such Proctors as for a ten
shillings matter will license it, for half so much dispatch it, and send you
packing to woe and misery? No, no, Thieves shall never want receivers and
concealers. But, still you will say, It should not have been done, but now its
done and past; It Is true, its done strongly enough, I grant, for parents must
digest that which they cannot vomit; But the necessity of the knot excuses not
the knitting. And, you shall have many lookers on upon such matches, who will
speak much for them; the case being none of their own, who, if it were their
own lot to have such children, would be ready to cast the first stone at
them, Ioh. 9. 5.
and of all others, be most implacable with them. To whom I say, Justify not
sin in others, suspend your censure till it be your own lot, as its like to be
the sooner, if you excuse it.

Oh! but for pity sake, you must now help them with some means to maintain
them in a hard world! why? will not love alone maintain you in cool blood, as
well as it did in hot? what? have you forsaken your parents in the maine, and
come you now unto them for the by? shall you have the pleasure, and they the
burden? Alas you divide badly! Nay, nay, you must hold to you to what you have
chosen; Parents may be shy to disobedient Children, and why?
Parents have but small joy to maintain thieves and traitors with their means
and estate, it cost them more the getting, then your easy matches cost you.
But still they allege, Would you have God deal so hardly with you, when you
repent? I answer, God forbid, but (if there be any sound repentance wrought in
you) you should be as freely pardoned, as we our selves desire to be forgiven
of God! But if you think to tie God to your sleeves so far to follow you
with grace and repentance as fast as you sin, or to accept of that for sound,
which you say is so, you much mistake it: he knows well if he should thus
easily be baffled by one, he should have enough* of your custom for ever. But
still you insist: Let us be accepted to favor as before. I answer, Its a
greater matter then so. If we could as easily purge your hearts, as pardon you,
we would imitate God, who does both at once. But since we cannot, we must
deal with you as David dealt with Absalon, though upon a show of submission,
he forgave him the punishment, yet (by your leave) he commanded him to his
house, and received him not to favor. 2. Sam. 14. 24.
And as David wisely abstained from that in discretion, for fear of nourishing
up the rest of his children to the like treachery: so parents had need rather
to set up such children as Beacons to the rest of their fry, to scare them from
the like attempts, then (as many fools do) by over hasty reconciliation, under
hope of their repentance, to encourage them to tread in the like steps. There
will be time enough for that when they have bitten longer upon the bridle, and
had leisure to repent that in coolenes which in their heat they committed. And
so much for this first Branch.

It also confutes the practice of such children, Branch 2.
as, although they will seem to rely upon the consent of parents, D^ssembled
and forced consent of Parents by children, is sinful.
and cannot be condemned by men in the business, yet its not out of any honor
or obsequiousness to parents, from conscience of the duty, or beholding Gods
authority in them: but from policy and necessity, because they know the parent
is the purse-bearer: and as the proverb says, Be it better or worse, we must
be ruled by him that bears the purse. These may say of themselves as he once
did, I swear with my mouth, but I carry an unsworne heart within me; so, in
fact I yield, but my heart is unloyall. So that (they say) they must be well
advised, for fear of overthrowing all. If their parents should take a pritch
at their neglect, they might lose a future friend, and forfeit the hopes of
their own good estate: and how then should they do? This is the pad in straw,
this forces the eye of many children to be upon their parents, and to make them
a grand mark or object of their duty. Galat. 6. 4.
I say to you, as in another sense Paul speaks, Let every man have the cause
of his own comfort within himself, and not without: let not the duty of a
child be resident upon the fathers ability, to benefit him, or to cross him:
so that a parent may thank his wealth for his childs service, and say, If it
had not been silvered or gilded over, it would never have proved. But, let it
proceed from sincerity. Some will say, Romans 12. 9.
Its well that it comes any way. I answer: Half a loaf is better then no
bread: for by this means order is kept in conversation, and many absurdities
held off, though there be no thank to them for their obedience. For, surely if
such children could draw from their parents what they listed to fish from them,
as that Prodigal did, Luc. 15. 12.
with a word speaking, they would soon bid duty adieu, and cut out the cloth
in their own fashion, marrying as they list: wherefore yield this honor to
thy parents entirely, as their due: Be humbled if it have not been so; make
your peace with God for this, as well as for any offense else whatsoever; else
God may exercise thee by some unwelcome buffetting, to thy cost, and perhaps
make thee to behold that sin which thou were blinded in, in the glass of like
disobedience of thy child to thee, yea such a child, as (of all others) thou
presumedst would be most faithful to thee; Matt. 7. 2.
Do as thou would be done unto; measure out to others as thou would have
them to measure back unto thee. So much for this second.

Thirdly, Branch 3.
this taxes other children also, who will perhaps suffer their parents to carry
some stroke with them in their matches, H^lfe consent of parents, or con^ent
after their contract, is faulty.
but themselves will have the chief hand in it, and it must come in after the
matter concluded between themselves. And then, at last, lest they should incur
the reproach of refractory ones, they temporize and flatter their parents,
causing them first to think well of, and then to ratify their marriages;
rather indeed to salve their own credit, and for necessity sake, then because
they are willing. These counterfeit actors and forces of consent, (as if it
were voluntary) sin against the rule of Consent of parents: Shall a child
bind the parent to the good abearing in this kind, and then by his consent,
countenance and shroud his own act, in it self unwarrantable? Consent is the
parents due: but whiles thou do urge it unjustly, thou make it thine own
work. Thou either do persuade thy parent really to think well of thy doing,
and that's to gull him: or else only to make show of it, and that's to make him
equivocate like thy self.

Exhortation to marry with Consent of Parents.
to remove all colors, shifts, subornations of parents, and go to work
plainly, deserve, sue, seek for the consent of parents. Leave is light, and
sweet: liberty against rule is pleasant in the taste, but bitterness is in the
end of it. Remember that is the best marriage, whose sweetness is best in the
bottom: a natural motion is swiftest in the end: now commonly matches of your
own making, are best at first, and worst after. Aim at so peaceable a
marriage, as may be so in a sad strait and affliction, and may not pursue and
accuse a man, when he is wounded and sore: such an one as will not upbraid the
soul, and say, This day I remember my sin: and I feel this rod was of mine
own making. That which Paul speaks of the Magistrate, Obey him not for
compulsion, but for conscience sake, for he bears not the sword in vain: so
here, For the parent represents not God in vain, and his voice is the voice of
heaven: Better err with a parent then do well without him. It shall be as
health to thy navill, and marrow to thy bones: it shall procure blessing from
thy parent, whose curse is worse then a Popes with book, bell, and Candle.
Obey them who are set over you, for good, for their sorrow will not be your
joy: you provide ill in grieving them. Esau and his race were Lord Dukes for
many ages: but his profane contemning and vexing of Rebecca with his wives,
lost him his birthright, and at the last cost him ruin. Honor thy father and
mother therefore, that thy days may be long in the land which the Lord has
given thee. Say thou deny thy self a little in this: say thou must conflict
with a crabbed untractable parent, yet behold God in a parent, when thou can
not in a good one: win him by humility, contest not, a fathers spirit will
not endure it: duty may overcome and break his heart, but wilful opposition
will mar all. And I speak not this only in case of young couples, living
under their parents roof, but in what distance soever they live. Nor, in case
only that the parent be wise, solid, judicious, holy: for such a one claims
it by many respects: but, even when ^eely, when unwise, irreligious, and
obstinate. The good parent may pray for thy success, as well as endow and
enrich thee. But the bad and preposterous cannot forfeit his right to his
child, though he may disable it: he must have the honor of thy consent,
though thou can not enjoy the good of it. Above all, let religious children
beware of prevarication in this kind; calling in question their sincerity this
way: yea, though they meet with many rubbes in their way: yet let them by their
good conversation, prevail with parents, and seek God to break and mollify
their parents spirits, rather then to exasperate. Yea, let mothers have this
honor as well as fathers: perhaps they can better advise: howsoever, they have
merited this honor as well as fathers. Yea let all such as are set in place of
such by marriage of own parents, all tutors, guardians, and governors share
in this kind. Think not that your youth and wit can see further in this kind
then theirs: children will say that old folk dote, and are fools: but old
ones know that children are so: 1. Sam. 25.
God has given them as props, therefore desoise them not. And to end, I say
unto you as Abigail to David, It shall not grieve you one day, but much comfort
you, that you have not made sad a loving parent. You shall never have cause to
repent you. Pro. 10.
The way of the Lord (says Solomon) is strength to them that walk uprightly.
The word of God (says Mica) is good to him that is upright, Mica. 2.
Though there were no reward for it, yet there is reward enough, even in this,
I have denied my self, and obeyed. So much for this former branch, the duty of
children to parents herein.

The second branch concerns the dignity of parents. Branch 2.
They must conceive, Dignity of parents.
that even in their privilege there lies a duty too, to God, to the child.
They must say as the Centurion did, Use of reproof to them that ^eglect the
care of their Children.
I my self am under authority. Therefore here is sad reproof to parents, for
a world of abuses. Truly most parents may thank themselves for their childrens
disrespect in this kind: they never sought to nurture them up in Gods fear:
to inform and teach them in the trade of Gods way, or their own: But either
out of a foolish affection and pity, will never see ought amiss in them, as
Adonija and Absalon were to David: (and the fruit was suitable:) or a great and
false opinion they have of their childrens dexterity and sufficiency in this
kind, which is the high way to their ruin: or else they offend in a base and
degenerate softness, which hinders them from maintaining their authority in
their childrens hearts: Too much familiarity begets contempt: and if a servant
over cockered, will look to be as a child, then will a child look to be hail
fellow well met with a parent. There is a mediocrity between excess of rigor
in many parents, Parents must go in a mid^le way between ^^usterity, and
f^lly toward their Children.
whereby they are so dark and aloof from their children, as if they were some
other men's children, and their slaves; (which imbreeds bad thoughts of them,
base qualities of servility and hollownes in children, and exasperates their
spirits against them:) It causes children to think themselves slighted, and as
in other points, so in marriage, as if parents were too high to take thought
for it. Difference (I say) there is between austerity, and the contrary
extreme, of foolish familiarity. For by this, children grow so saucy and
effeminated, that they think it almost ridiculous to question it, whether
their parents will consent to their choices: because they have been wont to be
soothed in all, by them, and never crossed. Paul says well to young Timothy,
see that no man despise thee. So I to old parents. Do nothing which which
might forfeit thy authority into the hand of thy Boy, or Girl. Of all such I
say, as old Jacob to Reuben, Thy dignity is gone. Lay the foundation, O parent,
of that privilege, which thou would preserve to thy self, in the wise
menaging of thy child's spirit while he is young and tender; for that's the season
of leavening him with such principles, as must work after.

Other parents so love their ease and vacation from care and solicitude, B^se
shifts and respects of Parents in disregard of their Children.
that, rather then they would take the pains, they choose to commit all to wind
and weather, leave all to the will of the children, hit they, or miss they,
they care not. Do we know (say they) what will fit and content our children,
what woman they would fancy, or distaste? If we should negotiate in this work,
our children perhaps, would beshrew us, for ever after, and never love us more.
We for our parts have given our selves content in our wives

parts, that scarce any can please them. Others are accessarie to their
childrens bad matches, by their unprevention and dalliance: (as before has
been spoken) and permitting their children unseasonable commerce and long
acquaintance with such, as they know to be suitable companions, cannot break
them off after, when they would, because they are snared. Others are too
satagent and busy about their childrens matches, for they being led by no
grounds nor sound reasons, but fancy, do persuade their children to such
matches, as become most snaring and uncomfortable to them for ever after,
selling them to sorrow.

Neither are parents guilty only about the match it self, A contrary extreme
of parents in overmuch love to Children.
but also the consequence thereof. For why? through their indiscreet love to
their welfares, and their ambitious desires for their childrens enhaunsments,
they grant greater jointures to their eldest then their estates will permit,
and so damnifie the rest of their better deserving children, and either must
run themselves into endless debts by borrowing for them, or else be at their
courtesy for the releasing of that, which they might have kept still in their
own hands. By this folly they do a double mischief: The 1. deg^e^^
for first they set the elder on float, to be some great persons, and raise up
their spirits above their estates, drawing them to great expense, company, and
at last to ruin: and then for the making of the eldest a Gentleman, they must
leave the rest to beggary: either basely to depend upon their brother for
means (which commonly falls short, and comes to nothing) or else to take
debauched courses, to steal, to sherke for their living. Thus the folly of
parents (upon the sequel of their childrens first matching) filles the world
with bare younger brethren, with hangbies, and idle ones, snaring them with
perpetual discord and quarrels, and at last bringing them to most
dishonorable ends. No, no: you parents, be wise, God has made you your
childrens carvers: Set your house in order, and do not make confusion among
your posterity, to please the humor of one child: let all have childrens parts:
Do not rush your selves into such debts, as your heirs must be feign to take
all, and pay all, and so fleece the rest: Let the eldest (carrying himself
well) have a double portion (education being considered which the eldest are
surest of) and the rest, a competent allowance; for perhaps they may do as much
good in their places after, as the elder, if not more, for grace does not always
go with Birthright.

But, The 2. degree.
above all follies in this kind, that is most eminent, when parents, to make
their children great, thrust themselves out of all, that their children might
succeed them in their places, holding the candle to them, while they do all,
and act their parts upon the stage. And by this means, both father and mother,
which have lived in good sort all their time, come in their old days to depend
wholly upon their childrens courtesy: That part of their life, which of all
others, requires best attendance and maintenance* must now become most
shiftlesse and desolate. They must come out of the hall into the kitch^n, sit
at tables end, or in the chimny corner with a poor pittance sent them, and at
last die in discontent, and repenting themselves of their folly. But, if they
may be at good terms, upon condition of being their servants both without
doors and within, as droils and drudges, they may deem themselves well apayd.
For when all strength and ability is gone, then are they no longer set by, but
cast up for hawks meat, despised, counted as burdens, wherefore to be eased
would be no small joy to their children: And it its worse with some parents,
because they live to see all spent and consumed, e're they die, one and other,
^tocke and branches, all withered and come to naught. Be wise, you parents,
yield not your selves captives and prisoners to your children: no prison can
be more yrkesome to a parent, then a son or daughters house: Trust neither
of them in this case, for in truth, your selves make the snare, and your
children put it on you: you wrong your children in putting that into their
hands, which God has denied them: Love must descend, not ascend: its not
natural (says Paul) for children to provide for parents, but for parents to
provide for them, therefore invert not providence. Look to your consent, and
look to those consequences following upon your consent; be sure to hold
stroke sufficient in your hand, for the securing of love and duty from your
children. You will say, all children are not alike in this case: its true; but
the best will bite, and the ordinance of God must be attended unto, as the
first rule in such cases as these. Sure bind, sure find: if you must needs come
down, rather choose to fall into the hands of God, then your children.

Neither must I pass by Guardians and Governors of Orphans in this point:
Abuses of Guardians and Governors of Orphans in this kind of neglect sundry
ways.
many of whom being left as menagers of the stocks and portions of children,
being now secure of any eye to see or judge them, do most treacherously betray
pooore children to misery, both before, and in their marriages. birth and
worth, what do they? Surely they turn to the spoil, and offer them such as
they know will be unwelcome, and so thereby purchase a great fine unto
themselves, and leave them to their own choice and fortunes. Others, more
dishonestly, force base and inconvenient matches upon them; either matching
them to their own children, and so raising their own estates thereby: or
else, selling them for money to others; (and which is worst of all) lest the
orphan should suspect and shun the offer propounded; what do they? They
marry them in their childhood at 10. 12. or 13. years of age, long before the
time of meet cohabitation, sending the one to travail, till he have fulfilled
his young wives years: who when they return, come to them with a forced
affection, and that breeds disdain, where there should be greatest affection.
And hereby grows such distaste between the parties, Woeful fruit hereof.
that they abandon each others fellowship, bed and board, expose each others to
most desperate snares, and to promiscuous lusts: and, if there be any
reconciliation wrought, its but violent, and the cursed fruits of the
separation do so distemper their hearts, that they fall at new jarres for
their unchastity, and disloialty of bodies: they renounce some of the children,
as none of their own, and so, do but pass on a most uncomfortable time of
marriage, more dismal, then to live in a wilderness, because the necessity of
an unwelcome chain, makes it doubly wearisome. And as themseves, so they who
were the authors of such matches, do live together at deadly feude, at
continual suits, the one striving to revenge himself upon the other, till
both their estates be ruined. I do not hereby exclude Guardians from that due
respect which the law affords when their care and respect to their orphans
welfare is suitable to the calling of a Governor: But, whatsoever the law
allots, the conscience of one that fears God should be so tender, that
themselves being no losers, in respect of the charge which they have bin at,
they should deal with the orphan mercifully in all other respect of advantage,
which a man of no conscience would encroach upon. Such as look at their own
peace and the honor of their profession, will be wary, in such undertakings,
to make their retreat sure, that nothing may after be cast upon them, which
might crocke their name or religion, or give occasion to others, either to
stumble at the practice, or to make it at a president for the like impiety.

Use of exhortation of parents to attend their Children in this great work.
To conclude, I say this to all parents, who will be ruled by the word, boast
not of your honor and privilege, to do hurt with: Shun all those base
distempers of which I have treated at large, as the infamies and reproaches of
bad parents, or governors: Sin not on either hand, either on the right, or
left, neither by base sluggish neglect and contempt of this charge, nor yet by
any abusing of your liberty, to the prejudice of your children. But walk in
the clear way of duty. To which end, consider, your prerogative is allotted
you by God, no otherwise, then that you might undertake the duty, more
cheerfully. Be circumspect, painful, wife and helpful to your children, (so
far as your means will admit) with a free, beteaming heart: God tries your
love and integrity, by this occasion. Times are now grown such, that the best
parents cannot improve their love and affection to their well deserving
children, as were to be wished: the world is at such an high rate, that they
whose estates are not very great, can hardly light upon a comely suitable match,
especially for daughters: there being none so mean now adays, but look for
as good portions, as in our predecessors time, would have been thought a very
good portion for men thrice above their fashion: And it is the disease as well
of the children of God, as of men, to flight good matches, where excess of
portion attends not: yea, I am persuaded, its the cause why Gods hand is so
manifest in the ill success of most matches, because God was never so little
looked at in marriages, as now. But as for these things, let both good parents
and children, count it their affliction: bear it meekely, and leave it to God.
Let your love be nevertheless, to do them the good you can. It is not in your
power to do all you would: God will have somewhat left to himself: Smaller
matches with Gods presence and blessing, (for ought I see) may in short time,
equal far greater, in success. Do that for your children, both in your
education, means, counsel, prayers, providence which is in your power to do,
and as for the the rest, remember, marriages are made in heaven, and thence
must expect their happiness: you can do no more then you can. And, for this
whole argument, viz. consent of parents, thus much.

CHAP. V.
Touching a contract. What it means. The substance of it. Answer to some
questions about it.

COncerning this argument, Second digression to the point of Contract.
the first inquiry, will be about the word (contract) how and in what sense we
here use it: Then touching the necessity or indifference thereof. Thirdly,
concerning the performance and act of contracting. Fourthly, touching such
reasons or respects as whereupon it may seem to be reasonably practiced. And
then shall want such quaeres, as are or may be made against it, or about it.
Lastly we will conclude with some use of the point. Contract in what sense here
used.
For the former of these we here make a contract, a relative word importing an
antecedent act between two parties, who intend marriage: that is to say, a
private, mutual, free, unconditionall promise, having past between these two
persons to marry each other, and no other. But here this contract is not meant;
but a more solemn and open binding expression of this former promise made,
that it may be ratified and strengthened, as becomes a business of so great
consequence. So that before we come to any other consideration, we must needs
premise a little, touching marriage promises, made in private between the
single parties, (it being presupposed that they be not within degrees
prohibited, and further that they be without all exception, of inconvenience,
or ill report and scandal (as in the case of cozen Germans is manifest) and
the nature thereof. For we must know, that although an explicit or expressed
contract, has in it the greater force external before men, to tie the parties
to marriage; Promises of marriage, the root of a contract.
yet the mutual promises of them both jointly made, either at the first, or
afterward, do as deeply bind them both before God, and in court of
conscience, as the other does. And indeed the difference between them, is not
formal, but accidental: and both are true real contracts, or covenants, the
one as the other: and if there be somewhat in the expressed contract which is
not in the other, in respect of outward obligation: then may there be truly
said to be somewhat in the former, which is not in that, in respect of essence.
For the being of the expressed contract rests in the former, To be very
cautiously made, and t^eir properties.
viz. in the deliberate, voluntary, mutual and honest resolutions of the
parties among themselves: which being past, give the essence to marriage,
before the other came, and is the foundation and ground of the latter: For else
it might be said, that any passage of expression between two, before witness,
falling from parties, though in rashness, or in sport, or upon a question
demanded, might carry the force of a contract, which no man of any sense can
imagine: to wit, because the expressed contract before witness, implies a
former mutual consent between them, not now to be questioned: but yet for
special causes, to be more solemnly and publicly testified for avoiding of
great inconvenience. And this appears plainly by the effect which a contract
or promise produces: and that is a great alteration in the parties, who before
such promise, were their own and had the stroke in their own hand, to dispose
of themselves as they please: But, after their mutual promise, they cease to
be their own, and pass over themselves, (not their money, or corn, or goods,
but themselves) each under God to the other, so that now each has power over
other, and only one over the other. In so much that whatsoever other promise
should possibly be made, by both of them, or either of them, to any other,
besides themselves, if confessed, does disanull it self, and is ipso facto
void, by virtue of the precontract or forepromise so made: But although it be
denied, yet it nevertheles binds them before God, so that they shall be for
ever culpable before him, of treachery and spousebreach, without repentance. If
this were considered, doubtless it would awe the spirits of many hot and
unstayed young ones, from such attempts. But of that after. Here only I say,
that seeing the true nature of self renouncing and self resigning resydes as
really in a private promise, as in a witnessed contract, therefore they are not
two things, but the same with diverse circumstances for special reasons,
annexed. So much for the acception of the word.

To this I may add, Real contacts as good as verbal.
that in some cases, realls may countervaile verballs: when as a thing done
implies as much (in the judgment of a discreet man) as a promise made in
words. As if a person formerly intermitting a purpose to marry another yet
hearing, that she is attempted by a new lover, shall repair to the party and
say, so it is that you know there is love between you and me of a long time
depending, so deep, that I dare not in conscience, yield my right in you to any
other; wherefore I pray you, if any such thing be offered, accept it not: this
in conscience ties the party to marry her, and is equivalent in promise, and if
there be witness, it concludes against him, that shall desert her. Why?
because he defraudes her of a possibility of equal weight, to his own
marriage. So again, a man has desisted to pr^secute an offer of marriage with
a woman, Virgin, or widow (all is one) and the woman adresses her self to a
far off dwelling, perhaps thousands of miles out of the Kingdom: The man
hearing of her drif^, comes to her, and tells her, that whereas there has
been some intermission of love and marriage-sute a long time, yet now he
cannot permit her to go that long voyage, his love is so deep toward her,
and therefore disswades her journey.

Here I say, that although the woman (if free before) is at her own hand to
go, or not to go, yet if she consent to stay, the motion made is equipollent
to a promise of marriage: and cannot in conscience nor righteousness be broken
off by the man. Many like instances might be used: but these are sufficient.

The Use, etc. This being thus, what should the punishment be of such
counterfeits, and impudent varlets, who dare falsify the matter of a promise,
that is, impudently aver and beat down a party, that there has been a
covenant and promise of marriage between them, when as yet never any such
thing was in the world? I say such persons ought to have the uttermost penalty
inflicted that the Law can impose: as being an extreme impeachment of the
credit and estate of the innocent party, and a mark of intolerable
audaciousnesse in abusing so solemn a thing, to any counterfeit ends of base
wretches, not meet to live in a Commonwealth. An example whereof we have
lately had in our Corner, by so much the more odious, because so insolent.

Before I pass from this point of promise, What promise for marriage does bind.
it may be asked, what promise does realize marriage before God? I answer:
First, it must be mutual; secondly, voluntary or free; thirdly, without error;
I mean such as does overthrow and contradict it self. A mutual one.
but of that other to him? For if such a promise be a putting off ones self
into the power of another: then, as no man can put himself into another power
without an act of his own resignation of the liberty he had in himself, so
neither can each of the two parties give up their liberties without mutual
consent each to other. For in marriage the yielding up of the right of one,
receives a right in another: and therefore it must be mutual and reciprocal.
If one shall pretend the promise of the other, and yet suspend his own, as
thinking hereby to tie that party to his own time and leisure, himself being
free, he is deceived. For marriage consent must be mutual; and the party
withdrawing consent, does in that respect extinguish and make frustrate the
others promise from s^aring the promiser: except afterward the other party also
shall as freely come in as the other did, and so make the promise mutual and
equal. I have heard of a sad accident in this kind, that be fell a suitor to
a maid, being a Gentleman of good personage, he seeing himself to have won
the affections of the maid, and thinking himself ^ure enough of her, without
any deep obliging himself unto her, pleased himself in his conquest, and
there rested: so long till the Gentlewoman perceiving her self slighted, fell
to as deep a disdain of him, as he had been indifferent to her: in so much
as another match being offered her, she embraced it. But the report thereof
coming to the Gentleman, as he was playing very solemnly upon his Lute, he
suddenly start up, and breaking his Lute all to pieces, instantly went out of
his wits. A notable Item to all, that they play not fast and loose in matter of
mutual A free or voluntary one.
either of the parties themselves, nor yet their agents and spokesmen: nor
extorted by fear and threats, either of parents, (when they are desirous to
put off their children for their ease, and are set to dispatch the matter) or
by the parties themselves, (as when the man menacing the woman, and attempting
to ravish her, except she consent, or to do other violence to her, do hereby
force a promise from her) or any other who are active in the business. And
this I would have noted, that although parents do not use any compulsory and
terrifying courses, to draw their children to inconvenient matches; yet if they
do carry themselves stearnly to their children in an indirect way, and refuse
to hear them who are third parties, using weighty reasons to dissuade; or if
the parents do not rather in meekness convince the child by reasons
invincible out of the word, or other respects of good reason and discretion,
that its a meet match, yielding still to the childs objections, (who must bide
by the sorrow, when the parent goes free) then I say, That the overmuch
reverentiall awe of the parent, smiting into the child a loathnesse to offend,
and taking deliberation a way from it, that so its led in a cord of necessity
to do that which else it would not do: I say this ought to be counted as a
compulsion, and such a child to be pitied and freed from the Contract: Or, if
marriage proceed, and ill consequences follow, they must be all fastened upon
the parent, not upon the child, and the child may claim the best amends. I
say then such promises bind not in conscience, because the princible of
willingness is absent: and the party would never have consented, if such fear
and compulsion had not been used. I add this, except afterward the party
being freed from such fear, and returning to her self, shall express another
consent free and ingenuous: then the former impediment cannot frustrate this
latter promise.

Thirdly, 3. A plain one without deceit.
it must also be without deceit or false opinion: and that in such a kind* as
opposes marriage essentially. Hence those Heathenish presidents of marriages
are frustrate, when one sex marries the same, (Nero was an horrible example)
when an Eunuch marries a woman, or a woman marries an Hermophradite (one of the
Epicene gender,) when a man is deceived in the person, as Jacob in Lea, put
into his bed in stead of Rahel: (notwithstanding the act of copulation) but
especially, when the party supposed to be pure, and a virgin, proves defiled
and corrupted: in such a case, if it break out, before marriage consummate, it
does justly infringe the promise, and makes it of none effect. This be said
touching a binding promise. What that is.
But touching this last of error, understand it of no other errors accidental,
which do not of themselves cross marriage. For, though they may be such as
gave occasion to the party to consent, and, had the error been foreknowne, the
party would not have yielded: yet because they disannull not the real knot of
marriage, that is, peculiarity of person, by defilement, therefore they are
presumed no other then in some cases would have been admitted: and therefore
the party must stick to his or to her promise, nevertheless; and therefore let
them either bear it as their desert for lack of inquisition, or if they did
their endeavor to be informed, but were deceived, let them take it as the
trial which God has put upon them; the promise binds still, except the other
party releaseth it. And so much for this question.

point is but occasional, Admonition to all parties to beware of their
marriage promises.
and shall be no more returned unto. And I would urge these two uses following,
the one of Admonition, the other of Reproof. The admonition is, that ^ingle
persons be well advised of their promises, ere they make them. And indeed few
words might serve* if the former item were well regarded: viz. that the
speaking of a few words at once, may for ever dispossess them of their
liberty, never to be recovered: fools once, and slaves perpetually. So that
its no matter of slightnes, and merryment, no play, no trifle, no sport, except
you will call that a sport which may cost a poor wretch both body and soul.
Abuer indeed called murder a sport, but bitterness was in the end of it. Be
advised therefore: and let this point, seasonably as a hammer knock home to
the head the former exhortation of marrying in the Lord, and wisely to look
well about you, e're you venture. I pray tell me, would you willingly make
another man master and owner of any commodity you have for nothing? say it were
but your horse, or cow, yea were it but a dog, which you set by? I trow not,
how much less of thy self? Art thou so seelly as to resign up the right of
thy self, and to make thy self a prisoner, a captive, in the prison of
marriage, whence there is no escape. Surely no except thou art mad, and hate
thine own flesh: thou would not do that with a breath, which all thy worth
cannot revoke and undo? As Solomon says, beware how thou become surety for a
stranger: quit thy self speedily, and deliver thy self as a Roe, and as a
bird from the net of the pursuer. Man or woman, youth or maid, look to your
promises. I think resignation of a man's or woman's self to an other, had not
need to be to every commer, to every unknown stranger, to each unchaste,
irreligious, indiscreet companion, which might make thy life irksome for ever.
In the promise is the foundation of marriage: whether it be well done or ill,
it can be done but once, therefore let it be deliberately, wisely and well
done. Oh! let it be a solemn thought with you, my promise gives away my self
and takes unto my self another, my liberty is gone. If a woman be urged to
give up her right only in a little copyhold she will shrug at it, and think
well of it before hand: And yet she may possibly recover a better piece of
land, for a small matter: But this free hold of thy person, and thy liberty,
once resigned up and forgone, can never be recovered again. Therefore I say,
be well advised e're thou forfeit it.

The second use is Terror and Reproof to all who have disguised themselves in
this kind of inconsiderate, Ra^h and inconsiderate promises of marrage very
foolish and sinful.
rash promises. You shall have leisure enough to repent, if anguish will suffer
you. Also of all violent parents, who to be ridd of their children, force them
upon unsuitable marriages, which their children had as leive part with their
lives, as venture upon: and so bring upon them a lasting monument of misery. If
says the parent, thou refuse this match, I will never own thee for my child, I
will dispossess thee of all? Nay what say you to parents who first defloure
virgins, and then force their childen to marry the harlots, for a cover of
their own villainy: Is not this cursed love, and cruel command of an inocent
child? But to be short, especially it rebukes the baseness of many, who cast
arrows, and deadly things, and say am not I in sport? that is, who scrue
themselves with strong persuasions and arguments into the hearts of such as
they sue unto, and having so done, break off all again, and wipe off every
crumme off their mouths, as if they had eaten no bread: Oh, you masterlesse
persons: what? are sollemne promises but cobwebs, which great flies can break
through? Make ye no bones of them? do ye snap these bands in two as Samson
did his cords and green withes? There is one who is stronger then you, who
will not be mocked, but bind you for bursting in cheines too strong for you.
But perhaps you will say, if it were my lightness and giddiness, it were very
sinful indeed, and I deserved never to be trusted more. Yes perhaps your word
shall be taken, but it shall be by such an one, as shall make you do penance
against your will, all your life for the breach of that promise which you
willingly made. But you have since that heard sad reports of the party: for
instance sake. That the woman is no huswife, or is a Melancholique person, not
fit for your temper, nor yet (in a second marriage) for your children, or she
has some of her own, or some such blemish now you have found out: well either
these are true or else false. Are they false? How basely minded art thou, whom
the prattling tongue of some false sycophant, jangler or gossip (loving neither
her nor thy self unfeignedly, should shake that affection of thine, which
being well grounded once (as thou supposedst) drew from thee promises of
marriage? But say they are true in part, or wholly? what then? They come in out
of season, the steed is stolen, its too late now to shut the stable door:
affections are snared, thou may not desert her. Wast thou not in thy own
power before? has any man forced thee to resign it, save thy free self? Thou
art snared: and I say, if she should release thee, it were her meeknes and
discretion, but its thy rashness: if thou were amerced as he was, who defiled
a Virgin, for the satisfaction of her discontented spirit, and questioned name,
thou were well served. No other satisfaction can duly be made her, then thy
return again to her with so much the more affection, by how much thy
deserting of her has been long and yrkesome. Let the falling out of friends,
be the renewing of love: Thou departedst once, that thou might return for
ever. And thus much for this occasional point of promises.

viz. of a witnessed and professed contract, Whether a Contract be essential
to Marriage.
it may be demanded whether it be essential or not, to marriage? (for they are
all one) to be very solemn matters, as the words they use, and the ceremonies
then performed, do testify: So sacred and reverend it has appeared to all
sorts, Contracts very ancient, and of general use.
that there seems to be a finger of God, pointing out the usefulnes thereof.
Witness the assembling of the friends of the parties on both sides to be
spectators thereof, that so the blessing of it might be more effectual.
Witness that instance of Booz and Ruth who were (as it were) affianced in the
gate of their City, before many solemn witnesses: who being called forth to
testify the contract, did assent thereto, and by their acclamations and
thanksgivings, and prayers to God for them, graced and honored the same. So
that its no wonder if the Church of both old and new Testament did practice it.
And its particularly specified in the Generation of Christ, that when Joseph
and Mary had been espoused together, before they came together, she was found
with child, Jewish Contracts what?
of the holy Ghost. The Hebrew writers tell us of the forms and tenor of words
used among the Jews, to wit, that by diverse real ceremonies, they strengthened
the promise which had passed between the parties, and that in a set meeting of
the family. Sometimes they did it by tickets of paper, written by each of their
hands, and delivered by each other mutually. Sometime by very solemn words of
obligation passing between them: sometime by a piece of coin given and
received, which by the change of possession, argued the possession and
assignment which one made and surrendered to the other: All to show that they
accoumpted this business no trifle, or toy, to be wantonly used, for the
pleasing of carnal humors, but a divine ordinance requiring firm and strong
assurance each of other. The forms were these, Lo, thou art betrothed unto me,
or, be thou betrothed unto me, or the like. If it were without witnesses, it
was frustrate. The solemnity hereof was acted under a Tent, Canopie or
Tabernacle, set up for the nonce, to show inwardnesse and secrecy of marriage
affection and benevolence. This was distinct from the act of marriage it self,
which followed sometime after, and was done with great festivity and with many
songs and Epithallamium's of the boys and girls of the bride chamber, alluded
unto by our Savior Luc. 5. After the contract followed the dowry bill, which
was from the man to the woman: though the woman brought a portion to the man
also, as appears in Calebs bestowing his daughter Achsa upon Othniel, Josh.
15. 16.
yet usually it was the man's act to endow the wife only, and to purchase her
unto himself. To these may be added, (which I add lest any should accuse me
of singularity) the joint consent and practice of the Church of God among our
selves, especially such as fear God, (though we condemn not those who do
not:) and there are extant in print sundry books published by authority, and
by name one of M. R. G. wherein the practice of that reverend servant of God,
is at large expressed, when he contracted couples. So that I hope, touching
this second branch, little more need be added.

Touching the third, Action and performance of the Contract ^ow to be done.
which is the action or performance of the contract. And that stands in three
personal acts. The first is of him that leads the contract, or guides the
two parties, to express their former consent. Who ought to be a meet person
for gravity, and experience, able to teach them (if need require) the duties of
that condition, and to answer such scruples as might arise in their minds
about it. In a word, such an one, as by his presence might cast some awe and
authority upon the minds of the parties, and assist the action with some
correspondence. One that may be wise to discern of the frame of the parties,
and therefore by questions may sift out the truth, to prevent danger, as by
demanding whether they formerly have engaged themselves to any other man or
woman, person or persons, showing them the dangerous sinfulness of such
dalliance: Also, whether themselves have freely and without fear, and with the
mutual consent of parents, testified, by presence, or by their hand (if doubt
be made) consented mutually in heart, to this contract. The second person, are
the parties contracted: who ought to follow him that leads them in the
contract, thus, or in like form of words; first the man, then the woman: I
Thomas, John, etc. do take thee Joane, Mary, etc. for my espowsed husband, or
wife, and I promise to marry thee shortly without fail, if God will. And so
with some short counsel and prayer to God to dismis them, as true man and wife
before God. The third person are the witnesses produced: who being moved
thereto, answer and say, we are witnesses of this contract, by which these
parties are betrothed each to other, and will testify it, being required.

The fourth general is, the rational respects, in which such a contract
seems very meet to be used. Rational respects in which a Contract may be used.
And they may be reduced to these three following. As first the sutablenes of
the contract to the witnesses of the attempt. It Is meet that such things be
done orderly, leasurely, and by degrees, not rashly, The 1.
suddenly: and therefore although a promise have passed betwixt the parties,
Sutablenes to the weight of the thing.
yet as the matter grows riper between them, so its comely that it be no
longer kept secret, but manifested, that thereby they may be awed with the more
fear and jealousy of themselves, from uncomely and audacious enterprises one
against the others chastity. Secondly to prevent inconstancy. The 2.
The nature of flesh is vain: and all men are liers. And its seen as much in
this subject, as any others. To prevent inconstancy.
As hot as youth is in her gare and passion, yet the best of their gold prooves
brass often times, when they weigh things in cool blood. Add hereto, that this
base world is full of curiosity, and jangling, talebearers, and flatterers, who
fill the ears of couples with idle and ungrounded surmises: whereunto they
whose ears as credulous, do lie open, and hereby their affections are
unjustly alienated, each against other. Thus fools love lightly, and leave as
lightly, others of themselves, not knowing their one spirit, take a toy in
their heads, and without all reason, run into humors of fear, jealousy,
melancholy and conceitednesse against each other, and so withdraw themselves
suddenly from each other, and change their minds. They do not (as they say)
affect so well as at first, they observe some lightness each in other, some
u^gov^^n'd tongue and passions, or they distaste the kind^ed car^iage, or
training, and upon these eiesores, either so, o^ seemi^g so, they repent them,
and fall off. And yet perha^s some of these have had time long before to
bethink themselves. But who can make a coat for the Moon? By this means, as
God is dishonored, so the party innocent wiser and of more solid affections is
deluded, yea sometime driven to desperateness: And had not here need to be a
cord to tie a Proteus in a knot from sliping? yes surely, witnesses had need be
solemnly used to witness to the contract, that if they will still be so
fickle, they may be compelled to faithfulness, or else handled as their
treachery deserves. I have heard of some who have gone to the doors of the
church to be married, and yet shrunk back. And whereas its objected, may not
things appear in time worse which before lay hid? I answer yes, but you should
have thought so before, and suspended your promises: except you made no other
promises, then you indented together to keep or break, and that each should
consent to the others resolution, either to proceed or desist, which I think
is a fulsome course, and makes a promise needless and frustrate.

Thirdly, Respect 3.
this may serve for the benefit of the parties contracted. For, The benefit of
the parties contracted.
as it was an ancient custom among the Jews when two parties were contracted,
to pray to God for them, and to bless them solemnly: and (no doubt) the
parents or such as supplied their rooms, did annexe some word of exhortation,
to them, from the experience they had, both how great work they entered upon,
and how raw and green they were to digest it, so I say I think it not amiss,
that some grave person did the like now. The contract ought not to be a bare
surrender of each other; but an instilling of some discreet watchwordes and
charges from their elders, touching the mutual duties of both, jointly and
severally, and so prayer for a blessing to be added. Solemn things should be
handled accordingly even in the outward fashion of it: for men are sensible and
sensual creatures, and are led by outward objects to inward apprehensions.
Still I say, I do not affirm this course to be of the essence of the contract,
but yet a very meet addition, if it may be had: and much making for the better
dispatch thereof. And, what season is so apt as this? when the Ewes of Laban
were to conceive, Jacob (warranted by God) set rods pilled and straked before
them, that the fancy of the creature being heated in the act of generation,
might the easier carry in the species of particolourednesse: So here, the
sight of so solemn a work is this is, of contracting two, and making them one
flesh, will more easily and thoroughly stir the imagination, and the sense
being moved, does the more familiarly convey the instruction to the
understanding and heart. Pity therefore it is, that the mouldes being so ready
to fashion it, that the melted metal of instruction should be wanting unto
them, they being so capable. And this I think is the cause, why there be
Sermons made at Baptism, and the Supper, at funerals and such occasions, to
let in the doctrines of the things into men, (whereunto in general most are so
a verse) because, as there is a season for all things, (which is like apples of
gold and pictures of silver,) so also for this: and that is, when by the
novelty and strangeness of the thing, never done before, the mind is provoked
to an expectation, and so sets the wheels on work, to receive and apply things
according to their worth and use. This for the third. Only one word more I
add: If any should ask, what form of instruction were meet to be used at
such a time, to the parties contracted? I answer, I prescribed none: This whole
treatise following shows their duties; two or three sentences culled out of
each branch may serve at such a time, if wisely applied, as the several use of
the parties may seem to require. So much for this fourth.

General Touching questions.
Whether publication of contract be necessary.
for as much as the procuring of the safety and good report of the married, is
a point of religion. Now the private contract of two insecret, or with a few,
reaches not the end of publication; Because its more likely that the body of a
Congregation may sooner give notice of any precontract between the parties,
then a few witnesses can do: and as for the parties themselves if they were
guilty, its much less to be expected, that they should accuse themselves. So
that, for prevention of such a confusion, as to marry precontracted persons,
what course can be too safe and sufficient? True it is, when all is done, it
may prove but little to purpose, through the subtilty of the offending party:
but when that is done which can be, the Church is free: the mischief ought
justly to light upon the wicked delinquent. Well therefore were it in this
case, if liberty were denied to parties, (at least in so common a way of a fee,
without difference, or special inquiry about the fitness of the dispensation)
from thwarting so wise and orderly a device: which being done, people would not
itch as they do after private marryings, to oppose publication, and that upon
humor, and vanity. For through such a base custom, it comes to pass, that one
learnes of another, and now he is thought but a peasent who declines not this
lawful provision of the Church. Rather those who be of fashion and wealth,
should think it their honor to submit to this practice: that they might give
the better example to others, and so approve the warrantablenes of their
marriage: and stop the gap of privacy and of clandestne matches, without
consent of parents, a world of suits upon pretended precontracts, and as much
sorrow to parents who by this disorder are robbed of their children, and cannot
understand of their marriage, till it be past revoking.

What is to be thought of the marrying by a Minister.
In the Scriptures, we see it was civilly carried, and dispatched by the Elders
in the gate: and now in some of the reformed Churches, we see its performed in
like sort, officers being appointed to take their names, to book them in a
Record, and so with a short ceremony to dismiss them. so, as they may not be
ashamed to show their faces in public, to justify what they had done. And if
there were liberty given to parties in this kind to marry upon their private
contracts, what a world of sin might ensue, as in some to live in a course of
defilement, and to abuse each others bodies, at their pleasures: in others to
leave each others, even after the knowledge of each other, besides making of
that vulgar, which cannot be preserved too warily. I deny not, but that
possibly some persons so marring, might do it without direct sin against God:
but what is that to the scandal which is occasioned thereby? we must so look
at that we do lawfully in it self, as not forgetting our rule, that we
procure things honest before men. Whatsoever is pure, and of good report, that
we must ensue, and so the peace of God attends us, not else. Many acts may be
good in the doers conscience, which yet are subject to the suspicion and ill
construction of others. In such cases, a man must ask this of himself, if all
should take such liberty to himself, what would ensue of it? And this would
check his proceeding. The Jews (as the writers tell us) had a strange way of
contracting couples: to wit, for the better securing of the match, they
permitted the use of copulation for once to the parties, and and no more till
marriage, upon a great penalty: But finding great inconvenience to grow
hereupon, (as no wonder it did) they forbad any such course of contract: and
who so attempted it, if it were proved, he was scourged with rods openly, for
reproach sake. So much for this second.

Whether Cosen Germans may marry answered.
that is lawfully entered upon, between such as are within degrees permitted.
So that, its asked here, whether cosen germans may marry? To which, this I say,
that I observe of late time many more Divines to incline to the affirmative,
then formerly have dome; and some of them, godly as well as learned: and not
only so, but (which I wonder at, seeing such novell and forbidden things, are
too soon run upon) that they do write for it, and have determined the
marriages of some in this way, contrary to the affections of some of the
parties, bearing them down by the judgment, and giving occasion (probably) of
snaring their conscience after, when the crusted sore shall break out again.
But to the point. First, for my part, I should much rest in the generality of
that charge, Levit. 18. 6. None of you shall approach to any that is near of
kin to him, to uncover their nakedness, I am the Lord. I demand what is
meant here by kin? Is not it to be meant both of such as are near in blood,
and also affinity? And, is there not very great nearness in blood between the
uncles son and the uncles daughter? Tremellius, as learned a Jew as most of our
later Jewish writers, in his Diagram upon Levit. 18. at the end, is so bold as
to take it for granted, That as its unlawful to marry the uncle or the aunt,
so the he and she cousin germans (cognatum and cogratam, says he) and yet
alleges no Text for it: as if he would have the matter taken for granted. And
in the Annotation upon the 6. verse, he says thus, Of thy kin] that is, of
those who are specified hereafter, or which by Analogy of comparison with them
are understood. And, who are they? In the end of the Chapter he tells us, in
his first Corollary, The marriages of Collateralls (either by affinity or
consanguinity) are forbidden to the fourth generation. Is not this plain
enough? And he adds, There was no use of it that the Holy Ghost should name
them, the case is so clear. I suppose the testimony of one such Jewish Textman
as he, should overweigh the opinion of many novell writers. But (say these
men) if the Holy Ghost had been against it, might he not have named it? I
answer, yes, if he had thought good, out an argument from negatives prevails
not. Rather, the not naming it, strongly argues the thing out of question. The
Text mentions not the nakedness of the daughter in laws daughter, among the
forbidden particulars: what then? may a father in law marry such an one? I
think not. The second degree is included in the first: viz. Not uncovering the
daughter in laws nakedness. Yet here is nothing but affinity by marriage of
the mother: and is it not as rational that although though the uncle or aunts
son and daughter are not named, far nearer of blood (though not in the
descending line, but collateral) then they, yet their nakedness must not be
uncovered, because the uncles and aunts may not? Tell me, if the wives brother
or husbands sister had not been named expressly, had it been a thing lawful to
meddle with them? I think not. If the uncle be directly forbidden to marry
his niece, or the aunt the nephew, shall not their children be forbidden to
marry also, being but one degree lower? As touching the argument from
negatives, it is so weak, that it is gone into a proverb: and might not a
thousand absurdities be as well proved by negation? Dare these men argue thus
against a Sabbath of the eighth day, because it is no where translated expressly
from the seventh to be the Christian Sabbath? Again, what is more common
through the Scripture, then for particulars not named, yet to be included in
their generals? It was not expressed in the fourth Command, that a man might
not gather sticks on the Sabbath day: yet because in general God had charged
that no dressing of meat, or bodily labor should be then done, but all be
dressed and provided before, therefore the Lord commanded him to be stoned by
virtue of the general Commandment. And, are not these weak bottoms for men
to warrant their own, or other means marriages, because the contrary is not
forbidden, when as that is forbidden, which is, if not further off, yet full as
far? It is objected, that many of the Patriarchs did thus marry, and are no
whit impeached for it. I answer, if that be a reason, then let us marry our
half sister, as Abraham did Sara; for so he justifies himself to that
Abimelech, yet in deed she is my sister, for she is the daughter of my father
by my mother in law.

Do we not know how Terahs family after it came to Mesopotamia, and subsisted
there, was far divided from the other families of Shem? and therefore
straightened much in their choice? Cursed Chams family they were expressly
forbidden to marry in, as being the nation which God would root out, and give
it the posterity of Abraham: where then should they marry, but within their
own narrow family? And we may well think they did as well as then could be
done, and made such a shift as they did: for even those they married were
Idolaters, which was forbidden, if it could have been shunned: but one
necessity pardoned another: better Idolaters under no curse, then accursed
Canaanites. If they had had larger breadth, had they so ventured? I make no
quarrel, but only show my opinion, leaving others to themselves.
But they much press the example of Caleb his giving of Achsa his daughter to
Othniel her coufin german. To which I answer, If it had been as they say, yet
it was not in cool blood, but upon a condition made in general to any: but
falling out as it did, it might have been an exemption by an extraordinary
occasion. But the thing was nothing so, for Othniel is called the son of
Kenaz, by the same liberty of speech which calls Christ's kinsmen his brethen.
He was not the son of Kenaz, Calebs brother, but the son of his sons son: so
Tremellius upon the place: Brother (says he) that is, one descending from his
brother, two or three Generations remooved. Each Grandchild, and each Nephew or
son of Nephew, is called a son by the phrase of the holy Ghost. But I list
not here, to take off every objection. I return. Put case I should grant them
their desire, that because cozen germans are not named, therefore they are
allowed, yet methinkes there be abundance of things which prudentially might
move men to forbear these marriages. First, notwithstanding the long time that
this Tenet has possessed the spirits of some men, yet we see, the blemish and
crock of it is yet unwasht out, yea cleaves still and abides upon it. The
minds of men cannot yet put it on, as a garment fit for their back: still its
a generally questioned thing among the most, and even by such as are with much
ado urged to it by such as think they see further then all men, yet scarce is
the doubt exempt of out them, but they stagger. I make not this an absolute
reason, but a suspicion and prejudice against it. And why should any man choose
rather endlessely to beat his brain to evince a thing of so doubtful truth,
then yield to the contrary practice, which no man can doubt of? Is it not
wisdom to do that which is safest? Can faith and doubting stand together? And
can that be done without sin which is not done in faith, but wavering? Surely
the Plaster which men study to make for this sore, is far too narrow to cover
it. Again, the scruple being unremooved, what apudder does it cause among Gods
people, especially what jealousy, strangement, and dislikes among the kindred?
We should aim at all communion, not alienation. Besides, when God has
vouchsafed so great breadth and liberty, who should strengthen himself by
mixture of blood, and (as Nicodemus says) going into his mothers womb, to be
borne again? Not to speak of that observation, that God has not blessed it
with such increase, or integrity of affection. And its not (to conclude) among
those things that are pure, and of good report.

And surely, if this be a great reason of unlawfulness of marriage between
degrees forbidden, because thereby that natural honor and awefull esteem of
parents, and consequently of such as are near of kin unto them is imbesselled
and violated (for what is more repugnant to respect and honor, then the
familiarity of carnal commixtion) then I am sure the reason holds as well
between cozen germans as others of kin: for nature has put as due and chaste a
respect of honor between them, as between those who are namely forbidden in
Leviticus. But the former is avowed by many writers, one whereof I produce,
Augustine his speech de Civit. Dei, book 13. cap. 16. I know not how it comes to
pass, that there is a kind of natural instinct in the modesty of man, (and
that praiseworthy,) that to whomsoever he owes any shamefast and chaste honor,
for kindreds sake, from the same person he restraines any marriage affection,
which even the chastity of marriage blusheth to violate.

Wherein differss contractfrom marriage.
what is there more in marriage it self? or what reasons are there for the
dissolution of the one which are not for the other? and the strength of
complete marriage. God is in a contract for good, and not evil: but in
marriage whether good or evil.
For the strength of the former stands forcible by the private con^ent of the
parties: I mean this, that although God be in a contract, yet so, as the
parties which consented, may also dissent, when they find that consent did
hinder the private good of their married estate. And so, when it appears, that
the one party is unqualified for the other through many evils, that break by
after intelligence, then they that made it may break it. But marriage has a
strength by public consent of the law, and the custom of men, and therefore
its above all strength of private promises: and admits no dissolution by
private consents: The union of contracted ones, is an union of imagination, or
of affection, so long as its within such bounds: But the union of marriage, is
an union of state and condition, standing in right, and law, above all private
affection. If private contracts be broken off (as they ought not without
consent) there is private satisfaction given to the parties: but if marriage be
broken off, there is public scandal given beyond all satisfaction. The
regard whereof tieth the hands of married ones behind them from all liberty of
consent to dissolve the knot: because as it concerns the body of the state to
see sin punished, so to see good established, when it may be so. For in Moses
his time, One is better spoiled then (...).
the hardness of men's hearts was so great, that they would be curbed by no
law, each man's will was his law. But now law having got the upper hand, men's
wills must submit: because better it is that one couple suffer, then the law,
which is the bond of public peace and welfare. So that this authortie looks
not at men's private contents, or discontents: But makes a voluntary consent,
which might have been broken, to become necessary, and irrevocable: And
whereas its instanced (as before) in the point of comparison of incontinency
committed before marriage, (not known till after) with that in marriage. I
say, I deny not but formerly and really both ought to dissolve it by the word,
yet (as before I noted) the wisdom of the Church, putting difference, is to
be regarded: neither is the sin (in every degree) so extensive. In this case
therefore, that speech availes.: Better admit a mischief, then an
inconvenience. Better pull down a smoking chimney, then admit a continual
smoke in the eyes: so, better endure a bad marriage (which is the lesser) then
a breach of law and right, which is the bond of the whole body. Besides, before
marriage, the deserting of the one party, inferres a liberty to desert another:
the forfeit of the time allotted to marriage, by the error of the one party,
may forfeit marriage, it self, in the will of the other. Such a portion
promised by parents in fraud, and after withdrawn injuriously, dissolves the
marriage because its such a fault asopposeth the condition of the first
consent. The like I may say of any the like violations, which yet, after
marriage it self hold not.

But let me not be mistaken in what I have said: I would not be thought to make
promises of no value, because I make marriage of greatest strength and virtue.
For, although we have a rule, that is, in the same power to break a law, that
first made it: yet it holds not in contracts, without special warrant. Not
each pretended sudden impotencie of body, not each suborned infamous slander
of the parties, or either of them, not every devised flim-flam of a giddy
brain must be accepted to make a spouse breach: (for what were this, but to
open a wide door to all baseness, and to expose the laws of God and man to
open contempt and mockery?) But such cases as I have mentioned, if they can be
sufficiently approved to those who are the witnesses of the contract, so that
all doubt of treachery and falsehood be taken away, then its free for the
contracted parties to desist if they will. Howbeit, not without mutual consent
neither: For put case that one of the parties pretend debility of body, yet the
other party knowing her self to be in a way of God, and to be bound to trust
God in his way, either for the recovery of strength to the weak party, or for
strength to wait upon God in the way of disappointment: shall refuse to
release the other: then I affime that other party is tied still by virtue of
the contract, to marry. Gods weakness is stronger then man's strength as the
Apostle speaks. And whereas (commonly) rationalnesse and wisdom of the flesh
does step in here (for Self ever crosses God) and shall either out of
disdain, self-love, fear, or other sinister respects, say: If he will needs
break off, let him: if she will needs break, let her. As good do so, as
proceed with discontent. And it shall be well seen, I scorn him as much as
he scorns me. I answer: No, these are base tricks to shake off Gods way:
let that prevail. But if the unruly party will depart, the innocent is
discharged to marry another.

Why a space is allotted, twixt contract and marriage.
Another Quaere may be, Why is there a space or distance usually appointed
between the contract and the marriage? Job says, although thy beginnings are
but small, yet he can make thy increase great in due time. Make thou no more
haste then good speed: Seek the Kingdom of God, and the righteousness of the
same, and make it not thy solemn care to plod upon great matters, or to enter
upon marriage with a fear of poverty, that thou and thine shall prove beggars.
Plod both of you how this solemn estate may find you well prepared; and for
other things cast your care upon him who cares for you; and in well doing, and
means using, commit your selves into the hands of a faithful Creator. This
work would be done even in the threshold of marriage.

What sp^ce is he most conven^en^.
d^d no sooner move a contract, or in that he moved it at all: For if there be
no difference between a present promise, and a promise shortly to be
performed, to what end is contract, when only marriage would serve? So that a
middle space is best: The Jews at the first aimed in their contract at the
striking up and securing themselves of the marriages; and after, took large
liberty of a year, or half a year, for the consummation. But after, they
found they lost as much in the Hundred as they got in the Shire, and that
hereby they endured great inconveniences, many more things falling out between,
when the cup and lip are so far asunder: and so, amending their error, they
grew to pitch a shorter time. So that it must be the discretion of a man which
must herein moderate it: I would think a matter of a week or ten days a
complete space; but because occasions may so fall out by absence and travel,
that there is more present use of the contract, then of the marriage, and that
for settling of minds: and sometimes when speed is intended, yet delays fall
out, therefore the due ends of Contract and Marriage being observed, and good
considerations agreed upon by parties (who best know what should let them, and
what should further them) it is to be left to providence what space is most
agreeable. So much for this.

What if either party defile it self before marriage?
I answer, There need no doubt be made what is such a case ought to be done:
for no doubt the contract ought to be broken off. By the Law of God, it was
death both to the defiler and defiled. Joseph's case of error about Mary, before
he knew the truth. But if it be demanded, What if this treachery be not
known ere marriage perfected? I answer, I ^now the judgment of Canonists, and
Popish Casuists is one, and Divines another. As touching the practice of our
Church. its no doubt grounded upon better and wiser principles: not only
because marriage came between the act and the accusation, and so seems to
disanull it (for who knows not, that the root of it was error?) But to make
the ordinance of marriage more solemn, and to teach people not easily to admit
of seperations, which I think is the cause, why Divorces being once admitted,
the guiltless party is prohibited the remedy of a second marriage; which being
allowed by the Scripture, would not else be forbidden now, were it not for the
honor of marriage, and the opposition to Jewish abuse (who used Divorces
frequently) lest every loose, idle person, having the liberty of a second
marriage, should rush upon the pikes of Divorce. And so (in charity) its to be
judged in the case of uncleanness committed between a Contract and marriage,
that separation is cut off, not as if it were not according to the desert of
the offender (for it must have bin so among the Jews, as Moses expressly
speaks in that case, when the marks of virginity could not be produced) but
for the safeguarding, and solemn esteem of marriage, which oftentimes ought
not to have bin, but being done, prevails; the honor of an ordinance, being
esteemed above the content of this, or that married person? This I thought good
to say of his Question. As for more, its not now my purpose: and, as for
Divorces, I hope I shall easily be pardoned, if I say not any thing: its
already sufficiently treated of: and, I being here only to speak of an
honorable Marriage, it would be as death in the pot, if I should here come in
with that, which of all other things is the most absolute opposite and
dishonor unto it.

Of Reproof, of all disdainers of Contracts.
this is reproof to all such as deride and vilify this so ancient, so useful
an Ordinance or practice of the Church: and think it scrupulous, and
superfluous. Tush, say they, what a waste is here of words? must we first marry
in the Lord, then aptly, and then be taught at our Contract, and then consider
of the weight thereof? here is preciseness indeed; do not others as well
without it; I warrant you, if once married, you will be sure enough without
this ado! Somewhat like Christ's Disciples, If this be the case between
husband and wife, its better not to meddle at all. So say these, I had rather
live single, then make such a stire! But I answer these two ways: first, as
Christ answered them, No, says he: Its not better not to marry at all: If any
man can abstain upon the gift of chastity, let him: but all cannot. So say, I,
if it be so easy to take up a single life, you may: it were best, no doubt;
provided that you mean a single one, and a chaste one also: for otherwise if
you mean (as Papists tell their Priests, better a life of uncleanness, then
marriage) it were more desirable to live an unchaste, single life, then to make
such ado, ere you marry, I should greatly pity, but rather sharply tax you
for your labor. For (to come to my second answer:) Tell me I pray you, what
think you of Marriage? Is it a life of looseness, and of the flesh? else why
are you so loath to be well fitted ere you enter it? Surely, you must know, that
Marriage is rather a curb to the flesh, and a bridle serving to restrain the
looseness thereof. And, do you affect carnal liberty in a condition of
restraint thereof? No, no: rather, if by any means, you might compass a
cheerful and contentfull marriage, thou should be gland to take the pains
for it, and roll every stone under which such happiness might lie, and well
too: what is a little pains for a perpetual good, and to shun a constant
misery? As Naamans servants told him, If so be the Prophet had enjoined thee
some great thing, should thou not have done it, much more to wash and be
clean? So, I say, if the service were far greater, would thou not admit
that, when the scope is, Marry and be happy? Oh, but is it enough (say these)
that we be precise in worship, and religion, and in our conscience to God, but
we must be so strict in marriage? So strict: how strict? would thou not take
as much pains for a purchase? Nay, for a good Horse, or a good Hawke? would
thou presume both were good enough, if price enough were set upon their heads?
No sure, but the rather thou would look to thy bargain. So do here:
think not a wife unquestionable because of her price: enquire of her true
value; when thou art married, and art stung with his or her unquietness,
unfaithfulness, uncleannes, oh then! what injunction should be put upon thee,
which thou would not yield unto, to be eased of such a burden, in a right
way? But I cannot promise thee thou shall prevail then, so well as thou may
prevent it now. Do as some Gentlewomen do, they will take no maids to train,
they will have them trained to their hand, or else none. What will not a fool
do out of season to shun sorrow, when he has smarted, but in season, that
he might not smart he will not stir a joint, nor wet his finger? To verify
that of Solomon. To the fool God gives toil and vexation for his portion,
because he will not be wise for his own ease. But I have before purposely
handled this point, I willl trench no more upon it: So much for this use of
reproof.

A second use then, Exhortation.
(to finish all) is exhortation to contracted couples to prise their contract
for the use of it. Contracted Couples prise your contract.
I shall not need to joy them of it, that now they have their desires
accomplished, (that will come alone) but, let it be their care, to sactife
themselves and their marriage, for time to come. It was the custom of the
Church of the old Testament, to offer sacrifices to God upon solemn occasions,
as upon solemn meetings of the family: 1. Sam. 13. 12.
when wars were attempted, Job.
upon any special service of God to be performed, as fasting, thanksgiving,
Sabbaths, circumcision of the children, recoveries from sickness, enjoying of
any blessing, Hezekia and Jonah deliverd, offered sacrifices, made songs and
vows: Marriage therefore, being a special change of estate, such as befalls
once in the life, should have no less solemn preparation, for entrance into
it. The entry of young ones into this condition, cannot but amase the thoughts,
and possess the spirits and powers of the soul, more then ordinarily;
striking jealousy into them, least their succes should not answer their
expectation, and they should not be happy in each other. So that upon whom
should all this care and burden be cast, save Iehova: who has said to married
ones as well as others. In nothing take thought, but in all things commending
your selves to God, by prayer and and, cast your care upon him, for he cares
for you: Let this be your care, even the promise of God. Yea in the verse
immediately following this text of Marriage, the Apostle meets with this
corruptions in couples, Heb. 13. 5.
let not your conversation be in covetousness, for he has said, I will not
fail thee, nor forsake thee. It is no easy thing to stir up a dead heart,
to reflect meditations of our future estate: take this time therefore, now the
thoughts and passions of of the soul are up in arms, now the iron is hot,
strike some impression of God, faith in his alsufficiency and providence, into
your selves. And as the Lord of the Manor, at each alienation, comes in for
his herriot, so now, at this your change, pay God his fine, the best jewel of
all you have, devote your selves, give up your souls to him with mutual
consent: Zach. 12. end. 1. Cor. 7.
rest not in the prayers of others, but set close your selves, to the Lord in
your own supplications both apart, and together without separation. Astronomers
call the twelve days of the Nativity Critical, for the twelve months of the
whole year; the days of your entry upon marriage should be even such; for
look how the constitution and frame of them is, so may you expect the time of
your marriage will be, either for Gods use and the honor of your marriage, or
for your own ends. Unblessed entrances have naughty successes.

Recognize with your selves, what the solemn opinion and hope is, which the
Lord, his Church, and your selves, have conceived of you: Tremble to think how
woeful a defeat it were to frustrate them, and your selves: Acknowledge God to
be the ordainer of this estate, look what rules he has directed you unto,
Deuteronomy. 32. end.
for an happy life in this kind, muse of them, Luc. 22.
set your hearts unto them, and let them sink deeply into your hearts; G^lath.
6.
take the Lord as a solemn witness of your intents and purposes to walk by
rule, as you look for peace: And by strong resolutions bind your fickle hearts
as with cords to the Altar, and pray God to set his seal to them, that they
may prove as good silver in the performing as they seemed in the promising.

And more particularly, Counsels in peciall for such.
these two things I advise you unto: First, look what especial base
distempers and lusts you have found to sway in you, either formerly, or since
your purpose of marriage, labor to purge them out, that you may not carry
defiled bodies or spirits into the married estate. As Physicians at the end of
a disease give their patient a clensing potion, to expel all scurfe of bad
humors remaining; so do you: you are entering into a pure and honorable
estate: honor it before, by burying all your Idols, and cashiering your base
lusts, that they crowd not in with you into the wicket of marriage: lest if you
shall dare to carry an unclean, froward, covetous, discontented and unsavory
heart with you into that estate, the Lord shall accurse you, and make them as
Judas his sop unto you, to defile you for ever after. To the pure all things
are pure, but to the impure every thing even the very mind and conscience are
defiled. Secondly, look what feeble seeds of knowledge and grace were sown
before marriage, you ply and attend them carefully for time to come. Promise,
yea secure the Lord beforehand, that no contentment of flesh, no humouring of
each other, no reaching at commodity, shall so forestall you, that this work
of God should be forgotten by you; rather lay all sacrifices by the Altar, and
renew your Covenant, both Gods with you, and yours with him; tell the Lord
thus, When my husband, my wife first met me, I was very busy in grounding my
self in the principles of knowledge, the sight of sin to humble me, the
truth of the promise to cast me out of my self, upon the arms of mercy. I was
occupied about the doctrine and use of reg^neration, union, and the new
creature; now, let not this marriage of mine deface these fair beginnings; it
is appointed for good, let us therefore meet for the better, not the worse. Take
me on further (Lord) as the child takes forth his lesson, let the sun of my
light and grace not go back, but forward, ten degrees: in all my hearings,
Sacraments, public and private use of ordinances, growing in the truth, as it
is in Jesus, that together with judgment, sweet affections, and again with
tender affections, sound judgment may grow and increase in me.

And thus I have finished this point also of a Contract, being the second piece
of my Digression from the point intended, to wit, the honor of marriage, both
in the entrance of it, whereof I have spoken in the first three Chapters; and
the continuance of it, whereof in the Chapter following shall be treated.

CHAP. VI.
Return to the first Argument. The Honor of Marriage in the preserving of it,
during the marriage life.

TO return then whence we digressed: now it follows that we come to the
second part of the Honor of Marriage: The second general preservation of the
honor of Marriage in the conversation of it.
standing in the careful improving thereof in the marriage conversation. It is
the nature of honor to love attendance; and they who have found an honorable
marriage, must wait upon it, and keep it so. And it is a true speech, That it
is no less virtue to keep a man's wealth, name, or honor, then to purchase
them. Job tells us, that God has denied wisdom to the Estrich to look to
her eggs, to hatch them when she has laid them: she forgets the work of
laying, and leaves them in the sand, for the feet of wild beast to destroy
them. The Apostle John wills that Lady and her children not to lose the good
things they had gotten, 2. John 8.
but to get a full reward. It had been better, that some had married with
far less shows of goodness, and hope of thrift, except they had kept it
better: For there is nothing so miserable as to have been happy. The praise of
that good woman in the Proverbs, is not, that she was virtuous before entrance;
Prove. 13.
no, it was her proof and practice which made her honored, and her husband in
her. Many great Captains have got a sudden crown upon u^eir heads: but they
have died with a bare title, and lost it with more shame, then the glory came
too which they got it by. Its not said, that Zachary and Elizabeth were worthy
couples in their entrance; but both in their married course, walked with God.
Paul does not only teach married ones to be married in the Lord, and no more;
but how to live together and maintain conjugall affection, and to keep that
knot, by subjection, compassion, tenderness, and faithfulness: Rest not in
this, (as some Scholars do) that their names are up, and then fall to
idleness, and prove dunces: So many couples are like the Image made of gold in
the head, silver in the breast, but worse and worse downward. They would have
their marriage bear up it self, whereas that is, as she is used: if she be
not cautiously observed, she will take a tetch, depart, and carry her honor
away, some husbands and wives, through the slighting of religion, as thinking
it needles to acquaint themselves with God, (as Job says) in all their
complaints, wants, and distempers; others by looseness of heart in company,
whereof they make but small choice; others pampering themselves with ease and
wantonness, lying open and naked to a unsuspected enemy: soon blast that
honor of their marriage, which at the first they seemed not dishonorable to
enter upon. And others have done the like, by improvidence, by needless
meetings, gamings, or the like idle courses, others little observing each
others temper, and so preventing many discontents: others also by presuming to
find at the hands of another more respect and affection: or expecting greater
wealth and estate, then they found, grow to distates and debates; then to seek
stolen waters, as weary of their own cisternes: And thereupon grows a decay
in their estates, discredit among such as esteemed well of them, poverty, and
imprisonment, separation from each other. And, what is all this, save to cast
their crown into the dirt, and to profane it wilfully? whereas, had they
resigned up themselves and the success of all their hopes to God, walking
faithfully and keeping covenant both with him and themselves, humbled
themselves and submitted painfully to their callings of magistracy ministry,
or private life, without ambitious reatching at matters above them, they might
have kept their crown and garland fresh and green: yea surely had they set
themselves to embrace those graces of God in each party to win love and
amity between them, bearing with infirmities, and covering them with
tenderness: how flourishing had their head and honor continued without
fading, even to this day? But, it shall be enough in this place to touch only
in the general, upon the equal necessity and coherence of this second duty,
with the former: for all such as would preserve their honor inviolable. That
which I shall further say hereof, may more seasonably come into the use of that
discourse which shall ensue, after we have cleared the point it self; which
because its large, and will cost consideration, Honor of marriage to be
preserved, partly by the joint acts of both, and partly by the several acts of
each party.
let us enter upon it.

It may then be demanded, wherein this art and skill consists, of saving this
honor of marriage so unsteined? The answer is, it stands in two sorts of
duties; whereof, the former sort, concerns both husband and wife jointly and
undividedly to practice: The latter concerns each of them in several, the
husband apart, and the wife apart. Let us then begin with the former.

Those duties which concern both equaly are four. Joint acts of the married
four.
First, Iointnesse in religion; mutual love; like loyal chastity: and suitable
consent. Touching the first of religion: my meaning is, that, as they are
entered already with a religious spirit, into their marriage, so they must
continue: not only to be religious still, but to cleave mutually together in the
practice of all such means of worship, and duties of both tables, as concern
them; I say, in the parts of religious conversation to God. More plainly,
first that they be joint in the worship of God publicly, both ordinarily upon
the Sabbath (and occasional at other times and seasons) as also extraordinary:
The word must be heard by both jointly, Sacraments mutually received, prayers
frequented, and all the worship attended. Secondly family duties, concerning
both themselves and their children and servants, as reading of the Scriptures,
conferring of them, prayer and thanksgiving: exercising those, whom God has
committed to their care, in the principles of Godliness, Jointhes i^ worship a
main preservative of honorable marriage.
and the several duties of inferiors: The husband being the voice of God when
they are both together; touching which, more shall be said in the several
offices belonging to the husband. If he be absent, and there be no man of
better sufficiency to present whom both of them allow of, then ought the wife
to discharge the duty, as hereafter shall appear. Thirdly, and more especially
those several duties of worship, which in private and apart from the other
family do concern them: which although they ought to perform alone also, yet
not always, but jointly and mutually: as to confer, read, pray, confess,
and give thanks. Fourthly, they must be joint, in the duties of charity to the
poor, harberousnes to strangers, relief of other both public causes and
private persons, whom by occasion, God offers to their regard. Fifthly, that
mutual harmony in all religious relations, both toward themselves, as
instruction, reproof, advice, admonition, or encouragement; or else others, in
the Communion of Saints, (of which read more at large in my Catechism, Part
2. Artic. 4.) or else in their general, and exemplary conversation, in the
sight of the world, which, when it is mutual, is resembled in the glass of
each others practice, but if not, then looses her beauty as we see in the
opposition which the holy Ghost makes between Abigail and Nabal in that point.
1. Sam. 25.


E're I answer any questions about this, I must ground and prove it by reasons
and Scripture. For the latter, it needs not many proofs. That, of these two
worthies Luc. 1. 6. may be sufficient, of Zachary and Elizabeth, that, both
were upright before God, in all the Commandments and ordinances of the Lord,
without reproof. In which sentence, most of those 5. particulers named before,
are touched. That of the Apostle may be added, that they defraud not each
other, except in the case of fasting, least (says he) your prayers be hindered:
that is your joint communion in religious worship. Now, if there must be such
an intercourse in extraordinary duties, how much more in ordinary? But its
objected, that Zachary cap. 12. bids them in their deep humiliations, to be
apart; this seems to contradict jointnes. I answer. The phrase is not to be
exclusively taken, that they should always be apart; for the Prophets scope in
the words, is, that there be singular uprightness in their humiliations, for
which cause he enjoines secrecy, because he mournes truly who mournes without
witness, but this excludes not jointnesse in other times and cases, because
fervency being as well required in them, as sincerity which is more stirred up
by mutualnesse, it is meet they should be mutual in that respect, as apart
in the other. So that, these two (as occasion differs) exclude not each other.

And there is special reason of this duty: Reasons of join^ religion of
couples.
For first, God is not now the God of them apart, as before, but jointly, as
married: of them I say, and of their seed: and therefore now, G^^ is their
mutual God.
as in their former estate.

Because the grace of each furthers both.
hope, knowledge, yet they reach to the furtherance of each others grace; if
they be bound then, to trade with the whole body of Communion, for the increace
of grace, how much more one with another?

They enjoy all things both good and bad in common.
Their sins are common: (God may punish the one in the other) their gifts and
graces are common, (both blessed for the others sake) their infirmities are
common, (each being a fellow feeler of the other) their blessings, as health,
wealth, success, are common: their calling and business common, tending to
the common good of them and theirs: their crosses common, yea their
punishments, their posterity, their dwelling, their friends are common: Shall
their God then be several? Shall their religion and worship be disjointed?
No, sure: mutual wants and needs, must unite and reconcile them to one God
with common consent

Religon is the Cement of all fellowship.
That union, which is not thus fastened, is but as the union of those foxes,
backward, by firebrands in their tails, soon dissolved, and very hurtful.
The Jews have a pretty observation upon the Ebrew name of the woman, the first
and last letters whereof make up the name Iah, God: which if they be taken from
the middle letters, leave all in a combustion, for they signify fire. If God
enclose not marriage both before and after, and be not in the midst of it, by
this band of religious fear; marriage is nothing save a fire: a contentious
and an unpeaceable condition: But this consent of both in the Lord, is the most
firm and blessed of all. Those terms are ever strongest and best agreed,
which agree in the best third, or couple. Now the Lord is the best, and the
safest band. What a sweet glass is it for husband and wife to see each others
face, yea heart in, to be acquainted with each others graces, or wants, to be
assured of each others love and loiall affection, then to look how they stand
affected to the band of their union, I mean fellowship in religion, faith,
hope, and the fruits.

From one instance, viz. their necessity of joint trust in God.
and that is faith in the alsufficiencie of providence: and that will teach us
the rest. What is the married estate, save a very stage of wordly care to act
her part? Single persons never come to understand what care means, till
marriage come. That's the black ox which treades heard upon them. How shall
this tread be borne, except faith in the promise act another part, of holy
carelessness (I mean in point of carking?) Surely, as the fashion of some
countries is to hang up a care-cloth in the Bridechamber, to cool the heat of
other affections in the married, and to put them in mind what an estate they
are entering upon; so, well may this cloth of care ever hang in their chamber,
except faith take it down and fasten their care upon him that cares for them,
cutting off all superflous carking. Now this grace belongs jointly to both of
them: not only to the husband, who follows the world hard to please his wife;
but also to the wife, who (as the Apostle says) is as ready to please him.
What a gulf of care do both implunge themselves into, except the Lord
vouchafe them his antidote? What craft, tricks, coosenages, d^ceits will they
not find out, to scrape and rake together, all being fish that comes into their
net? What clamors, discontents, and brawles will arise, if defeated of their
wills? What baseness will utter it self, upon any other expenses, then
expected? But let the Lord be their portion, rock, and defense, and what can
distract them: How sweetly will both draw in this yoke, if, as they have made
God the God of the hills, so they can make him of the valleys, I mean, the
God of their bodies as well as their souls? Now, if this one joint gift do so
run through all their life, what will joint consent in all graces do, as hope
of salvation, fitness to die, mercy and compassion, love, fear, meekness,
and the rest? All which in their kind, under faith, serve to furnish the
married condition with contentment and welfare.

Sixthly and lastly, Nothing has such blessing annexed to it.
what can so assuredly bring in blessing to the bodies, souls, posterity,
families, and attempts of each other, as jointnesse of religion? when both are
agreed of their verduict, and one buildes up as fast as the other? when no
sooner the one enterprises any thing, but the other joines in a commending it
to God, for blessing. They not daring to go to work in an unblest way,
without God. That no sooner they spy an infirmity, much more a corruption in
each other, but they reserve it for matter of humiliation, against next time:
No sooner they meet with a mercy, but they make it matter of thanks, keeping
the Alter ever burning with this fuel and Sacrifice: What a sweet derivation
is this to both, of pardon and blessing? What a warrant is it unto them both,
that each shall share in all good, when as both do equally need it, so each
seek it of God? When God is made both of Court and Counsel, privy to all
doubts, fears and wants of both, what can so assure them of an happy
condition, when censuring, condemning, or quarreling each with other, is turned
into a mutual melting in Gods bosom, for the greefs and complaints of one
another: when in Christ their Advocate they sanctify all to themselves and
make all things pure to them, bed, board, love, crosses, mercies, which else to
others are unclean, and defiled. This for Reasons.

piety or mercy, as do mutually concern them? Must she then desist, for lack
of jointnesse? I answer: The question were much harder, What if he one party
will not join with the other?
if it were made of such an husband, as not only does not concur actually
with the wife, but is contrarily minded unto her. I will therefore frame the
answer to both cases: I say then that the wife may supply the defect of his
non-concurrence with her, in these acts of religion, or charity. For why? his
defect of joining, although it may hinder the grace of the duty, yet it must
not hinder the essence of performance: better is it, that God be served, in
prayer, in teaching the family, training the children; that the poor be
relieved, and good done, as it may be, then not at all: Not only because the
defect may possibly proceed in the man rather from impotency, and weakness:
in which respect, the wife making supply (especially being eminently better
fitted then other women are) does as it were, obtain acceptance of both, as if
both could join, and the husband could be the mouth of the woman to God. This
being provided, that her gifts consist in an humble modesty, as in other
sufficiency. But besides also, though the husband be opposite to good himself,
yet if he connive at good in her, she must not under any pretext, detract the
duty from God, by his lewdness, and incur double wrath from God. Nay I add
further, although he be actually opposite, that is forbid it to be done, yet as
the case may require, through necessity of present miseries, she is bound to
step out from her ordinary course, as Abigail did in Nabals desperate
abandoning of David's servants. But I wish the Reader to suspend his thoughts
awhile, till I shall find fitter occasion to treat of this answer: which will
be afterward, partly in the duty of the husbands understanding, partly of the
wives subjection. Here therefore I do but touch it.

Reproof.
as I began. And that is, first Reproof of a foolish contrariety of couples in
this kind. Severalnesse of religion in the married sinful, if af^ected.
They will be religious in marriage, but how? Forsooth as they were before:
they will go apart by themselves, and severally; but, this jointnesse of
worship, they abhor, as too strict and needless: They will grant that they
must read, pray, confer, but it must be as formerly, either apart, or with
other company; but as for imparting themselves to each other, they are loath to
utter their ignorance, barrenness, ungroundednesse in the principles, or their
spiritual forgetfulness, unthankfulness, lukewarmenesse, especially the
defect in marriage duties each to other. These they are ashamed to make each
other privy to. God only is (they think) meetest to be acquainted with them:
Why? are you such strangers? Were you not as able before marriage, as now, to
do this? Are you now in no deeper relations, then before? Then you could not,
but now you may do otherwise, and will you not do it? I cannot better
describe the folly hereof, then by the fondness of such wives, as when they
speak to their husbands, they call them by their names, or place, Master such
a one, or John, Richard, etc. so, as any other might call them, as well as
they, or as they might call them, before marriage. Surely the name of your
relation, husband, or wife, I think, were fitter for them then common names.
The like I say here, such a religion (I trow) were fitter for you, as might
best agree with your near union; and not such as any unmarried person may
enjoy. Woe to him, that is alone says Ecclesiastes, for, if he fall who shall
help him? And, to one, how should there be heat? (he means of generation)
But, two are better then one: how does this agree with the course of such? They
are alone even when they are two: and they are two (divided) when they should
be as one. Surely if they should claim power in several over their own
bodies, or power to have a several purse, or a stock going apart, it were
less sinful, then thus to nourish a worship of God, wholly apart from each
other. May any so fitly join in mutual confession or thanks as they, who have
but one God, and can (as one soul in two bodies) fellow-feele, and
compassionate each others case as his own? Is there any rent so bad, as in
semelesse coat? What can this division savor of, but pride, singularity,
selflove? Or how would the devil desire to rule, rather then by this
separation? I ask, do thou hold the body, or the body thee? And, whom
hurtest thou herein, save thine own body and soul, by refuseing such a succor?
Would thou not think it an unkindnesse in the heart and liver, if it would
keep in all spirits and blood within themselves, and transmit none to the
parts? Must it not threaten (as he said once) putrefaction and obstruction to
themselves, and ruin to the whole? So much for this first.

Secondly, Branch 2.
this reproves all such couples, as are rather backbyases each to others in the
matters of God, Hindrers of each other in such joints religion, to be taxed.
then helpers either in ordinances, or duties. Such as, when family duties are
called for, either by husbands, or wives, then they lay loggs in each others
way, then of all other times, their business sticks to their fingers, then
they have most irons in the fire to attend, errands abroad, or children within,
to run upon, to dress: If private duties be occasioned, much more awek and
untowards they are: If any duty of compassion, and mercy offer it self,
visiting the sick, counselling of the distressed, helping of the needy, come
in their way, they lowre, and cross it, disnay each other from it. Nay, and
yet profess to be religious nevertheless. Oh woeful ones! Is this your
consent? Do you thus honor your marriage? Did you enter it with some opinion
of religion, and do you thus promote it? Is it not a sweet nosegay for you to
smell to, to hear your husbands alledgings, this duty, Sabbath, Sacrament,
Fast, had been done, sanctified, enjoyed, had not thou hindered? Take heed,
God will not be mocked! If this be done by the religious, what shall the
irreligious do? If this be done in the green tree, what shall be done in the
dry?

Thirdly, Branch 3.
it reproves all such as basely rest in the religion of each other, Such as
dorest in each others religion, taxed.
though themselves look after none. Many women good for not hing but for
drudgery, yet have a conceit husbands prayers, their zeal and holiness shall
serve their turn, and under that rotten ragge, they shroud themselves. No, no,
this plaster is too narrow for the sore: If each party will fare the better
for other, both must combine, both must pray, fast, sanctify their blessings
and crosses, wives must not plod for their childrens backs and bellies,
leaving the care of their souls and good government to their husbands. What is
this, but to be a true slave, but an unfaithful wife? Rather say thus,
husband, I have a part a part in them, as well as thou, sure I am, they have
received as much of old Adam from me, as thee: Oh, that I had as careful a
spirit to train them up, as thou. So in other parts of duty, rest not either
of you in others religion, being barren your selves, for each tub shall stand
on his own bottom. The goodness of one shall not be imputed to other; but
the soul that sins shall die. Take heed lest it be verified, two shall be
in one bed, the one taken, the other refused! As God has made you for marriage
to be one flesh, so see that by grace you be one spirit.

Fourthly, to these may be added the preposterousnesse of such couples, Married
persons who forsake their own fellowsh^p, and run to strangers, faulty.
as are then safest, when as they forsaking their bosom fellowship, run into
the company of strangers, to converse with: to them they impart their marriage
discontents, crave counsel, advise from them, betraying (by their practice)
their husbands to base report; all, and more then all their griefs they power
into strange bosoms, refusing their own, who are much better then themselves,
and then its best done, when most privily, and furthest from their husbands
notice: But they may never hear of any thing from them, except with up brading
and discontent: They must either hear of it from strangers, or not at all. Oh,
how many of these housewives have deceived both Minister, friends, and husbands
by their subtilty? till afterward their sin betray them, what metal and
stamp they are of! The truth is, their love is unfound, their hearts
turbulent, their tongues querulous and clamorous: But, if their husbands be
taken from them, and their eiesores remooved, then religious persons, and the
Minister shall no more hear of them; their hearts are upon new liberties, all
their gronings are vanished, and the next husband (though less religious then
the former) pleases them better. Oh woeful hypocrites, thus to color over a
rotten heart, with religious complaints! God shall meet with you, in your
kind, and make your selves at last your own judges, when his plagues ceaze
upon you! repent beforehand, and prevent them, if you be wise. Your sin is
hereby worse then others, who perhaps of me ere ignorance neglect this duty,
being otherwise honest: To whom I give this caveat, let your sin this day
come to your remembrance, amend it, and the good Lord regard not, but pass by
your former errors upon your Repentance.



Cause or the unhappy and unprosperous state of many couples, is, want of
mutual religion.
some cry out, they can have no peace one with another; others, that they
thrive not, cannot be well reported of, or, their children disquiet them: God
is against them, nothing prospers: Alas! what wonder! God is the last end of
your though, he is not set up in your married estate! he is thrust out into the
back room; who yet should be all in all, chief in your souls, prayers,
family, worship, he is nothing at all, and is it strange nothing goes forward?
How should it? Surely if it should (as perhaps some as bad as you thrive) I
should think he meant to destroy you! But now, since he sends this Bayliffe to
arrest you, and filles you with adversity, I hope it is to bring you to a
parlee (as Absalom in burning Jacobs barely) to provoke and stir you up to
lay hold upon him, in due season! Bethink your selves, set him up better,
honor him, and he will honor you, but if you dishonor him, he will (as
Samuel told Eli) lightly esteem of you: Prevent it in time, ear he come upon
you worse; he has hitherto been only as a mothe, and destroyed your beauty,
but he can tear you in pieces as a Lion, if you look not to it! pick out the
secret canker out of this apple, else it will consume all: And this I add,
although you should swim in all welfare, and prolong your days, if this be
all your mourning, for corn and oil, it shall be given you as a curse: if you
see not Gods meaning, and honor not your marriage, by resigning up your
Crown, and casting it at Gods feet, depending upon him for blessing; you shall
die dishonorablely, and live without comfort: its not all the wealth you have
shall help you to joy, but rather as quails shall all come out at your
nostrills, and leave you desolate.

Exhortation to all good couples to be joint in their religion.
to be joint in their religion together. And here give me leave to speak a
word or two of some particular duties: and then of your general converse.
Touching the former, I would touch these two, the one touching family worship,
outward, the other touching that grace mentioned in the fourth reason before, I
mean faith in Gods providence, which is inward. I begin therefore with this.
Consider both of you, there is but need of it, in this your course of wordly
dealing: most couples are met to increase carking and distrust, Both inward, as
in faith, and the like.
as much rain to make a torrent. The Devil will so stuff and fill them with
carking and covetousness, their own base hearts set upon the creature, will
so inflame them, the error of the wicked will so pollute them through lust, by
their cursed example, that many who met together in hope to become Saints,
after they are met, prove little better then disguised heathen: Well might the
Apostle join the caveat of marriage here, with that of covetousness in the
next verse: and mark his phrase, let not your conversation be in
covetousness: the words are, roll not (as the door upon her hinges) in the
love of silver: his meaning is this, marriage is a rolling up and down from
one carnal business to another: the calling, the looking to children, buying
in, paying out, stocking the grounds, raising of commodity thereupon, going
out and in, and walking in a round of the world: nothing but scuffling and
shuffling to get and scrape: except there be this gift of faith to season the
heart in all this orb and round: to settle it in the center of providence, to
sweeten it with affiance in God. Alas, else, all the questions will be, how
shall these chargabe servants be fed? how shall all these debts be paid? what
losses are here in our cattle? how poor are our takings in our shops? our
trades are mean, our children are many, what shall we eat, wherewith shall we
be clothed? Alas, little thought I at first entrance, that marriage had been
of this die, I thought all had been white and fair: now I see corn, cattle,
husbandry, house wisery, all lies at the courtesy of mercy, the stock is out,
and except God bless it, may never come in again, except God give success,
good seasons of weather, crops will fail, rents will be unpaid, and we may die
beggars. What? did you think marriage was but a song, a sport, an honey moon,
of one days jollity? did you not consider, that its a perpetual exercise of
faith, for your selves, for your children, for your servants, and business? If
you did not, then learn wisdom now: God has set you in it, to try you, what
metal you are made of: whether it will make you disguised heathens, or
gracious believers, who commend your selves and all to God, shutting up your
selves in his Arc, that the floods of great waters overflow not. I tell you
marriage is a stage for faith to act upon, to cast and venture all upon him,
who will care for you, and promises to do all your works for you. Be
therefore both of you just before God, walk in this command of faith, as well
as any, yea this before any. Take no carking thought how children should be
maintained, educated, portioned, married. Do not as one lately did: having one
son borne, he vowed he would have no more, whatsoever came of it, for he
meant to leave that child, all his estate, (judge by the way into what noisome
snares a base heart brought him into) and he whould have no more, to be
beggars. Would it be thought, this Devil of unbelief were so rank? Why,
marriage will make covetousnes a venial sin, (worse then the Pope makes it)
without faith.

Be resolved of it, Faith the principal prop of the married.
faith must be your only help, to stop you from drowning in this gulf. Else
no farm, or occupying will be great enough: you would think all your life but
a moment, for the satisfying of an insatiable spirit? So many irons at once in
the fire, till one mar another, and overthrow all. Else, you will pick
quarrels with your trades, and be ready to forsake them, as fast as you embrace
them, and so weary your selves with losses, till ruined. Else you will be so
sordid, so pinching and base in your house keeping, so subtle, false in your
sellings, you will grow defrauders, oppressors, usurers, and cheaters, in your
traffic and trades, so eager in your toil, so impatient of a defeat, so
injurious and unmercifull not only to your beasts, but even to your wives,
selves, children, servants: so base in your works of charity, that both God and
men loath and be weary of you. What patterns of such married ones, Infinite
miseries of the married through the distrust of Gods providence.
does almost every town afford? And when God frowns upon them, then they know
their tongues for vexation and wax as profane in the first Table, scorners of
worship, and Sabbaths, as before unjust in the second. Therefore, live by faith
both husband without, and wife within, this is a joint work of both: (of your
several duties I shall speak after) does gain come in, and wealth abound?
Set not your heart upon it: be not giddie, wanton, sensual: faith abhorres
such behavior, and settles the soul in a sober frame of thankfulness: does
God cross you? Distrust him not, deject not your hearts, God is able to supply
it. How else was David supported, when not only city and wealth, but also
wives were carried captives? surely by faith he comforted himself in God, and
recovered all. Am I in debts? God will pay them: I came not into them by my
sin, but God brought me in, by providence: he therefore shall bring me out:
Have I losses? God will restore them as to Job: Am I sick in body? diseased,
husband and wife each lying upon others hand, threatened by creditors, to go to
prison, fallen into the hand of a merciless Landlord? faith will cast you upon
a merciful God: and although the common proverb is, faith will never buy
corn nor clothes: yet do but improove it, and thou shall find, it will be
like Salomons silver, and answer all things, buy all marquets: She serves a
master who can mollify the hearts of the cruellest enemy, will sooner suffer
the Lions to be hungerbit, then his poor shiftlesse Lambs to want: All the
fishes in the sea are his, his are all the sheep on a thousand hills, all the
mines of red and white earth, all the money in all men purses: All things are
Christ's, thou being his all things are thine, and shall be cast in as an
overplus unto thee: Thou need not say, husband, wife, we shall be destroyed
one day by this poverty; therefore we must fall to indirect courses, as
others, to bring in the penny: No; let Atheists say thus, they who have a God
to trust to, let them never dishonor him, by such doings: thereby making him
their enemy, lest they be compelled to speak for somewhat. He that clothes the
grass of the field, and the lillies, which neither labor nor spinne, much
more will do for them that trust him; you serve no hard master, nor one, that
needs your sin to serve his providence. This faith must be Domina fac totum,
she must do all and suffer all, and carry all, she must be the stirring
housewife (or else in vain do others stir) who can do more with sitting
still, then all others, though each finger were a thumb: By her therefore and
her daughter patience possess your souls, and commend your selves to him, who
will effect your desire. This for the former particular, for faith in the
promise.

The other particular is outward, Family duties, and private worship,
necessary for good couples to join in closely.
which is the joint serving of God in the family. Though both of you pray not,
yet the one hold it up in the others absence, and set up God with both hands in
your house: Let prayer, reading, and other worship hansell your dwelling and
sanctify it, at your first entrance, and afterward season and sweeten it, and
all, both persons and things that belong to that: Let all go under the banner
and protection of God by it. It must be as the Temple morning and evening
sacrifice, what else so ever you add thereto, you may, but this must be
constant. The holy Ghost loves to honor this Sacrifice through the Scripture:
Daniel would pray at the season of it, Eliah would offer his sacrifice at that
time, and so the rest. And this Sacrifice made all the rest welcome, and
blessed, Therefore be joint in it; begin not zealously at first, and end in the
flesh, which is the custom of most couples. Look not asquint with an evil
eye upon it, to cast your businesses so unhappily, as to trench upon the season
thereof: as if your hearts secretly grudged at God in it, and could scarce
beteame it. Both of you be just before God in it: striving who should go
before the other in it: be no snare each to other not only by your
backwardness and murmuring at it, not so much as in your indifferency of
spirit toward it: least you defile each other by it, and so you grow mannerly
to put it off at first, and then by degrees by any trifling occasion to
outweare it. Know it, that by the defacing of this, you outweare all blessing,
and go in the row of them of whom its said: pour out thy wrath upon the
families which call not upon thy name. Be very serious to task your selves to
it, to press each other not only to a performing of it in general, to say a
few prayers, but to be instant, fervent, and constant in it. The seasoning of
your children, the awe and government of your servants depends upon it: and
where its wanting, both prove ruinous, and brutish, besides the misery of the
whole family condition. Use all wisdom thou man, all prevention and early
care, thou woman, both without and within, that all business and occasions may
be set at a stay, and dispatched, that this weighty affair stand not let for
them. Be sure that thy heart smite thee not often in the day, when shrewd turns
befall thy children, thy house is in danger by casualty of fire, thy husband
and thou quarrel, or any other sad accident happen; to say, these are, because
we sought not God this day: therefore is this mischance befallen me in my
cattle, or in my travail, or by a fall off my horse, or ill success in my
business, or the like. Let not the coming in of friends, strangers, break it
off: sit not loose to it, least each toy unsettle it. Awe the family to it,
both join in the drawing of your inferiors to reverence it, least if form and
commones once break in, the next news be, weariness, and so breaking it off.
And with prayer, let solemn calling of the children and servants to account be
practiced. If you can possibly let the morning rather then noonetide be your
appointed season, lest necessary occasions deprive some, whom it concerns.
Choose it before meals, if it be possible: If the greatness of household
hinder that, then take heed that drowsiness, slumber, and the Devil set not
in their foot to mar all, which for the most part is the canker of most
family duties: which through custom is made nothing of, till it have cast out
duty it self upon the dunghill. I shall speak more of the man's duty in
special, afterward: this now I thought good to premise in general. Needfnll
to use private worship.
And this of these two particulars, of the joint duty of couples be said. Now I
come to the general exhortation, and so finish the Chapter.

Let it be therefore exhortation to all good couples, Causes why it should be
so.
to be mutual in all religious duties, ordinances, and service of God. This
will strengthen the wheel of marriage life, as the strong spoakes in the cart
wheel, strengthen it, from cracking, and splitting. Live not like strangers to
God: for so shall you never be inward with each other: your life will wax
common and fulsome, past and spent out in a shadow and vanity, yea vexation of
spirit: and at your death, you shall say, alas we never knew one another
truly. I dare not snare you for settnesse of Canonical hours, or for
oftnesse of duty: I leave that to your own experience, who should best know
each others wants, or at least your own to draw you to it. It is not meet
families be made privy to the privacie of their governors: it is the next way
to make them despised: its (...) referring them to your own seasons: except
your selves be the whole family, for then the difference is taken away. I say,
there may be secret cases, wherein even each party may choose secrecy; in
such, be wise, and power out you hearts to God, apart, as its like Rebecca did
in the strife of her twins. There is a season for all things: and marriage
secrets are sacredly to be kept. Therefore I say let this be the chief pearl
of the marriage crown; search out all thy corruptions: make a register of all
favors of God, which God has granted to thee, Great benefit of pr^va^e j^^^t
wo^sh^p.
and to thy wife in common; such as at the time of receiving, seemed most
precious, and might ill have bin spared: mark how the Lord has gone before
thee and ordered thy conversation: consider together how happily, and yet
perhaps hardly you met in marriage: what sound love, and covenant the Lord bred
at first in you: how they have since held firm; and although many things have
come in to weaken them, yet they have not prevailed. Consider how your hearts
are drawn daily each to other: calmeth your unquiet spirits, (which otherwise
would not keep compass) so that you look not each upon the other with the
eyes of Serpents, but of Doves. Observe how Sabbaths and Sacraments are
blessed, Counsels about it.
how your faith and peace grows, your fears decay, how your corruptions are
purged; what dangers in body, state, children you avoid; and what sorrows,
which comber others, you are free from: also what success in your childrens
tractablenesse, and towardness: what faithfulness and subjection in your
servants, (for is it not God, who makes many stout stomachs of both sexes,
subject to weak governors? (as David says) how your fellowship with the good
increases, what new blessings are fallen upon you, in persons, names, trades,
posterity: Mark also well, where Satan most insuleth, and where the hedge is
lowest with you: what corruptions (as old sores) break out in their seasons,
which yet seemed to be quasht before; what lusts of the heart, lust of the
eye, or pride of life bubbles up from within: Look not each into him or her
self, but each into other, as having interest deeply planted; yet do it not
with curiosity but simplicity: By this means both abundant matter and manner,
as oil to the lamp, will offer themselves to nourish this ordinance; all lust
of sloth, all rust of ease, weariness will be filed off. And a free heart to
make God the umpire of your differences (if any be, as how can it be avoided,
but a root of bitterness within, will less or more break out) the composer
of your hearts, the granter of your requests, and the gracer of your marriages
will be obtained. And fear not, lest this course should in time weary you, or
alienation each from other should grow, to distaste this duty; for the Lord who
has founded it, will own it, and can bless it, and keep out disorder; and
the sweet fruit of this service, will so both prevent, attend and follow you,
in all your ways, that you shall feel your selves to walk each before other,
and both before God, less loosely, moresoundly and safely: For why? how can it
otherwise be, when both of you remember whom you use to go to, (as to the oath
and covenant) both in your confessions, on which you shame your selves for your
faylings, and in your requests, craving pardon and purging, and where you have
done well, to praise him for support, and to be thankful for that
administration and protection of his, under which (as his beloved) you have
bin, all the day long.

I conclude therefore, go to God more jointly then ever; hold, Exhortation to
private en^^^ourse with God.
and pull more hard and close together, so often as you go to the throne of
grace; especially, when as with that good Jacob, you are resolved not to cease
wrestling till you be blessed: compel him to send you away with your request,
else you cannot be answered Go by a promise in your Advocate, and say, now
Lord, this new state of ours, requires new manners, new selfedeniall, new
faith, new life, a donble portion of grace; beg it therefore as Elisha did;
all that belong to you, require a new part in you: And, who is sufficient for
these? Make your selves nothing: and God all in all, who can satisfy you.
Separate not your selves in these duties, as others do in Congregations, or
others in board and bed, but say, come, let us pray together, confess, give
thanks, I am as thou art, my people as thine, my horses as thine, my thoughts,
affections, members, as thine. By this mean, love shall so grow, that it shall
outgrow all distempers: you shall say of each other, I never thought my wife
had the tithe of that grace in her heart, or that my husband had half that
humbleness, compassion, faith, which now I perceive. Those evils, those
infirmities, which would for ever have estranged some, and caused distaste, I
see in him, in her, breed so much the more love to my soul, sympathy, and
mercy: This from this welspring of joint worship, shall flow streams of honey
and butter (as Job speaks) into all the life^ Especially, when crosses and
streights shall befall you, then shall God be nearest of all unto you, and be
afflicted with you in all: because you have made him the God of your
mounteynes, he wilbee the God of you valleys also, whenas others, who never
thus traded with him, shall be sent to their Idols, and to shifte for
themselves. And as touching the first duties, of mutuallnes, viz. of these
four jointnesse of religion and worship, thus much.

CHAP. VII.
The second mutual duty of the Married, viz. Conjugall love handled.

I Now proceed to the second main and joint duty of the married which is
conjugall Love: The second joint office of the married, Conjugal love
For the better handling whereof it will not be amiss first to premise
somewhat, touching the nature of it: and then to show some reasons, why it
should be jointly preserved, adding some means whereby it may be done, and
so, concluding with use.

That infinitely and only wise God who both upholdeth by his providence, Love
ought to be jointly preserved, for the honor of Marriage.
all his creatures in their kinds and subsisting, and has by one soul of
harmony and consent, accorded each with other, for their mutual aid and
support: much more has his hand in the accord of reasonable creatures, their
fellowship and league together, as without which they could not well continue
in their welfare and prosperity. And therefore, for the more sweet reconciling
and uniting of the affections of one to another in every kind of league and
fellowship, both the more general and common, standing in outward commerce,
and the more near and close, as in friendship and marriage; he has accordingly
planted in every nature, sex and person more or less Simpathy, that the one
not possibly being able to subsist without the other, might by this tie, each
love the other, and be knit to the other in union and affection. Not only bred
by peculiar instinct.
This appears even in the most remote contracts of buying and selling,
borrowing and lending: wherein although the league stand rather in things then
in persons, yet even there, is seen a general kind of love, each man choosing
to trade and traffic with them, whose spirit and frame is most suitable to
their own. When God meant to enrich the Israelites by the bounty of the
Egyptians, he darted in for the time such a sympathy into their hearts, that
they found favor in their eyes; so that nothing was then too dear for them,
jewels and gold and silver, till they had impoverisht themselves. And, in those
combinations of men which are grounded in law and civil order in commonwealths
and corporations, although there be a necessary bond, to keep all sorts within
order and government: yet there is to be observed between those members, a more
peculiar bond between some then others, through a suteablenesse of disposition
that is in them, whereby for special causes, the one does more tenderly affect
some one or other, then the common body can affect it self. This yet does much
more appear in the league of friendship, wherein we see God does so order it,
that by a secret instinct of love and sympathy, causing the heart of the one to
incline to the other, two friends have been knit so close to the other, that
they have been as one spirit in two bodies, as not only we see in Jonathan
and David, but in heathens which have striven to lay down their lives for the
safeguard of each other. And that the finger of God is heart, appears by this,
that oftimes a reason cannot be given by either party, why they should be so
tender each to other: It being caused notby any profitable or pleasurable
mean, but by mere sympathy, which is far the more pure and noble cement of
union, then what else so ever. Nay, in the very senseless creatures is to be
seen this amity and neerenesse, that as some have an antipathy each to other,
as the shadow of the walnut is noxious to other plants; so, the elm and the
vine do naturally so entwine and embrace each the other, that its called, the
friendly elm; who can tell why? much more then in reasonable creatures, it
must be so. And hence those heathens (that could go no further) make the very
constellations of heaven, under which two are borne, to be the cause and
influence of their accord: I know not what star (says one) has temperd my
nature so fitly to thine, that we should be so united. And another, scoffing at
one he distasted, tells him, I love thee not certainly, and yet I cannot tell
why, (for thou never hurtest me) but this I am sure of, that I love thee not.
What wonder then, if God for the preserving of that band which is nearest of
all, durablest of all, and the most fundamental of all: has much more caused
a secret sympathy of hearts to live in the breasts and bosoms of some men, and
some women, that are to live in the married estate, (whereof no reason can be
given, save the finger of God;) whereby I say their hearts and affections do
consent together, of two to become one flesh, the most inward union of all?
Whence is it, that (all others set aside, sometimes more amiable in themselves,
more rich, better bred, and the like) yet through this instinct of sympathy,
(an hidden and unknown cause) two consent together to become husband and wife?
Surely by this it appears, that by how much less reason can be given of this
temperament, so much the more God is in it, as purposing by a more precious and
uniting band, then ordinary, to knit them together, whom he purposes to
maintain in such a league, as must endure, and cannot be dissolved, when once
it is made. So that we see marriage love is oftime a secret work of God,
pitching the heart of one party upon another, for no known cause; and
therefore where this strong lodestone attracts each to other, no further
question need to be made, but such a man such a woman's match were made in
heaven, and God has brought them together.

But, But oftent^ms by outward occasions and motives.
because the finger of God is not so manifest in all matches as by a secret
inspiration to unite them: and because man being a reasonable creature, is led
in affections, not to live by sensual appetite, as a beast, but by rational
motives and inducements: therefore providence discovers it self herein also:
even framing the matter so, that oftimes where this natural inclination
fails, and where in likely hood some antipathie and contrariety of spirits
would appear; yet, by some accidental endowments of religion, of education,
of eminent natural parts, of sweet disposition, even that party pleases best,
who yet were as likely to displease as much as any in the general. I say this
is a providence more general, then the former: so ordering things, that where
mere sympathy fails, yet another band may prove (to some persons) as
pleasing and lasting, when as they see that one defect is recompensed, with
another eminency and perfection. Who but God has so accorded it, that many a
woman of exquisite beauty and person, like to attract love enough (in a mutual
way of man) should yet come short of inward wi^, wisdom and abilities? Surely
he who does all so well, that nothing can be found out after him better then
he has made it, has thus appointed it, lest if all perfections should
concur in one impotent subject, the heart would be too big for the bosom,
and swell into an excess of pride, and self-love. And on the other side, who
has so ordered it, that oftentimes, where beauty fails, where ^ther person is
ordinary, there yet, these uncomely parts should be clothed with greater
honor, of virtue, understanding, industry, providence, and other qualities of
worth: and all for this universal end, that there might be an equality? So
that whereas the person in some regards might be an object of disdain, yet in
others, might be to a rational and wise man, a meet object of esteem, her
gifts drowning her defects, and so sustaining the poor creature from contempt
and scorn. Thus does God by his wisdom so order contraires, that being
brought by his own skillfull hand to a due temperature, they might cause a most
pleasing harmony: so that oftimes a nimble wit joined with a more slow, a
phlegmatique temper with a sanguine, a melancholique with a merry, a cholerique
with a mild and patient temper, might behold the workmanship of God herein with
such admiration, that the frame of spirit which in the general might seem
most repugnant, yet in respect of the necessary usefulness and commodity
thereof, might find most favor. And why? surely because similitude of
distempers might breed a confusion in the married estate, whereas the one
quality alaying the other, might reduce the body to a sweet harmony and
correspondence. So that still we see God has an hand in this union of hearts
in the married and although some unite through a secret sympathy: others from
some confessed good and amiable object in the party loved; yet God is in them
both, that by a strong marrimoniall knot the married couples might eike out
that love and affection toward each other, which else neither the need of each
other, no nor religion it self could alone, maintain and preserve. And so
much for this second branch.

By all I have said, Conjugall love a mixed affection.
it may be perceaved, that by conjugall love, here, I mean not only Christian
love, a grace of Gods spirit: (for marriage borders much what upon nature and
flesh) nor yet a carnal and sudden flash of affection, corruptly enflamed by
Concupiscence: (rather brutish the^ humane) but a sweet compounde of both,
religion and nature, the latter being as the material, the former as the
formal cause thereof; properly called Marriage love. And this love is not an
humor raised suddenly in a pang or thoade of affection, ebbing and flowing;
sometimes when the parties are set upon the stage abroad, among company and
strangers, where they would act a part for their Credit; (for family and
place where they live ought to be their true stage of Action) but an habited
and settled love planted in them by God, whereby in a constant, equal, and
cheerful consent of spirit, they carry themselves each to other: each hollow
companion will exceed, at an od time, and put down true lovers: who if they
were tried by their uniforme love, And how?
would be tired as jades and betray themselves to be counterfeits: whatsoever
is according to God, is equal, though but weak. So is this, of the love of
couples: no union of imagination, mixture, nor yet bare affection, but an
effect of divineinstitutio^, between two, (for polygamy is the Corruption of
marriage;) not to be dissolved till death, except uncleannes divorced it. This
love is (as the echo to the voice) the vital spirit, and heart blood of this
Ordinance causing a voluntary and practique union of two, without which union
alone by virtue of Gods institution, is but a forced necessity. For then has
this ordinance her perfection, when this soder of love being added thereto,
makes that union w^^ cannot be broken, to become such a willing one, as (to
chuze) would not be broken. Else friendship were a better one-ship then
marriage, because that may be dissolved, when it waxes a burden, whereas this
holds, be it never so wearisome. But then is it happy when the lover and the
loved enjoy each other: else the fellowship of those married ones, whose love is
degenerat into bitter hatred, were as good as the best: for the worst, marriage
is such, that (till one cease to be) it cannot cease to be a knitting of two
in one; no time, no distance of place, no sin (except adultery) breaking it of:
but how miserable a necessity is that, which has no law, no remedy? Hence God
has allowed so many respects and liberties in the choice of husbands and
wives, because he would streighten none, but that they might live lovingly,
except the fault be their own. So that as he who marries for other ends,
religion being neglected, offends chiefly, so does he also, who shall marry
one religious, without due caution of other things which might strengthen love,
even he shall sin against the comfort of his own life. And its certain, that
longer then love compounded of the forenamed causes, does last, marriage is but
a carcass void of life. And the stronger the tie is, the irkesomer is
marriage, being frustrate of that precious thing, for which it should love
groundedly.

Let me add some reasons why this so joint a bond should be carefully
preserved. Reason of it.
First nothing is so precious among men in worldly respects, as that for which
the husband loves and desires the wife; and she him; no union so strong as
this; no joy in any outward union so contentfull as this; nor able to wish well
to the thing loved as this. For though I must love my neighbor as my self,
yet I am bound to love my wife otherwise for both kind and measure, then my
neighbor; yea and in some sense, better then my self. And its truly
observed, that this rule of loving our neighbor, is rather to be expounded
privatively or negatively, then positively: forbidding rather to do any hurt
to my neighbor, which I would not do to my self, then commanding to do him
so much good as to my self: sithence by this mean I should be bound to feed
and cloth him as my self, which were abused. But my wife I am bound to love
as my self in both respects as my self; both in the negative, and affirmative
sense. Ephe. 5. 29.
Hence is that of the Apostle, No man ever hated his own flesh, but nourisht
and cherisht it, even so ought a man to love his wife as himself: not only in
distress, Romans 12. 20.
for so am I bound to love mine enemy, If thine enemy hunger, feed him, etc.
but constantly, and at all times. Hence is the general rule, Ephe. 5. 25.
urged mutually upon both, husband, love your wives, as Christ loved his
Church, and gave himself for it, to purge and wash it: that, it might be
without spot: and the like he professes upon the wife to him; Tit. 2. 4 5.
wives love your husbands, etc. nothing is to be a reciprocal duty.

But yet this I must add, Conjugall love, though a joint duty, to be carried
in a several way.
that this so mutual a duty, is yet required of both in a different manner.
For the more clear understanding whereof, observe, that as the love wherewith
Christ loves his Church is a more abundant and bountiful love, then that
whereby she loves him again; yea, her love is as her other grace, fetched from
his fullness, which he commun cates unto her by his spirit, so is the woman's
love in the carriage thereof to the man's. And as the dim light of the Moon
borrowed from that principle of light the Sun; so by proportion, the love of
the wife is as borrowed from the love of the husband. He is the fountain of
the relation, she follows as the correlative, her love is the stream issuing
from his spring. Love must decend from him, Psalm. 134. 2.
as the oil of Aarons head descended down to his beard, and his clothing; So
that the manner of this imparting love must be orderly: the husband is to
offer, to bestow, and communicate himself first to his wife; in a free,
bountiful, full love; she is not so much bound to vie upon his love, or to
love bountifully and actively, as to reflect and return upon himself his own
love, and that in a reverent, amible and modest manner: Thence is it, that as
often as Paul uses the charge of husbands loving their wives, (which is very
frequent) yet he very seldom, and but once urges the woman to love her
husband: Tit. 2. 4.
(but as if he would have them, their love and all to be drowned in their
subjection) he presses them, to be subject to their husbands; wives submit
your selves: Ephe 5. 22. 24.
and, let the wife reverence her husband: Noting, that although the married
estate, be an equal estate, yet the carriage of both must not be the same: but
the love of the one must be conveyed with royalnesse without tyranny, the other
in loyal sweet subjection, without slavery. So then, as the head and other
inferior members, are equally parts of one body, yet the head in a different
and more singular manner, then the rest: so ought the case to be betwixt husband
and wife. And hence it is, that according to the custom of all Nations, the
husband seeks the wife, the wife loves after she is loved: except is be here
and there in some odd person, What that way is.
noted for folly or immodesty. The man's authority mixed with the woman's
midnesse, his activenesse, with her passivenesse and acceptance, makes the
sweet compound. As the Sun, exhaling vapors, out of the earth, draws them up
into the air, and having altered their groster quality, sends them down
again with more foyson and fatness to refresh the earth as with her own
store; so, the lovely disposition of a virtuous wife, drawing love from her
husband, into her own heart, sweeteneth the vapor, and returns his own upon
him again with a double pleasing grace and comeliness. And as we see, that the
meat, which the stomach receaveth, except it be cold or hot, scarcely admits
kindly digestion; because being luke warm, it cannot work upon that meat
which is like her own temper; so, if you take away this temper of natures,
love is loathsome in one manner and fulsome. For, what is more loathed by a
discreet man, then a woman mannishly qualited? And, what is more yrkesome to a
loving woman, then a man effeminate? Therefore, let the man keep his liberty in
loving; avoiding all base uxoriousnesse, softness, and nice affection of his
wife, and let the woman shun all uncomely boldness; and taking upon her with
authority in the carriage of her love toward him: it becomes him to play the
Captain and lead this service of love, and it beseemes her, to tread the same
steps, and follow. This is the wisest contention, whether shall love other with
the most cordial affection, in a true way.

Reproof.
who are so eager and peremptory in striking through the match, Branch 1.
that they omit the tying of the knot sure, (which is the maine point) and so
^ecome the occasions of forced matches, Forced and lovelesse matches dangerous.
empty of love. Alas! you little consider of time to come: and what a sad
entrance you make into an estate of life, which needs the mutual improovement
of a stock, which you never care to procure them at the first. And even so are
couples themselves herein excedingly to blame; in that they set the cart before
the horse, dragging (in a sort, as he those oxen he had stolen, into his den
by the tails) so they, the wives which by head and shoulders they have gotten,
into their bosoms, the contrary way: Sympathy of heart, or amiable qualities
which should attract love toward their persons, and cover any such defect as a
carnal curious eye would stumble at, these they set not in the first rank,
but as the kite upon the prey, so fall they eagerly upon something in the
woman, neither praise worthy nor amiable (for as the Philosopher says who
praises any for wealth, or that which is without) but either profitable or
sensually pleasing: these they think will carry love after it. But by that
time they have tried at leisure, and found that love is not compelled, but a
thing which must be persuaded, and extracted by some deservingnesse of the
qualities in the party loved: then finding no such thing in the party married,
they perceive how preposterous they have been, and would amend their choice,
(if possible) with the forfeit of much other commodity. And in what respects.
But its too late, for what shall a man give for the recompense of love if
absent? or what shall it profit a man to have won a wife with, all other
advantage, in whom is no true amiable thing to win affection? what a sad
bondage is it, to be tied for ever to one thou can not love? An object of
discayne, of hatred, of loathsomeness, of stinch? a thing, wherein there is no
dram of that which is desirable? How woeful a burlen wereit to have a dead
carcass bound with cords to thy oacke, to go with thee, every where? who^ thy
heart tells thee, thou know no one woman or man of an hundred whom thou can
not as well find in thine heart to love, as her? So that in all the companies
wherein thou come, and dare utter thy thoughts, this must be the first
complaint, Thou were compelled to marry her, or him whom in thine heart thou
never could set thy love upon: so that thou were driven into the net, and
taken, as a bird in a snare. Oh, if love be one of those joint duties which
the married should continually nourish, what shall become of them, who never
joined together before marriage to compass it at all? what is this, but to
prepare for themselves perpetual vexation? should I call it, or desolation?

And secondly how does this reproove such, Reproof.
as although first entered not without some affection each to other, Branch 2.
yet, through a vain, Love will not nourish self, but must be nourished daily
between couples.
empty, and base spirit, neglect the chary keeping of such a jewel, as love
is? Tush, they think that will keep it self, although they live at randon,
and hang it upon every hedge. If love (say they) be the matter you talk of,
let us alone, I warrant you, we love each other as much as any body, there is
no love lost between us, we have one another heart as it were in a box?
Hear me I pray, what kind of love is that you mean? Is it a mere carnal and
brutish appetite, or a vertous, and religious love which I have spoken of?
perhups (for the present) thou supposest thy self enamoured with some
external thing which thou see in her, not yet comparing that one, with ten
other most odious qualities which in time will wear out the humorous content
and doting delight, thou have in that one. As years come on, sickness and
crosses, alas, that insufficient one object being blasted, and no other object
coming in the room, to hold thee satisfied, how needs must thy affection
quail, and sterve in thy bosom, thou should first have laid the ground of
thy love in such adefired object of virtue, modesty, and worth as might have
held water, and not shrunk in the wetting. The most resolute loves vanish in a
short time, where the fuel of love fails. By what means love may be
nourisht.
But to go back, put case thou had grounds of first love to thy companion:
what then? think thou that this edge will hold without daily whetting? when
thou foolishly, slightest the due attendance of this love, do think it a
toil to nourish it, nay dare cast water upon this sparkle, as never fearing
it will be quenched: do thou wonder, if this thy darling is lost on the
suddeine, for lack of looking to? No no: thou must fix thine eyes upon those
first objects, which won thy love to thy companion: not run up and down into
all places, with unsavorie compliants of husbands, and wives! Not looking at
the parts of others, to estrange thine heart at home. Love is a bird with
wings, soon gone out of the cage of thy bosom, if it be carelessely set
open. Thou say thou have it in a box, but what if thou loose box and all?
Therefore, shun those compleints which fools make! Oh! if my husband had the
qualities of such a man, were he of such understanding, religion, parts of
speech and memory, tenderness and amiablenesse, that such and such a one is, how
could I love him? Then comes in he with the like, if my wife had the
properties of such a woman, so chaste, so kind, so wise, so able to keep her
tongue, and observe the laws of silence or of speech; so zealous, provident,
and the like, as other women have, how worth were she of love: Dare you thus
dally in so weighty a business? dare you like the gnat fondly fly about the
candle, as secure of burning? Oh unworthie of love, each from other! should you
look out abroad upon objects which belong not unto you, hurtful, not helpful?
to increase emulation and envy, not affection? what are you the nearer? Poare
upon your own husband, and his parts, let him be the veil of your eyes, as
Abimelec told Sara, and look no further: let her be your furthest object:
Genesis 20. 16.
think you no virtues in any beyond hers: those that are but small, yet make
them great by often contemplation: those that are greater, esteem and value at
their due rate, that you may know them to the full weight, having weighed the^
in the balance. This putting your sickle in your neighbors corn, will prove
too hot and heavy: it will cause your own to shale and perish the while. Its
a better work of the two for you, to think, you see wonder, in your own
companions, though there be little in either; then to be quicksighted in
seeing the gifts of others, be they never so excellent; at least its the far
safer error of the two. It must be the mutual reflexe and exchange of
gracious, and sweet virtues in and from each other, rebounding as the sunbeames
from the wall, that only can hold you in an invincible league of amity! The
marking of each others, goodness, compassion, fidelity, chastity, which must
continue that first love, which at the first they caused. You need not quench
love: its enough that you withdraw this fuel, and look upon the infirmities
of each other, (the only dampe, and choakepeare of affection,) these alone
will kill it. And when other fuel fails (as I said before) let religion step
in, and make it up: this will keep harmony in other discord. Read over that
divine song of Salom. Setting out the blessed union between Christ and his
spouse the Church; wherein is most lively expressed, what inward content, and
feeling joy, each partakes in other, through the fight of each others
perfections. She in her head, because in him, she beholdes all fullness of
wisdom, and grace; and he in her, because of the reboundings of those
ornaments and graces of the spirit, wherewith he had furnished her. So much
forthis second.

Admonition to the joint practice of conjugall love.
and to preserve it entire. Which will the more easily be obtained, if they
shall consider those sad effects which come from the decay of it, in the lives
of couples. Pro. 23. 29. 30.
As Solomon speaking of drunkenness, says, whence are red eyes, whence are
wounds, and quarrels? Are they not from the red wine? 4. James: 1.
and St. James, whence are wars and contentions among you? Are they not from
your lusts that fight in your members? you seek and enjoy not, but miscarry,
in all your attempts, and see not whence your misery comes? So say I, whence
are those end less debates, differences between the married, that they are
always seeking for blessing, and longing after an happy life, but still it goes
further and further from them? Alas! because they dream still the fault is
without doors, in this and that, bad servants, ill success, improvidence: and
sometime in each other: but never set the sadle upon the right horse: the
disease is within their bosoms, they have lost their first love each to other,
they are waxen saplesse and unsavory in their spirit and affection one to
another. While that lasted, all went forward in a sweet manner, cart went well
upon wheels: for the spirit of mutual love made it slicke and trim, the
oil of love set it forward: but since this was exhausted and dried up, all
went to havocke, the sinews of society, the band of peace and perfection, of
thrift and welfare being broken, there is a dissolution of the frame, and a
shattering of all. Children have no edge to do their duties, servants have no
joy to do their work, lovelesse couples are livelesse and unfortunate: yea
the salt having lost her favor, is good for naught, save to be trodden under
the feet of contempt and scorn. Danger of brea^h of conjugall love is sad.
Whence are those Mock-divorces so frequent in the world, whereby couples
separate from each others some from bed, from board, from house, and so far,
that one shire will not hold the^; being barred of a real, they please
themselves in a local content, which yet lasts not, the names of each others,
much more the companyes being odious. Hence come those hideous presidents, of
conspiracies one against the life of another; adulteries, villainies, yea
murders practiced against husband and wife: he who despizeth his own life is
soon Mr. of another, and how can a man choose but despise his life, 2. King. 7.
4.
when he feels it wearisome. As those 4. Lepers said, let us be desperate, and
rush upon thee Camp of Aram, for what is our life worth, we are but dead men,
we cannot be worse: so may lovelesse couples say, whatsoever we do, we
suffer, we cannot be worse (though we were not) the^we are. A dead dog is as
good as such a living lion. Hence again come those manifold suites and
pursuites abroad, exclaming jealousies at home: the treasure is stolen, love
is gone. As he said of his Idols, Judge. 18. 23. 24.
so I of this love, you have stolen my Gods, and do you ask me, what ayleth
thee? The fence is broken, the sluice is pulled up, all goes to wrack and
confusion. There is as much use of a bone out of joint, yea, of a man out of
his wits, as of such a couple. Fidelity, modesty, huswifery in a woman,
degenerate into carelessness of body, of soul, of state, of name, into mere
vanity: a woman not loving her husband will not stick, to pull one eye of her
own, to pull out both of her husbands, as the fable tells: rob and spoil her
self of goods, and good name, that she might spoil him. Nay many have devoted
themselves to a defilement of their bodies, to be revenged each of other: mere
hatred and spite has drawn them to such sin as lust alone would not have
done. This taste may be sufficient, to warn all, who be not forlorn, to look
to themselves to beware how they embessel that sacred stock, which God has
inspired all such married ones withal, whom he means to sustain in this
state, with integrity and honor: Marriage is honorable, keep then the pledge
of it entire which is love. Its like that Image in the Capital, called the
Paladium, which if it ever came to be seen and profaned, threatened ruin to
their Commonwealth, therefore they kept it in a most affected secrecy and
safety. God has bestowed it to make the difficulties of the married life
tolerable; (which else, the multitude of them would make yrkesome) and shall a
man having but one string to his bow cut it in two? or a city having but one
engine to defend themselves cast it away? Let it be a warning to all sorts
therefore.

Lastly, Exhertation to couples, to love joinly.
this point must be exhortation to couples, to practice and discharge
faithfully, this joint duty of marriage ove, each to other. Wheresoever thou
art, whithersoever thou go, whatsoever thou do, remember thou carriest
about thee a precious pearl, look to it, prise it and preserve it, as thy
life. There be sundry motives to presle this upon willing couples, as hammers
to drive this nail home to the head: and indeed I may say of it, as he once
said, of one, an honest man need not, a dishonest man will not be warned: The
general motive to both husband and wife, is Gods charge to them: live and
love. Both of you think thus, he bids it who better knows the use of it, the
danger of the contrary, then such silly ones as we. Commands of God, are
folemne things, especially such as serve for a trench, for a fortress, a fence
to hedge in an ordinance. He that dares violate it, shall pay for it sweetly.
Therefore, set your heart to obey this rule, and say its life or death: Its the
crutch of your lame limbs, if that fail, you must fall, if the shores break,
the house ruins. Obey God out of love: discern his sovereignty in this
charge; love him and love one another. If thou love me feed my sheep: John.
21. 15.
says Christ to Peter: If you love me keep my commandes, John. 14. 15
says he to them all. And, John. 15. 12.
if you love me, love each other (says the same voice) to couples. Do not
dally with such edge tools. Say not oh man! what shall I loose my liberty, and
tie my self to a woman? nor she, shall I forgo my will, and tie my self to
an husband? is not the world broad and large? yes, but as full of sorrow and
woe, as its wide and broad, without this preservative. It is a good hard theme
I grant to handle: I will therefore reach out one or two motives in particular,
to each party: and because arguments for time past, as former covenants made,
great affections in the first heat of youth, like May bees file away, and are
soon forgot: I will mention such, as afford themselves daily to couples in the
course of their life. To the man, I say, thy wife is bone of thy bone, 2. Genesis
23.
and flesh of thy flesh: She is another self, woman made of man, taken out of
thee, a glass to behold thy self in: when the Lord brought this Model of
Adams self unto him, consider how natural, how precious, how welcome she was?
what? is not thy wife as natural an object to thee?

Secondly, Motives to thehu^ band to love his wife.
thy wife, so often as thou look upon her is a deserving object of love and
compassion: she has done that for thy sake, which thou would not have done
for her: for she has not only equalled thee in forsaking her father and
mother, and family, that she might be one flesh with thine, but she has
forgone her name, and put all her state and livelihood into thine hand: if thou
stick to her, she is well, if thou forsake her, she has put her self out of
all her other succors. Her subsisting is imperfect in her self, its wholly
substantive and real (under God) in thee? As the Lord Jesus speaks of the eye,
that all the sight of the body, is within it, if therefore that be dark how
great is that darkness? So, if thou desert thy poor shiftlesse wife, and
leave her mends in her own hands, how great is that desertion? Thirdly,
consider how much labor is put upon a weak vessel, daily, in diligence, in
stirring up the commodities of the house, in attendance upon children and
family, and such providence as is required of her: Her trouble is great in the
peculiar acts of marriage, great are her pains in conception, in her bearing,
in her travail and bringing forth, in her nurcery and bringing up, till they
be out of hand at least: and some women exceed others in this kind: for some
shift off this work carelessly, and commit their babes to strangers, as if they
were too good to nurse them, when as yet their breasts are full, and their
bodies strong: whereas others put forth themselves to the uttermost, and
therefore deserve double affection. Consider oh man, if not the drudgery of thy
wife in this kind, (if there were not a command and promse to make it sweet)
then that finger of God, and providence, disposing so, that a weak one should
do that with patience and cheerfulness, (as a work of her place) which all
thy strength were not able to turn thy hand unto: Love her for that impression
of divine wisdom, which thou see stamped upon her: what man were able to
endure that clamor, annoiance, and clutter which she goes through without
complaint among poor nurslines, clothing, feeding, dressing and undressing
picking and clensing them; what is it save the instinct of love which enableth
her hereto? Who has taught the poor bird, even a seely Wren to make her so
curious a neast, as exceedes all art of man to effect? Is it not the natural
instinct which love has put in her? so oughtst thou to nourish that love in
thy wife which puts her forth to all her marriage service? If God were not in
her spirit she would cast it offten times, ore she would go through stitch
with it, as she does. Its the best requital which can be given her from man,
to help digest so many sour morsels, sad businesses; and all too little. For
it must be the Lord who must tell her; 1 Timothy 2. 15.
That although she bear her punishment in her childbearing, yet it shall be
sweetened by mercy, for she shall be saved thereby, and obtain more glory
thereby, through faith and patience, then she who bears not. But above all,
the grace of God, in so frail a creature: the wisdom of the spirit shining
in her words, counsels, actions, examples, should be most admirable of all,
and the chief loadstone to draw affection from the husband, 1 Samuel 25. 39.
as in David's esteem of Abigail in that kind, may appear.

The like may be said of the man, Motives to the wife to love him.
to draw respect and honor from the woman, (if she be not degenerate) and to
love her husband: For why? In him may she behold yet more manifest steps of
Gods image then in her self. They say, there is in some kinds as much of the
Creator in the Ant, as in the Lion: in the former, excellent skilfulnes, in the
other, power and majesty: So here. In the man shines out more authority,
government, forecast, sovereignty, then in the woman: By the man, as she at
first received her being; so, still she enjoyes from him countenance,
protection, direction, honor: in a word (under God) light and defense. To
these add, They entered their league solemnly, but they shall part sadly; A
time there is to embrace, but there shall be a time far from embracing.
Improve it well therefore, love, live, and leave. Bitter else will the review
be of a life past, representing the fruits of a lovelesse marriage, a tedious
pilgrimage, whereas the memory of a loving husband or wife shall allay the
bitterness of death to the survivor. And indeed if that indenture which couples
first make solemnly to God, to keep this sacred knot inviolable, and
unstayned, were well kept: this darling would grow up in the house, as that
poor man's only lamb did, whereof Nathan tells David, 2 Samuel 12. 3.
which eat with him at the Table, slept with him in his bosom, and was to
him, as one of his children: (so Bathsheba and Vrya are described) so dear I
say, should this pledge be to them both, and through it they each to other;
strongly fenced before hand, against all occasions of the contrary, (for that
which preserves it self, always destroys the contrary) and so providing that
this twinne may live and die with them together. Some dream that old folks
are past love: and foolishly impropriate it to the heat of youth: but alas,
the anciently married (if right) may as ill want it as the young; yea worst of
all when old age has prooved it to be sound; then may the married cease to
love when they cease to live. Therefore roll each stone to find this grace: buy
it whatsoever it cost, fell it not, whatsoever you may have for it: lest you
be as he who sold his birthright: which once gone could be no more
recovered, though sought with never so many tears. And truly for the most
part, its noted, that when it once gets a fall, it prooves almost impossible to
soder it again; being as the native heat and moisture of the body, which
once spent (they say) is irrecoverable. And so much of this second joint duty
of the married, Conjugall love.

CHAP. VIII.
Treating of the 3. Joint duty of the Married, viz. Chastity.

THe third mutual service of the married follows to be spoken of, Third
mutu^ all duty of the married, Chastity.
to wit Chastity. A dignity, held by a duty, both the virtue of preserving
it, and they who are the preservers of it, are honorable, And, while we are
discoursing about this, we seem to be in the center, in the chief of the
honor of marriage. Other honors are excellent additions and ornaments, but this
the being of it: marriage delights in being quiet, peaceable, rich, in credit,
but, provided always the main be entire, else they lose their value. As it is
with the rich, Chastity the m^yn joint duty of the Married.
their pleasures, feasts, companies, and liberties please them will, but how?
still presupposing the oote to be sound, their stock and state to be
unquestionable. Every accidental of marriage is pleasant, because chastity
which makes it so, is taken for granted. It is the fairest flower, the richest
j^wel in the garland, the crown of marriage. And well it may be so styled: for
as a crown is blasted, if it have a peer, and a competitor to amate i^, so is
this, if the chastity thereof be empaired. The want of other happinesses may in
a sort, be supplied in this: the wife is sheepish, or shrewish, or the like;
but the comfort is, she is chaste. Whereas if she be unchaste, there is no comfort
in it, that she is fair, rich, personable or well bred. The peculiarity of
Marriage stands in chastity. I am desirous that my money, my land, my friend
be my peculiar ones, and that no man may have a right in the^ save my self;
yet rather then I should want them, I had rather have them in a community,
then want them altogether: But chastity is such a peculiar of marriage, that I
rather choose infintely to have no husband, no wife at all, then one that is
unchaste. Many endowments so honor marriage, when they are present, as that yet
being absent, they disannull her not: they make it a sad, an uncheerfull one,
but undo it not: chastity is so real, so essential an attribute, that the
absence thereof, quite destroys the being thereof.

The institution of Christ is sufficient to approove this duty. Proofs of it.
They two shall be one slesh: not two, not three, not joined to this harlot,
Math 196.
that Adulterer. Malachi tells us, he who had spirit enough in him to have
devized and bestowed ^^^ther elbowroome in this kind, Mal. 2. 15.
yet foresaw, that closenes and entirenesse of spirit, such as the married
couples ought to embrace, cannot subsist in multitude: the first number, two,
are enough, to grow into one flesh: and love would vanish into lust, baseness
and brutish commonnes, if the bridle were let loose into manifold copulation.
Sin not therefore (says the Prophet) against the husband and wife of thy
flesh: nay sin not against him that made them one flesh, and only them: for
that were to tax his spirit and ordinance. And wherein do rational creatures
differ from sensual, save in this honorable peculiarnesse, and propriety?
which, not the scriptures have revealed, but the very law of nature has
dictated and engraven in the minds of the very heathens: who have censured
promiscuous lust with as severe laws, as the word it self; many of them I
say, especially in case of adultery. As for that loosenes of the first times,
where in men took the liberty, both of many wives, and of those frequent
divorces, whereby they stained their bodies with unbridled pollutious: although
the former were permitted in the first times of the church, the number whereof
was scant, (being cooped within the narrow bounds of one family) and the
latter winked at by the Lord, and his government, for the unavoydable hardness
and rebellion of that Jewish nation: yet neither was allowed of, but abhorred,
and as the times grew more enlightened, so such commonnesse and vagrancy of
lust, grew to be restreyned, till it was quite out of practice. Hence that of
the Apostle, having dissuaded marriage in times of danger and persecution:
Nevertheless (says he) to avoyde Fornication, 2. Cor. 7. 2.
let every man have his own wife, and woman, her husband. And in the rules
given to Ministers, the same Apostle foreseeing what a sad president the common
sort would snatch to themselves from the practice of the Minister; precisely
charge him, that if he marry (which he forbiddes not) yet he should be the
husband of one wife. 1. Tim. 3. 2.
Noting doubtless, that all Chastity is not seen in abstinence from strange
flesh: but in the restreint of corruption from coloring over uncleannes, with
a marrying of many; which is a double sin, not only mocke-adultery, but a
defiling of an ordinance with that pollution which it abhorres, and sin (as
it were) by privilege. And let every man (says Paul) learn how to preserve
the vessel of his own body, 1. These. 4. 4.
in holiness and honor: mark how the one goes with the other! 1. Cor. 3. 16. 17.
why does he press it? because its the Temple of the holy Ghost; and he who
defiles the temple of God, him will God destroy. We need go no further to
prove this duty of Chastity, to be the Crown of marriage, then that text:
(keep your vessels in honor:) we know a like phrase of the Old Testament when a
man shall lie which a maid, D^ut. 21. 14.
he having humbled her: what is that? Surely he has taken her honor of chastity
away: her credit is gone. And fitly in this text, the Apostle prooves marriage
to be Honorable by the undefilednesse of the bed: God (says he) has put honor
upon it (as carnal a thing as it seems) power not you any contempt upon it by
unchastenesse. So Jacob says in his dying words to Reuben, Gen 49. 4.
Although thou art my strength and crown by thy first borneship: yet because
thou went up to thy Fathers bed, thou art unstable as water, thy dignity is
gone. And the child (we know) begotten thus, is called a Base: A mark of
dishonor to Father and it self. Pro. 6. 33.
Solomon tells us, that such an one gets himself a blurre, Judge. 11. 3. 4.
which never will out. Judge. 16. 21.
Jephtha a valiant man, yet a bastard, was scorned, and cast out from among his
brethren, had no child's portion; and Sampson by his wild lust became of an
honorable Judge, a fool in Israel.

Chastity then (you see) is a general duty, Amplification of this Truth.
for all them, who seek to maintain their honor unstained, nothing does
cleave so deeply to marriage as this: I have noted before some accidental
stains by unequalnesse, when Ladies and their horskeepers, young girls and
old men match together, when a Prince marries a beggar, a bad with a good, a
christian with an heathen or heretic, or if marriage prove contentious and
unpleasant, who sees not a reproach? But these are such stains, as may be
washed out in time; either by repentance, or (in a sort) by second better
marriages. Only the stain of unchastnesse, is like an ironmole, which nothing
can fetch out; its like the leprosy which fretted into the walls; no scraping
the stones could cleanse it, Levit. 14 44. 45.
but it must be demolished: Death may end the parties, but not the memory of
the shame: David's repentance took away the guilt, but not the reproach, that
abides to this day. So then, as I have began with the duty of love, (which must
be the first, and inward cement of couples (for what is crystal worth if it be
broken?) I say, as loves is the inward band of preserving, because the outward
action follows the affection: so now, I proceed with chastity, which is the
maine Charter of love, and the patent thereof, evidencing that the heart loves
entirely, because the bodies are kept pure from pollution. I deny not, but
there are thousands of none of the most loving ones, nor religious ones, who
yet loath adultery and filthiness in this kind: but yet there are many also,
not the worst for repute, whose marriages are spotted with this stain: and all
to show, that where the root wants, ten to one, if the branches do not
wither. The restraint of providence is such by a common light, that many are
kept perforce from this dishonor. And yet this proves not, but that the
inclinations and temptations of others are such, that they lie open to this
snare, as much as to any. We must not neglect the urging of the duty, because
some are innocent: for some are so in same who are not in deed, and some in
deed, who are not in spirit, and some in spirit and yet no thank to them: let
the point fasten as it may: and find out the guilty: (the guiltless are out of
the compass of it.) But the age is generally debauched, and iniquity carries
all as a flood before it; Although the second part of this Treatise, treating
of the denunciation against this sin, may perhaps more fully discover this
disease with the cure of it: yet here (by so fit occasion) I shall press the
jointnesse and honor of the duty, by a few reasons, exhortation, and motives.

Chastity the main support of union.
as the contrary is the chief dissolver of it. No other fault (if once the
marriage be lawfully consummated) does jnferre just separation (by authority of
the word) save this of uncleanness. Therefore needs must that which mainteins
union be the greatest pillar and prop of marriage. Prostitution of the body,
profanes the honor of it and casts it into the mire: and therefore the Cardinal
virtue that must bear it up, must be this Chastity. If so, then ought it by
joint consent to be maynteyned by both parties.

The defilement of each party, is enough to defile the whole state of marriage.
As we say of a virtuous action, all points must concur to make it good, but
any one defect in those will serve to make it vicious, so here. Marriage
dishonor does not need the consent of both the parties dishonesty: if one be
disloiall, its as good as both. Not before God in point of guilt: but men in
point of honor: for to manward, guilt and reproach, ^ (in a sort, especially
here) lose their difference: the innocent party, being pitied with as much
dishonor, as the guilty is reproached. Therefore this joint duty of chastity
must be supported most carefully, by the joint care and pureness of both
parties. Add hereto, that defect of this joint closeness may bring a shame
upon marriage, (though perhaps not so great yet as true) as well as a greater
crime committed. As the Philosopher says, glory is not in the glorified, he is
but the object; the agent is the glorifier. Therefore fame and report is well
called by some, the married ones Saint. For by fame they either stand or sink.
Now, how easily may fame snatch the least neglect of the married in this kind,
to raise suspicions? How closely curious had they need be of their course, and
pureness, who cannot keep their own honor in their own power sometime, do
what they can? Is it not the misery of many to be defamed without cause?
Neither smoke nor fire appearing, but perhaps some mistake, error, or advantage
of a foul mouth being the spark that kindles the fire: And yet it sometimes
little availes (for the point it self of honor) whether a man be guilty, or
be taken so. How great had that caution need to be, that should preserve the
honor of chastity?

God has ordained one for one.
in appointiug one to one. How serious and solemn ought the meditation of this
charge be, being not humane, but divine? And, (to repeat nothing) If the
violation of this sacred band, had such a blemish cast upon it by the Lord,
when yet it was covered over with a mantle of connivence, and the practice of
so many holy Patriarchs and Saints who were guilty of it: what shall be said
now of that uncleanness, which proclaims it self like Sodom? If Poligamy
were a state of uncleanness in Gods esteem, and seldom went without a scare
from Gods stroke (as in Jacob and David and Elbana's cases appears, especially
in that exorbitancy of Solomon) what shall be said of that which carries the
bastard at the back, and wants the least rag of any veil to color or excuse
it? Attend this reason, and shun this sin.

It covers all other defects.
which has such a covering faculty in it, and sets the varnish and luster,
upon each other endowment of it. But it self can be covered by no endowments.
My wife has defects, but she is loyal: by unavoidable errors she may offend,
but by voluntary she will not. From her the honor of my marriage coms even
when both of us are dead and gone, in our lawful posterity, the Crown of
parents. She is beautiful, (says one) personable, well descended, rich says
another; yea but she is chaste, says a third, this crowns all. What else were
her beauty, but her bane? her devotion but profaneness? She that thought no
crumbe clave to her lips, because she had paid her vows, yet escapes not her
eternal reproach, because she was a disloyal harlot. Tell me, were thou
married to a chaste wife, blind of an eye, lame of an hand, a leg, whether
would thou change her for one sound in all, being unchaste? I trow not. That
which then covers all wants, is worth the due improoving and careful
attendance.

Its the corner stone, which holds in the whole building.
A chaste wife has her eyes open, ears watching, heart attending upon the
welfare of the family, husband, children and servants: she thinks that all
concern her; estate, content, posterity: this rivets her into the house: makes
her husband trust to her, commit all to her, heart and all. But the unchaste,
having lost his or her heart, is loosened from the whole body, thinks nothing
perteining to her: is ready to part the children, leaving the lawfully, and
choosing the misbegotten for her portion, that so she may go to her Paramour.
That which Saul (through mistake) thought Michal would prove to David, 1 Samuel
18. 28.
that does an unchaste one (without doubt) prove to her husband, a very snare.
That which I said before of love, may be said of her sister chastity, she is
painful, close, does all things, hops, believes, endures all things
without grudging. The frost is nothing by night, the heat by day, toil in
both, because he loves her, she him, each are faithful, loiall to other. Who
should not nourish that tree, which has such branches?

Whereupon some think the English and Latin words (Chaste) do come from a
greek word, signifying to Adorn, noting that Chastity is one of the chief
ornaments of the married: and so of all in either sex. One says. As the face
of a statue or fair picture razed, or the head rent off: so is the most
beautiful, rich, honorable person, if Chastity be gone. Its (as that father
speaks) The Ornament of the Noble, the exaltation of the low, the Beauty of the
Abject, the solace of the sorrowful, the increase of beauty, the glory of
religion, the friend of the Creator.

^e^^use in somerespects it makes marriag Honorable.
Chastity preserves marriage in honor, and ought to be jointly again
preserved, because it preserves that joint ^lessi^g of God, which makes it
honorable: and that, in sundry respects. 1. of the fruitfulness of the womb.
Many think a fruitful posterity rather a cross, 12 ps. 3. 8. 1.
then a blessing: but the godly are of his mind, who said, she shall be as the
fruitful vine, Fruitfulness of womb.
by the side of thine house, and thy children, as olyve plants round about thy
table: Numb. 5. 21.
The adulterer and adulteress, are cursed with barren wombes, fruitless
bodies. There is not now such a cursed water to try the unclean, by rotting
the womb, and bowels of the harlot; nor to become a water of blessing to the
chaste. But in stead thereof, there is a curse of God, upon the one, and a
blessing upon the other. Even the adulterine mixtures of Beasts (as the Mule
coming from the Ass and the Mare) have a brande of barrenness, nature
stopping all infiniteness and confusion, as most contrary to her self; how
much more the bodies of adulterous husbands and wives? and whereas it is
objected, Isai. 56. 4.
even a place should be given them in the house of God, and an everlasting
name, that never should be cut off: So does he here, to all chaste ones; when he
cuts off the cursed race of the unclean, then he continues to the godly
(though barren) a better name then posterity could atteyne unto. Secondly, to
the chaste belongs the blessing of legitimation; 2 Respect.
but to the unclean, the curse of illegitimate ones; Blessing of (...).
to bring Bastards into the family as lawful heirs, how execrable, and how
unnatural is it? The children of Gilead cast out Iephtah, bcause he was the
strangers issue: Sara said well of Ishmael, Genesis 21. 10.
The son of this stranger (though of her own gift) shall not inherit with my
son Isaac. But the curse of Adultrous is, to leave their wealth to bastards. As
the Lord cursed the garment made of mixed lmsey and wolsey: the field sown with
sundry kinds of grain together: so much more, the illegitimate posterity of
defiled persons. As Eagles feathers consume the feathers of other fowls; so, the
unlawful brood of the unclean devoures he lawful, till at last that fire
consume them and all, which is threatened the children of the whore and the
Adulterer, for it was unlawful fire that begat the^, and the same shall kindle
and burn, till it have destroyed them. And thirdly, 3. The curse of si^ turned
to blessing by Chastity.
to the Chaste, eve^ a curse is turned to a blessing: The sorrows of
conception and birth, turn to the salvation of the pure and Chaste (being
faithful) whereas the blessing of marriage turns to a curse to the other. As
all things are impure to the impure, 13. Levit. 49.
as the ceremony also made the things and vessel to be defiled, whether wood or
stone, which the leper touched: But especially to the impure in bodies, yea,
their very consciences are as impure as their flesh, and thereby, whatsoever thy
do touch, use, partake, or possess, is made filthy, because their nasty
consciences tell them so. Even so, To the pure, all things become pure; As our
Savior says of alms, Tit. 1 15.
Give alms to the poor of that you have, and all the whole lump of your
estate, shall be clean unto you: Luc. 11. 41.
So here, If couples keep themselves pure, in body and spirit, pure are their
prayers, readings, conference, Sabbaths, Sacraments, service of God: yea in
Christ, all things are pure unto them, their health, estate, eating and
drinking, duties, fellowship and benevolence, bed and board, and all they take
in hand. Now (to finish the reason) if it be under such a threefold blessing,
then ought so happy a virtue as Chastity, to be jointly preserved by both the
married persons.

How Chastity may be preserved.
In these four. First in the Chastity of the spirit. Secondly, of prevention.
Thirdly of the Bed. Lastly of the Body. 4. ways.
If that be pure, there need be no keepers (as he once said of those
Romans, 1. The spirit.
the richer sort of whom kept their wyves chastity, 2. Prevention.
by Eunuchs) if that be unclean, no keepers will serve the turn, 3. Bed.
unbrideled lust (like the wild fig) will soon mount over the wall. 4. Body.
The first care then must be, Math. 12. 24.
to keep that clean from whence (as our Savior says) all filth proceeds, I
mean the heart. Get the Lord Jesus to come in with his spirit, to cleanse thine
husband, thy wife, to wash them, and make them undefiled to him self, as his
own spouse, without spot, or wrinkle of wilful baseness; Get him to cleanse that
Augean stable, that throughsayre of base thoughts, (the master wheel of your
soul, the will and affections) the thief that betrays all: and then, the
root being pure, so shall the branches be. Solomon aims at this; my son give
me thy heart, and let thine eyes delight in my ways. Pro. 2^. 26.
And why? he adds, for an whore is a deep ditch, and a strange woman is a
narrow pit: The. 1.
q. d. if thine heart be pure thine eyes and senses, Chast^^y of spirit must be
kept, against Contemplative uncleannes.
thy body and members shall follow, and not delight in the false hiew of an
harlot. Who is he whom God loves? surely him who is upright in spirit, such an
one, and only such shall be kept from her, but the sinner shall be caught in her
snares. If the thoughts be impure, they will betray the body to the eyes,
ears, and company of the unclean, and Satan will play the Proctor, soon
bringing one unclean person to another. There is a contemplative filthiness of
the fancy and senses, (which the Lord compts the Adultery of the spirit) by
baseness of spirit within, nourishing unloyall conceits, inward dallyances,
capering thoughts and fancies of uncleannes, both sleeping and waking: and so
set the door open to outward actual defilement, (which although providence
restreyne) yet are odious to God, and will break out in time. Yet I would here
speak with caution. I know in the best, (unmarried or married) there be
naturally planted these imaginary and Ideall uncleanness, steaming up from
the furnace of concupiscence, a natural principle, not always subject to the
law of grace: it is a law of the members, in a double sense, a dye in grain;
but yet, so long as it is abhorred, opposed, and quenched by all possible
diligence, it shall not be imputed: (provided that the means to subdue it, be
not slighted.) But I speak of an heart permitted to it self, without
control, and bridle. For when the door stands loose upon the latch, how
soon may it be opened? Crackte glasses, we know, last not long: they wait
but for the next knock and then are gone. Why so needful.
Alas! what thank is it for a man not to be unclean, for lack of
opportunity! or because he was overruled for a time? The religion of these
times, is come to this. Suspect by men what you will, so you can prove
nothing, what care they for giving occasions of never so much suspicion. Is
this thy honesty, that because thou can weary them in the court, who accuse
thee, therefore thou art chaste? Nay, because thou dare purge thy self by
oath, (like a forsworn wretch) therefore thou have wyped every crumme of thy
lips? Is not thy conscience as a thousand witnesses nevertheles? I tell thee,
thou have thy brand in heaven already and perhaps upon earth too, or else art
next door to it. And what odds is there between these two, not to be
approoved for chaste, or to be thought unclean? Its hard to say, whether many
men and women have lost their credit or their chastity sooner. Lust if once it
kindle, (as the sparkle will kindle to a great fire) will soon snare us, and
bring forth fruit unto death. But, if there be pureness in the bent of the
spirit, and the sway of the soul tendes to Chastity, the streams will easily
become pure. So much for the first.

Secondly, The. 2.
there must be chastity of Prevention also. That is a narrow survey of the
cinque ports of the soul, Chastity of prevention necessary.
by which traitors to Chastity arrive at the shore. Preserve the in-lets of
your Soul, I mean the out ward senses, ears, eyes, inward fancy, and Idea's
of evil, closely and firmly, and then the body will follow Still we must
proceed by degrees. The spirit lets in sin to the body, by these conduits and
Channels. David sweetly prays, set a door before my lips O Lord! What is?
so, set a watch before my senses, that there come in no vanity! Lord not only
lead me not thy self into tentation, but forestall all other tempters, that
I be not led: for thou preservest the souls of thy Saints, and he whom thou
love, scapes them all, which another at one time or other, shall assuredly
fall into. 2. Sam. 11. 2.
It was David's misery to cast his eye from the roof of his house, in an
unwatchfull manner, and there wanted not one to further the occasion. So
Sampson. Those who loath the act, will also abhor the fomenters thereof, all
extravagances of senses, and sensuality: all setting themselves to sale,
haunting of markets, fayres, night-metings, wakes, dancings, and common
festivals, which with all the like occasions, Alehouse hauntings, or
frequenting of forbidden and noted houses, as give aim to the flesh, to play
her part: All needless travailes and jorneyes, without warrant, Genesis 34. 1.
among multituds of all sorts all Dina-like rovings, and gaddings about,
without due cause: all loose carrying about the eyes through the air of the
world; All gestures, beckes, aims, of an unchaste heart, soon appear to such
as are of like temper: birds of a fether will flock together. Intemperate
diet, excess of gamings, delights, pampering the flesh; amorous books,
sonnets, stage plays effeminate disguizings and arayings of one sex in the
others attire, (a thing censured by all writers) both morrall and divine;
Iestings, and unsavory rotten communications, allusions, similitudes and
discourses: what are they, but as bawdes and Pandars to uncleannes? Drinking of
hot inflaming wines or waters in an usual distempered custom, (no infirmity
of nature requiring) what are they (in bodies hot and lustful of themselves)
save inflamings of lust, and spurring of a running horse? I say especially in
such persons, as neither make use of the ordinance, nor yet abstain from
excess of provocation? Must not (of necessity) such sinful plethory, have a
like vent? And where there is no Chastity of prevention, making men abstinent
from promiscuous occasions, is it like there will be Chastity of body, like
occasion being offered of the one as the other? No doubtless, a body desirous to
be Chaste, will also be very cautelous of meat, drink, fashions, softnes,
delicacy and pleasures, which will be as oil to the flame: and he who is not
chaste in the suburbs, is not to be trusted in the city: Dives in all his riot
and luxuriousness, must escape hard, if he were not incontinent.

This argument (I know) is common: Why this is here urg^d?
I need not insist: save only for the custom of these days, which will
needs separate means from ends, and be seen going onward to the Den, and
not seen to come back, and yet maintain it, that they kept out! This is to
divide the things, which God has not separated: I give to all who would shun
this plague, the counsel belonging to it, soon, far, slowly: Get from such
occasions, as soon: go from them as far; and return to them as slowly as
possible thou can. If thine eye, thy right hand, or foot cause thee to
offend, pluck them out, and cut them off, (not as Origin did carnally) and cast
them from thee; but make thy self a spiritual Eunuch for the Kingdom of God,
and for chastity, use all contrary means, of holding under thy flesh, and
boxing it till it be black and blue (to use Paul's word) if thou will preserve
thy vessel in honor: 2 Cor. 12. 7.
yea, count all too little. If this counsel be meet for the married themselves
who are under the remedy, what shall be said to the unmarried? Surely I say,
touch not pitch lest thou be defiled. Job. 31. 1.
Make covenants with your eyes with Job; remember our Saviors divinity, beyond
the Pharisees: forefeele all your steps and passages; put your knife to your
throats, if ye be given to your appetite, and venture not upon forbidden
dainties, to try if they will surfeit you. But, if after all means, both of
prevention, and preservation of body and spirit from this tainte, yet you feel
your natures to recoile, and concupiscence to want ears, 1 Cor. 9. 7.
then hear that voice behind you, saying, marry and burn not. But yet, take
this counsel with you, still carry this rule of prevention with you into that
estate, lest you marry and burn too, and so the disease will, if not be worse
for the remedy, yet may prove never the better for it.

The third is, The third, chastity of the bed.
the chastity of the bed. The Apostle tells us here, the bed is undefiled.
Surely (as he told his children, at his death, they should find their
Kingdom, so I may say of this) It is as its used, and kept. For its the great
wisdom of God, which has so concealed our infirmity, and covered it with
honor, that the bed should be honorable. But it imports us so to keep it
then: and that, against a double infirmity. The one of snaring, the other of
defiling us. Two extremes here.
By snaring, I mean, defrauding each other, by any means, under any colors:
as when by discord, and difference of minds, the body is disabled: when the
one party, denies due benevolence to the other; The first.
by pretended excuses, to satisfy a base heart: when religion and conscience,
or infirmity are falsely alleged to cross the ordinance; In this case let the
Apostle overrule: Let the husband and wife, 1 Cor. 7. 3.
yield each to other, etc. refuse not the lawful and sober use of the remedy,
(except when both in private consent in some extraordinary duty, for some
little season before) some add the preparation of the Sabbath, rather I
suppose from a pious heart, then the warrant of the word, although I wholly
yield to the equity of that abstinence, so there be no snare of a rule: for he
that generally follows this light must not be snared by any rule (except he
have vowed it voluntarily, and then it binds in another kind.) But, I leave
the decision of that, to the wisdom of such as can discern between expediency
and inexpediencie, lest Satan prevent us: for we know his devices how he seeks
to snare them that are weak, against their intentions, and under color of a
better pureness, he seeks to breed a weariness and disdeine of the
ordinance. He is an unclean spirit, and cannot brook that which holiness
has invented, to prevent sin. Let such as are privy to this rebellion, humble
themselves and repent, remembering that marriage takes off the propriety which
each had before in himself, and gives away the power of the body of each to
other without contradiction. And, there is more in this, then most will take
notice of. And some openly profess that they abhor this judgment, being yet
expressly grounded upon the letter of Scripture.

The second extreme is on the left hand, The second.
when men abuse marriage to a defiling of themselves, and under pretense of
general lawfulness, run into excess. This is as odious as the former. Its
not the wisdom of a Christian, to choose the uttermost brinke of the river to
walk upon, because it threatens slipping in: nor of his liberty, because its
allowed. Our greatest offenses are commonly about things lawful, when as we
dare not attempt the unlawful: whereas religion is much more tried in the use
of liberties allowed us. And its strange under what sorry and thin covers, the
conscience of one will shroud it self when as once it has cast off the love
of closeness: half a loaf is better to a Libertine, then no bread. Whereas a
sound spirit should think thus, In this God tries me, what metal I am made
of, whether to betender of a command, when I have the bridle laid upon my own
neck, or to run away with my uttermost liberty, when I have some granted to
me. Doubtless he who will take all that he can, in liberties, shows he is
but kept in by violence, in commands, and but for shame, would desire Gods
cords were more slack, and suited to his lusts. I speak, because it might
scarcesly be believed what baseness, immoderatenesse, and licentiousness grows
in many even by the occasion of the former point, of benevolence. They will
stretch it beyond the bounds of modesty, and bring themselves into such a bad
custom, that a Bear robbed of her whelps may be met with and stopped, as
easily as they crossed of their lascivious and luxurious appetite. Some
brutishly imagining, Levit. 20. 18.
that the very law of God forbidding carnal knowledge (during the term
forbidden) was but a ceremony, not grounded upon the perpetual natural
absurdity of the action: wherein they bewray themselves by their swinish
appetites, to have drowned the true dictamen of nature in themselves, which
most heathens themselves acknowledged.

Others are wholly ignorant of all pureness and chastity, in the demeanure of
themselves each to other: for though Isahac and Rebecca sported themselves,
Genesis 26. 8.
yet doubtless in no base or uncomely manner very Philosophers and Politicians
in their laws made for the good of Commonwealthes, led by no Scripture or
religion, yet for the preservation of health, vigor and strength of body, for
the shunning of diseases occasioned by this, as well as unclean mixtures, have
set down their judgments touching the modesty and mediocrity of marriage
converse, forbidding frequencie and licentious use of it; I had rather express
my self so, under their person, then in mine own words, knowing to what
language he exposes himself of scorners and profane people, Heathens shame us
Christians in this.
who does but glance this way. I say not as they say (Plato and others) once
weekly, or thrice monthly might be a model of convenience in this kind, for
the greater part of number of men's bodies: because I know, there can be no set
rule for all persons, seasons of marriage, and varieties of bodies, because
variety of subjects, causes variety of rule. But this I affirm, that if
heathens could rove at such a mark, in the dimnesse of their light, and all
for the restraint of excess: I should think it rather meet that Christians,
especially in years, (who by their place should teach the younger to be sober)
should rather aim at being under the line, then above it. But as it is not
youth (where there is a chaste spirit) that can provoke to excess in this kind:
so neither is it age (in any profession) if it be once tainted with
defilednesse, which will persuade men to moderatenesse: but as brute beasts,
their will is their law, and even in those things they know, yet they corrupt
themselves to the grief and sad woe of their companions, who know not how to
redress it. Loath I am to speak that in this argument, with many sentences,
yea in two words, if one might serve; and heartily wish, which yet never will
be obtained, that (at least) the religious might be laws to themselves in
such kinds. But the experience of the contrary may plead some pardon for that
little I have said. Some must speak, and where more aptly, then in a treatise
for the nonce.

But how shall we know when this due measure is observed? Marks to know the
moderation of the bed.
Surely then when snaring concupiscence is prevented, and fitness of body and
mind thereby purchased, freely to walk with God, and to discharge duties of
calling, without distraction or annoyance. And so doing, much fredome may be
enjoyed (both the former extremities being avoided) and Gods wrath prevented:
which I cannot say, whether it more hangs over the heads of superstitious
Papists, for vowing a forced chastity, contrary to the express rule of the
word, or upon married persons, Popish forced chastity.
for abuses in either of the two kinds. Concerning the former, we know both
into what odious enormity of lust the Lord has suffered them to be plunged,
both unnatural, and unlawful; making them the execration of the world, for
their lust. Touching the latter, I leave it to the experience of the wise to
consider; And affected Abstinence from the benefit of the Bed compared.
Both what vexation the neglect of this ordinance has caused to many, who
under pretexts of their own, have refused the mutual due to each other; who
afterward, seeing what woeful snares they have brought themselves into, as
seeking the Company of harlots and adulterers, have bin deeply terrifyed,
wishing too late, with sorrow, that they had denied themselves and subjected
them to the ordinance. And so for the other extremity, when due regard of
Chastity has bin neglected, what weakness, diseases, inability of body and
mind to calling and duty has ensued! Inconve^sence of both unjust abstinence
and excess of liberty compared.
Yea further, when presumptuous lust has broken bounds, of womanly modesty,
compting all seasons alike, what marks has God set upon their own bodies for
their incontinency, and so upon the bodies of their Children, yea and upon
their minds, and whole constitution, the one by disguizement of countenance,
the other by defilednesse with the like sin, (for what was bred in bone, will
not eazily out in flesh:) when as I say, men have met with these penalties,
then they have justly confessed wrath to ceaze upon them. And indeed, although
there were no religion, yet if men were but Philosophers, to understand the
natural mischief and poison of such ways, they could not but loath them.
Therefore, let a wise mediocrity be observed: sanctifying our fellowship and
fruit of bodies by earnest prayer, that both may be clean to us; Make not
that help, which God has given as water to quench, as oil to inflame; There
is a white Devil as well to corrupt, as a black to abhor the remedy. But
such debauched filthiness the loosenes of our age is come to, in all kind of
lust, that I verily think if those chaste Platos and Lawgivers of old times,
were now living, although Heathens, yet would be scorned by many Epicures and
Libertines in the Church: who think it a curb to their will, not to live as
they list, worse then beasts, and Savages. Be we therefore, who stand to Gods
bar, a rule to our selves, following the steps and practice of such, as in
our own degree, and rank go for the most moderate in either sex. As he
said of the endless questions arising about morrall actions, let it be, as a
wise man would judge, so I say of this: for questions of this nature are so
impossible to be decyded punctually, as other the like are of fashions, and
liberties of our common life, that except they be put to a comprimize, there
wilbee no end made. So much for this third.

The fourth and last Chastity is that of the body. The fourth and last head of
the mutual duty, is the Chastity of Body.
This I make one duty by it self. For although its true, that if the three
former were kept, this would follow alone; yet I say, when all is done, the
body is not to be trusted too far. This sin of uncleanness is a running sore
in our flesh, hardly cured. Even many (otherwise good) persons, though kept
from the act, yet by all their strife have scarce felt themselves free, through
a bodily propensenesse to this evil. And Satan is ready to do in this, so in
other sins, even by how much the sin is loathed, by so much the more to
exasperate this sin: not to speak of the falls of those worthies in Scripture.
So that, except there be a special arming our selves, against Snares objected
and laid in our ways (which are innumerable in the lives of such men, as have
to meddle in the affairs of this life) and that, with resolution, both before,
and upon the occasion, to preserve our selves: all our former course taking to
shun temptations by our senses and the like, will do us no pleasure, when
they are brought home by the Devil to our door, and laid in our lap,
presented in a Lordly dish, with secrecy, ease and fair Colors. Mere
suddenness of affront (mark what I say) when nothing else could do it, has
prevented some, that it has made them all their life, slaves and miserable.
Take heed, bring not unclean bodies to the married estate and bed: lest being
married, this dog be not easily rated from the carrion. There must as well be a
fidelity of body as spirit, an holy strength to ward off blows, to cut off
deadly temptations by the middle, by our well ordered members, as not to call
them in, by well awed senses and carriage. Chaste Joseph was not only resolved
not to provoke himself to sin, Genesis 39. 8.
but when he ws suddenly surprised by the offer of an harlot unsought for, he
abhorred the object, as if he had been warned beforehand. Its one thing for a
man to have grace, another thing to have such a presence of it, that when our
base hearts are in a readiness to embrace, present grace is nearer the door to
thrust it away, and abhor it. There is more danger in a prepared snare, made
ready to our hand, then in the speculation or foresight of that, which may
possibly befall us. So much for this fourth: which I call Chastity of the body,
in a special sense, to note, even how the whole man ought to be as well
strengthened against the suddenness of a temptation, as beforehand kept from
the means leading thereto. And perhaps there are some sorts of men, whose sad
experience will construe my meaning herein, better then others can.

I now conclude the whole Chap. with use of exhortation and with some short
direction to set it home. Exhortation to the duty of Chastity.
First I say, let all who desire to preserve the honor of their marriage, look
to their Chastity. Drink of the waters of thine own well, but, let the
Cisterne be thine own; Seek not to strangers; Pro. 5. (...). and 9.
give not thy strength to the harlot, and thy years to the cruel. Abhor all
sweetness of stolen waters, let not thy teeth water after forbidden
deynties, lest thou find bitterness in the end. If meddling with thy neighbors
hedge, thou may fear lest a serpent bite thee, how much more with his bed?
Let thine own wife delight thee, she is the woman whom thou chosest for the
companion of thy youth: transgress not against her therefore. Let her love
satisfy thee, and her affections equal thy embraces: let thine appetite be
subject to him, and share the duty, and the honor of it, between you both: and
keep chaste till the coming of the Lord Jesus. Know that this is an equal
duty of both, God having bestowed the power of each over other, upon both:
Think not thy husband tied to this rule, O woman; nor thou thy wife tied, O
husband, and the other free: the tie is equal.

Its not jealousy of each other, Against base and unjust jealousy it is most
odious.
which can preserve this honor; no, its the Canker of marriage. Bathsheba
describing the condition of a good woman, tells us, The husband of such a
woman, Pro. 31. 11.
rests in her, his heart setles upon her. Nothing, that a wise man, observing
virtuous qualities in his wife, judges her the same toward himself, which
he is to her. A good man (such an one as Joseph was to Mary, a just man, one
that had no worse thoughts of jealousy toward her, then she had to him, loath
to entertain the least suspicious thought against her) will always esteem her
by himself. Why should I think, that her Conscience, Chastity, is not as
tender to her, as mine to my self? what can it come from, save a base heart,
inclined to treachery against my wife, that I should imagine, my wife should
be false to me? Surely were it not a sin, to do such a thing, or wish it
done, it were but just that an unjustly jealous husband should meet with that
he fears, that so he might be jealous for somewhat. Many civilly chaste women,
having bin drawn to commit this folly, by no greater motive, then the vexation
of jealousy: as not fearing God, and therefore thinking they were as good
commit it, as be always falsely charged with it. And mark it, Its commonly
the sin of couples unequal in years, who having married younger husbands,
wives, then themselves, lie open to this temptation, Alas; I am too old to give
him, or her content, they seek such as are like themselves; when as yet the
parties are as clear from such aspersions, as the child newborn: what? have
thou offended once, and is there no remedy but thou must soder it by a worse?
I speak not, as if I would make men Pandars and Bawdes to their wives, through
their folly and careless confidence, exposing them to any temptations, and
winking between the fingers, for what is this, save to give aim to a chaste
woman, to be lewd? No, But to shame that impotencie and baseness of either
sex, whereby each is prone, contrary to the good carriage, and approoved
conversation of the other, yet to surmise in them, falsehood and ill meaning.
What can be such an incendiary, to set all on fire between couples, as this
cursed mischief of jealousy? which is ofttimes (upon mere mistake of some
word, guise, or action, nothing tending that way) rooted in the spirit of man,
or woman, that neither all the assurances of truth between themselves, nor yet
by mutual friends, can compound the matter so, but still there must be a pad
in the straw, and there smoke must argue some fire: And yet when all is done, it
prooves a mere Idol of fancy, nothing in all the world.

The Lord indeed appointed a trial for the jealous man, against his wife: but
we must not conceive this was to breed or nourish causeless conceits: it was
no doubt first brought to the judges in criminal causes, to determine what the
matter was, and (as our Inquests do) to cut off all mere surmises: else what
a bondage had it been for a wife to be so hurried and defamed? And although it
be true, that for the hardness of their hearts, the Lord permitted more
liberty to men at that time, (being sturdy and rebellious) should that be any
encouragement now to Christians to nourish such trash in themselves to make
their spirits, their prayers, their whole life sad and miserable to themselves,
and to be so imbittered each against other, that even when they would feign
shake off their own conceits they should not be able? I say no more of this
elfe of causeless jealousies: but this for the party sinning, no man shall
need to wish his greater torment, then himself has created to himself; let
him thank himself, that his own sin has eaten up the marrow of his bones.
The greatest pity is to the party innocent and sinned against, who is to be
advised, while there is any hope of recovery, to strive by all caution and
exact circumspection of carriage, to tender the weakness of the other, hoping
that love rather then anger has bred it: Remedy of the innocent party.
but by no means disdain them, and to walk loosely under pretext of
innocence. But if the disease be so rooted, that it will not be healed; let
them enjoy their uprightness (for the way of God, is strength to the upright,
as Solomon says, Prove. 10. 29.) and not be dismayed: but look up to God, who
can clear their righteousness as the noone day, and plead their cause against
their oppressor: joining prayer to God to quit them accordingly. This I have
said of injust jealousy: as for that which is just, I say as much against the
guilty party, wishing the law were as strong now, as it has formerly been
against all violaters of this sacred knot. And for this branch so much.

I had here purposed to insert some other watchwordes and directions: but I
consider that in the latter part of this Treatise more full occasion will be
given of this Argument. So much therefore shall serve for this Chapter.

CHAP. IX.
Containing the description of the 4. last Joint duty of the Married, viz.
Consent.

THe fourth and last duty equally concerning both parties married is, The
fourth general and joint duty of the married consent.
Consent, and harmony of course each to another. Both the former of chastity,
and this, do grow as springs from the stock of love: the former in the
bodies, this latter in the lives of both. For this I would have the Reader
conceave, that the former of love, and this of consent, do not differ, save as
the root and the branch, the cause and the effect. Love being the noble
groundworke, this the sweet building upon the former foundation: both making up
marriage, to grow to an happy frame and building, which who so behold, can no
other judge, but those parties are well met, and dwell commodiously: But will
better appear in particulars how the one differs from other.

This then is the point, that both married persons ought studiously to
maintain this grace of mutual consent, as a maine piece of that, which must
maintain the honor of their marriage. Branch 1.
who either (by woeful experience) could never attain it, Experience of such
as want it.
though their eager desire after it may prove it to be the crown of marriage,
or the more happy experience of such as have atteined it, according to their
desire, and found it to be no less, then I have spoken. For the former of
these, who need to question it, but that must needs be most honorable, for
lack whereof, the estate and contentation, yea whole welfare of thousands have
perished? Who covets that with earnestnes, which has not some rare felicity in
it? And when a man has with all his skill, sought that, which yet (when all is
done) he cannot atchieve, yea is further off from, what remedy, but such a one
must needs lie down in sorrow? Prove. 13. 12.
If the deferring of the souls desire, is the fainting of it, what is the
utter defeating of it? when as, not for the present only, but for ado (for
ought appears) a man foresees his own misery, and must of necessity survive
the funeral of his own happiness.

For the latter, Branch 2.
who doubts of the honor and price of that commodity, The experience of such
as enjoy it show it to be worth the preserving jointly.
unto which, they who have enjoyed it, do esteem all as mere dross and
dung? Even all their wealth, beauty, and birth, which yet do much confer to
a comfortable life. What shall it profit a man to win all these, and to lose
his own content, in a sweet amiablenesse of conversation? Or what shall a man
give for a recompense of it, if it should be in hazard? Thus will every one
speak of this blessing, except he be a fool, to whom the Sunshine is
wearisome, for the continual shining of it (and yet this fair wether may do
hurt, so cannot consent) or such as to whom nothing will seem precious, save
by the want of it? As for all wise men, they will affirm it; That then which
in both the confessions both of desirers, and enjoyers, makes so much for the
honor of marriage, Th price of this Jewel in her nature, deserves the
careful improoving of it.
justly deserve the joint consent of both parties to ensue and maintain.

it. It may challenge equality with the things of greatest price, and
excellency! Oh thou sweet amiablenesse and concord, what may not be said of
thee? Thou art the offspring of God, the fruit of Redemption, the breath of the
spirit: Thou art the compound of contraries, the harmony of discords, the order
of Creation, the soul of the world: without which, the vast body thereof would
soon dissolve it self by her own burden; The praise of Consent.
as wearisome to it self, and fall in sunder by peacemeale from each other. By
thee, oh sweet peace, and concord, the heavens are combined to the earth, by
their sweet influence; by thee, the earth confines the unlimited waters, within
bounds, both earth and waters nourish those inferior vegetables; by thee those
same creatures, nourish the sensible; by thee, those sensible again return
their food to the most noble members of the world, the reasonable; that so the
spiritual part, which is above the rest, I mean the inner man, and new
creature might by them, for them, and in them all, honor his Creator. Oh thou
divine consent, the sweet temperature of bodily complexions, the blessed union
of soul and body, the law of government to Commonwealths and societies, the
band of perfection in the Church, the reconcilement of God with man, the
recollection and confederating of all things in one, both in heaven and earth,
the life of the family, the daughter of love, sister of peace, and mother of
blessing. Can thou then, who art the life of all things, choose but be the
honor of marriage? Shall all other creatures know no other marriage band, and
shall the truly married be without it? Is it so sweet and good a thing to see
brethren to dwell together in affection, although they cannot always in place
and habitation, and must it not needs be more sweet to them, who are both in
affection, and habitation inseparable? If in distance of bodies by necessity,
yet if it be so sweet, what is it in the necessity of each others presence? All
this considered, what a joint care ought there to be in couples to nourish it?
How stupid do they declare themselves to be, who do not feel it? The Beasts,
the Birds, the Plants are sensible of it, and strive to put forth themselves to
all mutual offices of service each to other, for the improving of it, as loath
to forge such a jewel, and shall married Christians, be senseless and
careless of it?

Consent h^th a Divine instinct in it.
deserves mutual care in couples to preserve it between themselves. But such
is this consent. For mark, when love has once combined and incorporated two
to one, what an instinct does it breed, and what influence does it instill into
each party, for the useful services belonging to their place? Each Be flies
abroad to work and carry home to her hive, being once appropriated to it. Even
so here. Readiness and willingness in each party, to his and her office, the
man to toil without in weary labor and travail, and the woman within doors,
both without complaint; these ^low from the geniall consent of each with other.
Hence nothing is thought too much, benevolence, providence, forbearance,*
patience, fidelity, secrecy; all virtuous offices: The husband complains not,
that the burden lies all upon his shoulders, the wife (as weak as she is)
mutters not, that her sick husband lies upon her hand, and spends all from
her, like to leave her in want. Both cheerfully go on, acted by Providence to
look upon a promise, and all because a secret accord of spirit puts them
forward to the work. The reason comes to this issue: That which is as useful
and gainful, as its pleasant, and contentfull is as the dew of Hermon, Psalm.
133. 23.
and the oil upon the head of Aaron, in both so much graces, marriage deserves
that the married should enshrine it in their bosoms, and nourish it with joint
endeavor.

Consent brings God into the married.
to rule and reign in the family over the married themselves and all that
pertain to them, then well does it deserve the care of all married persons to
join themselves in the promoting thereof. Its an honor to an house to be
frequented by the great and honorable: How much more when the Lord of heaven
and earth, shall condescend to dwell in our houses, to come in, to sit, and sup
with us? whom should he sooner do so unto, then to the peaceable and
consenting? we know that old maxim of Machiavell, if thou will reign, divide:
And our Savior affirms it, If Satan cast out Satan, 12. Math. 26.
how shall his Kingdom endure? No surely. Satan must cast out unity and amity,
if he mean to reign, that he may bring in hellish discord and confusion. Even
so if God will reign, he must cast out Satan, that he may bring in union and
consent between couples. There is no agreement, 2. Cor 6. 15.
betwixt Christ and Belial, light and darkness: Then (and never till then) shall
religion, prayer, Sabbathduties, holy exercises, love to the Saints be
enterteyned, when consent has taken up the room of each others heart. So much
may serve for Reasons.

A question Answered, Wherein Consent stands.
But wherein (may some say) stands this Consent? In 3. ^h^^gs.
or the tongue. Thirdly consent of practice and endeavors. For the first of
these; The principle of marriage consent must be rooted in the heart; 1 In
consent of heart as chief Ezekiel. 1. 19.
That each think and affect the same things; As in Ezekiel its said of the
beasts and the wheels, that when the one went forward, the other did so, and
when the beasts were lifted up, the wheels were lifted up, for the spirits of
the bea^ts, were in the wheels. So ought it to be between couples, one
judgment, one mind, one heart, one soul in two bodies; the spirit of the wife
in the husband, and his in the Lord. That which the flatterer says in the
Co^edy, (the hatred of the name being remooved) that should the wife say to
the husband: Say thou a thing? So say I. Deniest thou? I deny it too. And in
a word; I am prepared for the nonce to agree with thee in all things, good and
honest. What is more beautiful to behold in marriage, the^ that whereof it is a
Resembla^ce, I mean, the harmony between the Lord Jesus the head, and the
members, to wit his Church? Read the Canticles: See how the Church ecchoeth
her husbands voice, in all he speaks, see how she pleases her self in his
comely proportion, attire, gestures! And he again in hers; how she depends
wholly upon his beck and countenance, joies in his presence, mournes in his
absence, repozes her self in his bosom, being asleep, watches his awaking,
follows after him, hangs upon him in his departing, longs for his return, and
having lost him, runs after him as one distracted, and bewraies her life to be
bound up in his, as Jacobs in Benjamins. This inward complacence, welpleasing,
and welapayednesse of couples in each other, is the very quintessence of
marriage peace, and contentment. As in the mystical body of Christ, we see
what an instinct is in them, to maynteine their own being in the welfare of
each other. All envy, wrath, suspicion, jealousy, unkindnes, pride, censure,
and whatsoever else savoring of selflove and separation, being odious to them.
Each doing his own service, content with his own portion, mourning with any
that is ill at ease, and glad of their welfare.

Secondly, this consent must be in the speech and language of them both: 2
Consent in speech, necessary for the married.
Its true generally, but in this point specially, That speech is the discoverer
of the mind: Look what the abundance of the heart is, that will vent it self
at the mouth. So the husband and wife should answer to each other, as
Iehoshaphat to Iehoram, 2. Kings 3. 7.
I am as thou art, my people are as thine, Pro. 27. 19.
my horses as thine. Yea, the speech of each to other, should be (without
flattery) as the glass, to behold each other in. As face answers to face in
the water, so does a man accomodate himself to his friend (says Solomon) how
much more the husband and wife to each other? They should even resemble each
the others frame and temper (in the Lord) with all ingenuity. As the beams do
represent the Sun, in her heat and light: so should the sweet carriage of the
wife, argue the body which gives her influence, even her husbands virtues.

And lastly, there ought not only to be this harmony in presence only, 3
Consent in common life and occasions of it.
but in absence also, even in the way of their Conversation: abroad in company,
in duties of Sabbath, of Christian communion, whether together or asunder, such
should be the reflection of a wives carriage, that all that see her, may see the
wisdom, thoughts, affections of the husband in her: not a carriage of her
own, as of one severed from his way slighting his, as if she were wiser; but
humbly submitting judgment, will and spirit to his in the Lord: and where there
is any difference, so it be grounded, keeping it secret, and acquainting God
with it, as she did when she felt strife in her womb, that he might reconcile
it, and settle it aright in time: For in such a Case, discreet concealment will
far sooner reduce them together, then open expression of their differences. The
actions of the one should be the shadow of the others, yea a model thereof.
As it was once between David and his new subjects, whatsoever liked David, 2.
Sam. 3. 36.
that was presently pleasing to all his people; they agreed at an hairs
breadth. This threefold cord of heart, mouth and work, is not easily broken.

Reproof.
I pass by the ruder sort of barbarous people, rusticall and profane, Vulgar
guise of mar^yed ones, rude and rusticall.
(who never yet came into the garden, where this grace grew) such as pass
their days, either in brutish and Nabalish churlishnes, brawling, fighting and
quarrelling together; or else consent only in evil, serving each the others
turn, according to those vices they are inclined unto, as the world, to take
together portions for their children by hook or crook, or pleasures and
libertyes, or pride of life, and fashions, or envious pursuit of their Enem^es,
slander, or the like sins of the tongue. I say, to leave such, who would look
for such differences of spirit, and temper, among such as pretend great zeal
in profession? A man would think, when he looks narrowly into them, that
they are set as marks of opposition, each to other, then resemblers of their
affections, joys, and desires: verily I have often seen it (to the shame of
such I speak it) that among some ignorant couples, The Dissentions of
religious Couples, the shame of profession.
whom only natural likeness of manners, or civil education has handsomed,
there is found more love and accord, then among some such, as daily keep on
foot the worship of God in their families. Shall I praise them in this? no
surely. I know, the sorrow which heerby you procure to your selves, is
punishment sufficient for your folly; But you must not escape so: but shame you
for such contrariety of spirit: Many men and women, being so cross each to
other, that they think this consent rather a weak and seely fruit of a
pusillanimous spirit, yea a shame rather then an honor to their Marriages! And
that then they have quit themselves best, when they can whet their teene upon
one another, jarring and jangling, and pleasing their froward, and ill a paid
spirits, in displeasures and differences. And, can you, or dare you
nevertheless, board, converse and bed together, and go to the house of God,
and there hear, and partake the Sacrament of communion, as if there were
nothing amiss? Can two walk together except agreed? Amos. 3. 3.
Or do you cast arrows and darts, Pro. 26. 19.
and say, you are in sport! what villainous hypocrisy is this, thus to habit
your selves in sin, that the custom of it, should make you senseless of it,
and cause a falling sickness of discord, that you know not the way of geting
in again? All day war and deadly feud, and yet lie down at night, and wipe
off each crum, from the lips? Nay, what do such save make the Ordinances of
God, covers of their shame and wickedness! I doubt whether such or these, or
they whose debates break out into separation, so that neither town nor
country can hold the^, are the worse of the two! I say in point of
presumption, though their sin be not so exemplary. What a pageant is this for
the Devil to laugh at? how out of measure sinful is your sin? Tigers and
Bears have their agreement, and shall such distempers reign in the marriages
of the religious? Shall fraud and oppression be found in the seat of justice?
or a froward, waspish spirit, in the proper element of peace and consent. Where
shall peace be looked for, if you disagree in marriage? If you war and contend,
who should agree? Or, who should go about the families of religious ones, to
seek out matches, when as such as these, hatch up a brood, by their lives and
examples, more fit for the Devil to govern in, then the spirit of God which
is peaceable? Shall such as should one day, judge the world, (if they be as
they seem) yet be feign to refer the desperate quarrels of wife and husband,
to the arbitrament of friends? By which occasion, matters growing to be ripped up
between you, perhaps the coals of Juniper are blown to a greater heat, then
before, by these bellows, and the hope of accord set further off, then it was.
Surely, as the corruption of the finest bodies, is most loathsome, so are the
contentions of such as should be most quiet, commonly most tedious: for sin
loves to be out of measure sinful. So much of this first.

Hum^liation to all faulty couples.
) Oh man! Remember, the Lord has created thee in his Image, made thee as God
to thy wife, a man of more solid mould and frame, able to bear impressions and
occasions of discontent. Prove. 20. 3.
Its the honor of a man to pass by an offense: The Lord abhorres thou
should weaken thy self by a wilful opposition of a weaker sex; what a poor
victory is that, when thou have matched a seely woman! No, thine honor stands
rather in passing by her folly and weakness: not in a currish blockishnesse,
not in a surly stoutnesse, and pride of stomach, not in a controlling,
imperious carriage, and thwarting tongue; This is to betray thy own strength,
and to outshoot the devil in his own bow. This is to smite all due honor out
of thy wives heart; and, (as oil to the flame) to inflame and provoke her
spirit, to be sevenfold worse. Rather do in such a case, as workmen in
colepits use to do, when the candle burns blue, they suspect the dampe to be
a coming, which would stifle them, and therefore they strive to get out, who
can get first, and when the dampe is over, then to work again. So, give place
to this dampe and distemper of discord and contention, and when its over, then
return to thy wonted course. And, in conclusion, look to find small fruit of
violent striving: For, as Latimer said, he that gets the victory here, gains
sorrow, and he that loses, loses peace. The gains which thou gettest thou
may put in thine eye, and see never the worse: Thou shall repent thee at
leisure, that thou did not redeem thy peace upon harder terms, then the
curbing of a base appetite. Thou shall lose thy sweet words, in thy bitterness,
thy liberty with God, to lift up pure hands without wrath or doubting, shall
degenerate into fear, barrennes and bondage, thy prayers shall be choked in
thy throat, and perish in the uttering, which thou were once wont to power out
purely, confidently, cheerfully: Therefore obey this charge of God, and
prosper. If the Lord bless not thine endeavor, yet, its better for thee, to
deny thy self, and to wait the issue with patience, then bootelesse to strive
against the stream. The like I say to thee oh woman, Is this a life pleasing
to thee, always to live like a Salamander in the fire? Is this an Element so
welcome to thee?

Consider (poor wretch) how thou degeneratest from thy creation: The duty
urged.
Thou were molded by the hand of a wise workman, to be a tender and yielding
nature, the weaker vessel; and do thou delight in a spirit of
contradiction? will thou resist thy Maker and thy head, both at once? Should
thou think it an honor, to thee, to carry in thy bosom a proud wrathful and
shrewish heart, and in thy head a stinging tongue? Oh, it were more agreeing to
thee, to be melting, mild, and overcome evil with good! If this ought to be
done to an enemy abroad, that if he need, thou should cloth him, feed him:
If to him who reviles thee, Luke 6. 27. 28. 29.
thou should return good language; if to him who would take thy cloak, thou
should cast thy coat also (to show how meek thou art) that so thou might
be like to thy father, who does good to the evil: what then shall thou do
to thy husband, that thou might resemble the Lord Jesus his tenderness to
his Church, whereof thy marriage is a shadow? As thou would that Christ
should handle thee, so do thou oh man, handle thy wife, and thou oh wife, thine
husband! Go together (as once a couple did, being convinced by their Ministers
reproof,) and break heart each in others bosom, confess how far you are
off, from your first frame, what dishonor to the gospel you have been, and
woeful joint enemies to that joint and mutual peace which both of you should
have hatched and nourished between you: Beseech the Lord to shed his love and
spirit into your bosoms, his peaceable, amiable, quiet spirit, which can turn
your swords into mattocks, and spears into plowshares: who can make the ox
and the lion, the bear and the lamb to feed together, that is, take out your
felnesse, and put into you an heart of Amity and consent. Then shall you be
another while for the honor of that Ordinance with equal endeavors, which all
this while you have so reproched.

Admonition.
let me say this, Enter not into marriage, in a confidence of your own
strength when couples first meet together, youth, 1. Be not too co^fi^ent of
your selves in a tempt of marriage.
strength, and carnal Confidence upon their own means, with fleshly content
each in other, makes them dream^ of a dry summer, and think I shall not be
moved; It wil^e always honey moon with me: as if the bitterness of an unquiet
heart were passed away. But poor souls! you know no more your own spirits,
then Hazael did, when hearing the Prophet telling what a cruel wretch he
should prove, 2 King 8. 13.
he asked, Am I a dog? to do such things. You dawb with untempered mortar,
which will fall off in frosty wether; But, when experience has schooled you,
and showed you the discontents of marriage, and with what bitter ingredients,
sin has poisoned your hoped successes; when husband prooves an unthrift, wife
an ill housewife, business in the world cross and left handed, when also
cares, fears, losses, charge of children, sorrows of the womb, and nursery,
bad children, debts and straits come upon you at once, (none whereof you have
grace to prevent) oh then! you see that your first merry meeting will not bear
off all assaults. And yet, what should I speak of such things? when a base
heart in the midst of all contrary mercies, pamperd with the creature, but
wickedly proud and unthankful, can and oftener does cause this woe to couples,
more then all adversity! Oh, this canker grows out of blessing, oftener then
affliction! wherefore, enter this estate, with selfdeniall! humble your selves,
be as Ephraim, who was as an heifer unused to the yoke, ^er. 31. 18. 19.
but after, he repented, and smote upon his thigh: Do you so beforehand, and
beg armor of God for the hardest: bost not of the best, ere you put off your
harness: the best will always save it self.

Secondly, Caveat 2.
know this, That although the Lord should free you from such disasters, P^^y
for this ^weet g^ft of (...) and A^^ablenesse.
yet marriage of it self (without special grace) will try of what metal you
are made. Even mere continuance of time, Custom and usual society, will (by
corruption) procure a fulsomenesse, and satiety, yea a weariness of each
other. Acknowledge therefore that this frame of your marriage will not stand
alone, it needs daily props, to keep off an impatie^t spirit! For why? The
mere spirit that is in you, lusts to envy; enclines to crossenes, elvishnesse
and self willednesse of spirit, when as yet there is no vexation without to
cause it. What need is there then to ply the Lord with prayer, for the sweet
uniting of your spirits, and calming of your hearts? That the peace of God
passing understanding may fence or (as the word is) beleaguer and hemme in your
souls (or as a garrison keeps a town safe, Phil. 4.
) may preserve them with the knowledge of God, and possess them in patience;
Lu^. 22. 19.
Alas! let all your whetting and provoking each other, be reflected back upon
your own selves, fret with indignation, against the Root within, purge out
that leaven; and then your hard hearts shall melt into tears, for each other;
spend your time of jarring, in prayer and earnest request to God, for mercy and
pardon: That he would take off your rough edge, and make you polished and
squared stones, to couch in the wall of this building: which before could lie
no way. Oh! the Lord (for ought you know) may make you blessed means of each
others conversion, that you may bless him, that ever you met, who so often have
cursed your own eyes, for seeing each other. Let the fruit be as God will:
sure I am the cross of an uncomfortable yoke should persuade you rather to
spend all your life in prayer then in Rebellion. For its better (if it must be
so) that God delay your desires, whiles you are praying, then whiles you are
sinning, Caveat 3.
and stopping the course of prayer.

Thirdly, Put on the Lord Jesus his meekness.
put on the Lord Jesus, and he shall so furnish you, that you shall not need to
take any more thought, how to fulfill your base lusts any more. Put him on, in
his long suffering, meekness, bowels of compassion, as the Apostle speaks:
which will not only prevent those evils of an unquiet, and unsavory spirit,
through a well a paid heart: but, also will teach you to bear and lie under
your Cross, R^m. 12. end.
and to be as God will have you to be. Coloss 3.
Fight not against God, but put on the Armor of peace, as a Brestplate, to
bear off all the darts of distempers. If the Lord will not be entreated one
way, ply him another: Remember an heart armed with holy Resolution in this kind
is shot free, and able to conquer a city. The patient in spirit, is better then
the hasty, and the end of a thing is better then the beginning. Patience
carries with it, half a release, it is (as it were) boot in beam. If then,
thy wife and thine husband cannot be won to consent, yet, if thou can
possess thine own spirit, thou shall conquer hers. The best victories are by
yielding in this kind. Strange is the nature of a quiet spirit: it must
prevail at last, because it will wayt, till it have no nay. But especially, it
has this power in it, to quench any fiery dart, far better then any
resistance, and wrath. If Cannon shot light upon the Wool-packe, it loses his
force: but if upon a stone wall, it batters it to pieces; and a soft answer
puttes away wrath. Bring Jesus into this ship he will allay all the waves:
bring this Arc into the camp of debate, Mark. 4 39.
and it will make all whist and quiet: 1. Sam. 4. 5.
when the Whirlewind arises suddenly from the heart of an unquiet man or
woman, and like to that tempest Job 1. Job. 1. 19.
assaults every corner of the house to ruin it; yet, if this spirit of a soft
voice encounter it, all will be soft and calm on the sudden. The cause why the
house of Jobs children fell down, was, because it was such a wind as beset on
every side: So it will fare with thee: If when one wynd is arisen in the house,
the^ by and by another be up in the other corner to resist it, woe to that
house. Then is the season of thy Calm O husband, when thy wives heart is up in
heat: and then of thy quiet heart (o wife) when thy husband fumes and storms.
But if both be up at once, be thou (o man) the wiser, and say, Its now out of
season for me to meddle. Else thou will throw down thine house, and destroy
thine own peace. The second blow makes the fray: therefore while the cloud is
as a man's hand, little in the entry, give over betymes, ere it cover the whole
sky: 1. King. 18. 44.
and cause such a tempest, as clouds when they follow rain, which is a
continual dropping: and make sick wether for ado.

Fourthly, Caveat 4.
if the Lord exercise thee with this following cross, Renounce not God to use
Carnal shifts.
beware lest thou forsake his way, and through tedious discontent, consult with
flesh and blood, to use carnal shifts. It is not thy violence, to go to work
by strong hand, to bear down thy wives stream, by a stronger one of thine
own; by either threats, or much less blows, (a base remedy, and which I
wonder should either come into any wise man's thoughts and pen to advize, or
heart and hand to practice) or any other Policy of shame and disswasive, which
God has blessed to effect it. If he had, it had surely more prevayled, then it
has. No, its the only victory of heaven and grace; whatsoever fleshly
Wisdom, and rashness or device of man, has or may practice in this kind, I
speak not: extremities may plead excuse from the greatness, but not the
realnes of the sin. Nor yet do I deny but that a carnal way (for the present)
may help against the present occasion. As I heard lately that a man put to his
wits ended, agreed with his friends in London, that dwelt near, it seems, that
when they heard the Drum sound from his house, they should all make have to
take his wife in her scolding vein, and so shame her. So they might cut off a
finger, but who shall mortify the spirit? surely the Drum comes short of
that cure, and a woman will scorn to yield up her weapons at the found of such
a charm. No, alas! As the Popes blessing makes no Armor of proof: so neither
is any Medicine of man's devising, shrew, or scold proof: for a suddeyne they
may please by their violence, but at time of year, the malady will have his
course. To this, I might add a contrary extreme of carnal wit: That husbands
thus matched will seek to flatter and demerit their base wives, serving their
own wills, be they never so wastfull, and proud: suffering them to be all in
all, to carry all the stream, and to throw house out at windows, and all to
win them to some indifferency, slavishly subjecting themselves to their
usurping, and domineering spirit: They (forsooth) must buy, sell, let, hire,
take all and pay all, staving off their husbands from intermeddling, save at
their own courtesy, what they shall wear, spend, or carry in their purse:
Others, will redeem their peace, by casting all the tacklings into sea; let
their wives jolly and ruffle it out in what manner, measure, or Companies they
themselves please to spend at their pleasure, keeping their husbands at a
beck: yea, suffer them to keep and harbor Varlets under their noses to
defile their beds and family with filth and bastardy: and all that they may be
rid of unquitenesse. And when upon these terms, they have bought repentance
too dear, then they must either die in sorrow, or live with baseness and
dishonor. In general I like your patience (for some yielding does well) if
limited: But, your cowardly, base heart, distrusting Gods ways and method,
except you relieve your selves by sinning, that I abhor, and affirm the
remedy to be far worse then the disease.

Fifthly, Caveat 5.
I warn all couples, that they run not beyond the bounds set them by
providence, Keep each party the bounds of his place.
to intermeddle with the affairs concerning each other. Its the folly and
boldness of many women, to be so curiously prying and pragmaticall, about
their husbands matters, (which concern them not to busy themselves about, but
to rest upon their fidelity, except they see just exception) to be so
inquisitive into their actions, companies, and occasions, so jealous of them
(unjustly) that, although I allow not of the effect, yet I say, its a just
provocation to the spirit of a wise and innocent man, to differ from his wife.
And again, many foppish husbands do so intermeddle in the Element, and about
the peculiar emploiments of the women, taking upon them the menaging of their
Cookeries, their dayries and housewifery, as if they must have an oar in each
boat. What wise woman would not break into a mixed passion of fulsome
indignation and contempt? What husband would not be carried to extreme
discontent? God has appointed their station to them both, the one, without,
the other within: lest by idleness and sloth, they wanting their several
works, they should wax unsavory, and lie open to foreign vice: But this is
to turn the ordinance topsy turvie, and in stead of not doing, to overdoe, and
cause discord at home. Therefore keep your station: provoke not each other,
which gives occasion (ofttimes) of that mutual curiosity. Mutual consent will
not consist with mutual satagency in this kind. To this, I might add another
caveat, against the darkness and closeness of carriage of couples, each to
other, which does breed this evil spoken of. For, though each party is to be
trusted in his or her own sphere, to act and deal: yet neither must forget
other, to bear an equal share in the common welfare; and therefore, to
conceal themselves and walk aloof as in the clouds, one from the knowledge,
of the other; as never to impart their mutual affairs, never to communicate
together, or consult each with other, what is it, but a despising of that
equipage, and equality which marriage claims? what is it, save provoking of
each other, to turn a mutual spirit, into a private one? To turn equanimity
of love (that thinks no evil, but construes all in the better sense) into
jealous suspicion? what imports it, save that their ways are unthrifty and
unhappy, so that they are loath to discover them, till all be too late? And then
at last, endless broils grow upon such affected secrecy, and a necessity of
violent sparing, lest all should perish: both extremities, to be shunned by all
wise couples.

Sixthly, Caveat 6.
as the Proverb says, take not counsel in the combat: for then, Be prepared
for the hardest, before.
there is no season for counsel, then the spirit is in the power of passion,
and temptation present, as a bowl running down the hill, is in the power of
the descent. Take counsel therefore before, and use thy skill in preventing
that which is hardly endured. Observe thy husbands frame oh wife, and thy wives
oh husband: Study each others natures, and count it thy wisdom and vantage, by
that thou shall easily guess, both what may provoke and also prevent it; and,
what may both content and so procure it: But they who let all go at six and
seven, suffer the upper millstone to run upon the nether, they may be sure
the devil will see there shall want no corn, and then there will be grinding.
Studious shunning of occasions, with wisdom and pious caution, has in time,
wrought many an unquiet heart to some calmness; except there be so cursed and
churlish a nature, as delights in distemper, even to choose, and would rather
die fighting with it own shadow then be at peace. I say, 1 Samuel 25.
when a Nabal sees an Abigail, watch her opportunity, loath to provoke him in
his madness, willing to hold off whatsoever might disquiet, and further, what
might please and satisfy: how can he, but at last break his heart in her
bosom, and say, come my dear wife: thou art more righteous then I: for I have
sought thy grief, but thou have overcome me with thy wisdom and meeknes; thou
have heaped hot coals upon the head of a froward husband, and made me ashamed
to behold the ugly hieu of my passion, in the glass of thy meekness and
discretion. And this for Admonition.

Exhortation to the married to use cordial Consent.
who seek to live in godliness and honor, to establish mutual amity in your
spirits, and consent in your conversation. Alas! husbands and wives should be
as two sweet friends, bred under one constellation, tempered by an influence
from heaven, whereof neither can give any great reason, save that mercy and
providence first made them so, and then made their match; Saying, see, God has
determined us, out of this vast world, each for other; perhaps many may deserve
as well, but yet to me, and for my turn, thou excellest them all, and God has
made me to think so (not for formality sake to say) but because it is so. When
I consider, that, we are not met only, but met as we should do, not as many
mismatcht ones are, meeter for some other man and woman, then each for other;
so that we can say as he in his Motto, what we are, we would be, and would be
no other then we are; the only meet ones, for one another; oh then! how it
raises up my spirit to admire and magnify Gods dispensation! Oh, if it were
thus, how sweet were it to see married ones to live together! As the Arc
carried by the power of God, above the highest mountain in the world, fifteen
Cubits, so should mercy carry them above all contentions and garboiles, that
they should know no such. As they say the tops of some high hills are above the
middle region, and so above all those vapors of frost and snow, and wyndes
which inferior grounds are infested withal: so, so should these be above far
worse: and behold others beneath, molested with such things, even with wondering
at their happy escape. And as all the hills and dales, which make the parts of
that earth where they are, unequal: but cannot hinder the roundnesse of it,
because the circular figure of the whole, swallows up all particular
uneevennesses, into it self: so should those passages of unequality between
couples, here and there passionate heates and dissentings each from other, be
drowned in this consent, so that they should vanish as clouds without rain
and storm, though not without some darkness and lowering.

And, if ought did befall otherwise then meetly, how should each outstrip the
other afterward, in humiliation and Repentance! Oh base wretch (should thou
say) should I be weary of welfare! What is to be done by both after a
difference, even to repent and be humbl^d.
Should I return to nourish secret poison in mine heart, to hazard my precious
peace? and should I venture all upon a cast, to try whether mine be mine own,
or not? Shall one dead fly defile a whole box of precious ointment? No far
be it from me to forsake my fatness and sweetness, Judge. 9. 9. 13.
by which I have cherisht the heart of God and man, 1. King, 6. 7.
of wife, of husband, (like that bramble exalting it self above the trees) to
bear up my self above, against each other, by confusion and discord? No:
Far be it from us, Esaias. 42. 3. 4.
to suffer the noise of Hammers, Sawes, or axes to be heard in our Temples
hereafter! we were squared in Gods mount by his workmanship, not needing now
any such edgetooles! Rather let us be like him, who was typified hereby, whose
voice was not lifted up, nor heard in the strets, who never trod upon a bug or
worm to kill it, brake not the bruised reed, nor quenched the smoking flax. As
he the head of his Church, is to his Church, so will I be to my spouse and
beloved, amiable and consenting. Enough to marriage is the necessary
unavoydable grief of it, such as must be in it by Gods allowance, for trial:
I will not seek to add needless to necessary, but pull away, as much as I
can: and when the needless is taken off, M^th. 18. 7.
then shall the necessary be the better born. Offenses must come; occasions will
arise: Pharao's own privy chamber cannot be free from frogs, as well as other
common men's: Exodus 8. 3.
and the sweetest May-moneth may have frosty mornings, and cold evenings, yea
there will be sad days and sorrowful affronts at one time or other; able to
affront the most peaceable: But the peace of God and marriage, which pass
understanding, Philip. 4. 7.
the peace of Conscience and family, running in a stream together, will keep
the hearts of the good, so firm, and stable, that they will lose their wills
and humors ten times rather then this jewel: And if, when all is done, there
must some dreg of old Adam cleave still, it shall not be for hurt, all shall
turn for best to the peaceable, to search all which is in their hearts, to
keep them humble, to exercise selfedeniall, and to teach them, that the best
marriages upon earth must have their eyesores, lest we should say its good
being here, for the best and purest peace wilbee in heaven, where there
shall be no such relations as these, but all fulfilled in our eternal
conjunction with our head the Lord Jesus. Also it must teach them, even when
the weather is most contrary, yet to imitate the skill of the Marryner who will
not strive against the wyndes, but rather coast, and fetch a compass, to gain
ground and further his travail.

And so I finish this last of these mutual duties of the married, Conclusion
of this main du^y.
which is consent. Ensue peace with all, especially with your selves: Ground it
in that peace with God, to pardon and accept you: and this will be as the rush
growing in the mire, a peace always maynteind by a better, never failing. Walk
according to this rule, and the peace of God shall be with you. Try no carnal
conclusions, tempt not God, be not weary of welfare. Though it should turn from
you, yet follow, and take it by the lap of the garment; hold it fast; its the
free-simple of good couples: Let it rule and overrule, to forgo any thing
rather then it. They who angle with golden hooks, had need look to it, lest if
they lose their hook, all their catch equal not their loss. And so doing,
consent shall make your marriage honorable; till it bring you to enjoy that
peace and blessed consent of Saints in glory, which shall be a perfect sweet
without any bitter, a life without end. And so much also for this Chapter: and
for these 4. Duties mutually concerning Marriage, for the preserving of the
integrity and comfort thereof.

CHAP. X.
Return to the Personal offices of each party. And first the husband. His
first duty handled, To be a man of understanding.

HAving handled the joint duties of both, Coherence of the points.
we come to lay down the several duties of either party in marriage: And what
great difficulty will there be in this latter, when the former is once settled.
As in a faggot, each stick is kept straight and whole, while the band holds:
so, let the married parties once be united in the former duties which stand in
equality: it will be no difficulty to maintain these which are peculiar. When as
once the retreat of the army of soldiers is made sure: each soldier fights
merrily in his rank. So here the maine work being dispatched, and mutual
security being given and taken each from other, of religion to God, of love to
each others person, of Chastity to Bodies, of Consent in the life and whole
course, what hardness can there be in the residue, for particular offices of
each other? The nave of the wheel being strong, the staves well fastened: how
easily will the wheel and orb of it run, and what a sweet current will there
be in the same? Touching the particulars then first of the man, First Peculiar
duty of the husband to be a man of understanding.
then of the woman (for both must manage this common stock of honor by their
personal industry.) The man's first duty, is* to walk as a man of
understanding with and before his wife: that is, so to a bear himself, that
he may sweetly strike into his wyves spirit a due reverentiall love and esteem
of his person and Headship, for the virtues of an husband: such as may satisfy
her to be a meet guide of her life, by his gravity, stayednesse and Prudence
of carriage. That her heart may tell her in secret, mine husband is indeed a
man of understanding. An husband, With this is?
who would save the stake of his own honor, should set down that for his
Maxim, let not thy wife despise thee: for if once the woman's heart despise her
husband, the whole frame of marriage is loosed. This is Peter's counsel to
husbands: 1. Pet. 3. 7.
Likewise ye husbands dwell with them, according to knowledge, or
understanding: he seems to contract all the work into this comprehensive
rule, in a general sense; as if any branch might fitly be deryved from it: But
here I take it for the first special gift of the husband, as an head. He that
has a good head-peece, is a man of good understanding and judgment: (that's the
peculiar virtue of the head) for as its the highest of the members, so it is to
lead and guide the inferior powers of the soul and the members: In the head
is the eye, which outwardly leads the latter, as the brain and wisdom is
within, the which guides the former. In that semblance is this gift of
understanding, the most peculiar to the head, the husband: the wife must
follow, as the will and affections, and members do follow the judgment. There
need be no more proofs of the point, reason convinces it sufficiently.

The greater question is, Particulars wherein it consists.
wherein this Duty of understanding consists. For the answer whereof, I think
(as he once being to teach the art of Memory first would teach the art of
forgetfulness) it were best to show what it is to walk as a man of no
understanding, First in what it consists not.
and then the positive. First then to walk understandingly, is not to walk
aloft in the pride and vain conceit of thy self, Dan. 4 30.
saying, to the wife, as he walking Nebuchadnezzar? So, Do thou not know
(wife) that I am the head, Not in an high spirit.
and set above, made to rule? That thou art made of my rib, and for my use, and
not I for thine but for mine own ends? yes, I will have you to know it too,
that I am a man by my self, and am able to menage a woman better then she.
Nay, first learn to understand thy self, ere thou prove a man of
understanding to thy wife. A man of understanding, is (as Solomon speaks) of a
cool spirit, Pro. 17 27.
not a proud, insulting and domineering spirit: he that is such an one, had
need of such a woman as to his cost, may teach him to understand himself
better. First learn to rule thy self, if thy will be too strong for thy wit,
Tim. 1. 3. 5.
and thou art hurried by thy lust, against thy knowledge: As the Apostle says
of another, he that cannot rule his own family is much less able to rule the
Church of God: so, he who has not understanding enough to rule himself, is
very unfit to rule a woman. That husband, who stands upon it, that he will
Lord it and be all in all, bear sway over his wife, as his underling, and who
shall control him? may perhaps (when Mistress Experience has well awed and
tawed him, repent of his lording it, and wish, his understanding had lain
another way. Add to these, such as wilbee ruled by no other Not in a rash self
willednesse Ioh. 19. 22.
save their own, and yet have little of their own neither (a true mark of a
Fool) but rashly rush upon their dealing, and affairs, saying, What I do, I
will do, what I have written (as he said) I; have written: my will shall stand
for my Law: prove it for better, or for worse, I am resolved to do as I list
and what is a man's liberty, but license, to live, to speak, and go to work
as him lists without control, Psalm. 12. 4.
as they, Psalm. 12. Is it not lawful to do with mine own, as I list? If I
give all I have away, who shall gainsay me?

To know but not practice.
or to be able perhaps to speak of a Sermon, or to pray, or read a chapter
(which yet many such do not) or keep some show of a Sabbath; But, to neglect
all the practice of his knowledge in his life, to expose himself to all
loosenes of carriage, baseness of example, living within doors currishly,
spitefully, without doors shiftinglie, cunningly, Not to give way to good
Counsel, but no following it.
deceitfuly and offe^sively: not stirring an inch. They moove upon their
center, as the windmill round about, but stir not one hair from it: Oh
(says one,) a very facile man, and easy to be handled* True, but hard to be
changed: he has a trick for you, worth ten of a rebellious refusal: for he
will say as you say, Nor to give Counsel to eth^r, and not to himself.
To end, neither is it any mark of an understanding man, to be able to give
counsel to others, either in Gods matters, or the world, or, to make others to
say, Oh! this man is of great parts, and deep understanding, see what wisdom
and experience he has gotten! whereas all this while this wise man, whose head
is aloft in his counsel to others, falls into the ditch for lack of taking
counsel himself. He cannot guide his own way, nor order his own conversation
aright. In generals he is very free and full, because he is carried only to
the object of truth and judgment, till you come to particulars, and then
occasions of his own profits, will, pleasure or ease and ends do so hamper
and ensnarle his spirit, that this man with his great understanding becomes a
very fool, for lack of a special wise heart to apply knowledge to his own
occasions: as Sampson was able to judge Israel, but his lusts and passions cast
him out of the rule of himself. These then, and the like argue no man of
understanding.

Secondly therefore, Second branch what is to be a man of understanding.
he is a true husband, and a man of understanding, who first has denied his
own wisdom, and is abased before God in the privity of his own wants, and
inability to manage this great affair of Marriage, 1 King. 3. 7. 9.
or to walk before his wife, as a man of understanding. To say of this, as
Solomon did of his Government, who am I Lord, that I should walk before this
great people? To renounce our own understanding.
To say as holy Agur did, Doubtless I am a fool, and the understanding of a
man is not in me: q. d. I have not half the wisdom that a man of my
condition had need of. I say its one step to an husbands understanding, to be
convinced of the defect and disproportion of his abilities, Pro. 30. 2.
to guide the way of marriage. To think of it neither so highly as if it were
above his possibility to atteyne, nor so low, as if he had enough and to spare
for it. David being nominated to be Saul's son in law, did not vaunt himself in
his abilities (as Absalon after did, 1. Sam. 18. 18.
but) said thus, Think you it so easy a thing to stand in this relation? And
Abigail a woman affirmed by a judicious man, to be of great counsel and
understanding, yet thought not her self so: but being sent for, to be David's
wife, answered, Alas! I am more fit to be an handmayde to wash the feet of the
servants of my Lord! 1. Sam. 25 41.
I say this holy humble diffidence in our selves, is a surer mark of an
understanding man, then the former. Especially when the sense of a man's
nakedness, carries him to God, to pray (as he did) oh Lord, I beseech thee,
give to thy servant an understanding heart! This pleased the Lord well, that he
asked this only, not other matters for his own ends, long life, riches,
honor: so, if thou sue to God for such an head piece of wisdom, as might
guide thy marriage course aright more then for welfare and jollity in the world,
its a sign that the cheef thing is more prized, then the inferior. To be first
Subject to God, and so ^^govern others.
ere thou undertake mastry over others: To say with that centurion, I my self
am under Authority, I come to the bar my self, and give account of my head
ship; Matthew. 8. 9.
I am fellow servant with my wife, and I have a Master in heaven my self: it
behooves me to use my headship sparingly, not to Lord it, lest I be scorned my
self, for taking upon me in that office which has more service then worship
tied to it: my Rule over my wife is not imperious, but royal and Princely, not
over an underling, but copartner with an equal: so that, if with all my
understanding I can bow my wives will, by a mild persuasion, not by
austerity, I have quitted my self well.

The third.
then the honor of it. I say, To be more sensible of a burden then of an honor.
to apprehend what cost and care belongs to my wives soul, how to mould it
unto true lowlynesse and meekness for God; (which is of great price with him)
to instill the principles of Christ and selfdeniall into her, (or to nourish
them if already instilled) to cause her to see into that scope and view of
Religion, which, is the change and subduing of her will to God. Oh, what a
work is this, and who is sufficient for it? were it but to menage her outward
man and carriage toward my self, toward her children, in her family, and
before others, in point of subjection, love, and wisdom, oh it exceedes my
understanding! it exercises me with more thought then all her portion contents
me! Oh! I must carry her to God, and commit her to him, to be trained to this
To be qualified with a Spirit of all sorts, as occasion requires
For such an one, is of an excellent spirit throughout, a man framed by God
within and without, with a spirit for marriage, a spirit of cheerfulnes,
discerning, diligence, dexterity to devise and dispatch also, humbleness,
courage, and patient enduring. By these, such an one first orders his own
personal way of religion, conscience before God, conversation in tongue,
dealings, and example before men: Then nextly he walks before his wife, as a
wise man ought: And, he attempts not to rule others before he have got the
upperhand of himself: But, having begun (as Physicians do sometime) to try
conclusions upon himself, then he prescribes to others, I say that these and
the like Graces, concur, to qualify a man of understanding in point of
Marriage; as (God willing) in the sequel, shall more fully appear.

For which purpose, Particulars of this general, two.
let this further be enquired into, in what main things consists this virtue
of an husband, walking as a man of understanding toward his wife? I answer. In
these two, first in matters of God, then in such as concern the married
relation. Both these will procure and maynteine the honor of marriage on the
husbands part: and, the contrary, It appears in matters of God.
And first, its requisite for the husband to handsell his understanding with
the matters of God. That he count it his crown, first, to seek the Kingdom
of God, and that for it self; and from the savor thereof, as one well grounded
in the Scriptures, to be able to express his knowledge to his wife till she
conceive the like: And, having so done, that he set himself to walk
accordingly toward his wife, both in the general, to instruct, admonish,
comfort, resolve, support her, and in special in all private or family duties,
to be her mouth to God, and to present to him the wants and petitions of all
that depend upon him. Both indeed ought to know, they have several souls to
save, and not to wrap up themselves in one another grace: Both ought to be a
spiritual body of Christ, anointed which his prophecy and Priesthood: yet, as
the man is the Image of God in special, and her head, so ought the
Consecration of God to rest upon him, in more abundance then upon her: that
she and all the rest may be replenished therewith. So that he (for his part)
must be as her Priest, and his lips must preserve knowledge for her: To give
some two or three instances of this point. Instances wherein.
First for the discharge of family duties (whereof I have spoken before) he must
purchase for himself an horn of oil, not only (as one says) for his
vessel to be savory, but for his lamp to shine. My meaning is not to force
such knowledge upon him as is ministerial, exact for degree (God requires no
service beyond the ability and Talent received, be it one or three) Its not
required that he be an interpreter of the Scriptures; that he gather punctual
doctrines, to clear doubts and objections, or to make distinctions and
applications beyond his calling: and object: This were but to make the Family
duties a stall to vend himself upon, and to pride himself in his parts and
endowments (as many have done so long,) while at last thinking themsel. too
fledge for their own nest, they have boldly leapt out of their shops and
Trades, into the pulpit, thinking themselves as meet to preach as the most able
Ministers; no, in no sort: (I krow there is difference in men for their skill
and understanding in matters of God, and for sobriety and humblenes of spirit,
whom I much honor, and desire not to trench upon, or discourage any Governors
in this kind, especially in such a profane world that runs a contrary stream:)
But impartially I desire to utter the truth by so just an occasion: and this I
say, Its enough for a private person, to insist upon such points of doctrine,
and especially of Catechism, as he has by his careful attention, heard in
the ordinary course of the pubblique Ministry handled; to cull out such, and
to impart them to his wife and family, in a familiar manner, upon confessed
grounds, and upon easy texts: whose sense and scope is plain and undoubted;
thereupon, fastening such exhortation, admonition and watch words as best befit
him to utter who should be best acquainted with the state of such as are under
his roof: rebuking sin, pressing duty; but otherwise as for texts of darker
nature, abstayning from them, and leaving them to a public gift of
interpreting: which is abler to rectify judgment, and answer doubts, and
settle the conscience.

Secondly, he is to apply himself to his wife, as a man of understanding, in
the private way of her soul, helping her out of her fears, answering her
doubts and questions according to the light he has received abroad, to
reconcile their timorous and scrupulous spirits to God, by the promise, so often
as they stagger, and to enlarge them with those comforts, to acquaint them with
such directions for their walking with God, as themselves have had experience
of in their afflicted conditions, to fellow-feele them, to be afflicted with
them, to conferr with them about their growthes or decays, their slips and
recoveries, and so about the fruit of their both public and private worship
and service of God: to satisfy them in any such difficultyes and dangers as
they meet with, and so to help them as well in the extraordinary duties of
humiliation and Thanks, as occasion requires: of which I said enough in the
joint worship of God before. And so thirdly (to conclude this point) he is also
to be a man of ability, to encourage, hearten and quicken his wife in respect
of any outward burdens she undergoes, to condole with her in them, Cant. 8 3.
to underlay her (as the beloved in the Canticles) does his spouse, that so two
may bear that which one cannot, and the toil may be the more cheerfuly
undergone, when she sees, that her head steps in to his uttermost to bear the
brunt, The backwardness of most husbands in this kind.
and discharge her from the di^t of trouble! Alas! how far are most husbands
from this course? where are they whose understanding, humblenes and love seeks
the good of their wives herin? how seldom do they apply themselves to such
public ordinances on the Sabbath or week day to enable them in knowledge? or
seek the help of Minister or other to guide them? Or put case some hear or
note Sermons (which now is grown each man's case, and not amiss except they
find that the gain of writing, mar the power of the truth in their
affections) yet they shut up all presently in their Note-bookes, without
meditation or aiming at the purchase of a lively stock, of understanding; nor
thriving upon their hearings, by proof and experience of that they know? Or if
they have knowledge, yet how surly and conceited do they grow, drawing their
wives rather to errors, and fancies, and busying themselves rather, about
matters beyond their reach, and of less consequence, ere they be grounded in
the maine. How sad are many women for their want this way, that alas! when as
they ask their husbands at home, they are little the better, if not much
discouraged! Their husband either despising the light of knowledge, and so
walking like blocks and idiots in all matters of God: or else filling
themselves so with other trash, that knowledge runs over, and is spilt upon the
ground: or if they have light, yet resting in generalities, never coming to
the experience of the way of God, or life of faith. And by this, they wax
barren, and tell their wyves, they are no Preachers, they must go to Ministers,
if they will talk of such matters, for it passes their skill to deal in them!

Understanding in matters outward requisite for the man.
or marriage affairs: He must be as the guide of her youth, going in and out
before her: able to direct her way and course with wisdom; not only in point
of obedience to God, but also in circumstances, and matters indifferent: for
her company, for her solitarines, for silence or speech, showing her what her
person and place will admit and bear, that she do not either over or under
set up, or cast down her sails, but live within the bounds of her place, for
her company, attire, household furniture, expenses of children, what is pure,
modest, sober, of good report, what not; who are safely to be conversed with,
and trusted in so bad a world as we live in, who to be shunned: he must be her
eye to see by, her hand to work, her foot to walk with, to discern things,
and persons, how they differ: And these things she must not only learn by the
ear from his discourse but discover by marking his practice and example:
Beholding in his glass an image of understanding, how wisely he can conceal
things not to be uttered, how warily preve^t danger to life, name, state: how
he can avoyde the snares which are laid for him; how he shunneth ill company,
remooves offenses from the bad, keep peace upon good and safe terms with all
men, handle business of weight both without equivocating, and reservation of an
ill conscience; and on the other side, without betraying himself, and exposing
himself to hazard: and in both how he preserves innocence, and uprightness.
Besides these, she may behold in him, neither on the one side cowardice in a
good cause, nor in the other, folly in the bad handling of it: how close and
secret he is to them that are faithful friends to God and himself; how he is
neither basely niggardly, nor yet vainly lavish: that he is neither lightly
credulous, nor yet sinfully distrustful: in his liberties, neither taking the
uttermost, nor yet scrupling the moderate, and lawful: Thus I say when she
sees the image of God shining in his understanding and behavior, she shall be
far from despising him, at least justly, for grace is honorable, and makes
the face to shine, even before such as have little good in them; much more such
as can observe it; Nay more, she shall honor him, as her head, see cause of
entirely loving him, devoting her self, first to God in thanks, for such a
blessing, and then to him in all loyal affection. No woman save a Micol can
find any disdain in her heart of such an husband. And, (which is the crown of
all) she shall represent and act her husbands virtues, upon the stage of her
own practice, and conversation. So much for this second.

Reproof.
we Ministers, you people; who in matters of God suffer their wives to live at
randon. Because they see it requires some labor to menage the souls of their
wyves, Husbands not walking as me^ of understanding to be blamed.
by that near Communion I have spoken of, therefore they pluck off hand quite
from boorde, and leave them wholly to themselves to sincke or swim. The very
ground of the sluggard does not so speak against his sloth, Pro. ^4 31.
by the briars and thistles wherewith its overgrowne, as the souls of these
men's wyves, by their profanenes, and their lives, by their immodest and rude
behavior. So themselves can hold bodily welfare, farewell, sleep and play, and
lie down in an whole skin; what care they, what becomes of them? How many
inclinations are there in some tender plants (at first marriage) which through
the neglect of husbands, vanish. How many sweet parts and graces which lie and
ruste, for the want of good improovement? how many blemishes and wants (which
wise and seasonable counsel might redress) are suffered to grow remediless?
how many husbands might say of their wives, as once a shrew said of her
husband, she could have lived sweetly with him, if she would? meaning it was
not passion, but a spiteful heart which hindered it: so, its not ignorance, but
a ^ase and lasie heart which does this: had they bin worth their ears (God
seconding the^) they might have improoved them sweetly. And how gladly would
such wives have blessed God, for their counsel, if they might have bin
beholding to them for it? what honor had they got for their isntrumental help
to convert, support and save the^? If thou do not this work, how can thou
say, thou love her, or thy heart is with her? Surely thou shall pay the sad
shot of her sin; If no place in thy house, bed, board, closet, walk, can
witness for thee, if any common work steal away thine heart or leisure from
helping her: If she run into riot because thou staydst her not: how just is it,
that thy life go for hers, wherewith God betrusted thee?

Terror.
that alas! they lack all wisdom to guide themselves. Husbands who cannot
guide themselves worse.
So that, if their wives should be so unhappy, as to tread in their steps, they
must of necessity fall with the^ into the ditch of all error and profanneesse.
Alas! how full is the world of women, (not the worst for disposition and hope
of good) who yet through ill planting, (because they see that else they must
live a dismal life) not only stumble at the threshold and go not one step
forward, but ten degrees backward: being fain to comply with their husbands,
and wax tenfold more the children of the devil then before? what is more
easy, then for a weak Chamaeleon, a faint and weak creature, to resemble the
color of each cloth its laid in, when they see no fear of God, nor reverence
of man, care of Sabbaths, conscience in dealings, savor in examples: to fall to
the like? especially fynding a sweetness and welpleasing to the flesh, and
nothing to gainsay it? How basely dare they speak of sincerity of the
ministry, how vain, frothie and fashionable grow they, their husbands reading
them the lecture, and as Abimelec, saying, what you see me do, do ye
likewise. How full is each corner of Lamecs desperate varlets, who act villainy,
wrath, rage, envy, worldlines, pride, and scorn before their wives to cast
them into the like moulde of wickedness?

Nabals to observe and judge aright; Instruction.
how can they choose, but underprise them for want of understanding? Many waves
justly stumble at the folly of their husbands.
Is it wonder, that a woman (except very humble) should extremely vilify such
an head? Does the Apostle justly reproove men for wearing shag hair (like
women) and for shaming their head, 1. Cor. 11. 14.
or being ashamed of the glory of God, (which they resemble by the uncovering
of it) and shall not these dishonorers of their headship much more be
condemned, (as in this matter of walking like men of understanding before their
wives?) yes surely: its no wonder that their complaints against such husbands,
are so frequent, and that they can nourish so little honor in their hearts
toward them, who power out so much contempt upon their own heads! I do not
patronize such women as do so, but yet their disdeyne is in some sort veinall,
against them who do so violate the Ordinance ^ what a clog is it to be matched
to a man who in stead of stayednesse and due wisdom, is not so much as
sensible, when he is told of his follies? So openly ridiculous, that (as oil
in the hand) it bewrays it self to all men? Passages of folly in husbands.
So shallow-braynd, fickly, easily led aside by any bad counselor, to any
loose, unclean wastfull courses? who makes as many promises, as he has
fingers on both hands, and that daily, but breaks them before he go to bed?
what wise woman can endure it, to see him who should understand himself, to be
so seely, credulous, in judicious, that each base cheating companion can cosen
him of his wealth, rob him of his money, make him drunk, and pick his pocket?
Such a fool, as will lend every man he meets with, that would borrow, not
shillings, but pounds, without any band save a bare word, as good never a whit
as never the better, to such as are not worth that they borrow? what
indignation would it moove in a woman, to be compelled to follow her wise
husband to the Alehouse, to gaster him thence from drinking and revelling,
spending of his time, thrift and honesty? making her self a Byword, to pull
him from the pipe and pot, to avoyde worse dishonor? Nay and yet to avail
little also, but even to see her self sinking and perishing by piece meal,
while she beholdes in him the cause? when he follows him that leads him to
the stocks?

Instance.
so full of passion, so talkative, so contentious with children and servants,
so weak in government and in his pangs, so hayle-fellow well met with his
servants, fond and apish with his maids, ready to traduce his wife in the
hearing of strangers and the family, as if he put no difference between times,
persons, or occasions? If a foolish woman by her tongue and unseasonablenes, be
such a shame, yea rottennes of bones, to a wise head: what is he (who should
be the head, to her) when his carriage is so burdensome? I have seen an evil
(says Solomon) oppression occupying the place of justice. As if he had said,
for a poor man to steal a stick off the hedge is sin, but, for a judge to
oppress in the place of judgment is notorious: so, for the husband to play the
fool instead of a man of understanding, how disordered? How shall the wife
sustain her repute or esteem in the family, when he that should honor her,
by his reproaches, withdrawes both her own children, servants and negihbors,
from their allegiance and duty?

Instance,
who is so idle, and so unfit, to set himself on work about the service of
his place, so ready to fleece from her all that she has, so helpelesse in
his place, so giddy, and gadding up and down from place to place, after his
copesmates, pleasures and vanities, that its hard to say, whether she were
better want his company to rule his servants, or have his room, to avoyde
noisomeness?

Instance.
save when he is in his jiggs and jests, unsavory scoffs and scorns, at every
one, wife not excepted, that comes in his way? And in his humorous extremities
so contrary, that either he cannot be pulld out of his Melancholy and
mopishnes, being discontent; or being humored, cannot be driven out of his
froth and lightness; Like those fiddlers whom the Poet describes, who either
cannot be gotten for any need to play, or, if they fall to it, can never adone!

Instance.
for a week, or ten days in an houte, will put on the habit of the most
diligent and provident husband, to follow his business: But on the suddeine
(as one that forgets himself) rushes again into his vein of good fellowship,
soaking himself in his Pots, as if he would take revenge of himself for his
former abstinence, and make eaven with himself by spending twice so much by
day after day, as he saved by his diligence? what is so yrksome to a woman, in
company, where she becomes, as to see her husband, (whose honor should be her
Crown) to be the jest and laughing stock of fools, an object of May Game to
each one, who will make himself sport with his baseness? I might be endless;
But in a word, she that is yoked to a foolish head, what a spectacle is she
of a woman miserable by necessity?

Conclusion with exhortation to husbands to be men of understanding.
endeavoring himself to the uttermost of his power, (according to the gift of
God) to walk with his wife, as an understanding husband: both in matters of
God, and the way of common life: that so he may draw from her (as the weaker)
due acknowledgment of him in his place, as set over her for a guide and
Director: In whom, (under God) she may repose confidence, applying both absent,
and present, without fear or suspicion: returing that reverence, which his
worth has deserved: and bearing willingly with infirmities, because her lot is
fallen into a good ground. As for the husband, although his wife should not
perceive his worth, (for some good wives cannot) yet seeing its his chief
understanding to see none of his own virtues, but to conceal all, let him
choose rather to be a man of knowledge, though his wife should not behold it,
then to be magnified of a flattering woman (as some are) deserving contempt.

And now I should have passed to the next point, had not this come in my mind,
that the Apostle in this Charge includes cohabitation: for he who must dwell
with his wife, as a man of knowledge; at least must then dwell with her: else
the subject is taken away. Cohabitation of the man with the wife necessary.
Where else (I pray) save in his house should his understanding appear? Or
where should he shine else, save in his own sphere? This is that which the
Apostle charge them, 1 Cor. 7 10.
who were yoked with Infidells, (themselves being converted) that they depart
not in dwelling from the unbeleeving party: Humiliation to all that refuse to
cohabite.
if the other will abide. I wish that the woeful age we live in, urged this my
Admonition: which I have glaunced at by passage before; but here as the duty
of this place. Persons of great rank and quality, think themselves lawless
in this kind; Even a base thing they deem it, to dwell with their wives. Not
only not one bed, board, roof, town, shire, but scarce one kingdom can
(long) hold some of them. And some are so noted for this trick, that it were
good at last, they would note themselves. Each distaste and discontent to their
unjust, unreasonable humors, is enough to cause a settled, habitual separation
between them, and their wives, not for days (which in cases is allowable) but
for months, quarters, years, many years together. Who doubtless, if they
might have Jewish liberty would much gladlyer be divorced And what gain they
by their separation? Dishonor to themselves, sorrow to their wives, I might say
snares to them both: distemper to family, ruin to their estate, wrong to their
country; ill example to inferiors, scandal to the irreligious. Besides, both
occasion to themselves abroad, Reproach of Seperaters.
clandestine societies and leagues with those that are luxurious, wanton,
defiled women: and lay offenses and snaresin the way of their wives at home
(except they make the more conscience) to forsake their Covenant, and to expose
themselves to like uncleannes. For why? Their husband is gone a far journey, and
you know what follows. Surely thine amends is justly in thy hands, who
provokest it! Husbands should say to their wives, as Ruth to Naomi; As the
Lord lives, Ruth. 1. 16.
nothing save death shall part us. Thy house, thy Children, thy Church, thy
God, and no other shall be mine, till death separate. It is not the way for
thee, for the obteyning thy base ends of thy wife to depart from her: (pity it
should) but rather to exasperate her; Its cohabitation, which is blessed to
soder breaches in time, not Separation. The practice of the greater sort is so
rife now adays, that it grows common, among the inferior sort, and will be a
sore incurable. A deserted Lady, or Gentlewoman, is become a common notion. As
one said, now the dogs bark at the Masters of family, when they return, as if
they were absolute strangers: forgetting them, as they did their wives. Oh
shame! Let Kings that be wise keep near their Crowns! and husbands that would
be happy, near their wyves: not turning Jew and Samaritan, who intermeddle
not. Such husbands, as care not themselves to become whooremongers; or to make
their wives as good as themselves, let them depart. But let all others, dwell
together with them as men of understanding, bringing in honor to their Marriage
by this personal duty. So much for this chapter, and first office of the man,
be spoken.

CHAP. XI.
Proceeds to the second Personal duty of the man: Providence.

I Proceed according to my order, Second several duty of the Husband,
Providence.
to the second several duty of the husband, and that is in one word,
Providence. As he is the husband in name, so must he be in deed: he must play
the good husband. Neither has he his namo fer noght: for the husband is as the
house-band, which (as the corstone to the sides of the building) hold in all
the parts of the house: which would soon dissolve and crack, if (under God)
his providence did not support it. He is the steward both for his wife, and
himself: especially without doors: He is not to put his wife to it, as one
insufficient himself to menage it, but (considering she has her handsfull at
home) he is to undertake the whole burden abroad: as being the party, to whom
(by divine dispensation) the credit of the well-improoving it, does belong: and
therefore upon whom, the shame of the contrary must lie. God has put into him a
spirit of deeper insight, forecast, prudence and prevention, then the woman, to
this very end. And to say the truth; The Lord has imposed this burden upon him
in Adam, instantly upon his fall, as the penalty for his base yielding up his
authority to his wife, and enslaving his spirit to hers when yet his fre will
abode enite. True it is Adam was to til the garden before his fall, even during
his innocence: but that was a labor most sweet and contentfull unto him. To the
sinner does God give toil and sorrow (says Solomon) and so, Eccles. 2. 26.
since his sin, labor is waxen a toil and vexation to him, and is, so that now
in the sweat of his brows, he must get his living. He that shakes off this
yoke, is a double Rebel, both against the first charge in innocence, of not
disobeying, and secondly against the penalty of suebjcting himself to
travail. In respect heerof, Job says: Job. 5. 7.
Man is as naturally borne to labor, as the sparks to fly upward: as naturally
deputed by God to the one, as subject by his own sin to the other; as the
Ebrew word [gnaval] imports, which includes sin and toil in one. The woman
brings all her state and stock, putting it into his hands, resigning it up to
him as her agent, and the more able party to improove it: if he fail her, he
betrays both his trust to treachery, and her state to embezeling. There be two
sorts of Infidells taxed by the Holy Ghost: the one in our Saviors words, Take
ye no thought what ye shall put on, or eat; for your father knows what is
meet for you. And why? The infidells do but so: Math. 6. 25. 26
And the other by Paul. He that provides not for his family, has forsaken the
faith, and is worse then an Infidel: 1. Tim. 5. 8.
Excess of providence, as well as defect of it, both are taxed by the name of
heathenisme. Therefore, so far as good conscience will permit, the man is
bound to the Law of providence. He must oversee the affairs of his own
household, Prove. 27. 23.
as Solomon speaks, he must look to the flocks of sheep, and herds of
cattle, laying in provision for the^: by this one, urging the whole Baylywick
of providence requisite for the support of the family. And that which the
Apostle speaks, 1. Cor. 7. 33.
is to the same purpose, That the husband looks in his way, after the things
of the world, that he may please his wife: he speaks not of it, as of their
blemish (so they add no excess and sin to the act) but as a necessity imposed
by Gods Command.

Now as touching that point, Reason of it in general, he honors his marriage
by (...) and how?
that the husband in several must close with this special duty of Providence,
appears by the honor which hereby he procures to the married condition. And
this I suppose no man will question. For why? Wherein stands the Princes honor,
save in the wealth of his subjects? And wherein is the honor of a State save in
both? what peace can subsist, what ware can be supported without wealth? Even
so here. The husband is the Prince of the family, if he be base and beggarly,
what is more ridiculous? what is so pitiful to behold, as a poor King, a
titular Prince, that has nothing to support his state, save a bare right?
being the whilst most forlorn and for saken? So, how shall things belonging
to the diet, attire and welfare of the family, be provided, if the Treasure
fail? And how can that choose but fail, if Providence the channel of this
fountain fail? If the Pilot of the ship be idle or a sleep, what shall become
of the ship? Must it not needs run on ground, and be swallowed up in the
quicksands? And, what a dishonor is it for him who should count it a more
blessed thing to give, then to receive, who should reach out an alms to six
and seven, and do much good? himself and his family to become burdensome to
others by his penury? Especially when, not the hand of God, (which can
overthrow the best providence) but the improvidence of the idle or ill occupied
husband has procured it. Again, when the husband honors marriage by this
Providence, those who fare well by it, honor him back again with the
rendition of his own. The weak woman and the shiftlesse children, seeing what
a prop, and father of a family the Lord has set over them, acknowledge his
care, with honor to God, and reverencing him, as the instrument of their
welfare, next under God. He resembles after a sort, Ephesians 3. 15.
God himself, whom Paul calls the Father upon whom all the families of the
earth depend, and are called by his name: whose honor it is to fill all with
his blessing, to provide for all creatures their due food in season, as they
need it, with clothing and other things both for need and comfort: even so, the
eyes of all the family mediately look up to the Master thereof, looking that by
him as a steward, the Lord should furnish them with necessaries; yea, to end
this, how honorable is such an husband, even in the eyes of them, among whom he
lives? How is both Church, Commonwealth, and Town beholding to such, as are
provident, for the upholding of peace, the Gospel, and the poor? If all were
careless Husbands what must become of all these? Some I grant shall ever be
poor, but these subsist in all these respects, by the aid of the Provident,
when as spend thrifts do nothing but pull down the house with their hands. The
conclusion is, If the personal diligence of the husband do so much honor his
marriage, he has good cause to put to his best care, to be provident.

But I will waive that in this place, attending the point as here it stands,
In what consists it?
cutting off whatsoever does not peculiarly touch this relation. First in the
through skill in the Trade of his way.
even while he is young: If there must be teachers, Teach a child etc. then
there must be learners: This is the Seminary of Providence in husbands that
they have learned their way, Prove. 6. 6.
in youth. There must then be a foresight of things to come, in youth; and a
willing subjection of themselves to such wisdom and painfulnesse, as may
enable them, with skill sufficient in their trade of life (what sort soever it
be of) to be provident. The very Pismire is taught by instinct: but its not
so here, man must be trained with much ado, and discipline, to be provident.
First by Shunning unlawful trades.
and apply himself to that way which is most warrantable, and best agreeable
to his nature (whether ingenuous, or mechanical:) and that by the direction of
his wisest Governors and friends. Mock trades savoring half of idleness, half
of work, base Trades which import a shifting, indirect and ill reported way of
Support, and profane Godless Trades of life must be abhorred. Such as to be a
Serving man for inheritance, to keep an Alehouse or bowling Alley, to be a
stageplayer, Dancer or the like. Secondly he must compass for himself through
Gods blessing, by the learning the mystery of this or that meet Trade, ability
and experience to himself, to make him a provident husband. He must He must
get wisdom and insight, not scorning them that can direct
that he may get insight and experience; he must not be so wise in his own
way, as to slight them who should teach him the right way, which may maynteyne
him afterward: But he must subject himself with teachablenesse to their
direction, that an habit of skill may accrue thereby. For, not only through
the total lack of a trade, but the half still in the trade, and
inexpertnesse therein, many of all sorts, procure to themselves most
uncomforable and shifting courses in marriage, whether bred to means, or
wanting them.

Curiosity in trades must be abhorred.
and fickle weariness in attending upon thine own, carrying a busy heart and
eye over the trades of others, having many irons in the fire at once, so that
some must needs be marred: this error must be abhorred. And there is none more
common: and yet very dangerous, stealing away the heart from a settled applying
of the mind to one thing, distracting it to many: as we see how many curious
brains, prying into things beyond their skill, and trying conclusions, for the
satisfying of their humorous spirit, have laid all their estate and hopes in
the dust.

There must be a stock less or more to occupy.
The best husband may sit still, if he want wherewithal. Yet, we must know a
little stock is a stock, as well as a great one, all have not the like
abilities, but all sorts must be occupied about their stocks, more or less.
They who have but one talent, have suitable expenses, or contentment in less:
they must not bury it, but employ it, as far as a little will extend, Job. 7.
8.
looking at the promise; Though thy beginning be but small, yet thy latter end
shall be full of increase. Although other trades outstrip them by their
stocks, yet they go not so fast forward but providence and blessing may
follow, and sometimes overtake them, if there be faith and patience to wait,
and not be discouraged. Each man's stock is his own, or ought to be; Such as
have not the patience to be doing with a little, but must hasten beyond rule,
to borrow, and rake a stock together, or to follow their first Credit out of
breath, till they load themselves with more dealings then they can digest, are
not like to atteyne to much, but lay a foundation of Bankerupts. For, a
competent stock followed with moderate diligence, though it be sure of no great
increase, yet (usually) frees the owner, from excessive losses: which are much
worse then slow gains.

Application of himself to his Object, with diligence
(though some trades consist more in manual work then stock, and others in
the activity of the mind, not the body) there must be an of the one to the
other; else providence fayles. The upper millstone of skill must run upon the
other, of Stock. The hand and the saw are not enough to cut the log in two,
there must be an hand of life, to moove and draw the one upon the other; and
so, some what comes of it. This Mort-maine of sloth will spoil providence,
what skill and stock so ever there be besides: and therefore there must be all
dexterity, cheerfulnes, and painfulnes exercised to keep life in a trade. A
wise, seasonable taking in of wares, of Commodities, at the best hand, paying
old scores, ere new be made, warily: and a putting off in season, not
overpassing our best marquet and opportunity; an accomodating, pliable and
acceptable spirit to traffic with others, (a fine gift to be a Chapman if it
go without baseness and flattery, and with truth and simplicity.) To be as
ready to put off, or take in, without either rashness in the one, or covetousnes
in the other; are all meet properties for a provident husband. The Apostle Romans
12. 11. has one sweet rule for this: Not slothful in business, but fervent
in spirit, serving the Lord. q. d. So far as Gods work is not hindered by our
own, its a comely sight to see a man active in his employment. The diligent
hand (says Solomon) makes rich: Prove. 10. 4.
and, in all labor there is abundance, if it be wise. He said not amiss that
said, I love when I eat my meat to eat heartily, and when I am at work, to
follow it closely: so to do each thing as if (for the present) I did nothing
else. Its a common saying, He that keeps his shop, his shop will keep him. The
speech is usual. Its not enough, not to be idle, except a man be well occupied
too: early up, and never the nearer, is to small purpose. A wise, judicious
head is as good a tool for a Trade, as a nimble apprehension; lest cost
without wit, prove wast. Here then observe some Rules.

First begin thy action and workmanship with God: Rules for diligent
improvement.
and the rather if thy service be the work of Study, of the mind especially.
Trust not thine own wisdom, but commit thy ways to God. Prove. 16 3.
That so, as thou have shunned a bad trade, so Begin it with God.
under color. Its in vain to build, except the Lord be the Master builder:
Psalm. 127. 1.
Except the Lord watch the City, in vain are the watchmen: in vain it is to
eat brown bread, and drink water, rising early, and lying down late; for,
he gives rest to his beloved. Many have miscarried in their thrift and
prosperity; no man can tell how, or why? save only that irreligion has bred a
secret canker, and shut God out of doors. I have noted it, some cannot keep
out the waters from flowing in, and wealth from increasing, while they in a
manner sit still: and others fray it away by their eagerness. For the one
counts it the honor of their faith to sit still, Esaias. 30. 7.
(thy strength shall be to sit still) and make no have: the other by their
have, fill themselves with snares. God will be the chief mystery in all
trades: not Manu-factuaries and Merchandise only, but even Sciences, and
ingenuous Studies: even Scholars must place the Bible above all their books:
and all sorts of set prai^r above, and before all their work.

Yet so make Gods providence chief, Rule 2.
as not destroying thine own. Yet destroy not thine own.
Beware of base cowardly Sioth. Ease slaies the fool, both body and soul. It
puts hand in bosom, but is loath to pull it out. Its like Jacob, for frost and
heat, and all weathers; Prove. 1. 32.
it frames lions in the way, if it should put forth it self, lusking in a bed
of idleness, loathing action. Such should not eat. Prove. 18 9.
The idler is the companion of the waster; whiles he rolls upon his hinges,
foldes his hands and yanes after more sleep and sloth, he hastens poverty upon
himself, as the necessity of an armed man. The thorns on his backside are his
Emblem. Yet abhor being ill occupied, as much as sloth. There is a golden
measure in all things: Our proverb says, better sit for naught, then stir for
naught. Rash, headlong, wilful, indiscreet busying a man's self, may prove
worse then lying in bed: as some eager on^s, keep wares (at a good price
offered) till they prove trash: Its a question whether there be more husbands
prove beggars by the pot and pipe, then by overmuch nimblenesse, and deepnesse
in the world, and meddling too much.

Thirdly, Rule 3.
a good husband must beware of loathing and wearisomenesse in his calling;
B^wa^e of p^king quareis with thy Calling.
when gains come not in, according to thy expectation, and desert. (for I
speak still to all Artists, both studious, and manual) Look not at other
trades of quicker return and dispatch, to bring thee out of conceit with thine
own. Abide in the vocation, wherein God has pitched thee. Hold the trade of
thy youth, till old age; leave it not, either because thou thrivest not fast
enough, or because thou have thriven enough already: still show that thy trade
is not thine only object. I deny not, but some cases there may be, where the
trade may be altered: as when stock is wanting, without dangerous borrowing upon
usury: when its so sunk, that it affords no competency for the family: when
some other is offered wherein as much skill as in the former, or some mark, of
providence appears that the change is from God. But, to pick quarrels with
our trades, that we might turn to such as we conceit to be speedier for
return and gain, that we might be rid of our own, threatens future misery
under the speciousnesse of present commodity: To go through many trades, is
the high way to beggary.

Fourthly, Rule 4.
subject thy self to thy trade of life, not for gain sake, Subjection to God
in a Calling.
but for conscience, (whether thou get or not) as that yoke which God has put
upon thy neck, to try thee: to tame thy sloth, pride and other sin, that the
penalty of Adams curse, Deuteronomy. 33. 8. 9. 10.
may become to thee (as Jacobs curse upon Levi, through his obedience to God,
became to him) a blessing. The travail of the husbands hands, 1. Tim. 2, 15.
and labor may possibly be made to him (as the travail of the womb is made
to the believing wife) a benefit and favor. Only the rebellion of an
unsubject heart to the obedience of God, (in what kind soever) brings a curse.
The richest man, yea the Gentleman, must hold his trade still; the poorest also
must abide in it: both, as in their vocation. The Lord tries thereby, the
faith, patience, meekness, bounty, thankfulness, selfedeniall, uprightness
and pains of the husband. Its not given for men to fledge themselves and mipe
their feathers by, but to avoid temptations and snares, which if we avoid not,
but incur nevertheless (as most do) we turn Gods remedy into an encreaser
of the disease: that is, an occasion of eager worldlines surfiting with cares
and excess, a bai^^ of oppression, usury and unrighteousnes. Besides by the
calling, the Lord would teach a Christian husband, to know, what that portion
is which he purposes to alot him, and what not: and does thereby serve his
providence in the competent support of us, and ours, without sin and sorrow.
For, Prove.
such is the portion of the righteous.

Fifthly, Rule. 5.
beware of moiling and toiling in the world, only to pocket up and hoard
treasure and store, Aim not at b^arding up, ^r multiplying t^y estate.
filling our bellies with Gods hidden store (as David Psalm. 17. describing the
ungodly, speaks) which one day will bring a wasting and consumption as fast,
either upon our selves, or ours. But abhor all such aiming to enhance our
selves above others for the jollity and pride of life. This is the cast of most
men, if once become great, to bestow all upon their pleasures, in hawking,
gaming, prodigality and wantonness, that they might have much the more (as that
heathen said) to satisfy their lust and appetite. To set their wives, children
and selves on float in the bravery of buildings, in curious fashions, or costly
apparel, and the like. The Lord can pluck your plumes quickly, if we drink
to be drunk, or forget our beginning to be from the dunghill: (as indeed none
grow prouder then such base ones) keep we moderation then, and be sober: God
tries us by prosperity, what is in us; we may enjoy the travel of our hands,
and the benefit of our welfare, so, that prodigality on the one side, and base
niggardise on the other, (which commonly in this selfloving world concur) be
abhorred.

Sixthly, Rule 6.
(which perhaps to some may seem strange) God will have thee maintain thy
husbandry and providence, Serve God with thy increase.
by serving him with the increase of thy labor, and his blessing. Look about
thee and see what objects God has planted for thy bounty to be bestowed upon.
Thy wealth if it be a standing poole, will stinck and baine thee; If it be a
stream, it will be sweet, and all the bulk shall be pure unto thee. As in the
Manna, all had their due; the plenty of the gatherer of much, abounded to the
supply of him that lacked. By the decaies of others, God tries thee. If when
blessing comes in upon thee, thou welcomest it with an evil eye, saying, This
is little enough to pay debts, this will do well to increase my stock, this is
for the clothing of my children, I will spend this upon costly apparel for my
wife: and all that comes is only for thine own use; and thou shrinkst up the
bowels of thy compassion so much the more: know, this will destroy all as a
Canker bred in a fair apple; No, say thus, This plenty will serve me, and God
too: part of this shall supply the defects of my faithful Minister, poor
decayed neigh^our, such a poor widow, such poor Orfans, poor Students at
University: have thou such an heart to the poor members of Christ, (that no
complaints may be heard in thy streets, that thou, and they may meet together
and worship God with the more joyful hearts, that the Gospel and religion of
God may be supported, both in peace and especially in persecution? Its a sign,
that God means to make thy horn full, and thy winep^esse to burst with new
wine: well continue, and do so still; try the Lord if he will not requite
thee: Thy goodness cannot reach unto the Lord himself; let it extend to his
saints and such as excel in virtue; Se^d thy treasure to heaven before thee,
Psalm. 16. 2. 3.
cast thy bread upon the waters, trust God, and after many days, if thou trust
God, it shall return again. Many rich husbands profess religion, but all
their serving of God, Eccles. 11. 1.
is no other, the^ the poorest Christian may perform: to pray, hear,
confer: But as for the duty they owe to God as rich men, they cast it behind
their back. They think that their works should hinder their faith: and so
hoard up hundreths, yea thousands together, but do nothing till God by degrees,
wast and consume both them and their posterity, as a moth, and at last root
them up quite, out of the land of the living. Beware of this curse therefore.

Seventhly, Rule 7.
if any aff^onts, losses, ill success, or discontents befall thee, T^ke losses
as well as gaynes patiently and contentedly.
in thy course of providence, by ill debtors, servants, children; look up in
thine innocence with cheerfulnes to the smiter; as well, as in thy gaynes. Both
are alike from him, even to weane thee from the sweet milk of those breasts,
which thou art loath to be weaned from, to knock thee off from hence; and to
prepare thy spirit for better welfare; Be patient; Trades are as the sun,
which though it set over night, yet returns in the morning; Jobs latter days,
after he had been tried, prooved happier, then the former; And, Job. 42. 10.
when both the mizer and waster, shall both be left to want, the Lord yet shall
sustain thee, and thy faith (which yet the world thinks will buy no meat in
the marquet) shall be such current pay in heaven, that it shall purchase thee
abundance upon earth.

To conclude, Rule 8.
let all thy providence determine in this full point. Be jo^full in all thy
labor under the sun.
That hereby, thine heart may rejoice, thou and thy wife enjoying the fruit of
thy travail, that thou may not be like to them, that roste not that, they
got in hunting. For what has a man of all that sore travail and labor, which
as a poor son of Adam, he has taken here under the sun? save that a man eat
and drink, and cheer his heart in the goodness of the giver: P^o^ 5. 18.
and rejoice in the wife of thy youth: let her share with thee. Job. 31. 27.
I mean not as Job says, That he kiss his own hand, and magnify the Idol
of his provident head, saying; All this has mine hand gotten: nor that he
soake himself in the Creature, and set himself to look upon the sun in her
brightness, and the Moon in her increase, adoring the outward means, and
denying the Almighty: this were Idolatry and Sacrilege; No, but quietly and
thankfully praising God, and rejoicing (as those Israelites were charged to do
when they brought their first fruits) in all which they put forth their hands
unto. Deuteronomy. 26.
Taking with a loving right hand, that which God reaches out, causing
themselves to serve him with a glad heart, for all which the Lord has don for
them: Better thus, then as many do, pursing and stopping up in holes and
corners, in an ragge, or in the ground: and perhaps here one debtor running
away with an hundredth, there another cheater with fifty; or perhaps, a these
digging thorough and stealing as much in another kind. To the wicked God gives
toil and vexation of body of spirit, more discontent then all their plenty can
breed peace: whereas the rest of the Righteous is sweet, be their portion more
or less, thorough the good will of him that dwelt in the bush, added to their
Providence. See then, that it be so, that thou play not the block under all
mercies, so that neither a good day should mend, nor a bad pair thee. But
first for thy outward condition, proportion thine expenses according to thy
revenews, as near as thou can: keep down thine heart, and then its lawful
for thee to live according to thy means. Cut thy coat according to thy cloth,
rather living at an under then an over rate; as knowing its easier to fall then
to rise, and yet understanding what scantling God allows; yet better be a
cheerful dispenser, then a base niggardly grudger at the use of what God has
given. As the good woman said, husband better spend it freely as God sendes
it, then knaves run away withal. The^ for thy spiritual course, let thine
heart be doubly and trebly cheerful in the Lord, saying with her, my Soul
magnifies the Lord, and my flesh rejoices in his salvation: If I ought to make
him my strength in the lowest adversity: Luke. 1. 46. 47.
although neither vine should bear grapes, nor the olive her fruit, Heb. 3. 17.
although there were neither Calfe in the stall, nor bullock in the flock: how
much more then, when my paths are anointed with oil, and my streams run full
of butter and honey? And so much (if not too much) for the answer of this
question, wherein providence stands.

Reproof.
first, how many husbands Branch.
at their entry upon marriage) cast off this burden from themselves, Careless
deserters of their wives, odious.
and lay it wholly upon the weak shoulders of their wives? In the mean while
themselves bearing themselves upon the fidelitye or thedrudgery of the wi^e at
home, go abroad, and open the sluice and floodgates of prodigality and
wastfulnes, that all the labor of the wife at home, cannot damme up the
waters. They spending and spoiling more abroad in an hour, then the woman can
patch up or redress at home in a week: and so outstrip her way, by their
own, till all be brought to ruin! Oh! the misery of such wives that suffer,
should I say, or rather husbands that procure it: but indeed both one and
other? Others leave their houses at large, committing all to wynd and weather,
to sink or swim, while they follow their lusts, companies and pleasures;
without control. Thus, woefully inverting the method of God, injuriously laying
a double load upon the weaker party, till her shoulders crack again: who yet
undertake it to shun utter debt, and yet at last fall into it nevertheless: To
these add another sort of such as enter into marriage without any calling
Branch.
having brought this snare upon themselves by neglect to learn the trade of
their youth, Neglecters of learning their Trade.
for vanities sake, and serving their lusts, and so, (although they repent
them of their folly, yet still they are destitute of skill in their vocation,
and so expose themselves to a vain and wearisome course of life, to many
snares and temptations, as this for one, basely to live upon usury: and wanting
skill to bargeine, buy and sell, either they must live upon the stock, till it
be spent, and then run up and down shifting and hanging upon every man's
sleeve, or else live upon the sweat of other men, while they live idly so that,
Lyvers upon their usury odious.
of all other members of the Common wealth, they are most useless to
themselves and noisome to others. Thirdly others, Improvidence under color of
Religion vicious.
who under color of religion and zeal, wax careless, in matter of
Providence, and in a diligent watching to their calling, and lawful
employments, thinking it a venial error, yea a praise to them, that having
somewhat to take too, yet they are not worldly: to whom it may be replied.
Neither are you provident husbands, to mainteyne your families: for know ye,
that faithful attendance to a calling, is far from worldlynes: that is,
rather the honor of a Christian husband, to be provide^t. Nay, some will run
out from their shops and Trades, (as men weary of work) from house to house,
hither and thither; and all under color of religion, as to hear Sermons ten
or twenty miles off, in the week day (their wyves and children being
unprovided the whiles) and being poor men, and behind hand, abide by the 3.
or 4. days in places, to confer, to repeat Sermons, to utter some gift of
their own, as their memory, or Prayer, or broach some new point of their own
devising, or lament the evils of others: (things good, in their kind, and
within their compass, but) as they handle them, most odious and unseasonable.
And thus, they delude such as are simple minded Christians, rob them of their
goods, under these colors, by their craving, com^layaing or borrowing; whereas,
children and wife at home, famish, and themselves by such bad custom, more and
more wax unfit and disabled for the work of providence: whereas, during this
time, they might have gained more at home by labor, then they can scrape up by
their ill courses, besides the reproach to religion. These are inordinate
livers.

Fourthly, Branch 4.
others, not having been trained up early, in some lawful trade of life,
(...) ^^ing courses dishonor marriage.
are feign to take up base and dishonorable wa^es and shifts to live upon; as,
to get licenses for Alehouses, to set up houses for tippling, dicing and
pleasures; others, shrowding themselves under the wing of great personages, set
up Bowling-allies, to toll in the Gentry to pastimes, (which they are much more
prone too then to works of charity) and so, they withdraw inhabitants from
their trades, spoil their servants with idleness, and toll in poor men of
the country to drink and spend their moneys, and when the rain hinders their
sports, then to their cards and dice within: And such are the remedies of men,
who having spent their youth in idle service, must live upon the sin of others,
and the overthrow of the country. Others, through idleness play the vagabonds,
and take their vagaries, seeking their fortunes, within or beyond the seas, or
play the Parasites to Gentlemen, serving all their turns for their advantage,
and most sinfully betraying them to wickedness. Others spend their time, in
devising and living by their wits, cleaving to young heirs, dissolute
spendthrifrs, to fill their bellies. Young heirs, w^^stfull, overthrowing their
Marriages.
Nay, how many heirs themselves, who might have subsisted comfortably, either
in their Parents familie^, or upon their inheritances; and followed their
callings with success, and blessing: yet, falling upon lewd companions, and
waxing loose and un^rideled in their manners, either match themselves basely
and contrary to their Parents aims, or if married better, abandon wife and
children, give themselves wholly to whoring, gaming, riot and wasting of their
substance, till they have stripped themselves of means, wit, and honesty, to the
unspeakable vexation of Parents, if they live to be witnesses, and of the utter
desolation of souls and bodies, wife and posterity? How is the country pestred
with such vermin? How does the Devil by this means, uphold his Kingdom, (for
he has fit covers for such cups) and hereby gather kites to the carrion, fits
them with sherkers and horsleaches, who by flattering and admiring them for
their bounty, squeeze out all from them, and leave them as Gulls! Oh ye fools!
how long will you delight in eating and devouring your own flesh? will no
persuasion enter, till (as Sampson was from his Dalila) so you be haled from
your lusts, and like fools to the stocks: that is from taking of purses by the
high way, and such cheats, you be haled to prison, to the gallows, Digression
admon tory to Parents.
to hell it self, without mercy stop you! Oh! you Parents, cease your raking
and scraping up of goods for such spendthrifts! or, for, you know not what
ends, for the increasing (to be sure) of sorrow to your selves, while you
live, and of sin, when you are gone! Do good with that you have, l^^t God
sting you in those children, and childrens children, for whom you as basely
hoard, as they power our sinfully! Sooth them up no longer in their sin, who
are li^^ to bring your hoare hears with sorrow to the grave!

Fifthly, Branch 2.
how many husbands are there, who by their heady improvidence, Indiscreet
borrowings, overstockings, u^dersellings, bad husbandry.
either borrowing to stock themseves more then ever they can pay, or selling
their wares underfoot, to procure present moneys (by which a while they feed
their Creditors) do for a short time set up their top sails, a while, bearing
it out with other men's wealth, and when they can hold no longer then they leave
them in the lurch: many such wretches, ruining the whole families of many
better husbands then themselves, with their wives and children. More fit (in
truth) to be hanged up, then to pester a Commonwealth: and some other maintain
their state and pomp by such desperate courses, even under a color of
religion, causing hundreths at once to make outcries against professors, when
they prove Bankrupts. Add sixthly to these such hotspurres as will not be
idle, but run into another extreme of wilfulness, rushing upon matters
beyond their skill, and reach: affecting plots and inventions of gain, either
by Adventures, or by new Manufactures, resolved either to win the spurs, or
to lose all. And so, they have lost all indeed, and withal drawn many with
them (who were as greedy of gain) into deep expenses and forfeits of their
states, and indeed they are both well enough served, to teach them (as Paul
speaks) to follow their own affairs with quietness. Others weary of their
slow-paced Trades, desirous to hasten them, Branch. 7.
how do they enlarge their providence, (rather their greedines) as hell,
Engrossing many farms at once.
thrusting as many irons at once into the fire, as they can come by: adding
house to house, and farm to farm, borrowing upon eight, (gayning scarce four)
in the hundredth, yet dreaming of golden mountains. Till at last, (the
mistress of fools teaching them too late) they perceive, their haste to have
brought forth blind whelps, and wish they had made no more haste, then good
speed. Eighthly, how ordinary a course now adays is it with men, Branch. 8.
(as I touched before) to wrangle with their callings, Changing of Callings.
that they might change them, and seek others, till (as the dog catching at
the shadow) they lose the flesh, and forfeit that they have: which is, to cast
their present real estate upon the casual and uncerteyne hope of things to
come.

Yet since this occasion is offered, I speak not, as if all deserting of a
calling, In what respects a man may change or divert from his calling.
or diversion from it, for a time, were unwarranted. For sometime it so falls
out by providence, that a man deserts Country and all, and departs to such a
place, as will not admit a possibility of the exercise of his calling: so that
in the one, he must needs yield the other. Again, sometimes the outward
members, senses, and the inward abilities of a man desert him, and disable him
from his calling: when as yet some slighter employment may perhaps befit him
well enough. Necessity of banishment caused many holy men, to make buttons and
points for their living, who before had studied and written books. So also the
trade may be so grown out of request, either by multitude of Traders, or by
deadness of the wares, that they cannot support the workmen: or they may be
so low, and require so much work to be done for money, that a trader cannot live
on them. Shall then the mayntenance of the family, hang upon the strict point
of not change of a calling? No in no sort. But in these or any the like cases,
(whereof are many) the end must rule the means, and any other lawful course,
which lies nearest to the skill or sleight of the workman, is allowed, for the
support of the family. Only let men beware, lest out of a fickle, ungrounded,
lazy, wearisome, covetous, reaching, aspiring spirit, they desert not their
Callings: and, if they needs must, yet let them chuze to divert rather from
them for a time, and return to them after, when providence yields opportunity
for it, then show that they willingly and slightly were moved to abandon them
at the first. But this by the way.

Endless it were, Branch. 9.
to mention all abuses in this kind: but to finish, Unsubjection to the Rule
of Providence.
how many have we, who through their Rebellion, will not be subject to the
duty of Providence? Others, who spoil all by improvidence, and having sold
all, even their wyves clothes off their back, make a mock of it, saying If
any can make more of their wyves, then they have done, let them take them! How
many others, who having gotten a fair estate by their Providence, yet wast it
as fast, by their jollity and lavishnesse? making their houses Through-faires
for Epicures, and boon companions, disquieting their poor wives from their
settled family business, to wayt upon such base Companions, contrary both to her
spirit and conscience! Or, if not, yet far from honoring God with their
Increase, or their marriage, with wise dispensing of their estate. These
excesses have (as thou may see good Reader) caused me to lengthen out this
Argument, as if I had not only treated about marriage Providence, but
providence in the general, and the contrary thereto. But I hope, that some may
light upon what I have said, and amend. Thus much for the use of Reproof.

Exhortation.
both on the right hand and left: and in weldoing commend themselves to God as
to a faithful keeper, and God alsufficient. Let them neither go to work
carkingly, nor yet carelessely. Let them abhor idleness, and yet shun ill
occupiednesse. And by that I have said of the sin of Improvidence, let them
learn the contrary: and so shall they (as much as in them lies) build up the
house, give good example to their wives to do the like within, serve God with
cheerfulness, and enjoy the fruit of their Travail with contentedness, when
the slothful and prodigal shall perish and vanish. And for this second
peculiar duty of the husband, viz. Providence, so much, and for this Chapter.

CHAP. XII.
Treats of the third and last Personal Office of the man, Honor of
Respectivenesse to his wife.

NOw I proceed to the third and last duty of the husband toward his wife, The
3. particular duty of the husband, respectivenesse.
which is honor, and due respect to his wife. The ground of which is the
ordinance of God, Genesis 2. 23.
by which, they are made one flesh. For so says Moses, when the Lord had
brought the woman to Adam, he embraced her, saying, This is bone of my Bone,
and flesh of my flesh: She shall be called woman; because she is taken out of
man. For this cause shall a man forsake his father and mother, and cleave to
his wife, and they twain shall be one flesh. The opening of the point at large.
Lo, with what honorable esteem, he welcomes this his blessed compeere into
the world. Now, its true, the wife in this respect, Ephesians. 5. 18. 29.
owes the like tie of tenderness toward him: But, we must know, this first
lies upon the man; to her ward, because he is the root of the relation. We
say, that love descendes from the Father to the Child, because he is the
foundation of the reference. Not, but that mutualnesse is required; But the
Original root must first impart himself; Now upon this root of union, the
Apostle enforces this duty: No man ever hated his own flesh; But nourished
and theri shed it as himself: He then that hates his wife, is an unnatural
monster, and devoures his own flesh. He that loves his wife, loves himself.
We know, how it is in the body. Union of parts causing samenesse and uniforme
subsisting in one, procuring an exceeding tenderness, compassion and sympathy
betwixt each member. So that although the foot stumble and give the body a
fall, yet a man will not be so mad as to smite it, because its one with it
self, and suffers the same fall with it. So here. The samenesse of flesh,
which the woman has with the man, makes him natural and sympathising toward
her: and not to hurt or hate her in her weakness, and stumblings, but to bear
with her, condole her, and count himself to suffer in her; his content, joy
and welfare not to stand in himself but in her, who is another self, and
therefore to be as willing to wound himself, hurt and hate himself, as to
hurt her.

By virtue of this union, Union the root of this tenderness.
and neerenesse it is, that there arises in the spirit of an husband (who is
not degenerate,) a marveilous natural and tender instinct of sympathy toward
his wife, in all her complaints, and infirmities. She is one with him in all
things, one in flesh, one in generation and posterity, one in blessings and
welfare, copartner also in all crosses and wants: All these are common: the
husband shares with the wi^e, and suffers in all her diseases, pains, trials
spiritual and bodily. Self does ill, and selflove is odious* between
n^ighbour and neighbor, yea stranger and stranger: much more between father
and child; brother and sister: but most of all in this superlative union of
marriage, wherein two bodies may truly be said to be linked into one soul.
Here then to affect a singularity, a privacy in so close an union, and for the
husband to be a man by himself apart, from her who is one and the same flesh
with him, what a podigious selflove is it? union breeds love, and love,
sympathy and compassion; but where selflove abides, union and love are absent.
And from hence it is, that in another place, the Apostle adds, 1 Pet. 3. 7.
giving honor to the woman, as to the weaker vessel: which giving of honor,
is nothing else save the peculiar office of the husband to his wife, (and as I
may term it, the way of his tenderness) when as he willingly resignes up his
manly authority sometimes, and wisely abridgeth himself of that power to the
utter most, which else he might usurp over his weaker wife. And in stead
thereof, wisely considers, its the honor of a man sometime to be under
himself, to forget his strength: there is a providence, in the government of
this vast world, and it stands in the overruling of some inferior creatures,
that they may not know their strength over the superior, but be kept within
compass (as it were) by a necessary and natural restraint. Even such a
voluntary tie has the Lord put upon the more fierce and rough nature of the
male to the female, that there may not only be a consent, from hurting and
offending each other; (for so Lions and Wolves agree together) but further,
that there might be a virtuous and more generous forbearance of authority over
the weak vessel: As acknowledging, the headship of the man is given him not to
discourage or destroy: but to direct, benefit and build up the wife. That as
God clothes the weaker members with the more honor; so, we should condescend
and vouchsafe the like respect to the woman's weakness. Although a proud, and
base spirit would hold his own, leaping over the hedge, where it is lowest;
yet a wise and understanding head, will of his own accord yield, and give
honor and respect unto the woman as to the weaker vessel. Surely if a father
be said to spare his own son who fears him: and the Lord will be master
even over the Parent, that he be not bitter to his children to tread them
under feet, but count it his honor to pass by the corrigible errors of his
children: then what should that sparing eye, that indulgent heart and hand,
that honor and respectivenesse be, whereby God swayeth the husband (being but
her equal) toward his yielding and tender wife? And in a word, I say this
giving of honor, is the more special way of the man, then of the woman: for
though she be so to him, yet in a diverse way, and in a more natural kind, as
it were according to her frame: for who takes it not for granted that a thing
naturally framed to tenderness, should act her own property, and give honor
as due desert to the husband? But in the man's giving honor to her, there is a
more virtuous and royal disposition, that is, an abatement of the right
invested in man, lest excess of right might prove excess of injury? and a
yielding of that tenderness and sympathy, out of mercy and love, which else
neither perhaps the merit of the wife would require, but to be sure the
surlines and roughness of the man would not easily contribute.

Nothing gained by Austerity.
when the dint thereof returns upon our selves? Is honor and respect lost upon
the wife, when it reflects back from her, upon her husband? Is it not well
deserved on Gods part, when we not only behold what graces he has put into the
wife, as Treasure into a vessel of earth: but also how little is got by the
contrary, when a rough husband too much yielding to that which is corrupt, does
turn edge thereby in his wife, and force her to that which seems to be most
disguized and against nature, that is, Wise folks willingly bear with fools.
Do we not willingly bear with fools, our selves being wise? And is it not
as meet, that we bear with the weak, we our selves being strong? what a
betraying, rather a forfeit of a Masculine (not to speak of a religious,)
spirit and a bewraying (not of a feminine, God his Commandment.
is it, when a woman shall be faint to be are with an husbands seelynesse and
fraylty, as the stronger with the weaker? what a dishonor is it to marriage?
Besides what an obligation does a religious husband stand in to his yokefellow,
for infinite many fruits of love and service to him in every kind? Not to
speak of that command of God which is above all, We owe it to Christians.
though she should fall short of the duty: as once a good husband said to an
undeserving wife, Blessed be God yet who has given me a wife who will do
this or that for me upon never so unkynd terms? But, much more, if she be
deserving at his hands, for all her tenderness in sickness and health, is it
much, if she receive due honor and respect from him? If thou owe her thine
own self again for them, is it much, if thou repay tender esteem and
prising of her? If thou oughtst to lay down thy life in some cases even for
thy Christian brother, rather then expose him by thine unfaythfulnesse, to
danger, how much more should thou expose thy self rather to the greatest
hazard, then betray her who is weak, and unable to bear? Remember the
president whom God sendes thee to, the Lord Jesus: As he loved his Church, and
gave himself for it to the death, that she might escape it, so oughtst thou
to redeem thy wife in case of such a danger, when thy bearing will laten the
blow from her. When the Lord Jesus was taken by the soldiers, If ye seek me
(says he) let these my chickens depart: Take not the damme on the neast with
her birds: Let these be free: let all the danger light upon my self. If then
this tenderness must extend to life it self, surely then well may this
tribute of an inferior rank be showed. But, I cease to discourse the point any
further.

Well then (will some kind husband say) wherein stands this respect and honor
which I owe to my wife? Wherein this honor and respectivenesse consists?
I should be loath to wrong her of ought, which she might plead, (through my
ignorance) or which my self (if I knew it) could beteame her? well (in hope
there shall be no love lost) and that thy wife will requite it, when as (in the
next point) she shall come to the like trial: I will do her and thee this
favor, here to lay out her Privilege, and thy duty. But first its not amiss
again to recognize breefly, that which I spoke of, the model and the Canon of
this Duty: which the Apostle lays down thus, Ephesians 5.
As Christ loved his Church. Before, he had said, He that loves his wife, The
true Model and role of tend^rnesse, is the tenderness of Christo his Church.
loves himself; But, knowing, that self is sometime an ill judge and crooked
rule: he amends it, by a better, even the Golden Rule of that honor and respect
of Christ toward his Church, which never fayles or exceedes the mediocrity.
What is the^ that indulgence and tenderness which thy self would either
wish or look for from Christ thy head? Teach thy self, thereby, thy office to
thy wife, (in the measure of thy Grace) and tender it to her. Do thou desire
always to be accepted of him, and find grace in his sight? Let thy wife find
the like from thee. Would thou have him do all thy works in thee and for
the? Show thou the like Grace to her, do thou likewise: require not the
uttermost service from her, but let her do all in the comfort of thy love and
acceptance. Would thou have him count all thy deeds, not according to strict
law and performance of full measure, but according to sincerity of endeavor? Do
thou also so esteem of hers, according to the will and affection whence they
proceed, though they fail never so in degree. Would thou have him to esteem
thee according to the better and not the worser part? So do thou interpret
her. Would thou have him save thee from sorrow? So protect thou her, and let
thy love be her banner. Would thou have him to feed, thee, and fight for
thee, to be thy Protector and Champion? Should he stave off thine Enemies, and
catch their wounds in his own side, which should else light on thee? Would
thou have him to stop the mouth of each dog from barking or biting thee, yea
even to keep each cold wynd from nipping and blasting thee? Even so, stand thou
between they wife and her harms, and cover her head in the storm and rain,
not only with thy cloak, but thy best protection, against any annoiance.
Would thou have Christ afflicted with thee in all thy troubles, to pity
thee, suffer with, and sustain thee, by his patience, courage, and long
suffering? So, let thy blood run in her veins, and thy marrow in her bones:
sustain her like wise by thy meeknes, and long-sufferance, she is also flesh
of thy flesh, and bone of thy bone. Do thou expect at last, that he should at
last redeem thee out of all thy troubles? Do thou also (as far as lies in
thee) seek rest for her from all hers: let no enemy of hers, encounter her
alone, but know he has a double enemy to fight against, noteasy to contest
with. Thine are hers, hers are thine; rejoice to see herrid of all, if God see
good, which way it seems best to himself to deliver her: mean time, be thou
active, passive in all with her. In a word, whatsoever thou would have Christ
do for thee, the same do for her, for this doubtless is to be conformed to
thine head, and to do the part of an honoring and respective husband to her.

These generals had need be branched out into some particulars: else perhaps,
Particulars of the husbands Tenderness.
it will not be easy for every one to conceive them. These therefore that
follow may serve. First, let this respect begin at her soul: procure to that,
the chief good, that it may fare well. The tender love of Christ stands in
this, that he gave himself for the Church; why? Not to make her such as she
her self would, Branch 1.
not to give her the full swinge and swaye of her own will; Tenderness to the
soul of the wife the first duty of the husband.
But, to wash her, to purge her, to sanctify her, as peculiar to himself,
having neither spot, nor wrinkle; So do thou: begin with this, and this shall
guide all the rest: Think not this to be thy tenderness to thy wife, to deal
by her as David by Adonija, whom his father would never from his youth, speak
a wry unto, that is, ask him, what do thou? But rather in this is thy
tenderness, if by any ways of God, allurements, yea mild and well seasoned
reproves (if need be) thou may be an instrument of her good. Its not
tenderness, but exceeding and degenerate softnes in an husband, that, because
his wife is well pleasing to him in some carriages, therefore he should rather
suffer her to go on in deep ignorance of God, and her self, and go the broad
way to perdition, rather then he would grieve her, or speak one word amiss:
especialy, to be so base and remiss, that, when he knows he might win her by
his loving tenderness, he should rather neglect her by his Carelessenes, No, if
thou be tender truly, her soul wilbee thy principal object, and thou will
present to her those tender mercies of Christ, those bowels of compassion in
him to the church: never linning till Christ has by his blood washed her soul
from the natural uncleannes of it, forgiven her, and taken away her guilt and
blemishes. If her face were stained with some spots, how studious would he be
to tell her of them, that she might wash them off? how much more that Christ
Jesus might call her his Hephziba and Beulah: Isa. 62. 4.
his dove, fair one, and pretiously beloved? that he might behold her washed
and clean (as the sheep coming from the rivers to shearing) from her scurffe,
accepted of God, and (as much as flesh may be) without spot or wrinckle,
either of guilt, or apparent corruption: a vessel purged and prepared for every
good work. No work so honorable as this to make thy wife a vessel of honor to
God first, and then for marriage. Thus Paul describes that tenderness of
Christ: and yet, that washing and rinsing of her, must cost some hardness,
save that Mercy and love oversweetens it: and then it will seem pleasant.
Nourish and cherish and hate not thy own flesh, in this first respect, 2. Sam.
13. 3.
as Nathans lamb, in the true bosom of the Lord Jesus, the tenderest husband
that ever was.

Secondly, Branch. 2.
this thy Respect and Tenderness must reach to her person, Tenderness to the
Person of the Wife necessary.
and that in her Safeguard and Defense. Thy wife walks (under God) in the
shadow of thy wings and protection. Thou must be as a veil to her eye, to
keep off the dint of all lust and strange desires, as Abimelec told Sara of
Abraham: As the eyelid is made by nature a tender filme and very mooveable, and
watchful to the body of the eye, that no dust or mote fall into it to offend
it; so must the tender husband come between the least aspersion of reproach
and infamy cast upon the name of his wife wrongfully: And when thou art dead,
let her rest safe in the Ark of Gods protection, by the benefit of thy living
prayers, before sent up for In protection.
to the throne of grace, that God would be an husband to the widow; that so
even when dead, yet thou may speak. But, while thou art living, thou must
be as a wall of fire to her; let every one that has ill will to thy wife,
(as many will have, even for that which deserves honor) know that they malign
thy self; Nay, herein love her better then thy self that thou wiltright some
wrongs done to her, which perhaps (if done to thy self) thou would pass by
more strongly: Let her Name and honor, be as sweet ointment unto thee. The
husband who shall content himself in the general love of his wife, being yet
supinely negligent of her repute, In her repute.
within doors or without to disesteeme her, without sharp rebuke: or to be
known himself to see any of her weaknesses, with the least contempt, is not
worthy to have the comfort of her virtues, or the love of a religious
companion. The like I say of her body, both in health and sickness. Whatsoever
diet, or warmth or shelter, In her bodily in firmities.
or abroad, by thy self or others, thou see necessary for the preserving her
in health and vigor, from the least assault, or impression, that neglect not:
keep away wether, distemper, disease for her: be as a Physician according to
the discretion thou have, and the knowledge of her bodylie frame and
infirmities, in the absence of better help; Prevent all dangers from her which
possibly might assault her; and what soever sorrow or sad news, ill and sudden
accidents thou deemest, would disquiet her, turn them away if it be within
thy power, or keep them from her notice, lest they might overthrow her spirit,
or weaken her body. Yea, as our Lord Jesus did, so do thou, if a danger must
needs ceaze upon thee, provide it may not come to her knowledge, or as little
amaze and affright her, as may be. In her diseasednesse, neglect no means,
which either thy counsel, purse, or friends can help her to: advise for
soul, physic for body, attendance and nursery to person: Grudge not that
she lies upon thine hand, But, as thou would have (I say not her, but)
Christ himself to tender thee in thine, so do thou her, in her defects. 2.
King. 4. 21.
Let it appear to her clearly that her life is precious, and her loss would
be uncomfortable. If the poor Shunamite, seeing her child dead, locked it up in
the Chamber, hasting to the Prophet: proventing al pudder to her husband,
aldisquiet in the family, by taking it upon her self; how much more should the
husbands wisdom and tenderness reach to thy wife, that no Sickness or Sorrow
might ever ceaze upon her more deeply, then needs must, if thou can keep it
off.

Say not with unnatural Nabals, Unnatural husbands language.
Thou tookest her not for sickness, but for health: for better not for worser:
knowing that good wives in their health, lay up desert enough to be tendered in
their sickness: The wife is not for nothing said to be under her husbands
covert. Do thou as Boaz did to poor Ruth, upon the cold floor, and in the
chill night* spread the lap of thy garment over thy beloved; Ruth. 3. 9.
I charge you (says the husband in the Canticles) O ye danghters of
Jerusalem, Cant. 2. 7.
watch by my spouse, sit by her and keep silence, wake her not until she
please. Good reason she have more rest the^ thou, let thy waking be her
security, gaster her not up too early: sluggish women will not, good ones
should not be waked too soon. She is always in grief, and that for thee, and
by thy means; what day week, month is she free through the year, breeding,
bearing, nursing, watching her babes, both sick that they might be well,
Description of the husbands tenderness to the person of his wife.
and well, lest they be sick: If she lose a child by the hand of God, or by
casualty, her tender heart takes more thought for it in a day, then thy manly
spirit can in a month: the sorrow of all lies upon her: She had need to be
eased of all that is easeable, because she cannot be eased of the rest. We
read in the fable that the male sparrow once accused the female, for that she
did not so much take pains in building of their nest, as he did: But she
replied, There was cause why she should plead exemption: She had all the
trouble of laying the eggs, of sitting, of hatching and feeding them, and
therefore some reason she should be spared in the building of the nest, let him
do that, who did nothing else, and she prevailed. And shall not she, who
alleges for her self, with more reason? Get her asleep if thou can, but
awake her not, till she please. And, tell me, shall not her ease be thine? Or
can thou have any, if she want? Little do thou think of those gripings,
checks and pangs wherewith she walks, when as thou go through stitch with
thy matters with an hardy courage. If all wives be not so, I speak not so much
in their behalf: but the good wife is usually so; yield her this fruit of
tenderness, its all the milk thou give. Yea, let thy hollow cheeks, pale
face, sad heart, be as a Calender, in which others may read thy wives
infirmities, their number, their measure, and how long they have continued. I
speak not Rhetorique unto thee, Two extremes of Tenderns.
but Divinity: As and husband must loath uxoriousnesse, Viz, Roughnes
Vxoriousnes.
so, much more Stoicall insensiblenes, remembering who it is, who says, Err in
her love: let thy soul know no other objects while she lives, let them be
abhorred. And when she has breathed out her last, yea, even when she lies by
the walls, yea in the mouldes, yet then is there another honor due to her
memory, when she is not: even this, that thy hand be upon thy side for the
loss of another rib, thy sweet companion; Mourn not for her without hope,
like an heathen, (she is not lost, but sent before) but yet as Abraham, as
Jacob, so mourn thou, even till the days thereof be accomplished: Be not as
the horse, as the Fruit Creature, without sense of her worth, thy loss: Else
some beasts will exceed thee in tenderness: thou art worse; a very block: And
for this second particular so much.

Thirdly, Branch 3.
show this respect in thine ingenuity and openheartednesse. Its an unkindnesse
alone, Ingenuity and openheartednesse.
not to show love: to walk overloosely, dismally, and darkely toward her. Thou
can do no more to a stranger. I say not that she is capable of all secrets.
There is a season for all things. And had Samson been as wise at last, as at
first to conceal his secrets, he had done wisely. But there is a golden mean:
conceal not thy self too far from her. Impart whatsoever is meet, let her
know the difficulty of thy business, if the knowing it may either afford her
content, or thy self advise. Let not strangers tell her of thy follies, to
cause her to suspect thy respectivenesse: Josh. 6. 8.
She is but simple, that may not speak a word in season: Rams horns, and
empty pitchers have conquered cities, 2. Sam. 20. 18.
and armies: and the woman that called herself but a weak one, once delivered
Abel: and why may not thy wives help thee! Its no wrong to thee, for her to
desire a voice in thine affairs, who must be sure to smart in thy bad
success. There is (I say again) a discretion in ordering this business.
Neither to impart those things wherein grief would overcome acceptance; nor to
conceal such, as wherein by thy imparting them, either her counsel might
overweigh her grief, or at least, prevent the suddenness of a disaster. Its a
thing wherein the weak sex counts it self graced and satisfied, not to be
made a stranger to those things, which love and ingenuity would and should
impart. As for uttering any thing, which is needless, or might be a snare to
her indiscretion and weakness, its better kept a way. But, darkness breeds
ill blood of jealousy, hard thoughts, a striving for the like darkness of
behavior, or to seek other bosoms to lay her complaints in, when thou little
think of it, and perhaps worse then all these. She is laid in thy bosom by
God, that thy bosom thoughts, hopes, fears, desires, together with thy self,
might lie in hers: So for this third.

Fourthly, Branch 4.
comfort her in all her heaviness, and first for her soul and spirit; Comfort
in heaviness another piece of tenderness.
The anguish thereof, and the wound of conscience, is of all other, most
intolerable. Yea, though it be only some outward grief, yet if pierce the
spirit with any more then common distemper, it exceeds any sickness and empair
of the body. Show thy self more tender to her therein, then in all common
troubles. If thine own wisdom, faith or experience will not serve to heal
it, seek out, and enquire after an Interpreter, one of a thousand, who may
rightly and duly weigh her estate, both the causes and effects thereof. Vpbrayde
her not with her zeal, which were to aggravate her disease. Fret not at her
going to Sermons; lay not the falt upon that, wishing thou had never seen
her eyes, quarrel not at thy lot, accuse not providence, because thou see her
in perplexities: perhaps God has begun with her, that he might end with thee.
But however, lin not using all means, till God have spoken a word in season to
her very soul, saying, Deliver her, I have accepted a Ransom: till her flesh
come again, as a little childs, and she recover peace. Happy art thou, Job.
33 24.
if God shall so make thee an instrument of her good that thy self also may
be drawn nearer to God by affliction, then prosperity could ever have brought
thee. And, put case that the distemper ceaze only upon her natural spirit, as
by Melancholy, through passions of fear, and sorrowful objects working upon
her mind, or through some hereditary pronesse of constitution to mopishnes and
discontent; by all which God cuts her short of wonted liberties, calling and
service of marriage, and thee from former contens of life: be not in these
disquiet and impatient: Nothing has befallen thee which is not according to
man: use the best means of restoring her spirit again, by Physic, counsel,
wise secrecy, custody, tenderness of regard: and so wait with patience, till
God restore her, or what ever be the issue, charge not God foolishly.

Fifthly spare her weak body, Branch. 5.
from all toil and labor of wordly employment exceeding her ability: Spare her
from excess of toil*
yea although she should be too much addicted thereto, and hardly held
therefrom, yet dissuade her: She is thine own flesh: thou would think him
unmerifull, who should break thy back with too great a burden. So do thou,
and ease her. If nurserie exceed her strength, and yet her conscience will
scarce permit her to lay aside and free her self of so natural, so religious
a work, yet tell her, God loves mercy better then sacrifice: If God deny her
ability, or breasts, grudge not at God, at the charge of nursery abroad, to
ease her at home. If she have not strength to be both wife and servant, let the
latter yield to the former, redeem the comfort of a wife, with the charge of a
servant. Provide her that assistance and attendance, which is meet for one, who
chooses to be, to do all in one for thy sake, had not God denied her. Strong
shoulders are meeter for household business, then decayed ones: and releeve her
with seasonable tenderness, for there is a show of respect which appears all
at once, when the vitalls are spent: a penny cost in due time, will do more good
to a sinking house, then a pound, when it is ready to fall down. So she shall
hold out the longer with cheerfulness in marriage duties: He that should do
otherwise, were not worthy to have a free horse, much less a willing wife.

Sixthly, Branch 6.
yield her the indulgence of all decent and sober refreshings, Indugence in all
lawful refreshings.
and recreations of body and spirit, which may ease the tediousness of body
and spirit, through the uncessant and never ceasing yoke of family businesses.
Remember how often, her faithful biding by it at home, has enlarged thee to
travail abroad. Thy ground and soil, if it want her alternall revivings, and
rests, cannot last long: whether by allowing her the converse of her friends
for bodily, or of the ordinances (when she is straightened) both changes of aires
may do well, and help both body and spirit. At other times, some other
releases of labor, such as occasion offers in many kinds, either nearer hand,
or further off, eft one, eft another, may cause her to return to that service
with alacrity, which else she should attend with an unequal mind.

Seventhly, Branch 7.
connive and conceal with wisdom those invincible defects, Connivance at
invincible infirmities.
ignorances, yea though it be uncapablenesse, which either the frailty of her
sex, or the special frame of her mind, or perhaps the inexperience of one
untrained in some business, may produce. A Camel cannot go through a needles
eye. According to her strength, so is she: look for no deed, beyond power, nor
wisdom above capacity. Oppose unto her invincible blemishes, her incomparable
graces: which no art, nor nature can attain; no flesh and blood can teach.
Satisfy not, neither pardon thy self, till that honor which thine heart can
freely give her for that which is precious in her, make thee impotent to
disparage her for her infirmities. Though perhaps others would note them, yet
its thy best art to hide them. Remember this, perhaps, even thy wives defects
may make for thy contents. If she were a more complete woman, she would find
more work to be humble; and in some of her abilities, might perhaps give thee
occasion of less patience. Here now is the trial of giving honor to the
weaker sex; because God will have it so. Dissemble what thou can not amend:
Ofttimes, her sudden treafnes, or impatience come not so much from her self,
as from oppression of mind, faintness of spirits and much employment.
Encounter her not with like passion, lest God show thee thy folly, ere thou
die, in another more unwelcome glass. Many a foolish husband has a froward
wife, because he will have one, has not the wit to have any other, any better.
What an honor were it to thy wisdom to bear with her confessed weakness? as
going backward with Shem and Japhet to cover that from the eyes of others,
which thy self art sorry to see. Perhaps some other of her qualities have not
a little graced thee, cover therefore the rest with the mantle of thy wisdom.
And so perhaps, with that painter, by veiling a blemish in the face, which he
was loath to express, thou shall add to her beauty, to thy own honor. When
her passion shall be over, and her error past, she will more dislike her self
through thy concealing of her wants, then thou can dislike her for betraying
thy credit.

Eighthly, Branch 8.
commend her virtues, without foolish flattery: not as a man, Commend her
virtues.
who therefore marks them, that he might praise them, (which is baseness) but
therefore commends them, because tenderness will not suffer thee to smoother
them. Grace can no more be coverd, then a blemish: both are as oil in the
hand, Inward gifts, outward parts and performances cannot but delight thy mind,
and senses: let both in their season, for her encouragement, break out from
thee, by a tender, loving acknowledgement. But as for upbrayding her before
others, or traducing her in the family by open reproves, odious comparisons,
unsavory imputations; abhor it. Knowing that all thine and her skill, is
little enough to keep her from contempt of inferiors: but if thy contempt be
added to the rest, it will make a breach, not to be repaired.

Ninthly, Branch 9.
allow her all needful, and some complementall charges and supplies: Supply of
necessaries and comfortable supports.
let her have for comfort, as well as necessity; considering how soon thy
self would repine, if God should straiten thee with the only necessaries,
but not the overplus of Marriage comforts. Its not only thankfulness to her,
but to God also, to rejoice in seeing thy wife walk and demean her self
cheerfully, in the use of that liberal allowance, which thy tender heart can
beteame her. I do not here bid thee put the bridle out of thine own hand,
yielding to her the stroke of choosing to her self the fashions, attire,
company, and expenses, which she pleases, such as suit not with thy place, and
sober content: (for alas! what poor thank should a woman give her huband, for
making her as proud as the worst) but I say, furnish her with such conveniences
as thine own judgment and respect thinks meet for her, and her sober mind and
desires affect. M. Calvin, a man otherwise of some what a retired and austere
disposition, yet being married, perceived that there be in women, (as he
prettily calls them) many tolerable follies and toyish vanities, which a tender
husband should do better to oversee then deny her. He that will needs wring his
nose too hard, will draw forth blood, and there is a geniall liberty to be
permitted to a woman's liberties, companies, merriments, toies and trinkets,
which the gravity of an husband should shame it self in peering into. Many
trifles they affect for their children (of that sex especially) many
complements about themselves, some rearedges to bestow upon the meetings and
lawful merriments of their kind, which it were a poor thing for an husband
curiously to enquire after: and his wisdom to be trust her with, as knowing,
she knows how to use them. (Perhaps the French exceeded the English in
these) But let this be the rule, Better in such a case, wherein the spirit of a
wife takes content, to be rather indulgent, then too strict: so long as the
maine Canon of Modesty, thrift and deceny, be not transgressed.

Lastly, Branch. 10.
since rules in such cases can hardly be given, therefore as the moral
Philosopher biddes, Respectivenesse must be the Counselor.
do in this case, as Tenderness and a Respective heart would advize. That's ever
the best counselor. Remember, thou seekst the honor of thy Marriage.
Wherefore, whatseover else is meet, loving, merciful, forbearing and tender,
as thou expectest praise, honor, or requital, ensue it: give no way to strict,
unbeteaming, violent ways. He that handles a Crystal or Venice glass
harshly, deserves to repent him for breaking that, which slight and
tenderness might have saved. Precedencie in sitting is granted by an national
custom to the sex of women: by which, all other privileges of giving honor
and content to the weaker vessel, are intimated. A wise resigning up to her
custody of things within, jewels, plate, and things of price, trusting her
fidelity, and ascribing to her wisdom the overseeing and menaging of
domestical affairs incident to huswifery, without narrow, suspicious inquiry
after the expense thereof, not distrusting skill or faythfulnes: and so in like
cases. And thus much be said in particular, for the answer to this question,
wherein this Tenderness consists.

Terror to all base Nabals, and a description of such.
save that its true which Solomon speaks, Bray a fool in a mortar, with a
pestill, yet, will not his folly depart from him. So I say, a churlish, a
froward, loutish and ungeniall husband, will either see no error at all, in
himself, by all that I have said, or hold his own nevertheless. I have seen an
evil under the sun, Nabal married to an Abigail, a tender sweet companion,
worthy of such an husband as her husband himself is unworthie to wait upon:
yet so far is he from returning to her like for like, that rather the grace
of the wife is a continual upbrayding to the husbands currishnes; occasioning
to his implacable spirit so much the more insolency, to insult over her, and to
tread her under his feet. What sand is so weighty to the shoulders, as such a
fool to a worthy wife? well worthy after her death and loss, to meet with
lettuce fit for his lips, I mean with such a contentions Zippora, as might
outshoote such a Devil in his own bow. What one grace of a thousand does such
a block behold in his virtuous wife? when did he ever feel himself burn if
she were weak? What affliction of body or mind could he ever find in his
heart to condole for his wife? What one kid gave he at any time to her out of
his flock, or twelve pence out of his purse, to make merry withal? what one
lap of his garment did he ever spread over her! Or what, I say not blast of
cold wind, but sad cross did he ever keep in tenderness from her? himself
being both a nipping East wind to blast her hopes, and a perpetual dropping,
to dwell with? Many an infamy and blot has he suffered to light upon her head,
though he needed not, himself being the upshot of all! Oh the snares which
such unnatural wretches bring upon innocent women, but ease them of none! Oh
the narrow eye they carry over them, watching them as the Cat the mouse, from
either good Sermon hearing, loving friends, frequenting abroad, or Christian
company at home! Stripping their bodies of good clothes, their purses of money,
their hearts of delight, their souls of grace (as much as in them lies,) if
grace were not past their reach to rob them of! what one penny ever gave they
them for good use? If they knew of any, who should endure the tempest of their
violence, they will see their own turns served to the uttermost: But as for
easing them of their burdens or being drawn to resign up their lusts and
loose liberties, to join with their wives, in the burden of house government:
those Israelitish bondmen were as good complain to Pharao, or those other
subjects to R^hoboam, as they to their husbands, for their tale of brick
should be but multiplied, and their fingers should prove heavier the^ their
loins before. I might be endless: But, I blame only the faulty, for I know
(and God forbid else) all are not alike. Many, not only irreligious, Counsel
to the w^ongd party.
but merely civil ignorant ones, have had tender, melting hearts to their
wyves; so unnatural wretches, are all unmercifull, respectlesse husbands in
this kind, even bred upon the rocks, and nursed up by Tygres, yea fiendes in
the likeness of men. Let them alone: but O thou woman that fear God,
persist nevertheless in thy uprightness! serve God not man, and vile man for
Gods sake? do not repent thee of thy goodness, give thy work to God, and
still heap up hot coals upon the head of the Barbarous, if they melt not they
shall burn to hell, and bear a while, he that comes, will come, and not tarry,
causing thy light to break out as the morning and thy Righteousness as the
noone day. He shall plead the cause of the despised wife, and quit her of her
adversary: bringing his wickedness upon his own pate. And of this third
several duty of giving honor, and so of all the three, thus much be spoken.

CHAP. XIII.
Treates of the personal duties of the wife. Ana first of her Subjection to
her husband.

IT is high time now, The special duties of the wife to the husband three
having dispatched the husbands duties, to proceed to the next branch in which
the preserving of Matrimonial Honor consists, to wit, the peculiar duties of
the wife to the husband. Else I know husbands would tax me for partiality:
and I confess, as I have no cause to conceal the privileges of the good wife
from her husband, so neither must I withhold from her the knowledge of her
offices and services toward him. The first and maine whereof, comprehending all
the rest, is subjection to her husband: the second is helpfulnes: and the third
Gracefulnes. By her subjection she answers his understanding: By her
helpfulnesse, she equals his providence, by her gracefulness she supplies his
tender respectivenesse: in a word, she answers him (as face to face in water)
so she in marriage service with all correspondence. Else how shall the
relation hold firm and entire? The first Duty of the wife, Subjection.
First then of the first; This duty then of subjection, is the woman's great and
chief commandment; The first Duty of the wife, Subjection.
and as St. James says, he that can rule his tongne, is a perfect man, and can
rule his whole conversation: so, she who has learned to be subject (for as
Paul Philip. 4. is not ashamed to say of that grace of contentation, that he
had learned it, so may the woman say of this) is a perfect woman. That, which
was wont to be said of prounciation in Rhetorique, and of humility, in
Divinity, that may be said of Subjection in this business of the wife, Its
breadth, and length, it fills up all, yea, its all in all the whole duty of the
woman: all other stick at this, grant this, and all other follow of
themselves. Now then, this great duty of subjection, (so much cavild at by the
Rebellious, and so much honored by the dutiful and loyal wife) must have a
good foundation, both for the convincement of the bad, and for the
encouragement of the good. The warrant then of this duty stands not in the
opinion, choice or will of man, or flesh, no nor of nations, because the world
will have it so. (for there is a world of women to gainsay as well as of men to
allege it.) But it is a firm law, from the will of the first ordeyner;
because God will have it so. That very strict Imperial Edict of Ahashuerosh,
that, Ester. 1. 24.
Every man should bear rule in his own house, proceeded in a sort from a
discontent with Vashti, and a desire to be revenged for the dishonor offered
Ahashuerosh her husband, and for prevention of the like, for time to come: But
if all this stream of Authority had not met with another more strong one of
divine Ordinance, alas it had been no more terror to the sex of women, then
swords and spears to the Whales skin, even as stubble and rotten wood. No, no,
its an instinct put into the spirit of the woman, principling and convincing
her understanding, will and affections, viz. The great God of heaven and earth
will have it so.

and frame ended, then was she thought of. Secondly, she was not made of the
same matter with the man equally; but she was made and framed of the man, by a
rib taken from the man, and being formed by God, into a woman, was brought unto
the man. And thirdly, she was made for the ma^s use and benefit, 1 Cor. 11. 8.
9.
as a meet helper, when no other creature besides her was not able to do it.
Three weighty reasons and grounds of the woman's subjection to the man: and
that, from the purpose of the Creator; who else might have done otherwise, that
is, yielded to the woman coequall beginning, samenesse of generation, or
relation of usefulness: For, he might have made her without any such
precedence of matter, without any dependancie upon him, and equally for her
good, as for his. All show a kind of ennobling the man's sex, and denying of
her to him, as the head, and more excellent: not that the man might upbraid
her, but that she might in all these, read her lesson of subjection. For
otherwise, its also true, that neither the man without the woman, nor she
without him, Mal. 2. 15.
but both in the Lord. And doubtless as Malachi speaks, herein is wisdom,
for God was full of spirit; and has left nothing after him, to be bettered by
our invention.

From the penalty of disobedience.
being now in a fallen condition. For this is sure, that (notwithstanding all I
have said) yet the woman being so created by God in the integrity of nature had
a most divine honor and partnership of his image, put upon her in her
creation: yea such as (without prejudice of those three respects) might have
held full and sweet correspondence with her husband. But, her sin still
augmented her inequality, and brought her lower and lower in her prerogative.
For, since she would take upon her as a woman without respect to the order,
dependence, and use of her creation, to enterprise so sad a business, as to
jangle and demurre with the devil about so weighty a point as her husbands
freehold, and of her own brain to lay him and it under foot, without the
least parlee and consent of his: Obeying Satan before him, nay God himself; so
that, till she had put all beyond question, and past amendment, and eaten, she
brought not the fruit to him to eat, and so, became a devil to tempt him to
eat; therefore the Lord strips her of this robe of her honor, Genesis 3. 16.
accursing her with this penalty, that her appetite should be to her husband.
Which law is not as the law of the Medes and Persians, (for that must alter)
but a Law which bred a Law, an instinct of unequal inferiority, and smote into
the heart of Eve, a falling from her station, and subjected her to her husband.
This appetite here spoken of, not only meaning her weakness of desire for
some special end, as benevolence, respect, or the like; but the total
subduing of the bent of her spirit to him, not thinking her subsisting enough
without him, but a confessed yielding up of her insufficient self (and that
after a penal sort) to depend wholly upon him. A just hand of God upon her,
that she who would be Paramount as a Lady above him, in sinning: should be
fetched down to a spirit of fear and subjection under him whom she had so
basely dishonored.

And from this root comes that of the Apostle, roofes.
that the woman sinned, 1 Timothy 2. 13.
and not the man, (meaning, not first) she was in the transgression: and what
then? Therefore let her be subject. 1 Cor. 11. 7.
Read the place. The man is the glory of God, but the woman of the man:
Therefore she ought to have power on her head, in token of subjection and
modesty. And again, I permit not the woman to usurp authority over the man,
but to be in subjection. 1 Pet. 3. 1.
And Saint Peter, let the women be subject to their own husbands, lest the
word be evil spoken of. Ephesians. 5. 21.
And to the Ephesians. Wives submit your selves to your husbands, as to your
head: for he is as Christ to the Church, the savior of his body. 1 Pet. 3. 5.
6.
So Peter adds, As those holy women formerly were in subjection to their
husbands: Sara by name to Abraham, calling him Lord: By all these arguments
these two Apostles (not the one who was married, but the other unmarried) do
conclude the woman under subjection; that without grudging, she might resign
up her self (under God) to her husband. And doubtless, if it be asked, by
what commandment this subjection of the wife stands in force, its doubtless
by the virtue of that fifth, which imposes obedience upon inferiors to their
superiors (although in diverse degrees) with an implied penalty of disobedience.
And questionless, if look no further, then the sin and curse it self, in
the letter thereof, there is no less threatened to the woman then such a
subjection to the man, as had pain and irking annexed unto it. Even as that
other penalty also annexed unto it, of breeding and travail, extendes to a
mortal pain and pinch, as considered in it self. In it self I say: for
notwithstanding all this, the Lord our merciful and indulgent father, in and
through the mediation of Christ, has in great favor assuaged and released the
rigor and measure of these penalties, I have else where treated hereof. If the
common favor of Christ our Redeemer, Ca^ech. in part. 1. and 3. article.
had not eased whole mankind from the excess of all sorts of penalties, what
were the life of man, but desolation and misery? But in mere pity to the
accursed creature, weltring under her punishment, as a man wounded lies
wallowing in his blood, the Lord Jesus has brought things to a Reconcilement,
both in heaven and earth. So, that the heavens hear the earth, Colos. 1. ^0.
the earth the creatures, and they man: who else should subsist. Hos. 2. 21. 2^.
If the Ox, Horse, Ass, and other beasts, which by man's sin are of
subjects, turned rebels against him, and bereft him of his Lordship, were not
again retracted to some useful subjection, who should come near them? But now
their rebellion to us is moderated, and a shadow of our Lordship over them
restored, not to the godly only, but wholly to the nature of man: He has
recollected all things both in heaven and earth by Christ.
by whose industry, the wildest are tamed. I say, by a common fruit of the
superabounding merit of Christ. Such is the release of this penalty of women:
for though for their abusing the end of their creation by hurting and
destroying him, whose helpers they were created to be; the Lord abased them to
a low degree of inferiority to the man, Col. 1. 20.
and that justly: yet through Christ, this extremity is dispensed with, and
reduced to a tolerable mediocrity for the ease of womankind. So that God can
make that a royal and honorable equality (after a sort) which sin made a yoke
of tedious slavery. But to the Elect its far better; Notwithstanding, through
bearing of Children, she shall be saved, if she continue in faith, holiness, and
modesty: that is, her curse becomes a blessed occasion of salvation. So in this
point of subjection: it be comes an wholesome mean to humble the soul under
the mighty hand of God, and the guilt of her nature, and so to drive her to
Christ. And not so alone, but is a continual holder down of her soul under
subjection to God, in the course of her conversation. And both make her in this
religious awe and subjection to her husband, so much the more precious in the
eye of God, and all that know her. Lo a penalty made an ornament, very highly
esteemed of God. And as for those women, who fear not God, Pet 3. 4.
yet this indulgence of providence, if it be not a mean to break their
hearts, and to seek further to get a part in Christ's peculiar redemption of
the Elect: it shall be (doubtless) a double aggravating of their condemnation.

Hereby she preserves the honor of her marriage.
by being subject to her husband, appears by this, that by subjections she
preserves the honor of her marriage in the integrity thereof. She is called the
crown of her husband. The Crown Royal we know, is a rich thing, and richly
beset: all to honor a true King, when its set upon his head in his coronation,
before all the people. But a woman made of subjection, is of a far more
precious frame and metal then a Crown, or any thing which goes to it: and
being set upon the head of her husband, honoreth him, not only in the day of
his marriage, but all his life long, in the eyes of all that behold her. No
crown glads the heart of a King, so as she makes glad the heart of her
husband. He is her King and Lord, though he should want this Crown; for its
not a wives rebellion, which can divest him of his authority, and honor, in
point of right: he may he a poor pittyed King, for lack of this Crown, but
in right, he is a King nevertheless: having his Crown detained by violence
from him, and woe to them that deteyne the Crown from the natural Prince:
exposing the person of so sacred an one (whom God has made honorable) to
reproach and dishonor; So here. God will revenge it, and make her that has
kept it back, to rue it, and to pay full deerly for her presumption. But when
this Crown is added to the head of a lawful King, then is his honor made up
to the full; and such honor is a wife subject to her husband. Not as a Crown
above but upon his head: her honor is not in being a Crown aloft, but upon and
for the husband; She is no Crown of her self, but in respect of him whom she
honors: receving back as much honor from that head which she Crowns, as she
affoards unto it. Neither, is the honor of such a marriage between themsel.
alone, (for honor is rather in the power of the honorer, then the honored) but
also it reaches to many others; Ruth. 3. 11.
we see it in Ruth married to B^az. All the children of my people, knows thee
to be a virtuous woman, and him an happy husband in her, praying for them (as
indeed it fell out) that they might do well in Ephratha, and be famous in
Bethlem. How can a marriage between an understanding head and a subject wife,
choose but be honorable? who can smoother the honor of such Couples, or judge
whether of the two, is more succesfull in either? or who wishes not, it were
his own case, or the case of any whom he loves, to be married to a wife so
qualified? And well they may; for as it is rare to meet with such couples, so,
the Commodity which they procure each to other, exceedes all commendation. All
this considered, a woman should be much too blame to desert her duty in this
case, and to lay the honor of her Marriage in the dust.

What is then this subjection, Subjection what it is?
and wherein stands it? For the former I say its such a convincement of spirit
in the woman touching the equity of Gods ordinance, (and her Penalty in
special:) as causes, both a falling down of heart in humility to God, and
her husband; and in her conversation to acknowledge and practice all such
reverence, as be comes her head. By this description, it may appear, in what
particulars this subjection stands: to wit, chiefly in the spirit of the wife,
Subjection twofold.
and nextly in her demeanure, The former is that same, whereof St. Peter speaks
of. 1. Pet. 3 4.
The meeknes of the hidden man of the heart, of an incorrupt and quiet spirit,
which with God is much set by. He means an inward principle of subjection of
Of the spirit.
which is first given up to God, purged of self and Pride, (the seed of
unsubjection) and then to the husband, for his sake. Although a woman have all
outward accomplishments this way, yet, if her outward subjection begins before
her inward (as many women's does) it will vanish at last, as a lamp for lack
of oil. No framing of a woman, by most exquisite education, outward forming of
the body to delicate behavior and semblance of subjection, can compass this,
no more then an Ape can attain the qualification of Reason. No artificial
respectivenesse of the eye, the courtesy of body, the silence or composure of
the tongue, or the like, can secure an husband of subjection, except all these
be acted from an heart of subjection, through the conscience of the duty. But,
if the principle be sound, and an heart fearing God, awed by a command, issuing
from Christ his love and a willing mind, not from necessity, credit, or
restreint (which will go far, and make a great show) then is this duty well
planted, and will endure. What is all that Mi^olls bewitching love to David,
(which forced him to send for her long after her separation) to that one
baseness, 2. Sam. 6. 20.
That she despised him in her heart? The woman then, must set up her husband
there, and shrine him in the secret of her heart; and then, all her external
subjection will flow sweetly, fully, constantly, without grudging, and sit
comely as a garment fit for the body.

Husbands though but meanlye parted, deserve subjection by the Ordinance.
he puts this burden of subjection upon no woman, who takes not the yoke of
marriage upon her self; which the Lord does force upon none, but allows each
woman, to be her own Refuser, and to choose for her self (if she can) such a
man, as she can yield subjection unto, for the excellency of Gods image which
she beholdes in him. And there is no more then needs, in this caution, to
prevent that base and carnal disdain, which else might arise in her heart,
against her husband, to wit, when she shall meet with an object of dishonor,
and find little to provoke due respect toward him: I say, the Lord, who
knows, that the spirit that is in man lusts after envy and scorn, would have
this disease prevented to the uttermost, that so subjection might seem not to
come from necessity, but from free will. But yet, still I say, if a woman will
balke such a command, and, either out of a present humor, or out of a carnal
conceit (at first) that she can lead and rule a simple man at her pleasure
(which after she finds an harder Theme then she wist) shall snare her self
with such an husband as she cannot deem worthy of the honor of her heart: in
this case, I will wonder that she would snare her self with such a one: but
being married to her, I will press upon her, the like duty of subjection, as if
he were the most complete husband of a thousand: like (I say) for kind,
although not for measure. For, tell me, poor woman, who thus cavillest, what
is it, which God has aimed at in this Ordinance? at thine own ends, or his
own? and thy husbands? Art thou, so simple, as to imagine, when God has
imposed a yoke upon thee, to tame thy Rebellion; that he will (at thy instance)
turn it to a Contentment of thy selflove? what singular thing do thou in
submitting thy self to excellencies and parts in an husband? Is it not for thy
self! And who shall find out such an husband for thee, whom thou may not
except against, as defective in some kind or other? Know then, that God has
ordained subjection to an husband, as an husband, b^e he what he may (he is
such an one as thou have though fit) and therefore one whom God has thought fit
to receive thy subjection. If he have but indifferent parts, and abilities, and
not many men's gifts united in one, then consider, he has but the defects of
one. And who art thou, O woman, have thou the perfections of many women?
Therefore look upon thine own defects, and thy husbands will be overseene. Count
thine own parts but ordinary, and thine husbands will be tolerable. Enlarge
his a little, and diminish thine own, and so thou shall meet in the half way,
and make some equality. But howsoever, God has set thee in place of
subjection, howsoever: either to a man of worth, for his desert, or to a man
worthless, for conscience sake, and for the sake of him who has subjected
thee. If thou obey for a Command sake, there is thank, or if not, then for
necessity sake, and woe to thee in both respects, if thou be not subject. A
Minister is commanded to preach and watch for Conscience sake, not for living,
or by Respects: A subject has not that name for that he obeyes those Laws of
his Prince which please him, but because his Prince Commandes, except he will
endure the penalties annexed: If then either a Minister, or Subject will look
at God, whether gain or no gain, whether good Prince or unjust, and obey, or
else woe to both: then look also thou woman at the bare command of God;
dispense not thou where God does not. The same power that is in Commanding all
to obey their Parents, forbidding all to worship Idols, to commit sacrilege;
that same I say charge all wives be subject, forbids them Rebellion.

Now yet I will not deny, Exceptions in some cases against the woman's
subjection.
but there is an exception to some kind of subjection. If thy husband stretch
his authority beyond Gods bounds then and only then, thou art permitted to
restrain thy subjection in that kind, with yielding Vashti, (as I take it)
that she offered not her beauty and person, In case of unlawful commands.
to a vainglorious ostentation before the multitude; for, that might have been
a snare to her as it was to others: but that she subjected not her self so
far, as was meet, to go to the King, and to acknowledge his Sovereignty in
all lawful, meet things, to give a modest reason of her refusal, promising to
submit her self in all other. Even so here. Though the wife be tied, both in
all direct charges of God, and in all other which repugne not, I mean in
things pure, comely, and good report; yet if her husband will try her in the
contrary, she must in all humble modesty refuse, and say, whether it be meet
herein to obey God or you, judge ye. So that, herein there must be wise
caution used, that neither she streighten her husbands power, nor yet enlarge
her husbands tyranny, of her obedience to it. For (to digress a little) not
only the husband may press the subjection of a wife in things arbitrary, but
even in the omission of some commands. An example of both will clear it. Two
fashions of Apparel are offered to a woman, equally decent and modest: she
inclines to the one, he to the other. It were his discresion herein, to yield
to her, the choice of her fashion: howbeit, if he will hearken to no reason,
but urge upon her his fashion, she must be obedient and deny her own, for
conscience sake. Again, put case the husband requires his wife at such a time,
to forbear the hearing of a good sermon, and to hear another at another
congregation; or to forfeit the hearing of the word, upon such a Sabbath day,
although in general he oppose neither hearing the word, nor keeping a Sabbath
in the same kind and place; although its true, that the charge of hearing and
keeping of Sabbaths, is Gods: yet because these Commands tie not to every time
and place, and may in some cases be omitted, therefore, let the husband look
to himself how safely he restreines her of her liberty (lest God curse his
usurpation) or otherwise; and stand to his own adventures; But since such a
restreint may possibly be lawful, (though he harshly conceal it from her)
therefore she must not contest nor hold chat with her husband, why he
requires it, but yield for the present, and afterward return to her liberty
again. But if hereby, he encroach further, to forbid her the Ordinances, she
must disobey. Only in a case of particular abstinence, she must think thus,
my husband sees cause of such a charge, I will not descant, if he should
offend, yet I will not rebel, so long as any good construction may be made of
it, but meekly stoop and obey. I might be endless in instances; I deny not,
but many a good wife mismatcht and put upon sundry extremities, is to be
pitied and praid for: but not therefore to release her self from subjection
and break all cords in sunder, because unpleasing to the flesh. 1. Pet. 3^. 2.
As St. Peter tells them, They must strive for so blameless a conversation,
and subjection toward their husbands, though rude and churlish, as may cause
them to magnify the truth of God, and justify their Obedience, and wish
themselves in like condition with them, in the day of their visitation. Look
up therefore to God and yield to many unwelcome services (if they be not
directly sinful, but abhorring to have the least fellowship with them, as he
said, Into their counsel, let not my soul come.) If thou be pressed to any
base thing, which conscience starts at, as to keep loose company, to wear
garish apparel, to traduce the godly, or what else soever indecent and impure;
forfeit the pleasing of thy husband on earth, and please a better in heaven:
who will bring forth his doves from the crocky pots, and that with honor, when
they commit themselves to him, in their innocence. Whereas flattering and
temporising women, who in show will hold with God, but yet keep quarter with
ungodly husbands for their own ends; shall at last be detected for hypocrites
and rewarded with reproach and dishonor.

I shall insist in the next Chapter in another Exception, Further qualification
of the woman's Subjection.
which allows a woman such a liberty in Gods matters with her husband, as to
prompt and occasion unto him Christian speech, good counsel, with modesty and
in season: for In prompting the husband with Religions Counsel.
as I have noted: But to go on: She is not so to be subject as if in all
cases, she ought alike to stand or fall at the bar and prerogative of her
husbands will: Some cases fall out between them of greater difficulty, doubt
and danger, In cases of difficulty and hazard.
In such cases, (if they be but arbitrary) as removal from present dwelling,
upon great charge and loss, or, to places of ill health, ill neighbors, with
loss of Gospel; long voyages by sea, to remote Plantations, or in the sudden
change of Trades, or venturing of a stock upon some new project, lending out,
or borrowing of great sums, avoiding of debts, settling of estate, providing for
children, costly buildings, great enterteynments beyond ability, or such like
instances, wherein the woman is like to share as deep in the sorrow, if not
more, then the husband; reason good she should share in the advice, and not be
compelled to obey perforce. An husband perhaps in such cases may necessitate
his wife to yield, but he does her the more wrong, for God in such cases leaves
her to her freedom. Could a Martyr in Queen Marles days compel his wife to
suffer in the same cause with himself, although both were of the same
judgment? No: for her Conscience was her own, and his measure might (happily)
exceed hers, many degrees, both in knowledge, faith and Courage. It has bine
by some very strangely determined, that if an husband be resolved upon a remote
plantation, the wife must follow, by hand and by head. But, under correction
its neither so nor so: headship is not given the husband to destroy, but to
help and edifye. She has a judgment to inform as well as he, and must see
her grounds clear as well as he: she must have leisure and time, to deliberate
of it, as well as he, till she be resolved, that she may do that in faith,
which she does. Therefore (with modesty and discretion) its allowed her to
deliberate, to allege her reasons by her self, or by her friends, submitting
them to the judgment of wiser then her self, and as she shall be cast and
adjudged, so to deny her self and obey either way. And when Gods will is made
known, either he or she, are to rest, without further distemper each with
other? Mean while, the husband is not to insult, threaten, and domineer over
her as a Lord, who had his wives will captived to his own: neither to desert
and depart from her in a desperate way, but by all loving ways tenderly to
draw her, and convince her by the strength of reason, and the bowels of
compassion. God speaks not now by lively voice from heaven, in such doubtful
cases, as once he pleased to do in times past. Sara thereby knew Gods will in
her jorne is too and fro, as well as Abraham, and had his promise of
protection, as well as he: therefore her Subjection ties not women in like
adventures, now, as then. But now doubtful cases must be scanned and
determined, according to the nearest that Scripture, or reason import: that so,
her obedience may rather flow from consent, then compulsion.

Thus, Branch 2d
I have said more of the first branch, then I had intended to do; Subjection
of practice wherein three particulars.
not so properly, as necessarily, to spare my self a labor in another place:
let me now sound retreat to my readers thoughts: and come to the second branch
of my division, that is, the subjection of the woman's practice. Which, although
it be but a shadow without the other; yet that must not pass for the whole
payment of the debt; for, who may not say, their heart is good this way, when
as their conversation shows it not? But a subject heart appears best, when a
woman says little of that which is within, but leaves to them to judge, who
hear and see. The 1.
And this practice of the woman's subjection, In matters of God.
must appear in these three particulars, in matters of Gods worship, in matter
of the world, and, in her marriage converse. For the first, she is with an
awful and single eye, and honoring heart, to behold in her husband the gifts
of God; As namely, that ability which God has given him, to be in Gods steed
unto her, in all things pertaining unto her soul; as also to menage the
services of God with her, either in the family or apart; as to read the word
judiciously, to catechize and inform in the grounds of religion distinctly; to
admonish the family, against the sins, and exhort inferiors to the duties of
their order and condition, wife, children, so jorners, servants. I say, she
ought so to observe Gods image in these gifts of her husband, as to feel no
spirit in her to despise him, to gain say, to compare, or censure them. Yea
though her own gifts be more then ordinary, yet to conceal and suppress them
in this kind, (except her husband shall at any time desire to be partaker
thereof in private for his spiritual quickening, and then with all humble self
denial to impart her self with him:) and enjoy them to her self in
subjection. Note it, that the Apost. when he is in the midst of his urging this
duty to the wife, then does he touch this point, saying, let the woman learn
in silence; 1 Timothy 2. 11. ^2.
and, I suffer not the woman to teach, or usurp authority over the man, but to
be in silence. You must note, that in this age, the spirit of God was powered
upon all flesh, so that women as well as men had great gifts of understanding
and prophecy vouchsafed them: which (no doubt) might put them forward to
express themselves before their husbands. Now, if such women, then how much
more must ordinary women be subject in this kind to their husbands? She ought
indeed to encourage her husband cordially, to proceed in such a course, showing
it to be the joy of her heart, when she sees him to set up God in the family:
She is to remove to the uttermost, all lets and stops, which might offend; as
unseasonable attendance upon business (which commonly offers it self most,
when it least should, also the complaints and trouble of children: with other
occasions of the family, as that might by her wise prevention, be cast upon
other times as well. I say, she is wisely to procure the opportunities of
worship; but he is to menage and perform them: She being within doors, must
take it her part to prepare and forelay the seasons, for her husbands better
ease and content in these duties: a wise houswife will be always beforehand
in her business, that so the house may be empty, swept, and garnished for God
to come in. She must abhor (as I said before) to justle and shoulder out the
solemn matters of God, yea or to cut them off by the middle, and contract
them, by the colorable pretenses of other matters. So tedious in her dressing
and trimming, that a pin must not be awry, so sluggish and lateward in her
uprising, so curious about her childrens addressment, so tedious in her
manifold proclamations and turnagaines, that it would yrke any Christian
husband to suspend Gods work upon such fooleries, and yet either it must be
so, or worse. No no, account these things bables in respect of the other; that
one thing necessary: learn to outgrow all such old customs as base, in Gods
esteem. The devil will never suffer a woman to want bones to throw in the way
of duty, if he spy a mind ready to admit them. If any part must needs lose,
let the worlds part be the loser. Subjection to the husbands, will first begin
with God: setting him up, and affording him his due. Nothing will more
encourage a religious husband, to be strict and careful in his way, then when
he sees his wives zeal in this kind: nor more dismay and enfeeble him, then
the slacknes and indifferency of the wife, that she is so far from forgetting
herself for God, that she will not afford him that regard which lies within her
place to express.

But what then (will some say) is the wife then wholly out off from the
officiating of worship, How far the wife may undertake the service of God in
her family.
in her family? I answer, she has a great work of it, to seek God constantly
by her self apart, at times meet: and, if her family consist of her own sex,
she may like Ester with her own maids, in the absence of her husband pray
with, and teach her family, and children, besides the private respect she owes
the^ out of the act of worship. But (will some say) is she so straighted, that
in no respects she may perform these duties in the presence of the other sex
in the family? or of her own husband, as the case may require? Yet with
Cautions.
although the case be more difficult, yet I doubt not, but she may also before
him, as well as the other, perform these duties, if these cautions be
observed; For why? serving of God in it self can hinder no subjection, but
rather further it, in a lowly and humble spirit, privy to her own infirmities,
Caution. 1.
only mark how? First she may attempt it, in case of utter insufficiency of
parts in her husband, I mean knowledge and understanding. 2. In case of
invincible defects of expression and utterance in the husband. 3. And much
more, when there is an utter loosenes and carelesnes in him to look after it,
much more a vicious contempt, so that (as far as lies in him) the work were
like to be quite cashierd out of the family: 4. If her husband do allow her
with all cheerfulness, or request her to undertake it, for Conscience, or if
not, yet be content to give way to it upon reasonable terms, of connivence:
yea, though not so equal terms, but with some lowering, and with breakings out
now and then, or upbraydings of her; yet not forbidding and opposing, she must
rather undergo some brunts for God and her family, and bear them as meekly as
she can, then under such pretense to abandon the duty. But, if he be willing,
and able, though perhaps unqualified for grace, she must not encroach upon the
office and disauthorise her husband: but by all sweet means accepting that
which is, and covering defects, to draw him forward to that which is not, in
token of an heart truly subject. 5. If she (beside, her ableness to perform
it) be also, qualified with singular modesty, and humility, awe and reverence,
both of God and his Angels, and her husband, whose presence should always be
solemn, and balance her spirit to soberness and subjection. Women denied
this liberty must be pacient.


If God deny her that interest and Respect from her husband which she
deserves, so that he slights her parts, despises her graces, and will by no
means endure her Service in this kind; the effect is sad, to behold God cast
out, and the family deserted, and exposed to ruin: But her remedy is, rather
to mourn in secret, and by other wisdom to seek the relief of this burden,
then to break her bounds. On the other side, if these respects be observed
she may. For the Lord ties none so strictly, that either one must do it, to
wit, the Mr. of the family, or none. No no: the Lord knows, that oftentimes he
of all other parts of the household, least beseemes his place; and besides, if
the head of the family himself, even when he is able, yet for reasons may
resign up his liberty to another, a stranger, who probably may honor God and
profit the family more, then himself, (in which case to stick to his
Privilege were a sign of pride and singularity) much more may he (in the case
of usual worship, when the very substance of worship lies at the stake)
authorize the woman to perform it. For, although he dishonor his headship; yet
his ponance is just, for his sin. Better it is, that he be shent and shamed for
his sin, (especialy himself revenging it,) then that God should be barred of
his due; by both his and her withdrawing the duty, and the whole Family wanting
the ordinances. It was Gods Law, that, if the Servant would willingly abase
himself to slaverie, his ear was to be boared: but his Mr. Exodus 21. 6.
was not to lose his advantage. And the wife is as well the Mother, as the man,
the father of the family: She is a part of the householdes head, as the
husband is the wives head. Now if she be free from the dominion of her head,
then is she the whole head of the family, and returns to her privilege: so
that without, check or control she may (being fitted) discharge the duty:
But if being a widow, (never used to it before) she find this new task to be
over tedious to her, then ought she to resign it to another, as (if she be
of ability,) to one maintained for that purpose, if not, yet to such a servant,
as both for parts and humbleness may be meet to take it upon him, without
offense: for else the remedy may prove worse then the disease, through his
contempt. It being to conteyne a thing within bounds, when its out of his
Element. As touching the husbands absence (as I have said) she may doubtless
more safely perform it with the servants, then in his presence. If it should
be alleged, There be in the family, such, as whom she may resign up the duty
unto, both for dexterity and humility, I say little to that for the present, so
long as her gifts be competent she is the Governesse, they inferiors, and the
sad effects in bold servants of this course, does not a little disaffect me:
yet I will not deny a lawfulness altogether for her to resign it, if she be
advised to it by them that give counsel, as well as by her self. But, if such
helps fail, what should hinder her from the cheerful and free undertaking of
it? And so much for this.

Now secondly, 2. Branch
she must also be subject to him, in matter of his worldly estate. Of practice.
She is not to stand upon stiff terms, and (as we say) upon her pantofles
with her husband, Matter of the world.
touching her equality of right to his estate, and goods, with himself: For
here, the question is not so much of right, as Employment: Now she must not
distract the common stock from her husbands hand, into her own, to occupy it
at pleasure, to dispense the Charges of the family, as she listes, or pursing
of the Commodity, as well as he: which were to seek a Quartermastership with
him; and to seek a double, not the single wealth of the family jointly. No.
She must know, God is the God of order, both in Church and family: she must
hold no Quarter with her husband in this business. Two heads in a family
confound all: her Providence must be under his, and be directed by his;
running in the same stream with it, tending to one Common wealth, purse, and
gain, not her own, but his and the families. I say, while the husband is
himself: for else, he being disabled either by age, or infirmities, or some
sudden distemper by Gods hand, which suffer it not: she is to set to her
shoulders to the uttermost, rather then the state of the family be perverted. I
add also, if he being a man carried by his in ordinate lusts, Limitations of
subjection in worldly things.
and feeling himself to suffer his estate to decay, shall permit her to look
into the affairs of the family, (there being no child nor other to be
trusted) she may lawfully undertake the Charge, rather then commit the ship to
wind and wether. Moreover, I doubt not but the wife, so far as her skill
reaches, being endued with a gift and skill in some mystery, which her
husband is not, especially the husband being idle and slothful to improove
his own stock, or perhaps having embesseled it already: may be occupied in
that calling of hers: provided that she be comptable to her husband, whose
stock she occupies: For, Prove. 31.
if she occupy a borrowed stock, she is praiseworthie for her industry, but
comptable only to her creditors: in such a case, if she share with him so
far as to keep him from beggary, its enough, for she aims at the support of
her family. One thing more I add, if the husband shall allow his wife to
undertrade with him, that is, for her own vailes and content to use some petty
stock for her own advantage: so there be no prejudice hereby done to her
other Huswifery in family, nor to her husbands stock, she may lawfully accept
the kindness, provided that in the defect of her own skill, she be guided by
his counsel, to prevent damage, and improve her gains to the right ends,
not the maynteyning of sin in her self, or hers. But, setting these and the
like limitations aside, she must be wholly in all her course for him, and his
ends; Expecting from his wisdom and love, such recompense as is meet, for
her honest support and mayntenance. I am not ignorant, that many husbands some
for sloth, others to avoid their wives discontents, supposing to allay their
fierceness of spirit by resigning their right, others, under other color of
Ministerial, or burdensome service, have, and do, put the bridle of
providence, into their wyves hand: (and that, when as none of the former
cautions do require it:) but whether this swerving from the Ordinance, has not
weakened their Headship, animated the woman to an excess ofspirits, causing
that nature which of it self is too forward, to wax more insolent; let
experience judge. Inferiority is ready to despise authority, if occasioned:
sin is out of measure unbridled: easilier held off from the occasion, then
restreyned under the occasion. Besides, that the husbands hand is cut off, as
it were by the wives Mortmayne (for many wives peark up to meddle with the
estate, suspecting that their husbands are more ready to do good then
themselves) from that bounty, which both his place and will would admit.

May the woman of her self give to Charitable uses?
to give to good and charitable uses, of her own accord? that is, without the
husbands consent? Martyrs days (I doubt no^) that many women borrowed leave
from heaven to do good, Ordinarily she may not. But in some cases she may.
who if they had staid while they had leave on earth must have waited, till
their eyes in their head had fallen out, for ought their husbands would have
yielded to. They dispensed therefore with their unwillingnesse in such case, and
dispatched the duty. I leave the consideration of such necessities, to be judged
of by the wise, especially in these our sad times wherein the afflictions of In
public miseries of the Church
eat and sleep, and stretch themselves upon their beds, not thinking of the
affliction of Joseph: so they fare well what is it to them though the Church
perish? But to return, for an ordinary course, she may not put forth her hand
to give of her husbands estate of her own head, except, first, she demand her
husbands consent, which I speak because some women might have from their
husbands, if they would ask, but either distrust of their own loss, or
scorn to give it, except they may give it with an high hand of their own,
hinders them. A foul shame, for a Christian wife who should rejoice in Gods
way, and at the largenes of good doing, and honoring of God.

Decision of the doubt.
if none of these cases can be safely alleged, it is unlawful for the woman
to put forth her hand to her husbands estate, under any color whatsoever. As,
that their estate is (God be thanked) great enough to admit it: that they have
small charge, and do little by Consent, any way: or, that her husband is
extremely base, or that her dowry was more then ordinary; or, if she were
again to compact with him, she would not do, as she has done; or, because
her huswifery is great, she deserves the liberty by her great gains, or
savings: or, her comparing her lot with other women less deserving, then she:
or that she is hardly handled, or she is to be pitied and pardoned, if (the
need of the poor so requiring) she exceed the rule a little, for the greatness
of the good which might so be done. I say not what God may in mercy do in
point of covering the goodness of her meaning, if she do it ignorantly, but
what right she has to do it, before God. Let such women as enjoy their liberty
bless God, and beware lest they stumble at the stumbling block of their
iniquity: As for the rest, lest them mourn under their cross, but not ease
themselves of subjection: knowing that their desies are accepted of God, for
the deed, in greater inabilities then these, and therefore resting in their
integrity, till God grant them greater liberty. The worst is, many women whine
and ask Questions, while they live under Covert of their husbands; who yet,
when the Lord has set them free, to try all that is in their hearts, have
neither Questions nor Answers to make, but are bound with chains of their
own, from all good doing: showing that neither credit nor Conscience was their
motive. And doubtless, where there is a sound heart to God, few women are so
straited by their husbands, but they might by one mean or other win them to
some indifferency. But for that which I spoke touching the necessity of times,
and danger of not affording of help to the distressed, and the like cases of
extraordinary nature, its sufficient that the Church has been compeld to
greater aberrations then this, as appears by Act. 1. and the act of Abigail to
David, contrary to Nabals resolution, may sufficiently evince. And so much for
this second branch.

3. Branch Her subj^ction in marriage converse manifold.
Thirdly, this subjection, extendes to the whole conversation of the wife in
Marriage whereof I say this, That she is to be generally attendant to this
duty, and to have it in her eye daily, as if written upon her frontless and
fringes of garments, rising up, walking, and lying down with her continually,
whether God do bless, or cross them, in their goings out, and commings in:
she must carry it written on her forehead, Subjection to my husband. In
particular, take these. First in point of her attire, In Attire.
The common tenent of gallants and proud dames is this, that whatsoever fashion
is up, be it never so costly, above her mean, troublesome, be it change, upon
change, have it she will: The fashion she holds is above her husbands power,
she must not be laughed at for her worn suit, because she is not in the new
cut. St. Peter could not speak of subjection, but he must needs speak of this:
as, for the sake whereof, women otherwise subject, yet for their wills sake, will
venture a joint, and forfeit subjection. In a case of meetnes of fashion what
husband so little delights in his wife, as not to allow her that which is
indifferent? But hereupon, to run before the husband, even to that which is
uncomely and excessive, either for fashion, or cost, I must tell women, it
suits not with subjection. 1. Pet. 3. 3.
Not in gold (says he) broydred attire, playting of the hair; but in
meekness of the spirit: as if subjection were much a seen, and most forfeited
in this case. I will not run into the determining of fashions, suitable to each
degree: Let the soberest in every state, determine it, and I had rather it
should be the husband should determine, then she: Love will be bountiful enough;
and self love may not be trusted. But oh! the excess of this sex, both in
married women, and Virgins (yea the wyves of those who should be Patterns to
the world) is so woeful in these days, and so hideous, that it does not only
help to make a world of Banque-rupts, but to fill the world with curiosity and
Vanity! wherefore, let this be taken for a rule, Never was there curious,
proud, and fashionable woman, who could stoop to be subject; by their
ruffling, flinging, flaring, curling, dresses, tirs, and forelocks, you shall
know them. Custom (as the world thinks) takes away offense: But by that rule,
nothing should be evil in it self, but in opinion. But a subject wife puts
little odds between such opinion, and realnes: For she is known by her
Modesty, as abhorring to receive luster from rags, but affording honor to her
attire, by her sober subjection, be her attire costly or mean.

In gesture and composition of body.
and blushing, arguing her submission and privity to her weakness. There must
be a law, that is an authority of Grace upon her lips, ordering her silence and
speech, with a sweet mediocrity, but even as a thread going through a cloth, so
a gift passing through the whole man. That which is within, cannot lie hid:
for, grace will make the face to shine; Her very blush, is Ivy-bush sufficient,
showing what is within. And on the other side lofty carriage, proud, and
disdainful garb unsavory tongue, multitude of words, boldness of forehead,
stoutnesse of stomach, loud cry (as Solomon terms it) bewray to all men, what
a plague her husband nourishes in his bosom. All the honor of such an husband,
if it be not turned to contempt, while he is present; yet is turned to pity,
when he is absent. Such a demeanure, more befitting some mannish Amazon, or
insulting Curtezan, then a woman of true subjection to her husband.

Domestical Converse must be subject.
toward her husbands direct person. Familiarity and daily converse will breed
no contempt in a subject wife: she is not so, by compulsion, but by freedom,
therefore she utters it, equally and constantly. She fears not that imputation
justly cast upon women, who abroad will seem very respective, good wife, lets
have more of it at home! Sara, called her husband Lord, meaning usually, it was
not her holiday livery, but her workday phrase. Not he called her his Lady,
(and yet it were well if such flattery could prevail with some Donna's:) but
she him Lord: This Reverence and subjection causes the wife to behold her
duty, in the countenance, projects, virtue and way of the husband (as I noted
before of consent.) His service to God, government to children, following of
business, is the glass, which represents her: for either she sees all good, if
she have skill to discern, or believes it in love, if she have none. But as
for a controlling spirit before her head, she hates it as impious, degenerate.
To takeupon her, to be the household Oracle, and Idol, Romans 12.
to overtop all, to be under none, is too hot and heavy for her handling, she
loathes it as hell, to use Paul's word, Matt. 11. 30.
for her heart, will, tongue, self and all are not so much bound, as bind
themselves to the peace: only the yoke is easy, and the burden light.

She must he subject abroad
as coming from one, not ashamed of that, which is her true honor. Many women
are in their extremes: Some, although in private, they will not offend, yet,
coming into company, think it a kind of slavery, to profess the like honor,
and esteem of their husbands. And indeed, to flatter the husband, were but a
base office for the wife, wheresoever, at home, or abroad, arguing, that an
husband loves it. Such cup, such cover; But, wisdom keeps a mean, and
abhorres as much to sooth and gloze, as to despise and neglect; That due
reverence and subjection, which a good wife shows abroad, she shows at home,
and contraily: She is loath to have her hand out. Others are in another vein,
and, although at home, they make no bones, to taunt, and take up their
husbands, yet abroad, are quite other women, so sollemne and subject, as if the
Anointed of the Lord were before her, as if she were the subjectest, and he
the happiest living. But as he said to the Crab-fish, when she was stretched
out in length being dead, but before crooked, so thou should have lyved: so
to these, This should be always, and then safe. But this extreme as the
other, a subject woman avoydes without pain; for their inward principle
levells all, saying, Whatsoever is according to God must be equal.

In her tongue and Company Subject.
one, whose heels are over her neighbors thresholde, and, being there, is in
her Element, licentions, and talkative, is no subject wife. Solomon calls her
Turbulent, that is selfewilled and unsubject. And well he might: for surely no
husband can affect a woman of such a trade, it is his bane, except himself in
his kind be a Rover and wandering Planet, ou^ of his orb, and then better one
house troubled with them, then two. But whether he be so or not, whether he
like it, or dislike it, he must bear it: She will have her vagaries, her
tongue is her own, and she upon her own bottom, and therefore not redeemd
with a price, stands and falls to her self, and what Lord shall control her?
And sure as she cost little, so she is worth as little, and may go for naught.
Alas she is sick of home! There she sits, louring and powting, has no list to
say much: But lest you should think she has lost her tongue, she does but
keep it, till place and time please her, and there she will be as much on the
other side! She is like that sidler, which was long a getting to pull out his
fiddle, but when it was once out, there could be no putting it up, any more.
Surely, as some women are feign to fetch their husbands from their Ale-bench to
shame them; so had some husbands need fetch their wives from their Gossips, and
yet, its a question whether they were better to have left them where they were,
lest they make a Tragedy at home, of a Comedy abroad; A modest wife is of
another spirit; Home has her heart: She has work enough within doors, and
dwells most within her self. She like the snaile, carries her house always
upon her back. She builds it with her hands, and bears it up by her
shoulders; never going abroad, but then when it were an offense to keep at
home. And, being abroad, the Law of grace is upon her lips; her words, are as
the leaves of the tree of life, healing: and as the fruit thereof, life it
self, and restorative. Out of the abundance of the heart, the tongue
speaks: not so much, as well: not so long, as sweetly, seasonably; and when
she holds her peace, its with her, as with a beautiful face, wherein you know
not whether the white or red be fairer, for both are beauty: So you cannot
tell, whether speech or silence do most commend her; but both do, for she
knows both when to speak, and when to hold her peace.

Lastly, ^. In point of Nur^ery.
Subjection in a wife reaches to benevolence: for when the Lord set her
appetite toward her husband, he planted subjection in her spirit; as also to
nursery of her infants, except God deny her ability and strength. No sooner
does the infant which she has warmed in her womb, and given life to, in her
womb, behold the light, but it whimpers, and cries for the breast, as if it
said, I am thine, nurse me; Look upon thy breasts, whether dry, or milch; if
there be milk its mine, and given thee (my dear mother) to be a nurse, my
nurse: The subject wife stops not her ear to this call: She seeks not breasts
in her husbands purse, but in her own bosom; and, according to her power,
takes her babe, Ruth. 4. 16.
embraces and nurseth it. Ruth gave her son Obed the breasts, though Naomi
dry-nursed it. When Pharaohs daughter had found poor Moses crying, whom sent
she for to nurse it, rather whom sent God to it? oh the mother! to note Gods
verdict. No water, like the own: no nurse to the mother. As David of Goliahs
sword, so here, its best of all. None so tender, so chary, so careful.
Physicians for a fee, will be suborned to be at the request of an unaturall
mother, and to pronounce against the full breasts, and the milk thereof: to
advise the husband, if you love your wife, your child, let her not nurse:
Another Physician advises the contrary, if you love your health, nurse your
child: surely, if the skale hang so even, if you please, let God cast it, there
being no apparent let. A subject wife, will bewray it this way, as soon as
any: and the Apostle joins it with subjection, in the place so often recited.
She will do it, if not for her husbands sake who lies in her bosom, yet for
that infants sake which lay in her womb? Though she have not such wages as
Moses his mother had for her pains, yet she has assurance of such pay from a
better Master, who promises her she shall be saved, that she will do it for
his sake, though for neither husbands, nor childs: That fee and wages, next to
faith and love, will cause her to look upon her babe even in the worst pickle
and hand that belongs to it, with so sweet and smiling a countenance, that she
would not for the pain of many nursings, forfeit it. Oh thou coy woman, what
art thou? richer then Sarah, weaker then Rabel, better then Rcbecca, holier
then Hanna? then all those matrons of old, who were honorable in this point of
subjection? whose daughter would thou choose to be? theirs who nurse not, or
these? And by these six branches mentioned, judge oh ye women of the rest: No
one duty of many (I know) is less practiced: Consider what has been said and
God give you understanding: love made Jacob count all wethers welcome for
Rahcl: Let her think all service sweet for him. Thus much for answer to the
question, wherein subjection consists. Now to the uses breefly to finish
withal.

Admonition. Shun Rebel. Iron.
and pierce any such;) to all sad creatures, unsubject souls in this kind, to
shun all Rebellion against their husbands. If thou will hearken to thy corrupt
will, it will tell thee another tale, and quash all my former counsel. Oh, it
will say, thou may win the goal, and get the upper hand of thine husband
for ever, if thou be damish and imperious: It will make him to seek thee, not
thou him. But subjection will say, that I get this way in the Hundredth, I shall
lose in the Shire: If I lose the better end of the staff with God, what get I
by getting it of a poor husband? Its possible I may cone short too, even of
that; but sure I am, never was an unsubject woman powerful, or prevailing with
God. Therefore her voice is, a body thou have given me, its written in thy
book, I shall do thy will, oh God! Lo here I am, speak, for thy servant
hears, and cavills not, and my soul answers, thy face will I seek, I will
be subject. Exodus 4. 25.
A Zippora will throw the foreskin at her husband, the meekest man upon earth.
Micol will say to the holiest man living, even in the act of his zeal, what a
fool was my husband this day? But a subject one will say, I opened not my
mouth because thou bidst so: or if I have, once have I spoken, but I will say
no more, but will lay mine hand upon my mouth, If I have erred, teach me,
pardon me! By crookedness of spirit, of tongue, I shall lose honor, gain
reproach, yea hell too: but, by subjection, as I shall honor mine head, so
shall he me! yea my yielding is the way to honor me more, then all my
recoylings, and to win that Authority in his heart, which no usurping can
ever obtain? As is the shadow, such is the husbands heart, and love: fall
down upon it, and thou may overtake it, if thou pursue it, it flees further
off; So, if thou contest and with strong hand resist thy head, he will be as a
Lion, his courage will not stoop: But if thou shall speak kindly to him and win
him by subjection, thou have conquered him for ever. God has appointed him to
be over thee: in seeking to be above him, thou provokest him to Tyranny, and to
challenge his right, but can not subdue him by rebellion. Remember, thy sex
is crazy, ever since Eve sinned, sin is out of measure sinful, through the
Law, and Satan's incensing, loathes subjection, affects impotency; But oh, thou
woman that fear God, let that liberty with thine husband, which thy
subjection has purchased, satisfy thine heart, seek no more, lest in
catching at the shadow, thou lose the Substance. Let thy Birth, thy Education,
estate, endowments, exceed his never so much; yet the Ordinance of God has
subjected thee to thine husband with all thy perfections. There is but one Law
for all wives, both poor and rich, mean and great, wise and foolish, one and
other, that is to be subject. No Pop^, no Prince, much less the law of thine
own lust ca^ exempt thee: there were wives in Paul's time, who because they
believed, 1. Cor 7 10.
could have shaken off their husbands, that were Infidells. But Paul meets them
a going, and turns them back with force upon their allegiance and subjection:
saying, Except the separation begin from the unbeleeving party, do not thou who
beleevest, desert the other: As he said, Set meat before them, and break
their hearts, but smite them not: so here, win them by all holy means, but
oppose not. If subjection be due to heathens, much more to Christians.

Exhortation of wyves to subjection.
she is subject to her head: both in heart, she gives it to him; in eye, she
delights in his ways, she is so to him in all matters, both of God, and the
world, she is so in her gesture, speech, abroad, at home, in all. Be thou so,
and prosper. Without this, none of thy inward abilities, outward gifts, nay
the Graces of God, will be a Crown to thy husband: except it be a Crown of
thorns. No, if thou were never so huswifelike, fruitful in children, rich in
gold or jewels, except thou add Subjection, all will not amount to the making
of a crown, except this make it, nothing else will. All thy lewels may
bestollen out of thy box, thy money out of thy purse, clothes out of thy
wardrobe, thy back may be stripped of thy costly attire, thy beauty blasted with
age, thy body weakened with sickness, sorrow: thy name fullyed with infamy, thy
parts may decay: But thy subjection no man shall rob thee of, nor thine
husband of that Crown: If thou preserve that in thy Cabinet as thy pearl, it
shall supply and restore all those losses, in the esteem of thy husband. This
will be the Trench of thy castle, all darts will fall short of it, as
impregnable. Subjection is the true Mother of love, Sister of consent, root of
all other Matrimonial service, helpfulnes in the next chapter, gracefulness
in the next to that shall attend it, as precious handmaydes. And she her self
in the middle shall walk honorably, and honor marriage above all other
virtues. Be it never so meanly thought, spoken of by the Damish and Imperious
women of the world, yet she will say, If this be to be vile, I will be more
vile: yea those that would disdain me yet shall be compelled to honor me, and
say, Many daughters have done well, but subjection has surmounted them all.
And so much touching the first personal virtue of the woman, to wit,
subjection, be spoken.

CHAP. XIIII.
Which proceeds on to the second peculiar duty of the wife, that is
Helpfulnesse.

I Now proceed to the second special duty of the wife, The second special
Duty of the wife helpfulnesse.
which is helpfulnesse. The former gift tells her, that she must not be
Rebellious: This second tells her, what she should be, helpful, useful. Its
not enough for her to be Negatively good, not harsh, not rude: But she must be
positively good, she must also be helpful. This comprizes all her true
useful service to her husband: and in special answers his Providence. She
must within doors, lay all her helpfulnesse to his providence without doors:
that by both, the whole frame without and within may be supported. She was made
subject by sin: But helpful by creation, which yeeldes a choice prerogative to
this virtue, being of integrity, not from corruption. Of all the other
Creatures, says Moses, the Lord found not any one, Genesis 2. 18.
which might be a meet match for Adam; wherefore he said, It is not meet the
man should be alone, I will make him a meet helper: and so, he formed her of a
rib out of his side, while he slept. In the former Chapter then we treated of a
peaceable, in this we must speak of a Profitable, and in the next of an
Amiable companion.

Wherein stands this virtue of helpfulnesse.
In 3 Branches
Touching which, although I have noted before, that she is to be subject to
her husband in matters of God; In Gods matters.
yet this muzzles not the mouth of a good wife in helpful concurrence, but
only in bold usurpation. She may (without empeach to that,) cast in her mites
into Gods treasury, and be an helpful furtherer of his soul to all
spiritual welfare and content in knowing, believing, and obeying, so it be
done with humility and meeknes. Although she is to ask her husband at home in
respect of any usurpation, yet (as the case may require) she may, nay, she
must, in due season, being demanded, reflect back the fruit of that mercy
which the Lord has showed, and the cost he has vouchsafed her for the good of
her husband. And, as the Lord has gifted and graced many women above some men,
especially with holy affections: so, I know not, why he should do it else, (for
he was wise, and is not superfluous in needless things) save that, as a Pearl
shining through a Crystal glass, so her excellency shining through her
weakness of sex, might show the Glory of the workman. And how? In being only
looked upon or wondered at, as a bird of fine colors? No: but, in real
Communicating of that Grace which she has, to her husband especially, as also
to others in private communion of Saints as occasion is offered.

One thingh here comes to my mind; Impudency of usurping women in matters of
God, eaxed.
I would not be taken to patronage the pride and licentious impudency of women,
who having shaken off the bridle of all subjection to their husbands, take upon
them to expound the Scriptures, in private assemblyes, and to be the mouth of
God to both Sexes. Not blushing one whit to undertake by the 4. or 5. hours
together, yea whole days (if their vainglorious humor masked under the colors
of humility may be suffered) to interpret the word: applying it according to
their way by Reproof, comfort, Admonition, and the like, as if Shee-preachers
were come abroad into the world. And yet these are such as dare oppose and
confute the doctrine of faith, and selfdeniall, taught by the most able
Ministers of Christ: and tell their disciples that there is another way to be
walled in, and that is the way of the spirit which must give such a light to
the soul, and such an assurance of salvation, as may rid us at once of all
doubtings, fears and unbeleefe, and translate us into a confident and secure
persuasion of the love of Christ, without making question. As for any ways,
means, trialls, motives, signs whereby the soul may come to be settled about
the work of Regeneration, these they abhor, as savouring of the flesh, and
not of the spirit of light and inward evidence. In this kind they undertake
most boldly to expound the Scriptures, and to resist all who are of another
mind: Nor allow I others, who defending themselves by the practice of the
primitive Church, when the extraordinary gifts of Prophecy flourished, whereby
the mooving of the spirit, men to men, and women to women, did exprefle and
utter their thoughts and judgments concerning divine truths, which gift then
was very necessary for the breeding up of Ministers, Doctors, and Proctors,
they wanting other helps of furniture and supply: but appertains not unto us,
who both have ordinary ways of supply, and want that special presence of the
spirit which that first Church had, to guide and govern the use of such gifts,
orderly and peaceably to such ends as they belonged, without schism and
confusion.

God indeed promised by Joel to the Church of the Gospel, Joel 2. 28.
that he would pour out his pirit without difference to all ages, sexes,
states of people: But not in such a disorder, that a woman should dare in
public, or in a private place after a public manner to declare truths of
Religion: usurping over men, and encroaching upon the laws of Christ. Such
immodesties and insolences of women, not able to contain themselves within
bounds of silence and subjection, I am so far from warranting, that I here
openly defy them as ungrounded, and ungodly: and I cannot but wonder, that any
should be itching after novelties, as being present in such assemblies,
especially themselves being public persons, and such as ought to discern
better between things that differ. Admonition, to all usurping women in
matters of God.
To both I say, beware lest your pride of gifts, carrying you beyond the bounds
of your private condition, and your curiosity in favoring and being led away
with such vizored ostentation of graces, do not wrap you within in the sin
of Nadab and Abihu, and Vzza, and Vzzia who under pretext of holiness,
adventured to profane hallowed things: nay, of Cora and his accomplices, who
murmured against Moses and Aaron opposing their calling and office. If when you
be convinced by the word, you will yet rebel, take heed lest you perish in
his contradiction as Saint Jude speaks, teaching others by their fearful
example because they would take none themselves, If such as these had been
from God the devil would not have let them alone so long quiet in their
attempts: But he knows distraction in opinions, makes him reign in the
world. And to these more impudent persons, I add all such undertaking women,
who either in families, companies, or in the private converse with their
husband usurp authority, despising the graces of God in their husbands and
others, and taking upon them all the speech at the table, to discourse of
religion, to debate matters in question in the Church, to decide things of
difficulty, to spend all the time in hearing themselves talk of good things:
These although they think they have learned many things, yet have not learned
one great thing, to wit, wisely to judge what their sex and state will admit.
And therefore though happily what they speak is good, yet its not comely for
them, its as a garment of good cloth but made into a garment very unfit for the
body, for lack of taking measure beforehand. These are not helpers, but hurters
by their unseasonablenesse.

But I digress not too far. No reason there is, why the impudence of the
Rebellious should prejudicate the gifts of an humble wife, soberly improoved.
Neither does the holy Ghost envy her the honor of her grace and helpfulnesse.
But as Bathsheba says, Prove. 31. 31. Give her of the fruit of her hands, and,
let her works praise her, in the gates. Subjection and helpfulnesse enterfeer
not one whit, both may agree well. Subjection caused the wife of Manoa, when
the Angel appeared to her with a sollemne message, Conditions of modest wives
in act^ng of Gods matters.
to distrust her self, and to call her husband; when God preferres her, she
modestly craves leave, and preferres her husband, and his judgment before her
own: deriving her own honor upon him. Howbeit afterward we see, that (the
case so requiring) when as upon the Angels departure from them, Manoa was left
in a carnal fear, lest he should die, having seen God: his wife steps in
with her helpfulnesse, between him and his fears, saying, if the Lord would
have slain us, doubtless he would not have revealed himself unto us in this
sort: Judge. 13. 23.
to tell us we shall have a son, and yet to kill us. She saw further in this
case, then he, and therefore gives him advice what to settle himself upon.
What could more aptly have been spoken? how is that of Solomon verified, A
word in season, is like Apples of gold, and Pictures of silver? And, how is
Abigail honored, for her wise counsel, Sam 1. 25.
to a man, who for that her wisdom, was so far from disreputing of her, that
he sent for her to be his wife shortly after. So that, when David was in the
way of heat and resolution to shed Nabals and his families blood, she
encounters him, saying, let not my Lord do such a thing as this! It shall not
grieve him, when he shall sit upon his throne, that he has not shed innocent
blood: Oh! how comely a thing it is for Christian wives to come in thus with
humble subjection, sometimes with a soft word to allay wrath, to stay the
husband from prejudice against good persons and causes, to enterpret all in the
better part; to observe him when the word kindles any affections in his soul,
and presently to follow them home, not to suffer them to slip out and vanish:
to provoke him to mercy and compassion, to draw him from a natural course to a
morrall, from a morrall to a spiritual, to persuade him to equalness and
indifference toward such as are at controversy, to debate and decide things
peaceably, to stay his hand from immoderate correction of children or servants,
when she sees passion prevail against judgment: yea, and sometimes with the
same meecknesse, and mildness to convince him of an evil quality or pang, as
choler, discontent, worldliness, censuring of others, rashness and the like,
admonishing also to beware of the occasions which might lead thereto: wherewith
she herself should receive the like from him. Sometimes to win his adverse
heart to a more entire love to Gods Sabbaths, to his word preached, to his
faithful Ministers, and servants: to affect them, to associate them, and to
renounce all his old company and fellowship in evil. To be always darting some
savor of that which they have heard in public, and prompting him with it,
that the world eat not up all. Oh! these things come sweetly, as the latter
rain, from a woman, who counts it her happiness, to see her husband to be
brought home to Christ, who mournes for his rebellion, and rejoices to see his
heart broken: As Mordecai told Ester, so should a good wife tell herself, who
knows, whether thou art come to thy place for such a season, even to bring
home one sheep to Christ's fould? Doubtless if Satan were not a professed foe
to such helpfulnesse, the work would proceed with more ease and success. So
much for the first branch.

The next head of the wives helpfulnesse is in matters of the world. 2.
General.
Solomon as truly said of this as of any other virtue of the wife; Helpfulnesse
in matter of estate described.
that, a wise woman builds her house. For, though it be little (in
comparison) which a poor woman can add to the estate of her husband, yet she
must be all in all for the preserving thereof. So that an improvident woman is
next a waster in this only respect, and loses much: But if she be also a
spendthrift, and really wastfull, there is no end of her spoil, till she have
brought all to nothing, and overthrown both her husbands state and posterity.
She is the Moth yea Canker of the marrow and beauty of his estate, and by
insensible morsels, devours at length, the whole substance. And because there
be many queazy women, (yet such as would be religious) that think it a piece
of religion, to be no housewives, let Bathsheba, a Queen, who might more stand
upon her estate, then the proudest Dame may upon her dowry; in her instruction
to Solomon speak. She describing a godly and helpful wife, (and not only a
thrifty one) as it appears from the 25. verse to the end of the Chap. does
couple her virtue and house wifery together: Prove. 31.
She opens her mouth with wisdom, and the law of grace is upon her lips:
(there is her grace) and she overseeth the ways of her household, and eats
not the bread of idleness: (there is providence:) And, lest any should think
this latter might be spared, its to be noted that she spends the whole
Chapter in the description thereof, by diverse passages: whereas, the former she
shuts up in the end of that Chapter in a verse or two, although the more
necessary: as taking it to be more out of question, then the other; nay note
how the holy Ghost will needs convey that instruction by the counsel of a woman,
to all of her sex, to make the thing less subject to exception: pressing it
strongly in an Idea of such an exact helper: and that with pleasing Rethorique
and variety: Why? save because she saw it a virtue meet to be urged, as being
that which many women will not acknowledge. Neither can the greatness and
wealth of wives control this duty of Providence, and that not for show
neither, or complement, and praise, to let the world see what skill in spining,
in needle work, or in other matters, they have, but for conscience sake. In
Bathsheba's days, gold and silver were common, and as plentiful as the stones
and figtrees: and therefore need there was not for Queens or their maids to
work so hard; And yet, for the religion of the duty, she speaks so, as one who
had experience of it in her own princely person, and had the oversight also of
her maidens in the handling of the wheel and spindle, for flax and wool. And
surely in great families both sexes had need to be yoked, and awed from the
sins which come from sloth and idleness, although I add, in a mediocrity,
lest they trench upon the contrary of covetousness.

My meaning yet by all this, Wives must not have any peculiar wealth apart from
their husbands, but in common.
is not to allow any woman the liberty of any such peculiar housewifery by her
self, apart from the common stream and welfare of the husband and family, but
in common with, for, and under him, though in a way of her own, best fitting
her sex and education. For, I know there be housewives, who excel in providing
for themselves, and (like the Steward in the Gospel who to prevent beggary,
when he should be turned out of service) can shift for themselves, who yet are
but ill providers for the good of their husbands whom (to use that Emperors
comparison) I may liken, to the Spleen in the Body, which when its fullest,
makes the body emptiest, and so commonly, when the cofers of these Housewives
are fattest, their husbands treasure is leanest and lankest: whereas she should
rather be a pipe to conveigh into his cesterne, then a sponge to suck from, or
a Channel to dreyne from his fountain. This yet is a common vice: not only of
second wyves prowling for their own broodes, or kindred: But of all sorts of
women; and, is caused by pride of Birth, of dowry, education, or person: which
to godless ones, are occasions to withdraw them from the yoke of supposed
bondage, though if a Queen may judge of helpful and houswifely providence. In
some others its rather caused, by oldor late habits of luxuriousnes, riotous
and lewd companionship: for now we have meetings of Women-drinkers,
Tobacconists and swaggerers, 1. Tim. 3, 1. 2.
as well as men: lest Paul's Prophecy of the latter time should be falsified,
and (which is worst of all) secret and stolen liberties. These vices, are like
the daughters of the horseleach, crying, give, give, but like hell and the
grave, never satisfied. In steed of the which licentious usurping over the
husbands commodities, let women know, that although they have a true property
and interest in their husbands Estates, yet when the use of the same comes into
question, the Lord will have it, as well as other things, ordered by the
husband. Neither may the bad qualities of the man, as his churlishnes,
Covetousnes, and Enmity to virtue, authorize the woman, to be her own carver;
lest if this wicket be set open to good wyves, the bad ones throng in with them
also; and usurp it to evil ends. Gods law is one, and concerns all sorts
indifferently. If they desire any stroke in dispensing the matters of the
husband they must deserve it by good carriage.
If women desire a stroke this way, (as indeed some may more causedly plead in
then others in show) let them labor by their good deserts, to prevail with
their husbands, and by their helpfulnesse and love to draw so good an opinion
of themselves that they may with a willing mind, yield this favor to their
wives, as to use their pleasure in a sober manner. (Provided that they spend
it upon honest and religious objects.) But, if God have laid another burden
upon them (as I noted in the former chap.) of ill natured and straithanded
husbands: let them take up and bear it, as the Cross which God has set apart
for them, without discontent or grudging. Especially second wyves, having the
charge of former brood depending upon them, (further then by cheerful consent
of their husbands, they are allowed) let them beware, lest herein they dishonor
their Profession, by yielding to the strong and tempting occasions, of needy,
unruly, and burdensome children, supplying their want, by injurious pillage of
the husband, and his posterity. This by the way.

To conclude the point, Three branches of woman's providence.
these three specialls concern the woman's providence; first getting, then
storing, and lastly dispensing those things which are committed to her charge.
The first of these three, is proper only to those women, who sell their
husbands commodities, or are allowed to be chapmen of their wares, (which is
the case of few) or such as by reason of some special skill in any crafts or
manufactures, have some stock allotted them by their husbands, to trade and
traffic withal. In which way, Act of Providence to bring somewhat in.
neither selling to their husbands loss, nor for their own secret gain, nor
the hurt of the buiers, all which rules, are in all tradings, usually
transgressed. Besides the huswifery of many tradesmens wives, who learn their
husbands skill, serve to the making of sundry wares, which serve to the
upholding of the family, and estate. In which case (as the other burden of
family will admit) they are to show their best endeavor, both for the getting
in of some part of the mayntenance, and saving it from being spent about such
household expenses, as, by pains and thrift at home might be spared. Pro. 31.
And this is that which Bathsheba most insisteth upon; She labors cheerfully
with her hands: she is like the Ships of Merchants: She bringes home her food
from a far: She arises while it is yet darkish, her candle goes not out,
she puts her hand to the wheel, and her hands to the spindle. She makes
sheets and sells them: and gives girdles to the merchant. She considers a
field, and gets it; and with her hands she planteth a vineyard. This is the
image of the stirring housewife. It were well now a days if women would abate
of their superfluous ease and needless expenses (which they do the more easily
lavish out, because they wholly rely upon their husbands purse) and in stead
of great merchandise and selling of wares abroad, apply themselves at home in
private, about the supplying of the family wants, helping to cloth and lodge
them by their diligence: for better and more enduring is that ware which is
made, then that which is bought: taking occasion there by to busy their
Children in meet employments, and to prevent sloth, ease, gadding, stolle^
liberties and vanities which the unbridled minds of Maids, both of children,
and servants, are in these days pestred with, loathing labor and painfulnes,
and exposing themselves to the vices issuing from thence.

The second act of Providence in the wife, is, the Bestowing Women must be
their husbands storers and Treasurers.
Which, as it is fit they should be put to her trust, so ought she (specially
in her husbands absence) to be careful of them, that they decay notunder hand,
that they be not open and exposed to the stealth or spoil of Servants, or
violence of others. And herein, not only her self in person is to be
provident, but also to be careful to oversee the ways of such servants or
others, as are under her, as instruments to act that, which other business, or
infirmity hinders her self from performing. A wise housewife will contrive and
dispose as well by sitting still, and using her brain, as some other by
bending the force both of soul and body. Her self cannot keep things from
putrefaction, from Rust, from fust and spoil, from motheatings and decaies:
cannot perhaps do each inferour work serving to keep all things neat and
shining: but she may so oversee the ways of others, that they may prevent such
losses, and procure such conveniences as are meet for the family. So that she
may ease her husband from the inspection and care of such things, as concern
not his providence: to which task, if he be put, either for the things
themselves or for the seasonable dispatch thereof, she should much discredit
her providence and prudence, and burden her husband: whose work lies in a
deeper and higher kind. Not, as if the husband should (as Laban of Jacob)
exact each penie of the wife which miscarieth, or be implacable for those
losses which cannot be avoided, (since his own wisdom cannot prevent many.)
But, that she by her care must serve providence that no such complaints be
heard of as might provoke him justly: As for losses which befall by the hand of
God, Matt. 13. ^2.
both equally must patiently bear them: This is pithily alluded unto, in that
simile, where Christ like^s a good scribe or Disciple taught to the kingdom of
God unto the good houswife, which storeth up both old and new, that is family
provision of all sorts, which she brings out in their season, for meet use.
Otherwise, what comfort should the man have, in his bringing in supplies for
family, household stuff, bedding, linen, Apparel, daily diet for the body,
if he might not trust to her fidelity at home to preserve them, to menage, to
dress and proportion them to the use of the family? And surely, if she do her
part wisely herein, neither on the one side being so loose in her storings that
every one may com by her commodities as freely and boldly as her self, to
spend and spoil, to drink and imbezel at pleasure; nor on the other side
abusing her authority, and the power of the Keys, so that she straiten the
family of their due, and strangers of their hospital welcome, for her own
pinching and base ends: but go in a wise middle between both: I say, so
doing, it may be said, There goes no less care and praise in upholding an
house built, then in building it from the ground: and she deserves, in her
kind, equal commendation with her husband.

Is her Dispensing.
for the good of the family in due season, due manner, and due measure. For
why? She is the man's steward and Pensioner, and Almoner in this kind, to divide
the demensum to the family, and the poor of the place, And Bathsheba omits not
this neither in her Idea of the good housewife: saying, she fears not the
Snow, for her family is all clad in scarlet: By snow meaning whatsoever want or
affront may betyde, and by scarlet, all defense or furniture for the family,
and that which is not only for necessary, but sometime also for honorable and
comfortable allowance. And again, her husband is known in the gates, meaning
by the livery which he disdains not to wear, because its the work of her
hands. And further, she gives a portion to her household, and the ordinary to
her maids. In these three stand the woman's thrift and Providence: which they
who want, must learn, and count it worth a double dowry, as knowing that many a
naked bare wife is better then some waster, clothed in velvet, with her weight
in silver. To this pertaines the due observation of the seasons of the house:
that inferior things prejudicate not the better, and more weighty matters of
God, that all be done with foresight and forecast, that the members of the
family want not that provision and due diet, attendance and nursery, which is
meet for them, both in health, and sickness: the younger children (under her
care) be taught, trained, directed, and furnished, and the elder provided for
according to their needs.

And such wives, Provident wives right hand must not know what their left does.
as have obtained, and do improove this gift well, must beware of pride, and
selfeconceit, that they take not occasion hereby to swell, as if they were the
props of the house: or else to cover themselves under it, when they be
reprooved for other foul blemishes (for excellent parts in one kind are
attended with sad corruptions:) we read of Abner, ^. King 3.
the Captain of Saul's army, and protector of his house, that he was a great
champion for Ishbosheth, a man of great courage and valor: But he was another
way as Iewde, unclean of body; Ishbosheth, being too young a novice to deal
with such a Politician chides him for it, why have thou (says he) gone in to
my fathers Concubines? Abner, privy to his deserts, could not bear it, but
flourishes against him, and upbraydes him with his great exployts. Am I a dead
dog, that thou so speak to me about this woman? Is this the thank I have
for my great service to thy father and his house? Must I be so taken up for
halting? Thou shall know that I have been thy Patron! God do so to me, and
more, if I give thee not over, and turn to thine Enemy David! Lo, how the
Devil will so pride a man in any great gift, that he will take scorn to be
found fault with, looking that his merits, should plead pardon for all his
defects. So it is with many women (otherwise housewife like, and commendable)
that they are waspish, froward, holding their husbands at staves end, or
otherwise taynted! But, will they endure to be told of it? By no means. Have I
this (say they) for my providence and diligence? Nay (as Ioab despitefully told
David in his heaviness for Absalon, so they cast their husbands in teeth) I
see now, if I had been wastfull and licentious, I should have been better
accepted! yea truly, a waster is not much worse then a shrew: Thrifty or
unthrifty thou art little accepted, except subject and peaceable. Rather thy
one virtue, should make thee more studious of others, careful to shun other
vices which should fully and darken them: But they run into another vein, and
ask their husbands, what if you had such a wife, so expensive and costly, as
this or that man has! Alas! what froth of a base heart is here! Who will deny,
but a virtuous wife may sometimes come short of an exact houswife? Does that
argue, that such an housewife may plead it, to defend all her grosser
Qualities? The Town-Clerke said well to the people of Ephesus, Act. 19. 35.
Diana is a great Goddess indeed, who can deny it? But what is that to this
confused mutiny, and outcry? So here.

Therefore, Admonition to the wife against this.
O woman! if thou be so worthy, let thy right hand be ignorant, Evil.
what thy left hand does: let others praise thee, not thy own lips! Thy bad
qualities will sooner blemish thy good, then thy good excuse them. For who
seeing a Ring of Gold in a swines snout, wishes it not upon some fair finger,
rather then to be disgraced by the swine! Its true, that a wastfull women is
the bane of her husband in one kind, but so may the thrifty in another by her
shrewishnes; poison may kill, as well one, as kill many ways? And what avayles
it a man if he must die, that he rather is hanged, then beheaded? they are but
two ways to bring to one death? And what folly is it to turn off the
accusation of a fault which admits no defense, by that virtue which is neither
blamed, nor aimed at! Join other good parts with Providence, and then the
lump shall be holy! but one sinner destroys much good, one dead fly marres a
great deal of sweet Ointment; as Solomon says of two duties, so apprehend the
one, as thou withdraw not thine hand from the other: Eccles. 7.
So I say to thee, so, lay hold on providence, that yet thou renounce not thy
subjection! She that fears God shall come out of both extremes: There is no
necessity that one be fallen upon by shunning the other! Ungodly Improvidence
is bad, and brutish drudgery is worse: The Droyle overloding herself with
moiling and care, disables herself from goodness, and the improvident by her
sloth, deprives her self of all opportunity, either of doing good, or taking
it. The middle way is the golden way. Thus much of the second branch of the
wives providence, in matters of the world

The third and last follows, Branch. 3
and that is, in the service of the married life, Of the woman's providence, in
the conjugall life.
in the manifold passages of which, both toward his person, his state, body,
life, health, name and posterity, she must be helpful. To this end she was
made; Of all good couples that is verified, two are better then one; because
they have a good reward for their labor. Eccles. 4. 9. And if one fall, the
other will lift him up again: And if one prevail against him, two shall
withstand him: and, a threefold cord is not easily broken. It stands in sundry
particulars.
Mark, the Lord has appointed marriage, as the union of two weak ones apart,
to become a strong twist in one cord, to make one strength. This is true of all
combinations, two students, two partners, two travelers, two neighbors, two
friends, but, above all, most true in the married estate. In the absence of the
one, the other is present; when one is down and sick, the other (commonly) is
up: in the ignorance, doubts, inexperience, fears of the one, the other is an
helper at hand. Two see more then one: by my wives ere, foot, hand, wisdom, I
see, walk, work, contrive and dispatch businesses which else I could not. No
such Vicegerent, ^ojadjutor as the wife, whether together, or asunder. Though
the head has the leading part, yet the body has the attending part, neither
without other could effect ought. The acts of marriage are reciprocal: As we
see in them that handle the long saw, there must be a pair of hands
reciprocating the tool, through the timber, or else no sawing it into pieces.
An helper without an head, is better then an helper alone. A little to insist
upon each particular.

To his person.
a Fort (in distress) of safeguard and defense. She is but a little one, but
oh! shall I not escape thither and be safe? (said Lot in that storm.) So is
she a covert under God against the storm and rain: She is so under covert,
that yet she is a covert again: She is not terrible as Banners, but she is a
safe buckler of defense against any impression of danger, of Enemy: either
foreseeing and preventing, or meeting and repelling it. Despise her not, there
is a blessing in her. A woman once delivered a city: another overcame an army,
a third slew a Tyrant: yet there was another, a wife, Abigail, who objecting
her self between her husbands side, and David's blow, saved the one and the
other from bloodshed. Such a prop was that poor Shunamite, who without any din
or distemper, locked up her dead child, brought home the Prophet, who restored
it to life. She is not as Dalila, who bringing Samson into a sleep upon her
knee, betrayed his life, saying, the Philistines be upon thee. She is a Micoll,
who when her husband was escaped from Saul, laid an Image in the bed, to while
the Pursuers as if he had been in bed, but thereby preserved his person from
slaughter. Soul.
Her voice is quite contrary to that of Jobs wife, Job 2 9.
Not Curse God and die: But, Continue (deer husband) in thy integrity! Be thy
Crosses what thy will be, still trust, and wayt, deny not the Almighty! we
shall see a good end, one day. She is not as Iephthah said of his poor
daughter, Among them that trouble him, that damn him, and lay a snare to
entrap him in sin, or consenting to him in sin, Act. 5. 5.
as Sapphira to Ananias: nor yet careless which end go forward, so she may
compass her wicked content, as Jezabel, 1 Kings 18.
in Naboths death, made way, for her own, and her husbands ruin. If she can
keep him close to God she will: but she will never bid him curse God,
renounce obedience and dye. To his health of body.
the husband look well, they say I Will has a good wife. She is his nurse to
dress and provide him savory meat, such as his heart loves: she knows his
body, to what ailes he is subject, his diseases, and distempers are known to
her chiefly, she must order his diet, she must dissuade him from what is
hurtful,, present what is wholesome, and that not in a seeming curiosity, but
in a real, and cordial carfulness. She must be his welcomer to entertain
him, from his wet and cold journies, with warmth, with harbor, with comforts
and refreshings: For his heart trusts to her for it, and no colds, wets, heates
or ill jorneyes can be wearisome to him, having so helpful a yokefellow at
home to receive him. If he be sick, she is his best messenger to the
Physician, best and tenderest keeper under his Physic, best cook for kitchen
Physic at home, and must be the best instrument for recovery: For why? she
took him not only for health and prosperity, wherein he can provide for
himself, but for sickness and disasters, wherein he relies upon her
helpfulnesse.

His good Name.
and good Report. Suffers no fly of her own to light upon that ointment, is
impotent to endure or put up any base aspersions upon it; honors it, and the
merit and repute of it has a speriall faculty to commence and procure an high
esteem of his virtues in the hearts of all especialy in the hearts of such as
are worthy to honor a man, and shuns all occasions which might cause the
^asest to defame him: she has alwaya covering ready to carry backward upon
his nakednesses and blemishes: such I say as are to be covered. And such, as
she is forced to confess (as Naba^s churlishnes and folly by Abigail;) she
is rather haled thereto by necessity then prone to it with delight: She
abhorres them whose fingers always itch at the disgrace of their husbands: She
chooses to come between his folly, and his shame by catching the wound upon
her own flesh, and leaving her own bleeding rather then violate his, for
enduring others to derogate therfrom: she puts no great odds between the one
or the other: knowing that her own cannot be entire, if his be hurt, much
less thinking his loss to be her gain. to his family she is an absolute
helper by necessity, and cannot be spared: not only in point of housewivery,
but also in the dispencing the Affairs of it within. His family.
She crosses not her husband in any labor, and education of children, she
traynes and instructs the tender fry (fittest for her hand) till meeter for his
oversight: joines with him in his reproves and corrections, (knowing that
Satan reigns in the children by the division of parents) holds not his hand
from due strokes, but bares their skin with delight, to his fatherly stripes;
defendes neither hers, nor his children in their sin. And yet, as the case
requires, plays the kind Mediator, alienating the extremity of both words
and blows lest they be discouraged, yet by consent, for the breaking of their
hearts. She counts it her glory, by her lenity and love, with all innocence to
keep accord between the children of diverse broodes, indifferently ensuing both
their welfare; if not with equal nature, yet with the same conscience; not
seeking to derive the current of her husbands heart to her own, but letting it
have free passage to them who are equally his. She is not in words but in
truth, not astepmother unto them: as loath to betray the one as the other to
their fathers wrath, or to Gods: rejoicing when they are furthest off the dinte
of either. Not as Eve, who first had inevitably betrayed all her posterity to
ruin, together with her self, ere her husband knew it, and then himself. Not
looking at her own mayntenance, and holding the reine in her own hand,
without respect what become of them, or after the death of her husband,
unnaturally suffering them to perish, while her cruel eyes look on:

In all difficulties.
that like to God, she may be most seen in the mount) as well as when his
successes are most prosperous; In the affront of any ill news, losses,
discontents, injuries, she keeps off the dint of sorrow from his spirit, wypes
away the tears trickling down his cheeks, turns off what might incense,
ensues what might satisfy and give him content, and putting under her helping
shoulders to bear any common burden, which must be borne. Although her own
neck lie upon the block, and she suffer under any special vexation lying on
her spirit, yet she abhorres to be moaned or eased by outcryes and dolours:
rather taking it to her self, and biting it in to her own regret: the^
willing that for the sake of one, the whole Family should be in disquiet,
saying with that wise Shunamite, God can reconcile all disproportions, be quiet
my soul, bite not upon the bridle, but wait, and all shall be Bearing hardship.
she makes no mutiny nor clamor against heaven or husband, her lot and ill
Chance, (for she knows no such Goddess as fortune,) But rather by her own
example in submitting to providence, to fare hardly, to be attried homely, when
better supply fayles; she draws her husbands spirit from impatience, and
unequalnes, to equanimity and subjection. In submitting of her soul to God,
even when his hand is sad, and the rod is sharp, she finds sensible ease:
waiting meekly til God turn the wheel, and (with Naomi) bring her home to her
wonted welfare. And this shall serve for a draught of the third branch of the
woman's helpfulnes in the conjugall conversation.

Reproof.
For to this end has the Lord framed woman as I have said; but she has found
out new inventions; and indeed she was the first that set her wits on work in
this kind. Alas! how many women have we, helpful to others with the hurt of
their husbands? others, helpful to their husbands, with the hurt of others? A
third sort helpful to themselves, whatsoever hurt befall their husbands? And
lastly, some neither helpful to themselves, nor to their husbands, but
hurtful to all: but still the helpful wife is rare to come by. And, as we see
that first helper of man, created most perfect, yet instantly degenerated, and
became the greatest hurt to him and his, so her Grandchildren still tread in
her steps, so that few husbands therebe, but may say with Adam (and much more
justly,) The woman thou gave me has undone me. If it had been a stranger,
an Enemy, I could have borne it: but lo, she that are with me out of one dish,
drank out of one cup, dipped her morsels in the same vinegar, lay in my bosom,
and, was one with me, she has been as rottennes to my bones, as smoke to
mine eyes, and as a continual dropping. Oh! if the eye be blind, how great is
that darkness? And, if she who was made for the choysest helper (for what
earthly comfort is like her who is like her self) prove a plague and hurt to a
man, how great must that wound prove? As the discord of brethren is therefore
like the brazen bars of a Palace, (because they are in place of nearest
lovers) so the hurt of a wife is unspeakebly intolerable, because she breaks
that law in pieces, which ordained her to the contrary. For, there is a cursed
generation of women, out of measure sinful, whose chief revenge is to whet
their teene upon their husbands, and to kill their hearts, not only with
despitefull tongues, but also malicious attempts, professing, they do it to
cross them.

Such as these I deny not to be helpers, What kind of helpers wastfull wyves
are.
for they help their husbands to a sad heart, to a weary life, to bitter
complaints to such as they dare trust (for if they had no bosoms to emprie it
into, their hearts would break) to an empty purse, to a rotten name, to a
ragged coat, they help them (ere they have done) ^o the sheet, to the
stocks, to the Gallows, to hell it self, without mercy, by their several
hurtful inventions. Thus was not Abigail to Nabal, (though a beast) if she had
scorned him so far, as to renounce helpfulnes; she would not have endangered
her life for his safety; but left him to shift for himself. But such
presidents as Dalila, Iezabel, Jobs wife, and the like, helpless, hurtful
wives, joying rather in their husbands harms, and thrusting them forward, when
they are falling, better suit to many of our wives, then that out worn end of
Abigails. Alas! such a pattern serves rather for wonderment, then honor and
imitation. Do we not see how jolly and proud Dames, set up a private wealth to
themselves with neglect of the common good of husbands and families? Have we
not coy pieces, that affect a singularity of Diet, apparel, company, losty
carriage, above, and apart from their husbands? Public shame (which yet now
restrains most abuses) not curbing these! Are those helpers, that jolly it out
and ruffle it in the misery, debts, banqueruptnes, and dejection of their
husbands, brave in their ruffes and clothes when they are all ragged, costly
in their fare, when they are feign to bite short, sit at the upper end of the
Table, when Tom fool must stand with finger in hole behind the door? Are
these helpers, or harlots, trow you! How else should it be verefied of women,
which is foretold of al sorts by Paul, in these latter days, They should be
lovers of themselves, proud, unnatural, treacherous? What traitor is like a
bosom one?

And, well might these proverbiall speeches arise, that A man may thrive, if he
have his wifes good will: Or, A mant hat marries a second wife with Children,
need take no thought to purchase house and land. These argue that although the
case may be otherwise in many wives, yet generally it is dangerous, especially
in second marriages with widows.

Perkins wrote upon his study door, Ex^^rtation.
Thou art a Minister of the word, that do: so should a good wife upon her
palms and fringes, for an helper thou were made, this look to, mind the end
of thy creation, carry it with thee as thy charge, I was made for an helper.
Not for an helper on way, and an hurter, ten: but an only helper. So that as
Law is the soul of the state, the soul is wholly and in each finge of the
body, so should my helpfulnesse begin at husband, and animate all the family.
But especially it should be the life of my husband; his soul I am bound
chiefly to help, by godly counsel: his spirit I must help, by my cheerful
behavior: his body I must cherish with my best benevolence; his name I must
tenderly honor, his sorrows I must wisely mitigate; his joys, I must
sympathize; his dangers, I must prevent, his health and state I must uphold:
and when I have thus done, as the Be gathering honey, as the Sheep bearing a
fleece, as the Ox plowing the ground, as the builder framing the house, not
for their own uses, but the commodity of others; so must the helpful wife,
all these I have done, not for my self, but for my husband. Yea look what
instinct Nature, Art, has put into these creatures, that has grace and
helpfulnesse put into me. An helper I was made for, this oh Lord, let me look
to! If I do it of a willing virtuous mind, there is praise! If not, yet a
necessity is laid upon me, and, woe to me, if I be not an helper? who ever
shunned or waived the end of their creation, but vengeance pursued them as
traitors to Nature, to heaven! I was not made for my self, but for another:
each part of the house claiming a part of me. As he said once to a coy Virgin,
thy virginity is not all thine to dispose of: in part its thy parents, father
has a stroke in it, mother another, and kindred a third: Fight not against
all, but be his, whom they would have thee. So say I to thee being a wife and
an helper: Thy womanhood, thy helpfulnesse is not thine, its thy husbands, his
body, state, posterity claim it from thee: he lays claim to all, not as that
Tyrant did, all thy wives silver and gold is mine: but as one that is invested
in all thou have by peculiar providence. I live not by rule or examples: the
unhelpfull shall not teach me to be a hurter: the helpful shall not so teach
me as if I followed for their sake only, but for his, who has subjected me to
helpfulnesse.

Encouragement to helpful wives.
which might pull them from this virtue; If she be such an helper to thee, oh
husband, as I have said, comfort thy self in her, comfort and encourage her
thy self against all dismayments. And if she be so toward a lewed companion
who has not the grace to prise her: let me here from God encourage her. God
requite thee poor soul, for the world cannot, thine husband will not. God
make his way the strength of the upright, in the thankfulness of both: Thou
can do no more then thou can: If a bad husband will yet ruin all, well,
yet as long as thou could, thou have held carte on wheels: The Lord shall
be thy helper, the strong helper of an helpefull wife: Others shall help thee:
Thou shall not be forsaken in thy greatest straits. And touching this second
duty of the wife, viz. helpfulnesse, so much.

CHAP. XV.
Concludes with the third and last Several Duty of the wife, to wit, her
Gracefulness.

I Conclude now the discourse about the several duties of the woman to the
man: The third peculiar duty of the wife, gracefulness.
whereof this is the last, to wit her gracefulness. The former alone without
this, will make a good drudge, but this added thereto will make a good wife.
They say, he who has gotten both profit and pleasure together (for they are
not always joined) has hit the nail on the head. But in a wife, I am sure it
is so: if she be useful by her huswifery, W^v^s must be gra^^ous and graceful.
and cheerful by her graceful amiablenesse, she is right and straight indeed,
and well accomplished. Some, yet none of the worst housewives are none of the
most graceful creatures: their droile always hangs about them, as an ague in
the bones: and others amiable and cheerful enough, are yet none of the most
huswifely and helpful: as the apples of Sodom if they be but touched with a
finger to be useful, they moulder to ashes. The former are good droiles to
dispatch business, the other pretty Idols to look on. But the compound of
these two has no fellow, to reconcile into one an helpful gracefulness, and
a graceful helpfulnesse. Of all other duties, I need least insist, in prooving
that this woman makes her marriage honorable: and therefore, that she is bound
to improve her self in this kind to the uttermost, for the attaining of it.
This virtue of it self speaks (as Abel being dead) without words. What
gracefulness is.
This third gift is nothing else, save that complexion and luster which arises
and reboundeth from the mixture of the graces of a woman, duly compounded. As
from the well mixed Elements arises bodily temperament, and from the blood well
mixed in the face arises beauty: so from a well tempered spirit in a woman
arises this gracefulness. As once that Philosopher said, if virtue could be
seen with the eye, it would ravish a man with admirable loves of her: so the
graces of a woman breaking through her, and appearing in the conversation, are
able to ravish any spirit that is not a stoicke, a Nabal. A little then first
of the Materials, then of the true form and temper it self of this
gracefulness.

Two things in this.
Grace must needs be the matter of it. But, what grace? Surely graces fly
together as birds of a feather, Matter of it, Grace.
and link as the pieces of a chain: yet there be pearls which shine more
then their fellows: and some graces, do more befriend, and beautify a good
wife then other. Humility.
unpleasing, then a mannish heart of stoutnesse and stomach? 1 Pet. 3. 4.
and what so decketh a woman, as that whereby she is of great esteem with God
himself? So is she that walks in a due and daily sense of her infirmities, a
modest concealment of her graces. Not Saul's tallness, but hiding himself a
way from honor did most grace him. Not a scholars art, opened all at once, but
the concealment of it, most graceth him. So, not a woman's parts, but that so
frail a creature should be above all that's in her, is as the varnish which
makes all the picture so amiable. Why do we think Greek and Ebrew ill
bestowed upon a woman? save, that its above her ordinary sex to know it, and to
know her self too: yet if I should behold a woman of excellent parts of
learning, and yet to be as one that knew not her own knowledge, but drowned
all in the spiritual sense of her corruption, I should think I saw a rare
object. She is little in her own eyes: yet that littleness makes her greater
in Gods eye, preciouser in man's, then that great gift with which she is
furnished. Self denial.
A mere scholar is grown into a character of disdain: and so is every other
thing that is mere: a mere woman, is an homely sight because ordinary. But a
woman above a woman, her wits, and abilities: and especially a woman above her
wrath, envy, selflove and passions: a woman above her gain, pleasures,
earthly contents: having all, and yet above all: pestred with all, and yet
overcomming all, is an object of admiration. The spirit of God to affect our
spirits, presents strange objects in his word, women Captains, warriors
Co^querors: what a pretty thing it is to se Iael to master a great General of
the field with her Hammer and Nail? Judges 4. 21.
Debora to sit and judge Israel? what a miracle was our maiden Queen Elizabeth
to the world? Why! but because we think we see, and can scarce believe our
eyes in seeing those virtues which were admirable in the Man, to reside in a
weak sex, as it were out of place? So, the Lord presents to us in his word
his master-peeces, an Abigail without sword or bow, conquering a Conqueror, and
leading him captive, with her self-denial, and wisdom. And in experience we
see here and there one (as a berry, or an olive, left behind) who can master a
fierce husbands anger, by her long suffering and selfdeinall: one that can rule
her passions, which rule al sorts. Why? save that we might admire our God as
much in the Ants sagacity, as the Elephants strength? If he who can overcome
himself, then much more she who can do so, is greater, then he who has
overcome a city! Oh not always in great things is goodness: but always in good is
greatness, especially when that good is also little!

Faith
For the former, what more worth then Paul says its not of all, women or men:
its a flower growing in the gardens, For the truth of it.
a precious jewel worea in the bosoms of very few of this sex. 2. Pet. 1. 2.
What can calm the soul save pardon and grace from the promise of a Father,
the blood of a Mediator? 2. The^^. 3. 2.
What can make a woman peaceable and of a quiet frame, save because all is
well, between God and her self? And what is that grace which settles the
soul in this grace save faith, the fruit of the lips, and mother of peace?
They say there was once a famous Lady in the English court, that calmed the
differences of all the courtiers, and therefore they called her Ione-Makepeace.
This lady faith is that lady Ione: a meet ornament, not for court only but
country also. Ione-Makebates each house is full of, but of Makepeaces, very
few. Oh this graces absence, makes all amort! women's unquietness of nature,
wrath, scoldings and distempers, come not so much from outward causes, or
inward humors, as for lack of this lady faith. Their hearts are wicked,
casting up mire and dirt in the family, like the raging sea, casting up her
own foame, and all, because the peace of God which passes understanding, and
settling the soul by faith, is wanting. Some what they once had, in creation,
have lost it by corruption, cannot recover it by faith, and this disquiets
them: the loss of a pig, a chicken will vex by consent, because there is a
worse vexer within. But, as we know, if a woman had found a pearl worth an
hundredth pound, she would be overjoyed, (Christ speaks but of a groate) so
that, if she should hear she had lost one of her goslings, it would little
affect her: so, if this faith were within the bosom, the losses of toies, the
occasions of common anger in the family would cease. That would change all, as
Christ calmed the sea.

For the life of ^t.
Marriage is as full of troubles, as a Crown of cares. Sorrow there is
sufficient to each day: to a woman by name, breeding, bearing, bringing forth:
many losses she meets with, false aspersions, fear of debts, wrong of ill
neighbors and enemies, deprivall of health, her dearest children, sundry
diseases, ill successes: what were then the life of a woman under all these but
misery, if she believed not in the son of God, and hoped for a good end? That
although she cannot say, Esai. 63. 3.
All is, yet she may say, All shall be well, when the hour of Redeemed ones is
come. This life of faith will make the bush though it burn, yet not to consume,
and will bring the Son of God to walk with her in the hot furnace, who will
keep away the savor as well as the power of fire from the^. Therefore Sara and
the widow of Zarepta, and of Shunem, and Rebecca, are brought in as believers
in that cloud of witnesses, Heb. 11.
as well as Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob. So base is that speech of some
Atheists, that women must meddle with no faith, but wrap themselves up in their
husbands.

A fourth grace is Innocence, and truth. A compound of two in one. The one is a
brestplate of defense, the other a Grace. Innocence.
These I grant are pieces or Armor for Champions: but I understand my self to
speak of women Captains and conquerors, as I told you before: and you know
faith is no effeminate grace (though feminine) but overcomes the world. And why
should a shield of Faith (which serves to defend both the body and the Armor
of it too) go without a Brestplate, and a girdle? Debora if she will go into
the feeld, she must be armed, and a woman is not free from assaults, and
peril, shot and darts, as well as a man, in this feeld of the world: therefore
must learn to put on this armor. God has no other for men then women: though
women must not put on men's apparel, yet they must be clad in the same armor of
light. That will make them shot-free. The Emperor Charles the 5. went among the
thickest of his soldiers, and told his men, That a true Emperor was never
shot with a Bullet. But I am sure of this, That this Breast plate is armor of
proof: An innocent, hermelesse, quiet woman, shall not be ashamed to meet her
enemies in the gates, yea though it were of hell; when things come to be
debated, her uprightnes and righteousness shall deliver her: Innocence shall be
her defense against evil tongues abroad, and truth against an ill conscience
within; whereas the guilty and treacherous woman will betray her self, and lose
the day. That very harlot, true in nothing, but that she was the infants
mothe, ^by her truth escaped the swords censure. A miescheevous woman, or a
woman-lyar, who can endure? And who would not go or ride a far journey to see
this other warlike woman. Those Heroines of whom story and Poets so talk, as
Penthesilea and the like, were not so graceful a sight, nor those Amazons,
that seared off one dug that they might shoot, were no such spectacles as these
women, clad in innocence, and truth. Their name is more fragrant, then sweet
ointment, and there is no dead fly to make it stink.

Zeal and pretty.
as Diligence makes her so for her husband. Meekness in her own matters, well
becomes her who is earnest in Gods. If a woman man would be hot and fiery, let
her turn it to God, and for his cause, and this will make her cool and calm
in her own. As bleeding on the arm by art, stops unnatural bleeding by flux:
so zeal for God, cooles the heat of corrupt passion to man. This grace becomes
this sex, the rather, because it argues truth of grace: for else calmness of
her frame, naturally carries her to flatnesse and fulsomnesse. It must be with
a Christian woman, as it is in nature with the female sex of the creatures.
Nature has put a fircenesse into the female because of the impotency thereof:
therefore the she Bear, the Lioness, are the most raging, and cruel. But
grace makes that natural impotency of the woman, turn impotency for God: as
to provoke her husband with sweet affections for his servants and worship. 1
King. 17. 9.
It was a great praise for the sex, that God would send his Prophet in the
famine, rather to try the piety of the widow of Zareptha an heathen, then any
of the sons of Israel. And it was the honor of those wealthy women Joanna
the wife of Herod's Steward, Luke 8. 3.
and other the like to be the pious supporters of the Lord Jesus his body, when
he had not whereon to lay his head. And at this day, if estimation be made,
God is as much if not more honored with the forwardness of women, then of
men: their nature (being fearful) has ever been proner to superstition: as
in Ezekiel, those women that wept from Tammuz, those devout Grecian Gentlewomen
stird up by the Jews, against Paul: and where they are out of the way, none
are worse: But grace overruling corruption, turns superstition into zeal and
devotion, into religion, and then its comely.

Men's spirits are hardier, Men's hearts not generally so tendet and zealous as
women's, if they be right.
do not so easily fear Majesty, tremble at judgemnts, believe promises, shun
sin, love good, as women: so that when they are in the way, none are better:
none sooner embrace the Gospel, if it come a new to a place, none more readily
join together in communion, none more tender hearted to the distressed, and
such as suffer for Christ's name. God has his women that wove scarlet and
twined linen for his Tabernacle, as Manasseh had for his Idols. Oh! how sweet
a sight is it to see these Votaries, not of the Pope, but the Lord Jesus! who
can think of that honorable Countess of Richmond and Derby without
admiration: the founder of so many Colleges and Hospitalls. I omit to speak
of all: whose praise is in the gospel? we have many worthy momen in our
days, exceeding men in these pieties and zealous duties? Oh go on! hold your
daily intercourse with God! keep quarter with heaven, have your conversation
where your treasure is: and with that famous piece of devotion, old Anna, a
widow who for above sixty year, dwelt in the Temple, and ceased not to fast
and pray: go on, some of you had need to do it for your husbands and your
selves too, for surely they do it but little! The closet of a good woman
graceth her more to frequent, then her still-house, kitchen, or parlour: for
therein she plays the good houswife for her own soul; being much in
meditation there, in prayer, in brokennesse of heart, confession, renewing of
Covenant. As for Micol, who scorns zeal in her husband, has none in her
self, oh let not thy soul come into her counsel.

Grace: Mercy and Compassion.
when the former, Psalm. 16. 2. falls short of God, let the later be tendered to
his Assigns, and Attorneys, the Saints. So says Bathsheba, she stretches out
her hand to the poor, yea reaches it far to the needy. Some women cloth
their own with skarlet, but suffer the poor to go in rags. Surely cotton or
course cloth, or canvis, is due to these, if skarlet to them. Turn skarlet
rather to common cloth, then the poor go oaked. Women, especially Ministers
wives (who if bad, of all other commonly are worst) must think themselves
meant, Math. 25. 36.
when Christ says, I was naked, hungry, in prison, poor, and sick; and, you
clothed, fed, visited, releeved me! Be blessed women if you be wise. Your
husbands make you their almoners and stewards, beware you prove not thieves,
that the poor should curse you. A gift comes more tenderly from thee to a
poor soul, then from thine husband. What sight of the basest Miser is so
yrkesome, as of an hard hearted woman? And what ornament so becoming a tender
sex, as a merciful heart, to give, and to give tenderly in compassion,
abundantly to six and seven? Both are Bowels: and a woman should have more (by
right) then men. Act. 9. ^6.
Tabitha began betimes, God would not have her die, perhaps lest wives might
lose the honor and example of mercy. If being a maid she had so many good
works to show, of linen clothes made for the poor, what did she being a
wife? And especially let women be harberours to all, which belong to the
household of faith, but above all to poor of her own sex, women or widows:
Its no ill sight to see you in Prisons: But if you cannot go to others, send
not them away empty, who come to you!

Confidence with others.
So thou woman speak: I see not but it becomes me to be loving, patient,
wise, wary, prudent, thankful: These are ingredients into the conversion, as
those spices reckoned up by Moses, to make the holy ointment, and to cause thee
to smell sweetly in the nostrils of God, thy husband, and all sorts! one other
St. Peter mentions, confidence in God, the sister of faith even now mentioned:
They trusted in God, and walked without amasement (he means such carnal and
distrustful fears as that sex is full of: 1. Pet. 3. 5, 6.
) Their daughters are you, if you tread in their steps. As the eye of thine
own handmaid is always awefully carried to thee, waiting for acceptance, and,
and then she is safe: so let her teach thee (as Gods handmayd) to carry thine
toward him: for the support of thy Spirit, in the whole wheel of thy
conversation, for all other Gifts as well as these, to make it strong as the
staves do the cart wheel, that it crack not in pieces. More spices might have
been brought forth: but by these you may guess whereof a woman's sweet powder
is made: let us have to the Confection.

Form is temperature of them.
so, not only these mere graces, but the medly of them, the temper of that
spirit arising from them, is that thing which makes the wife so graceful. This
must come from that wise and alsufficient skill of the spirit of grace, which
must teach her Reins in the night season, and put into her the spirit of
gracefulness: He who has given a gift to the Be to dispose that honey she
has gathered from all flowers, in so wise a manner, that her workmanship makes
all the beholders to admire it; must in an higher kind teach her to make her
graces into one compound and temper; I say must enable her to lay them all so
sweetly together, and order her whole marriage course by the help of them;
that both every one may afford her special influence into it, and all of them
together may make her face to shine, and the beauty thereof to appear graceful
to all the beholders. She must beg of God this spirit by Prayer: and as all
the loose flowers of the Nosegay must be wisely ordered and put together, and
then bound together with a thread, that they scatter not: Is, the sweet union
of all into one compound.
So the spirit of wariness and wisdom must gird the loose loins of her
soul closely together, and teach her to accommodate her self to every
occasion offered, in a suitable correspondence, Act. 22. 28.
that there be no gulf nor interruption, no unequalnesse nor disproportion in
her carriage. No man shall need to paint an exact beautiful face: nor teach
her that is fair, to show it forth, it shows it self to all naturaly without
trouble. As Paul told Lisias: That he was borne a free man of Rome, it cost him
nothing: so where an heart is furnished with grace, it will without any
difficulty express it, and cast her savor abroad: That which will make an
hypocrite to toil and sweat, comes from grace with sweetness, and facility;
yet I deny not but as that Glyceris showed great skill in compounding the
flowers of her posies, and the Jewels of a Crown must be skilfully set into
it, to make it glorious: so, the more careful the woman shall be to mark the
circumstances, the seasons and all the occasions of her life so much the more
wisely she shall be able to apply each of these graces to their objects, and
show forth the luster of all in her general carriage. And such as are the
ingredients, such must needs the compound be, if skill and discretion order
it well. Now, the expression of all these in one is amiablenes: that is the way
whereby she utters her self, and in it, the lovely blush of them all appears:
humbly amiable, mercifully amiable, amiable in the comely carriage of all, (as
her body is in the wearing of the most costly and best suited attire) most
comely and pleasing. Especialy when the grace of this grace is added to it,
that this is not in a pang, or good mood, when all goes well, but comes from a
principle within, which causes her to go on in an uniforme course: so that
look how you see her at one time, you see her at another: she is always her
self: and as a Virgin of a comely face, although she be all blubberd with
tears, she loses not her beauty, but by the contrary, does commend it: so,
although the occasions of her life are sad as well as cherefull, yet the cloud
does not disanull the sun, but causes it to shine thorough with a more
acceptable grace. So far I say as weak flesh mixed with much corruption will
admit. Use of this point.
And this forth latter.

What shall I then say for Conclusion of this former part of my text that the
married wives must honor their Marriage by this amiable behavior? Instruction.
D^fference of Couples wherein it stands.
The odds is as great as the difference of the Prophets baskets of figs, very
good and very naught, so that they could not be eaten. The gracious wife is not
only an helper to the Estate of her husband; ^ut she is a Comfort and
contentment to his mind and spirit: she lies in his bosom as a bag of sweet
spices under his A^me^ol^s, as a perfumed garment to his nostrils, as the
spikenard of the spouse in the Canticles which gave her savor to the beloved,
Cant.
when he lay upon his bed. Hence it is that Solomon, compares her not only to
the most costly, but especially to the most comely things which Nature has
made. All her teeth, her forhead, lips, neck, bosom, thighs, legs, yea
even her very goings, are pleasing in his eye: he compares her to the lillies,
to the washed sheep, to the Roes of the Mountains, to the Doves, to the
Cedars, to the Curtains of Solomon, and every lovely, amiable thing: All to
show that amiablenes^e and gracefulnes is that principal excellency which
commends a wife to her husbands esteem and affection: without the which the
rest were little worth: In other things she has a mixture of her self: but
in this she resembles him who has restored her to her first order and
comeliness in her creation. A creation which no outward wealth or price can
purchase; nothing in the world can equal the reflection of those graces, and
the savor of that report which came from her. They are in her, not for her: as
the flowers of a garden serve to garnish the house* so these grow in her for
his use (her husbands) to adorn and grace his person, that he may be known in
the gates. All that City, which knew Ruth to be a virtuous woman, knew Booz to
be an happy man in her: himself thinking no less when he told her so. Her
virtues indeed shine within her own sphaere and center chiefly: yet, the
influence thereof, is as that oil of Aaron, which stayed not where it was first
laid, upon his head, but wet the whole attire, and earth about. And, as that
box of costly ointment, though only powered upon the feet of Christ, yet made
the whole house savor of it: so the temper which arises of the simplieity,
meekness, modesty of a good wife, makes her amiable to such as never saw her
face. Its as the vices of the bad wife, which like oil in the palm of ones
hand, cannot be hid.

Contrariwise, What a bad graceless wife is.
an unhappy husband falls alone, nor in himself, so much, as in his vicious
wife: who creates abroad dishonor, at home discontent to him. The best man,
thus plagued shall hardly avoid one of these imputations, either that he is
unworthy of a good one, because he makes her no better: or unhappy, because she
is no better: the one is his sin, the other his shame, both his sorrow. She
is neither comfort to him at home, because he is an eie-witnesse of what he
would not, nor abroad, being forced to stop his nose at the ill savor of he
vices, as Ahigail at Nabals churlishness. Neither can he be, but as the body
sitting upon a rolling stone, which is never at rest but always in conflict with
himself, with wrath and despair; yet there is no way to be rid of such,
either in the getting, or having, except God show a man favor, that a man fall
not into her hands. So much for information. But from this another use arises.

And that's admonition to good wives and happy husbands, Admonition.
thus much: Graceful wives must exp^esse it to then husbands.
To the good wife, this, if God have thus graced thee, enjoy it not thy self,
but set a Crown upon thine husband, express the temper of thy inward virtues,
in the amiablenesse of a loving and sweet carriag. Forget it not even in
affliction, utter it even in the midst of bodily weakness: Let thy pleasing
influence break through all opposition and sorrows, as the Sun breaks
through the thick mist, or dark clouds, yea although eclipsed in part, yet
shine in part, and let a glimmering appear; remember, thou art a true friend,
made for the day of adversity; it is not so thankeworthy for thee, to cheer
thine husband, when he can cheer thee, or himself without thee while the day
of prosperity lasts; but then to play the sweet orator, and to make him merry,
when all other comforts have forsaken him, in the sad season of sickness, of
sorrow; this is better then all music and melody. Every base bird (while
summer lasts) will chirp and chitter: But to sing upon the bare bow, or thorn
bush, when the leaves are gone, and the cold winter approaches, this argues a
wife truly graceful, truly amiable and cheerful, and (next to the Souls
peace with God) is the greatest content under the Sun. I exhort no woman to
play the hypocrite (neither indeed can gracefulness be long acted by any apish
imitator.) But, I entreat her, whom God has thus graced, to understand the use
she serves for, not concealing her self, but to the uttermost to apply her
self, Husbands that are happy in the grace of the^r wives, must return the
like.
to the comfort of her husband. And for himself, this I say, If God has thus
honored thee with such a wife, understand (oh man) thine own happiness, and
digest it seriously, with thanks to him, who has framed her so, and brought
her so framed, into thy bosom! Let her find by good experience, there is no
love lost; but, let thy heart rest in her and trust to her: seal her a bond of
thy sure and faithful respect, again, and let her see, she has not a
wearisome Nabal to do with, who cannot value that which is precious in her at a
due rate. Set her as a signet on thy right hand, and let her be nearer thine
heart, then thy costliest jewel. Let it not be enough that thou can love
one, who has honored thee, more then all thy wealth, or birth could do, but,
procure her honor in all places, and suffer none to eclipse her worth. Give
her of the work of her hands, and let her works praise her in the gates. And,
so much be spoken for the use of this third Branch, and so, touching the
mean, to preserve the honor of Marriage, by the duties which concern each
party in several.

And thus, General uses of the whole greatise.
having at last absolved this Task which I undertook, to wit, to show, how
Matrimonial honor may both be purchased and preserved entire, viz: first by a
wife Entrance marrying in the Lord, and aptly in the Lord; as also by wise
watching to the Duties, both of common nature, reaching to them both; and in
special, pertaining to either; let me conclude the whole treatise with an
item to both Reproof and Admonition to good Couples.
who love each other, are chaste, and consenting in the general: also who in
special, are understanding, provident, respective husbands, subject, helpful,
graceful wives: Let me say this unto you both, I doubt not, but in the reading
of my former treatise, Branch 1.
you willingly hear of other unhappy couples; your selves better married: But,
which of you in thus reading look up to God, or acknowledge such a blessing,
with due thankfulness? Which of you do but suppose, (as it is not amiss to
suppose, what might have bin or what may be) or say within your selves, If ^he
Lo^d had not provided better for some of us, then we deserved, then we desired,
given us good companions, before ever we knew what the misery of bad, Look out
and compare your lot with others.
or the worth of good ones meant: yea, if he had not been better to us most
unworthie, then he has been to more worthy then our selves, (whom he saw
fitter to bear, to profit by the cross, then our selves were) oh, what had
become of us? Oh! Nabals, La^ecs, Zippora's, Iebazels, had swallowed up our
sou^s, spirits, peace, welfare, thrift and all! The continual vexitions of bad
heads, daily dropping of bad wives had oppressed us! Alas? And why has the
Lord done this? Surely not for any good he saw, or foresaw in us, but because
he knew how unmeet we were to honor him, under such a chain!

Why then, do we not more magnify his providence, and wonder at his love, who
has so guarded us! There being so few apt couples in the world, that our lot
should be to light upon no unapter; there being so many bad ones, that we
should light upon no worser? Is not this mercy? Was it a golden blessing at
first, in our own sense and confession, and is it become a leaden one now,
after, ten, twenty, thirty; yea forty years experience? Do rich Pearls fall
in price? Could such mercy be better spared now then it might thirty years a
go? Have we had the stock of good marriage now 20. years, and come far
shorter in the Tribute of praise, thanks, and fruit, then when we first entered?
There be 4. ages of each marriage, through the sin of the married, the first
golden, the next silver, the third brass, the last iron! At first couples
begin with precious affections to God, to each other, join much in duty, cleave
closely each to other, mutually excite each other to zeal and good works, and
pay their vows: well then, nextly Gods part weakness and decays, and they hold
mutual marriage-love hardly. Then thirdly both Gods part and their own fail
too, and they wax fulsome, and formal in both: But lastly, and before they
die, the Devil will fail of his will but he will make them both, loose,
carnal, profane and scandalous! consider this! how many Marriages of great
hope and solemnity, have by these Declensions proved stark naught at last,
when indeed they should have proved best, and by degrees come to perfection.
Let it be a sad Item to such as enter well, to beware, lest they trust too
much to their own wisdom and strength, which will lay them in the dirt, ere
they be a ware.

Condole the unhappines of others.
Yea even Christians, better then our selves? Rather ready to disdain and
scorn them, then to condole and pity them? As those two Aaron and Miriam, fell
a cavilling at Moses for his Aethiopain wife? Why? Had he not sorrow enough
before? Was this to mourn with him, or rather to add more burden thereto? Was
it not from God? And were they to quarrel at it? Even so it fares with many.
That which should provok te^dernesse, love, fellow-feeling and compassion in
men rather causes disdain, indignation, alienating and estrangement of heart,
and deserting of fellowship! Why I pray? Do they stoop under their burden so
deeply, that they are often ashamed to complain, and do thou trample upon
them? Do thou judge them afflicted of God, and humbled for sin? Knowing thy
wisdom and choice was no wh^t better? Thy success only was happier in
providence? No: but as thy self in the like affliction would be handled, so
deal thou! Bear their burden, associate their persons, use all means to
reconcile their spirits, to compound their differences, to reduce them to
mediocrity and indifferency of affections! many couples had prooved happier, if
even such as were nearest them had not rather made them objects of abhorring,
then of compassion! A great sin! and mean to aggravate, yea exasperate those
seeds of evil, which disproportion at the first was like to kindle too much!
Pray, pray rather for mercy, and strength to guide, and carry them through!
For how hardly could thou digest those morsells once, which must be their
daily diet? Will thou eat thy sweet bits alone, and so little wish them to
such as want them wholly! Once a man enjoying sweet marriage, thought seriously
of another friend, that never married: a viling himself as base in respect of
him that seemed to be above the need of that which himself could neither well
want, nor thankfully improove! R. R. of I. K.
How much more should thou then pray for such as would feign enjoy, that
which no creature can help them withal?

And be h^mb^^d.
how does the sense of our weakness humble us? How do we esteem of the grace of
God, in such, as although but ill married, yet do walk more wisely, under that
cross, and do grow daily, more humble and wary, and purge out much dross out
of themselves which perhaps the blessings of God purge not out of us, but
rather make us sleep securely in the love of them? As pride, hypocrisy,
selflove and sensuality? what if we whose portion is better, do yet make a
slighter matter of it, and turn it into wantonness? How just were it with God,
to bereave us of our sweet companions, leaving us to pass the rest of our
days, either in solitariness with snares (so that we should bring our gray
heads to the graves with dishonor, (as many have done) or in marriage more sad
and sorrowful the latter part of our life, then ever it was comfortable in the
former part thereof? Could we well brook such sauce, and sower herbs? yet fit
for such as have eaten our former dainties with such unthankfulness? verily,
the experience I have had of second or third matches which have betided some
husbands have made me to think of our Saviors words to Peter, Ioh 21. 18.
when thou were young, thou girdedst thy self, and went at thy pleasure: But
when thou art old, another shall bind thee and lead thee whither thou would
not! Surely when thou art old its ill ending, it were better beginning with it
in thy youth, if God would! Yet so it is, many have been feign to hang up the
harpes of their youth, upon the wislowes of sad marriage in old age, and sing,
this new life requi^es other manners, other abearing: before, I was carried
upon Eagles wings, now I must shift for my self: my battles were once wont to
be fought to my hand, but now, I must know war, and fight my own. Now I am
tried indeed, what is in my heart, what patience, what self-denial is in it,
yea my best wits to please, to conceal what I cannot amend, and all too
little! Do you wonder? Who should have told you, that a good wife was worth
the thanks while you had her? Or that she was any better jewel, then you
thought you deserved, till she was taken away? If nothing, but wanting can
convince your folly, why should not medicine cure your malady.

Guide others to good Choice.
why do you not guide others by your experience to make a good choice? you
will say, marriage makings are thanklesse offices! I grant it, that if all I
have premised be true, I think some may con them small thank, who have helped
them to their marriages: But, as hard as the world goes, and although all hopes
must rest upon proof, yet by your leave, some may give a shrewder guess then
others, 2. King. 7.
and say more touching aptness or unaptnesse: howsoever, I say to you as those
Lepers, having stored themselves with victuals and booty: we do not well to
suffer our brethren to starve! And although the best care may miscarry: yet the
care is in no fault, but rather much worse it must be, where Counselors are
wanting.

Secondly, Branch 4.
I say to all such good couples, be wise: l^ve, love, Exhortation to live,
love, and leave.
and leave. What has a man of all his sore labors, under the Sun? or what
profits it, to spend our life in needless toil and vexation? Live first, in
the joifull improovement of all those graces and blessings, where with God has
endowed you. Take and mutually possess each others virtues: grow by the help
of others more inward, holy, useful in the communion of Saints. Let your
streams flow to others, enjoy not all to your selves. Love secondly: endeere
your hearts in each other mutually: Suffer not Satan to come between bark and
tree, and through a satiety of Blessings, to turn all to weariness and
fulsomenesse: to grow estranged in your affections: yea, ready to take pritches
at each other, forgetting Gods love to you both: If some had those advantages
we have (should you say, of consent and peace) oh! what a close walking with
God would it produce, without separation, whereas we vanish? how would they
settle religion, and government of family, which they would and cannot, we
might, and will not? Leave lastly, each other, willingly and contentedly, when
God shall determine your short pilgrimage; which will so much the easilier be,
if you have lived and loved before! the parting will be bitter however: yet
much worse, if all be to be done at death: Sweeter will the parting be, upon
experience of former marriage improovements; then upon guilt of remediless
errors! But I say, the time is short, use the world, 1 Cor. 7. 21.
as if you used it not, buy as if you bought not, marry as if you married not;
do all moderately: knock off before, unloose in season: There has been a
time of embracing, there must come another far from it. By that rejoicing you
have had in Christ, Eccles. 2. 5.
die daily; and tell each it other in your best rejoicing: I bid you not do as
heathens, set a scul before you on your marriage day: with a Motto: What I have
bin, thou art: and, what I am thou shall be! But know, marriage happiness is but
the liberty of a prison. Squeez it not too hard, lest you force blood: use it
slightly and it will comfort you. Say not its good being here, build not
Tabernacles, Matthew. 17. 4. Let not death knock unawares; Its pity, a man
should be in love with shells on the shore, as to forget the sip, and be swept
away: or love the husband here, forgetting Christ: a carnal relation,
renonuncing an eternal!

Instruction.
Its a mystery, as Paul calls it. Marriage is a shadow of that spiritual un
o^ of Christ and the Church.
And, as sometimes he teaches married persons their duties by the mutual union
of Christ and the Church: so also, another while he describes the true union
and Amity of Christ and the spouse, by the samenes of flesh, which marriage
causes between husband and wife. A word or two of both: and Eli^zer was a
spokesman between Isaac and Rebecca, In their meetings and marriage.
to draw her into a marriage knot with him: and as he carried the Bracelets and
tokens sent in Isaac's name, to allure her to him: also declared the abundant
wealth of Abraham, in cattle, gold and jewels, all to bestow upon his only
son Isaac: that so the richness and content fullness of the match might
persuade Rebecca: So does the Lord by his spokesmen the Messengers, reveal to
his Church by his spirit, all his wealth and Treasures of wisdom and
knowledge: all put into the flesh of the Lord Jesus, and tells her 1. Cor. 1.
all the goods which he has give^ us in him: that he may thereby surprise her
heart, and gain her to be his; he sets out his son from head to foot in all
amiablenesse of person and graces, that his eyes and looks might wound her, and
steal her heart away from trash and toies of the world.

It is he who not only so, And how,
but where as he found her unapt for himself, an Amorite, an Hittite, in her
blood, a base Captive: he shaves off her hair, pares her nails, washes her,
and makes her clean: he bestows her dowry upon her, (not as men upon their
wyves) for they look for it from them, thinking them little without it: he
discovers the miserable, desolate, and forlorn life of her woeful vriginity,
wherein as an orphan, she lay open to all enemies, all wrongs and injuries:
convinces her, that her support and welfare is merely from himself: Nay tells
her that she was engaged before to a most cursed husband, who would have
undone her: he undertakes to stab him, and to make her way clear, for the
marriage of himself, the old contract being dissolved: He becomes an earnest
suitor, an hot lover of hers, and refuses no patience, to win her: even till
his locks be full of the dew of the night: All to make her his own, his only
one: that having renounced (not only base qualities, but) her own fathers
house, her self, her name, and all her own happiness, he may be happy in
her, and she in him alone, (for he can endure no corryvall) and so be married
without any fear of ever being divorced. He causesher heart, by this
Attractive, and these cords of a man, to resolve upon the match: She then
enclines to him, she can say neither more nor less save that it is from the
Lord; she begins to chide herself for her so long ignorance of his worth,
unacquaintance with his excellencies: little enquiring after such a person: now
he needs no arguments, for she cannot pardon her self, that she knew him no
sooner, she casts off all her colors and covers of shame, and resignes up her
self fully, freely and for ever to be his: abhorring her self, and wondering
that such a person Their mutual Converse.
she compts all others as dung, they all stink unto her in comparison of him
alone: and therefore consents to his motion, believing she shall find no other
of him, then she has apprehended him to be. This touching the meeting.

And upon this her consent Christ and his spouse live and love together: What
Christis ^o the Church
for Christ takes her to himself, from that day forward, even home to
himself, and shows her his dwelling, making her glad in the tents of her
mother, as Isaac did Rebecca in Sara's tent: he marries her to himself in
righteousness, compassion, faythfulnes and love: he puts a robe about her, and a
ring upon her hand, attire upon her head, shoes upon her feet: furnishes her
with all his treasure: killes the fat calfe, makes her a royal feast, of all
fat things, of refined wines; even his Sacraments: he endowes her with all he
has, takes her both for better, to rejoice in her graces: and for the worser
to cover all her infirmities, to make a great praise of her poorest virtues,
judging her by them, and not the other: undertaks for all her debts: none may
sue her, but in his name, who answers all suits and quarrels: gives her himself,
his heart and love, and all which is meet for her for need and comfort, for
this life and a better, for why? She is his Hephziba, and Beulah: In all her
sicknesses, he assists and stands by her, he is afflicted, in all her
afflictions, and his right hand saves, sustains and redeems her: Charges the
daughters that they wake her not till she please, and his love is her banner
and defense: And let none touch his beloved, for he touches the Apple of his
eye: no wrong she receives of any, but he makes it good an hundredth fold, till
she be past all danger.

And suitable (in measure) is the spouses carriage toward Christ, What she is
to him.
(if she be not degenerate: She again most deerly loves him, she is in all
things helpful to him to his glory, to his contents, even as a wife of his
desires: She is reverently and meekly subject to him, under all his commands,
with most loiall awe, and yet with delight as under an easy yoke; is most
tender of his welfare, yea is glad, and thinks not her self too good to wash
the feet of his poorest servants: if her goodness cannot reach to him, she
reaches it to his children, whom (in his absence) she nourishes, solaces her
self in, beholds him in them, visits, clothes, and releeves them in their
needs; thinking them happy who may stand as servants in his presence: she
thinks her self more happy in him, then if married to the greatest potentate
upon earth: The spokesmen who treated with her about this marriage, are
precious in her eyes, yea their feet are beautiful to her, for the glad
tidings they brought her: She compts no labor too much, no cost too deer for
him: Even the costliest ointment is not good enough for his feet. The
reproaches of them that upbraid him, go into the bowels of her belly, and
dart to her heart: she walks not only not rebelliously and contumeliously, but
not uncomely, not slightly: But decks her self with all the gifts of the
spirit, humility, wisdom and sweet tenderness of spirit, yea the spirit of
grace is in her lips, that in all her behavior and converse she may walk in
and out gracefully and amially in his sight, in all long suffering and
welpleasing: she is faithful to him in all his secrets, keeps his counsel:
Dares not prostitute her self to any, not only lusts, but even liberties, or
companies which she thinks may be distasteful to him, yea but suspicious;
The tokens he sends her, as pledges of his favor, are most dear unto her. She
seeks no priviate welfare of her own besides his: She distrusts not his
provision, but trusts him confidently, knowing she shall not want: denies her
self for his sake, and rejoices that by this, her loyal heart may be tried:
Thinks never the worse of him, because she suffers for him, but rather the
more he costs her, the deerer he is to her: No husband of other women can
stain hers, for hers is above all, the cheef of ten thousand; the fashions,
garish and whorish attires, paintings and spangles of harlots come not about
her neck, nor wrestes But she frames her self to his contents, in all
chastity she knows his voice, but abhorres a strangers: Nothing greeves her,
but his absence: All her longings, desires, and tears, are, that she might be
with him, where nothing may ever divide her from him!

Let it teach us in the midst of our marriage contents to raise up our
affections to the joy of this spiritual union: and in the midst of our
discontents here, to make supply with the happiness of this!

And this may serve for these two general uses also, Conclusion of the
Treatise.
belonging to the whole discourse: In a word therefore, to conclude all; If
that, which I have at large said about Marriage duties, seem to discourage
any weak ones, as if their oil and meal could not reach out so far; they
shall never attain to this measure; I will not answer them as once a Poet
answered one that asked him, why he always brought in women as very virtuous,
always commending them: but another presented them (on the stage) as vicious,
always traducing them: Oh says he, I present them as I would have them, as they
should be: but he brings them in as they are commonly. So I might say, my
discourse does not presuppose either all husbands or wyves as they are, but as
they should be. Aim at it as a mark: But I will answer as a learned heathen
in his Epistle to his friend speaks, when he had received a very short letter
from him, I have read over thy very short letter very often, and so often, that
I have made it a very long one. So here: My large discourse may dismay some for
coming so short of practice as they do: Beseech the Lord therefore to behold
thy defects with a merciful eye, to read the short lines of thy obedience
often over in the glass and perspective of the Lord Jesus: and so, by his
large interpreting, and much looking upon thine honest endeavor, it shall be
esteemed as full and large. God help! Our discourses of these matters, are far
larger, then the practice of the most is: Our selves who write and ours, are
poor, and unsuitable to our Rules! Bowbeit, not contrary, not wil^^ly opposite!
and where there is but endeavor, God will accept Give Lord power to do as thou
directest, and command what thou will! Speak and spare not upon these te^nes:
for thy servants, handmayds, (mouring for their deaf ^ares, and dead herts)
desire to hearken and to obey. Look not at what is ours, its vile! but at that
which is thine in us, which is precious! In which happy desire, I conclude the
Treatise.

The End of the Treatise.
THE APPENDIX to the treatise: Discovering the just vengeance of God upon all
unclean ones, especially Defilers of Marriage.
Hebr. 13. 5. But, Whooremongers and Adulterers, God will judge.


ITwas no part of my Purpose, Preamble to the Appendix:
(good Reader) to have used this text any further, then as I have already
treated upon it. Why the latter part to this Text is handled.
The occasion of adding this Discourse upon the latter part, was the private
request of a friend to utter my mind unto him, and to satisfy his spirit,
touching the haynousnes of uncleannes: whereof he desired his soul might
thoroughly be convinced, (as blessed be God it was, through mercy concurring
both with this, and other helps used to that purpose:) which service I
considering seriously of, took the latter part of my Text: as a ground of my
project: even then, purposing (since God brought it by that occasion to hand,)
to annexe it to my marriage. Treatise: as foreseeing, not only it would satisfy
some to have the equal handling of both members of the Text: but that it might
not be impertinent, as a spur, to help the Application of the former
treatise; and as a disswasive to as many in this debauched age, (who shall
happily come to the reading of it) if they be not imperswasible, and hardened in
the sin, to weigh well their Estate, and repent: That so God speaking peace
to them, they may no more return to folly. In which hope, I begin.

But whoore-mongers, and adulterers, God will judge. God deals wite his own
by Judgments
by what means soever, God will judge them. The course may seem strange
(perhaps) which here God takes, speaking to his church, so to threaten, and, to
work rather by down right strokes, then by oil and promises of love, to
allure to Obedience. But even our God, (mark the word ^ he says not the
wicked man's revenging God, but even our God, Heb. 12. ult.
) is a consuming fire. And our God sees it meet, even to appear to his own
sometimes in this hieu, and in bloody colors when their spirits grow base, and
sensual: as this sin of Uncleanness of all other, infatuates the spirit most,
and makes it insensible of commands, except the Lord should take up weapons,
and flash hell fire in men's faces. That stupor of spirit wherewith David was
led a whole year together, after he had committed this sin, notwithstanding it
were accompanied with such killing circumstances, as to make a man drunk, and
to murder him, because he would not cover the sin: these might alone have
wounded him to death, if the sinful sweetness of it, had not bewitched him so
deeply: and the like we see in Sampson with Delila: and we know how terribly
God threakens both and pursues them. Elija himself, if stout, must have
thunders and lightnings: Jonah must have a tempest mingling heaven and sea in
one, and the jaws of a whale to gape for him, Job must have affrightings by
Leviathan and Behemoth: Nah. 1. 3.
and Nahu^ and Habbakuk must present God to the hard hearted Jews, Nahum. 1 3.
in jealous wrath, fierce rending the rocks: Habac. 3. 19.
in such a voice as makes the lips to quiver, Mica. 7. ult.
the bones to be blasted with rottennes; and all too little: who is a God, like
to our God, (says Mica sweetly) who passes by the sins of his remnant? But if
all should use such pleasing words, cursed flesh would say, That God is like
themselves. There is use of sweetness, when the heart is wounded with sin and
flayted with fears; But rare is the man who is always fit to feed upon such
honey without surfeit. The godly have a slav^sh part in them and free.
Too propense is, not only a base heart of the godless, but the baser part of
a Godly heart to turn grace into wantonness. There is a slave within us which
must have a whip, although the free borne be drawn by love. Each must have her
diet: the one, lest it grow too rank of Presumption, the other lest it be
overwhelmd with Despair. The Apostle Paul mixes threats and promises, to the
choicest whom he writes unto. For this cause, comes the wrath of God upon the
children of disobedience? 1. Cor 6. 10 1^
Be not deceaved, No whoremongers, Adulterers, etc. shall inherit the Kingdom
of heaven. And such were ye! Ephesians. 5. 6.
why adds he this? To show us that even Gods people had need to be put in
mind, what they were, what they have still a disposition to, to keep them
thereby in some awe. So again, let no man defraude his brother, 1 Thessalonians 4. 6.
for the Lord is the Avenger of all such. Many other such places there are. All
to show us, that God must sometime whip us to duty, and gaster us from evil,
as well as entise and draw us to or fro. Therefore, even so he urges these
Hebrews to Chastity, saying, Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge.

The sin of adultery then is hence concluded to be a great one. Adultery a
great sin.
Hosea the Prophet: bidding him to take to himself a fornicatresse to wife,
and so defile himself by getting children by her. dultery they were guilty of,
in forsaking God for Idols. The liberty taken by the Patriarchs in the point
of many wives and concubines, was for a time, in the first furnishing of the
Church with posterity. Else, from the beginning (as Malach. 2. speaks) it was
not so. Nay this Command against pollution, has herein a peculiar restraint
from some other: that whereas in some cases, it was lawful to take the goods of
Egyptians from them by dispensation; in this no such is granted, it being in no
case or respect lawful to commit uncleannes, no more then murder.

And we see this point verified in Scripture at large. Read these places,
Levit. 20. 10. Deuter. 22. 22. for temporal plagues and for eternal to all
sorts of impure ones, Romans 1. 29. 32. 1. Cor. 6. 9, 10. Galat. 5. 19, 20. 1.
Tim. 1. 9, 10. yea the greatest delinquents in these kinds, even Kings and
great persons, are not spared, as appears 2. Sam. 12. 7. Matthew. 14. 4. yea
even such as have attempted it ignorantly, as Abimelec, Genesis 20. 3. yea Priests
1. Sam. 2. 22, 23. all sorts, Numb. 25. 1. Ierem. 5. 7. Judge. 20. 4. The which
have their several judgments there applied. And more of the^ read, as of the
old world, Genesis 6. 1. 2. the Sodomites, Genesis 19. The sin of self pollution
(which I wish may be observed well) that of Er and Onan, Genesis 38. 9. She^bem,
Genesis 34. 25. All summed up by the Apostle, Col. 1. Mortify your earthly
members, fornication, uncleannes, effeminatenesse, unnatural lust: for which
the wrath of God comes upon disobedient men.

God will have all uncleannes laid open in her colors, as odious.
that there might appear as they all are, odious and terrible! But, what
odious colors are here? I answer, Here is one terrible one, which imports all
the rest. That which God himself will in person appear against, and sit upon
the judgment seat to enquire of, that must be a terrible crime; But God
himself, (not his Deputies only, for all men are liars) will in person sit to
judge it. Kings (we know) and Princes, come not ordinarily to the Star
chamber or to the Kings Bench in person, for slight crimes, but remarkable and
notorious. When King Henry the 8. to please that bloody Tiger Gardener, came in
person to sit upon that holy man and meek lamb of Jesus Christ, John Lambert,
how terrible was his appearance, and how frowning a brow cast he upon that
innocent Martyr? What then is the brow of that God, that must sit upon King
Henry himself? Only the difference is, Princes make a long and deep
inquisition of matters, either really, or for show, to boult out the truth;
But, the Lord proceeds ex officio mero, he needs no Informers, no Evidence, but
is witness, Accuser, Judge and all in one, because he knows all without
enquiry. A short count shall he make upon the earth; how much more upon this or
that man, Mal. 3. 5.
and his crimes? By name he will be a swift witness against the Adulterer, as
Malachi speaks; And where the delinquent is his own Accuser, what need long
process of law? Such is the conscience of each sinner, and of this by name!
The Judge then, coming in person making a swift work of it, and having the
sinner himself arraigned by his own conscience, must needs set a terrible
face upon the sin of uncleannes.

Ere I go any further, Digression, showing that fornication is a great sin.
since I wrap all uncleannes up in one bundle of wrath, I foresee that in this
loose and lascivious age, many will tax me for speaking so indistinctlie of
all sorts in this kind, fornicators and adulterers; for the former of these had
at the writing of this text, have still, and will have their patrones, not
Papists only, but Protestants, to aleniate and qualify them as less sinners,
if not to bolster them as none. And surely, in vain do I urge Gods judgments
upon that which is no sin: therefore observe; first for heathens, who (as
Hierom says) only condemned adultery, suffering youths and maids to defile
themselves without restraint, as if not will, but worth made the sin, I say
with him, Christ's law is one, and Cesars another. Alas, that weak Relic of
light which was in Heathens, Act. 15.
was soon overshadowed: It caused the Apostles to forbid the converted
Gentiles, the sin of fornication, and Idols, as equally promiscuous among
them. 1. Pet. 4. 34.
Their very Law givers permitted it as lawful, and therefore St. Peter says,
That they wondered at the Christians, that they ran not with them into the same
confusion of uncleannes. And no wonder if Pagans thought thus, when Papists
openly write thus. For not to speak of their most unclean Casuists who by
their base particularising of the circumstances of filthiness, noiso^^e to all
ch^st ears, do show themselves what tribe they are of) one of them expressly
writes thus: He is no heretic, that says, Fornication is no mortal sin,
because there it no Text of Scrip. that says so. No is? What means that then
of Paul, Colloss. 3. 5. are not the words plain, that wrath comes upon men
for this? Other Papists add, That light of Nature condemns it not; and
indeed, in such as themselves who by custom have lasht out their eye, its
true, but not else? And their Canonists write likewise.

But let these masters of misrule go: let us attend what the God of Order
speaks in his word, of which partly I have spoken in the proof of the
doctrine: add thereto that Deuteronomy. 17. 18. 1 Cor. 6. 18. Doubtless they who
drive out the spirit out of their souls and dodies, sin mortally. So do they
who shall burn in the lake of ^rimstone. Revel. 21. 8. The Fathers are all of
this m^nde. Homil. 22. in 2. ad Corinth.
Chrysostom, so often as thou have played the fornicator, thou have damned thy
self. He also tells us the law of Nature, and conscience does evince it; we
need not be taught what evil, incontinencie is and fornication: for we know it
from the beginning, Homil. 12. ad popul. Antioch
I do not much desire to load my reader with quotations save in cases
controversall, to put all out of doubt. And the same Father, Lo (says he) Paul
says not Abstain from fornication, In 1. ad Corin* homil 1. 18.
but fly from it. Another of the Fathers makes a Beadroll of the Reproaches of
fornicators, A fornicator is a filthy ignominious slave of sin, in whom the
Devil does knead in and imprint his loathsomnes: He is to be eschewed in the
house, to be abhorred in meetings, Gregor, N^ssen (...) 1. ad Corinth.
he is the reproach of such as come, near him, the opprobry of his enemies,
the shame of kindred, the Execration of Neighbors, the sorrow of parents, etc.
If he offer to marry, al reject him. So it was the^, but now its no matter, so
he have land or money. Tertull de pud^^t. cap. 1.
So another, whoredom and fornication, are not counted among common sins. And
Cyprian, That fornication, is a great sin, Paul shows to the Corinth. He names
that Text, All other sin is out of the body. To conclude Gregory (a Pope
himself) single persons must be warned, that they mix not themselves with
harlots. Endless it were to mention the rest.

And is there not great reason? Reason why.
How woeful a mischief does it reach to? For the bastards begot by such
vagrant lust, are wholly neglected, in point of Education, wanting the care of
a father, and the cohabitation of parents, and so both an accursed posterity is
begotten, and beggary increased. Vagrant lust being justly plagued with a
vagabond posterity. But the maine reason is taken from another ground. True it
is, that the fornicator sins against his own body, the bastard he begets (an
innocent patient, necessarily miserable) the Common wealth and society: all
bands of honesty: but especially he sins against that everlasting decree of the
7. command of a most holy and pure God. And so much by the way for this point.

Answer. By a particular induction of those punishments which he has inflicted
upon all unclean ones? Which by and by I shall number up: but in the mean
time, let me not forget to premise some Reasons, why the Lord strives to put
so odious an outside upon this sin of uncleannes: and these reasons, I desire
may be marked for the whetting up of the Readers edge, upon the matter ensuing.
I will be short in all, remembering that I am now only adding a little to the
former Argument. Uncleanness is a very near, natural Corruption.
and as much nourisht and cherisht as any one, a true Ruben, the eldest child
of old Adams strength, bearing name of the Mother, which is called in general
lust or concupiscence. Heathens esteem those virtues which carry the name of
the kind, ^o be eminent ones: as fortitude because its called virtue, its to be
supposed to be Eminent, and to have most of the kind of good in it. So has
uncleannes the name, and most of the kind, because its called lust eminently.
The Mother and Daughter are bawdes mutually to each other. Now then, the Lord
seeing how hardly those evils are shamed, and abhorred, which lie so near our
heart, and are so fomented by the influence of continual corruption as the
stream by her spring: seeing that this sin is bred, and steepes in our
bosom, as our son: does so much the more set himself to deface, and make it
odious. As a father, beholding some more natural evil, lurking in the spirit
of his child, pride, drunkenness, does all he can, to unmaske it, to
discover that blind folding selflove which maintained it, and does all he can
to bring it out of conceit with him, and make him loath it.

Men are prone to blanch over this sin.
and make it as none, or very small; by their slighting, and extenuating of it.
So much the more does the Lord strive to point it out in lively colors, and to
aggravate it. The heathens (such as all were, to whom Paul directs his
Epistles) had, by ill custom so far dashed out that dim twilight of conscence
left in them, that they deemed this sin, among others, a mere natural,
necessary appetite, and (in a manner) made as common of it, as of eating and
drinking: In so much, that in that Epistle to the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 10.
Paul has much ado to persuade them to see any shame in it. Nay, (that they
might add drunkenness to thirst) lo, they began to make the more bold with
God in this kind, under pretended privilege by the Gospel, as if Christ had
come to proclaim liberty to all petty sins, for opposition to which unsavory
baseness, the Apostle is feign to allege the wrath of God against it, even
upon them who were his peculiar people the Jews. The more we slight sin,
the more is God feign to cast us in teeth, and upbraid us with it.

This sin inchan^eth and bribeth the judgment.
yet the sensuality of our spirit, and the tickling pleasure of the flesh
(being as the belly which has no ears) inflaming and bolstring up it self by
the lewd general practice of base times, and the baits and objects of
uncleanness in every corner, spread as snares by Satan: is very propense, is
very apt to forget that face thereof, which in the glass of a royal law and
the terror thereof, were presented unto us: Our carnal affections (I say) are
so apt to take fire (as dry gunpowder) and to flash up, that they do bribe our
judgments dangerously, from a convinced persuasion of the loathsomeness of it.
And the devil is never far off: but presents this butter in so Lordly a
dish, that the soul spies not the hammer and nail in his hand, till he have
driven it into the temples. Who should have persuaded David, or Samson, that
those amiable objects and delights of their eyes, were so bainefull and odious,
as they found them? Jude. 10.
Saint Jude tells us, that those Idol teachers, were so defiled with the
flesh, that they bare down their conscience in that which they knew to be
evil: and like sensual brute beasts, powered out themselves to their lust
with greediness. Such a charming Siren there is in the soul, by this sin,
lulling it a sleep as upon Dalilas knees, lest it should admit a thorough
convincement thereof. The dead flesh then of this soar being so great, the
corrasive had need be smarty which should eat it out.

Adultery is very full of colors and excuses to hide it self under.
as this: none so fruitful in devising shifts and tricks that it might not be
discovered; or evasions that it might not be punished. Whether we look at the
tricks and inventions, which the committers themselves devise to cover it; yea
the many desperate ways which they have to cloak it from the sight of men:
or, whether we look at the covers which the devil has fitted for these cups:
how many ways of commuting, how many ways of recrimination, and turning the
crime upon the accusers, so that they are more snarled then the accused (for
vice is manifold, virtue is simple) how many ways of overthrowing witnesses,
for lack of narrow testimony? how many commutings, dispensings, and pardonings
of this sin (a very mocking of God, and adding oil to the flame?) Look into
the nature of the sin it self, its a work of darkness, and therefore as
deep as hell in the devising of ways to conceal it self. Sleidan has a
story of an adulterous Duke in Germany, who falling in love with his Dutchesses
handmaide, and thereof had in deep jealousy by his wife, devised a course
politiquely to imbarque himself more deeply into his uncleanness, and to
elude his wives suspicion. He sent the harlot to a Castle, (as if he meant to
cast her quite off, appointing a strait watch (as he gave it forth) that she
might not be thought to escape, and after some time caused a report to be given
forth in the Country that she was deadly sick (whether of discontent, or other
disease:) after this had a while possessed his Duchess, he caused it shortly
after to be reported, that she was dead: and left that might be suspected, he
took a solemn course for her enterrement; he hired women for the nonce to
conduct the corpse, appointed an Image (such was the manner of the burial) to
be laid above the hearse, openly to be seen, which should resemble to the eyes
of the beholders, the pale and consumed face of his lemman, as she looked
^eeing dead: also witnesses he suborned such as had tended her, to swear it,
a solemn funeral and a sermon, with a large dole to the poor; all framed to
give demonstration and assurance to the world, and his Duchess, of her death,
that she might no more be looked after. But still the harlot lived, prospered
in health, still the Duke (pretending other journeis) haunted her company,
burning in his l^st much the more: who sees not uncleanness to be as
ingenious as the Poet describes the Parrat when she is hungry, or as the belly,
which he calls a Master of Arts? Therefore I say, the Lord deals accordingly
with it; That which we commit in secret, the Lord will revenge in the open view
of the world, and reveal in the tops of houses (as at the last this Dukes
Villainy:) And by how much this sin escapes the judgment of man, the more
cunningly, and smoothly, by so much, God sets himself to meet with it, the
more terrible, That so his method might make it the more hated: for his colors
are in grain, laid in oil, and will soon wash out our false paint.

Eith^r for p^evention or s^opping of mouth.
the prevention of this sin, before hand, rather then they should learn
repentance too late; having before polluted themselves (and this he chiefly
intends) or else, if (notwithstanding all his ways) men will still try
conclusions with him, their mouths may be stopped, and themselves put to
silence, either from ability to excuse the fault, or decline the punishment.
They cannot then pretend, that they were the bolder to commit it, because they
thought it slight. They cannot (with any forehead) deprecate the punishment of
that, which is so confessedly odious.

That sensuality might have strong disswasives.
might have as well real and sensible pulbacks from this sin, (by Gods
abhorring and opposing it) as by the beholding the examples of loose and
dissolute offenders, to be tickled, and as it were to stand on thorns, till
they be like them. The Lord tries us with this bitter sweet, that is whether
his bitter or the worlds sweet be chief with us: if not, yet we shall not have
all our will, nor all the sweet of our lust, but with it we shall have some
sting and prick in our flesh, to make us sit uneasy upon our cushion,
especially in this woeful world, degenerated to all licentiousness, as in
other sins, so in this of uncleanesse; which so overfloweth the banks of
countries and towns in this declining age, that if examples may prevail,
there shall not want enough to corrupt the bodies, and defile the manors of
the most. Just it is, that such as defile the ordinances with the scurfe of
their own inventions, should be given over with Papists, to the pollution of
their bodies by all kinds of lust; the outward uncleanness having been always
a brand of the spiritual. So much for reasons.

Now, Gods judgments against it.
I return where I left, to make fuller answer to that question, how it may
appear that God is such a Judge of this sin? Branch 1.
I say therefore, if we shall consider these passages following, it may. First
if we shall consider that the Lord has not spared to set his own dearest
people on the stage for this sin of uncleanness. Mat. 1. 19.
Its said that Joseph (Mary's husband) was a just man, Gods dearest servants
not exempt from this general sentence.
and was loath to defame her openly, when he perceived her to be with child, but
meant privily to rid his hand of her. But the Lord is not as man, he is a just
and jealous God, not sparing to exemplify and traduce his best servants, that
their blurre and penalty might scare all from venturing. A just King will begin
with some servant or favorite of his own, by making him the spectacle of his
severity: when he would have all his subjects, put it out of question, that if
they transgress in the like, they shall not go guiltless. And, if this be
done in the green tree, if the fire so easily kindle upon that, what shall be
done in the dry? If the very righteous be not free from being stigmatiques in
the court of this justice, what shall become of the ungodly and wicked? 1. Pet.
4. 18.
And, if Judgment begin at the house of God, what shall be done with the rest,
the stubble who are ready to be burned? I say, what then shall become of the
common rout of Sodomites, Adulterers, and fornicators? Tremble oh ye unclean
wretches! Do you see Lot, David, Solomon, Sampson sholled out from their
fellows for this, and look you to escape?

Secondly, Branch 2.
see what a judgment appeared upon the bastard offspring of the Adulterer? It
might seem unjust, that an innocent should be so plagued for the fathers
uncleanness, The offspring of the Adulterer excluded from the Tabernacle, many
ages.
as to be shut out and cut off from the congregation to the tenth generation.
Surely the taint was deep, and the iron moll cankerfretted, which could so
hardly be washed out: what did this argne, but that by so severe a sentence,
(not to be expiated by blood, or any other clensing) the Lord would deter men
from such filthiness? That, if they durst not thus offend, they might tell
themselves, they must cut off the fruit of their sin, from ever coming, where
God and his people had to do. Who should dare to be so profane, if yet the
heat of his lust would permit him to think seriously, either of the hell which
himself, or the excommunication and blasting curse which his bastard child
should incur! But, Alas? Its to be feared that these thoughts are the first
of those which these last think of?

Thirdly the penalty inflicted upon Adultery, Branch 3.
was death without remedy. Old Penalty of Adultery, death without remedy.
There were diverse sorts of death inflicted upon malefactors by the law; and
some learned men question what this death was? The agreed tenet is, that it was
stoning, although strangling, and burning were used for some excesses in this
sin, when it came to incest, or the unnatural sins of sodomy, and bestiality.
The thief was not hanged, but spared by making restitution: (and in single
fornication, less penalties might be allowed) but in these cases the Lord
would allow none: as if the offer of a requital in such cases were most
unseasonable. No, but gave way to the jealousy of the husband, and himself
admits no pecuniary mulct to redeem that, which jealousy counts to be above
ransom; yea, so terrible a law he ordeynd, for the unclean harlot, (upon the
instance only of a jealous husband) that if she stood upon her trial, and
gaynesayd the accusation, she should be set before the Priest, and there drink
a cursed water, and if she were guilty, she was found out by the providence of
God, Numb. 5 18. 19.
and plagued with rotting of her belly and thigh, and so perished: So she gat
nothing by her concealment, for in stead of the peoples stoning, Gods hand
seized upon her. And what is this, save Gods coming in person to judge a whore?

Fourthly, Branch. 4.
what severe judgments has God executed upon unclean persons? Severe
judgments executed upon Adulterers.
Let first Scripture, then experience speak; for Scripture, how did the Lord
pursue David, for his Adultery? First with the rape of Thamar, then the murder
of Amnon, then the treason of Absalon, (both whom he should have slain and
taken from the earth) together with his just execution by Ioah: (the child it
self conceived in adultery should have been the first) the open defiling of
all his Concubines in the face of the sun, as he had defiled others in secret:
The perptuall unhappiness of his course all his life to his dying day, Both in
Scripture.
never free from sorrow, and even then in the usurpation of Adonijah, what
godly man ever suffered so in his children, himself living to see it, as he?
why should God sit in judgment upon his own favorite, for this sin, save to
scare all to whom this story should come, even to the worlds end? And, what
became of Salomons glory? Was it not all blasted, by this sin of uncleanness?
Although he lived not to see it, yet what a spectacle of ruin did the Lord
make Rehoboam? Stripping him of the ten tribes, and of the richest kingdom in
his fathers days, making it the poorest that it had ever bine before? What
made Sampson of a judge in Israel, yea a Giant, a conqueror to become a fool
in Israel: a blind slave to grind in a mill? save the besotting of himself
with lust? Number. 25 7. 8.
How dealt God with those Israelits at Poor? Did he not set his vicegerent
Phinees on work, to thrug throusth the chief ringleaders, ere he could be
pacified? And when the heat of wrath seemed to be slaked, did it so vanish?
Did not the tail of that plague sweep away four and twenty thousand? Could
their privilege of being Gods people save them? Where is now thy mouth (as he
said) who call adultery, but a trick of youth? In steed of one cloak which
men use to put upon it, of slightness; what cloak does the Lord put upon it?
Surely a Cloak bathed in the blood of so many thousand adulterers I was not
this enough to drive men from such dalliance? Who might not thenceforth call it
by the name of a bloody sin, of a scarlet die? What shall say of our own
experience? How many have we heard of, struck dead by the hand of God, taking
the^ in the act? Not suffering them to go out of the bed of uncleannes, whether
has God come in person to judge such or no.

And although many have bin suffered to escape such judgments, And in experience.
yet how many missing the Bear, have met with the Lion? out of the horror of
their conscience some dashing their brains against the walls, others stabbd',
drownd', hangd' themselves? To pen out of several writers who have written
Theaters of Gods judgments, the examples of such as God has plagued, is not
my scope! Alas! these be days wherein men will rather sit upon God himself
and scorn him to his face, then tremble at Gods sitting in judgment upon
Adulterers. But there be books which do at large supply us in this kind, if
our hearts be not quite sunk into a senslessenes of them. Even while I was
writing this, lest I should want unsought presidents, a report came to mine
ears of a Blacksmith near Colchester, (whose wound is as it were yet
bleeding) who having made a Cheine to hang a woman, that had murdered her
husband, fell into such suddeine terrors by Gods hand oppressing his
conscience, for his Adulterous life, that he cried out, saying, that he was as
wicked as she for whom he had made the cheyne; so, that he could not lin, till
by cutting his own throat, he had made an end of himself. So the Lord pulles
out some to be spectacles of reproach and detestation to the world, though
thousands escape. All are not dragged out by the hand of God openly as that bawdy
Bishop at the Council of Trent, whom Sleidan mentions, who creeping out of his
window along the leads to the wife of the next house, was watched by her
husband, and caught in a grinne or snare laid for him in his passage, and there
hung by the neck, as a ridiculous object to all the beholders. But, I say,
because men object, that thousands escape to some odd persons, whom vengeance
intercepts: Tell me, what better portion have they who survive, then the other.
Branch 5.


What one sin has so manifold marks of wrath upon it, Marks of wrath upon,
as this, upon the soul, body, or person sinning? as by the sequel may
appear. First for soul, what sin has found Soul.
Closeness, secrecy, shifts, always attending it, which keep the heart from
all tenderness, yea defile and disable the soul from repenting, nay the curse
of God sealing up that soul to impenitency: some walking, ten, some twenty,
some more years in the guilt hereof, yet with a smothered conscience: and
although they be wounded, yet hardly healed in a kindly manner, but suffering
their hearts to rankle inward, and outbidding all ordinances to their
destruction? How can it be, but such a sore must break forth all at once with
such a forcible outcry, that nothing can still or satisfy it? Name.
With what a blot do we think or speak of Sampson, to this day? And how many
Divines (though amiss) have deeply questioned Salomons salvation? Touching the
outward name, what a blot and infamy do they for ever procure? What an
infectious plague has it prooved in the stock of the Adulterer? No space of
time has purged it, it has been as the fretting leprosy in the walls, which
nothing could heal save pulling down the whole race and family from the very
foundations. Jeroboams name not being more prodigious, and odious in Israel,
then an Adulterers in the Church of God: as if such or such a family had bought
the staple of the trade! So that it is observed that this sin has so defiled
the blood of some families, that they are no sooner named, but their kind is
offensive, scarce any in such families being noted to be chaste? What a stinch
might such cause, and even a taint to a whole Country? How just were it for God
to pull down the whole houses of such, stick and stone, no memory of such to
be left behind? How just were it having first motheaten their name by
dishonor, to come upon their persons as a Lion and tear them in pieces? When
as men have failed, God has struck in.


Is not the finger of God here (as they told Pharaoh) when men on earth, who
should have censured them, suffer these nasty creatures to lurk in their sties
and dens, poisoning the Country with their breath, has the Lord let them
alone? Has he not been fame to step in himself, and by sudden vengeance to
cut them off? And, if such censures were in force as we are bidde^ to pray for
in the Church of God, such discipline I mean in the Church, could such a sin as
this, escape the dint of Excommunication, the greatest dart of wrath? Should we
have had such notorious whoremongers brought forth in the famousest places in
the land, to their penance, with such impudence or disdain? Not to speak of
such great ones as for their villainy in some kndes, not to be named, with their
own flesh, and forcers of their wives to yield to the lust of their servants,
have been brought to open execution? is it not pity, that through the
insolency of offenders, the sacred censures of Gods Church should be vilified
and exposed to scorn? To end this reproach of the name, its an usual saying,
that the sins of seed and pollution, are punished in the seed: one way or
other, a tainted seed, 1 Pet. 1. 18.
bewraying it self: Saint Peter speaks of some sins, derived by tradition
from the fathers to their children; among which this is one, (none of the
precious legacies) as Jericho was built, so is adultery plagued, both in the
eldest and youngest, it goes through the race, till it have wasted all, and
made an utter consumption. Some notorious monster in this kind, being as he,
who puts a burning torch into a stacke of straw, so violently burning that
there is no quenching of it.

Thirdly God accurseth this sin with beggary, Mark 3.
and rags, wastings of state, Beggary.
open, or secret: no man can tell how, save that so it is, and by this privy
plague, God has discovered many wretches, in the eyes of them, that else never
should have suspected such. One of them upon his death confessed both of this
and of other evils, I have spent many thousand pounds to damn my soul. Alas
poor soul, it need not have cost thee a penny, save that the devil loves to
have his bored slaves outvie Gods servants, and (as one says) do more for him
that will shed their blood, then Christ's servants will do for him that shed
his blood for them: When no cause, I say, has appeared of such a man's wasting,
but yet wasted he is, parsonage added to parsonage, great portion in marriage to
former inheritance, great befallings of legacies by this means, and that yet
none will serve the turn, but a canker fretting out the marrow of all; no
thriving in estate; what does it argue? but that moth that eats out the foyson
of all, and that fire that melts all, as fat before the Sun! The sluggard
and adulterer being commonly joined in one, partake of one plague of penury.
Go over towns and countries, tell the choice buildings, lands and
inheritances of them, and ask whose these were, all will tell you such a name,
such an house enjoyed them; but now all is gone and embezzeled away, nor one
acre remaining of four or five thousand pound lands by the year! And how? Oh
the fire of lust and burning concupiscence has wasted all, and driven them out
of their dwellings, as dogs or swine, so that all who come by may say,
drunkenness, riot, whoring, idleness, or malicious persecution of the Church
of God, have been the means to root out the most families of this greatness
and wealth: Truly methinkes when I pass by them they are as Theaters of
vengeance, and judgment of God against adulterers and fornicators.

Fourthly, the judgment of God appears in the snaring of the sinner by this
sin. Mark 4.
As is the whore, so is the adulterer: she is a deep ditch to devour,
Coherence of u^cleannesses*
and he is a vast gulf of lust and concupiscence. He is so drowned in his own
perdition, and cannot get out: snarled as a bird, so that the more she
struggles, the worse she is hampered, would unwind her self, but cannot. Oh!
then what a judgment is this, neither to be able to be chaste, nor endure to be
unchaste? As the Poet said of the Paramour to his harlot, neither can I live
with thee, nor without thee! So of this lust: I cannot endure it, it is so
dogging, so unsatiable, that it wastes my marrow in my bones, and causes a
perishing daily without death: its a tyrant to me, forcing me to serve it,
beyond my strength: And yet I cannot be without it neither, it has so
prevailed against me by the false sweet and cursed habit of it, that I cannot
want it. One in this kind was so addicted to it, that even when he was spent to
the very pith, yet had appointed his harlot to meet him, when death approached:
and could not believe he should die, till want of breath intercepted his
thoughts and trade. The soul in this plight sinkes deeper and deeper, one
harlot makes way for another; some one insatiable stallion in this kind having
three four, yea seven harlots to exhaust him. As he said merrily, so I here,
such need no gout, dropsy, ague or consumption to bring them to their end,
they have provided a speedier course. There is no end of sinning, and he must
needs go whom the devil drives.

Fifthly, Mark 5.
its the devils nestegge, and causes many sins to be laid, Its the Devils
nest egg.
one to, and upon another. Look upon the woeful cheine of David's lust, how did
one follow another, the act urged the concealment; 2 Samuel 11. etc.
the eagerness thereof provoked a suborning of Vrijah: that brought on the
making of him drunk, when that will not serve turn then the innocent must be
murdered: any one of these odious in a wretch, how odious then are all in a
Saint? How many secret murders of infants have been caused by Popish
Votaries, let the vaults, privies, fishponds, belonging to their lawless
houses testify; nay their own Pope Gregory, who took an order with them upon
the observation of such villainy I Oh the lies, shifts, perjuries, purgings by
forsworn men, bribes given and taken, policies and tricks to cover, defend and
make off such abominations! So it must be. I wonder that a man should be so
debauched as to be a whoremonger, but being one, I wonder not, that he is, as
such a one must be: for can a bowl rolling down the hill, stop her own
course, no more can he who is in the power of his lust, do as he would, but
as the force of ill custom, and the prevailing sweetness of his lust
necessitates him unto. No sin goes alone, but to be sure uncleanesse cannot
avoid many to accompany it. Once over the shoes in this puddle, rarely will
Satan leave off, till he have by degrees got thee over head and ears.

Sixthly, Mark 6.
what woeful consequences follow this sin? As Solomon of the drunkard, whence
are red eyes? To whom are wounds, black and blue cheeks? So say I here, To
whom are quarrels, Broils, blood shed, Duells between Corrivalls of Harlots,
with a raging heart never at peace: To whom? To those whom the fury of harlots
discontent has incensed: what will not such do to gratify their Mistress?
Nay where do Robberies by the high ways, and murders and burghlaries begin?
Surely in the love of harlots, as much as in any other root: It must be so,
love will not be maintaind with nothing, this sin is and must be desperately
wastfull: The old speech is, Venus must be nourisht with Ceres and Bacchus:
infinite is the luxury and Riot of such, no end of expenses in each kind: and
as the grave, so the harlot insatiably cries, give, give, else she thinks her
self scorned, and scorns her banquerupt lover. Now, then what does satan drive
them to? To all violent, hideous ways, rather then want oil for this Lamp?
An harlot must be fed with the rapine of all sorts, and when she is rich upon
the price of the soul of a man, she is best content. How many come to
untimely, shameful ends this way (especially of those Gentlemen thieves as we
call them) by the just intercepting hand of Gods instrument, the Magistrate? So
that many have said with him, finding God to pursue them, just oh Lord are thy
judgments! Many have been executed for crimes, which they never committed; but
yet confessed, that God has plagued them for such as man knows not, such as
the law cannot take hold of: secret Sodomy, Adultery, or other uncleanness,
which I never looked to have discovered. I did under a false title and crime,
but not without due and just desert: man has done me wrong, but God has done
me right: Oh what a just hand of God is here? Vengeance will not suffer them to
live.

Seventhly, Mark 7.
the body of the unclean is judged: seldom is it free from diseases and
distempers. The body.
Whence are such maladies, as poison wife, child, and each one that drink in
their cup? Who but God plagued that Army of the French with that loathsome
disease, never before heard of? Whence are inflamed, swollen, spotted faces,
puffed flesh, stinking breath, disguised body, putrefaction of the blood,
rottennes of the carcass, unsound health, speedy age, infinite infirmities?
Whence is that outcry which Solomon speaks of, when thy liver is darted through
with an arrow, when thy strength is given to the cruel, and thou mourn when
thy flesh and body are consumed, then shall thou cry out, how have I hated
instruction? Prove. 5. 10. 11.
Oh fool, and beast that I am, how am I led ^o the shambles as an ox, and how
to the stocks, like a ^ot? When all thy honor is laid in the dust, thy friends
are ashamed of thee, thy conscience flies in thy face, and thy harlot has
forsaken thee, and all is gone, then may thou say, God is departed from me
also, and leaves me hardened, and woe be to him that is alone! And yet all which
I have said, is but as the Adulterers prison and cheine, the chief Bar of
judgment which he must take sentence at, are, death and the last day: then
will God judge whoremongers indeed, then he will be a swift witness to
purpose, all his delayings and reprivalls of Adulterers, shall be recompensed
with sweetness in kind: then shall flames revenge flames, and one fire punish
another, and there shall be an eternal heat of wrath, for the short and
sweet pleasures of lust: For, without shall be Sorcerers, Murderers, Dogs,
Idolateors, Thieves, Liars, and Adulterers; this is the second death. This
death, shall be the reward of this sin, and this is the last judgment from
which no escape, no appeal shall be admitted. And this be said for Answer to
the Question.

(...) the uncleare.
as thwart and contradict God in his course; does God all he can to terrify
Adulterers, and to make this sin odious? Woe be to them then that make an
honorable thing of it; I shall not need to seek out as far as Spain, Italy,
France to find out matter hereof, such as make bastardy a title of honor,
covering it with greatness, so that a term of dishonor with God, is with
them a name of renown; woe be to them, who honor that which God abhorres! To
these add the Papists (touched before) who honor whores and concubines far
above lawful wives in the Clergy, setting up open stews, out of the which
the Pope draws an exceeding yearly tribute, (for you must note, he is not
so holy, but he will take the price of an whore into his treasury, and savor it
well) justifying the lawfulness of such practices and tollerations of harlots,
to the end forsooth, that the chastity of Matrons may be preserved! Are not
these wise Proctors think we for God and for his seventh Command? To make the
plaster of the rankest poison? But who wonders that the great mother of
spiritual whordomes, that old Bawd Circe who has poisoned all the world with
her double cup of doctrine and practice, should so tenderly nurse up the
stews? Oh you harlots children, and seedplots of bastards, are you so careful
of Matrons? and the safeguard of their chastity! No, rather your Banner and
Buckler is for whores, then Matrons! You care as much for your chastity, as
Judas did for the poor! whose successors you are, whiles for the filling of
your bags, you suffer any villainy, and live upon the sins of the people.

Once a young spark son to an Emperor told his father, he wondered at him,
that he would be so base as to exact tribute of the City for Urine! But he took
a piece of that golden tribute, and put it to his nose, bidding him smell to
it. Which he doing, he asked him, how it smelt? he answering, well for ought he
felt, yet (says he) it comes from the City urine. A base speech for a man of
so incomparable worth! But this tributemonger of souls is ten times worse; for
hell fire and all, do smell sweet in his nostrills, the smell of gain from any
thing favors well to him; so he have it. To these add such as slight this
sin, calling it but a trick of youth: such as blanch and color these sins
of all sorts, not to be named: never so rise in all estates, as now in this
debauched age! Such as play the bawdes to their own children, their own
wives, such as make a sport of it, and lay their bastards in their own wives
bosoms, forcing them to nurse them, Pro. 26. 19.
or else turning them out of doors? Casting darts and mortal things, and
asking, am not I in sport? Such as make a trade of this sin, serving the turns
of their commanders, as that hangby Hiram the Adullamite did the turn of Juda:
Do these, or such as these (for they are infinite) believe these terrors of
God? Or do they take notice, that God will have this sin made odious and
terrible, to gaster all from it? Oh woeful Rebels, and Traitors to the edicts
of Christ, beware, lest God come upon you, and tear you in pieces, and there be
none to deliver you! for so impudent a forehead of brass, and daring to resist
him in his own way! If he aggravate, dare you alleniate? surely he shall add
unto you all the plagues of his Book, and diminish your names from that other
of life!

Admonition to all uncleane^nes.
The ground is, that it opposes his ordinance; the end to prevent sin.
Deface not Gods way.
or defiling marriage, to cover your filthiness! (it was not made to such an
end) God will be surely avenged upon all such! Its the practice of Satan, and
Antichrist his eldest son, to be Gods opposite to thwart an ordinance. What
is so holy an ordinance, as the ministry of the word, the use of Sacraments,
the use of the Keys? And, what does he more purposely contradict? How basely
speaks all this rabble from top to toe, of a Minister? of preaching? of our
Sacraments? our Communion table! they jeere all, and oppose their Priesthood,
Mass, Sacrifice, and Altar! What so sacred a civil ordinance, as Magistracy?
They abhor it, tread under feet all kinds, that cross their own Government:
cursing, destroying, excommunicating, and murdering them at pleasure, if they
can come by them! What so pure an ordinance as marriage? But what uncleanness
is there, which they prefer not before it? Beware you rebels! you fight
against God, one that is stronger then you! hearten not one another against
this Ark, that is come into your Camp! lest he plague you, and make it too hot
and too heavy for your keeping! Call not those things common, and carnal,
which he has called pure; honor that which God has stamped: discern the
solemnes, the sacredness of it; defile not mine ordinance, lest I make you
your Sacrilege!

To prevent the sin.
you who formerly during your dissolute youth, have defiled your bodies, or
since marriage have adventured to do so: look back and bethink you, what you
have done! Tremble to think, that you dared to presume to sin in that kind,
which God has gastred you from. Should Adam have ventured to break into the
garden again, upon the shaken sword of a Cherubin? But lo, the shaken sword
of a greater then Cherubins are, is here! How just were it, that God had
struck you dead in the act? Still to strip you of all at once, and bring you
into the pit of despair! To accurse your posterity, and to transmit your sin,
through your race, to make you a by word as Jeroboam! oh wonder that ever you
got out of this pit (if yet you be) and take heed lest he who delights to see
dogs and swine turn to their mire and vomit, pull you not into this ditch
again! Tax not God for his severe and hard sentence against such unclean
wretches, whose bodies have rotted in prison, persons been ruined with penury,
souls perished in impenitency! It were just with God, your own should have
suffered no less! for such as despise his therrors, go on still as the
forlorn rank in the mouth of the Canon, wrath has always swept them away! as
a man who is a^gry will smite him that is next, so has he smitten some in
their souls, in their names, bodies, estates, posterity, to flaite others.
Else had he been unjust. Now then take warning: God aims at the preventing
of sin: If you by these examples repent not, your selves shall go in the
drove, and be made examples, that others may repent by yours.

And to conclude, Conclusion of it.
to both sorts, I say, knowing the terror of the Lord, desist from your
unclean course! who shall stand when God shall come in person to judge? Its
said that when Jehu sent to the Princes of Samaria, 2. King. 10. 3. 4. 5.
Tutors of Ahabs Children, to set up one of their Masters Children and fight
for him, they trembled, and said, two Kings could not stand before him, and can
we? Therefore they chose to cut off the heads of them, and send them in to him,
rather then to try it out! I tell thee, though the son of Nimshi were a
furious marcher, the son of God is more! Not two, or ten, but ten thousand
Kings could never stand before his revenge: Hell is prepared for Kings, if
unclean and adulterous? Stand not out, cut off the heads of these lusts, and
thereby make way for pardon and atonement to thy self, if yet ever this
woeful spot, and crocke of spirit may be washed out, (for there is but one
thing, even the blood of this Judge which can cleanse it) and forgiven. Think
not by peaking out of Gods sight for a while, to wind out, and be forgotten!
Rev. 2. 14.
So did Baalam, that Bawd of Peor, who cursed Israel more by this
Stumbling Block, then otherwise! Oh! he went to his place, and lurkt in his
nest, till the Lord in person came upon Midian, and then both the five Kings of
it, and all those entising fornicatresses, and then Baalam himself was dragged
out of his hole to execution! verifying his own Prophecy, who shall stand,
when God does these things! will an innocent Lamb tremble before a Lion, and
shall not guilty Adulterers, when God sits upon them? Shall this be the fruit
of Gods scaring of men, that with the new built house, they settle the more
upon the frame when the wind most shakes them? To run to sin, to snort in
it with so much the more impudency, securely? What is this save to mock God,
and play the Giants against heaven? To dare him with a Babell, and try whether
he can confound us! As those Philistians cried, 2 Samuel 10. 12
now play the men, kill both Israel, and the God of Israel, if you can! Be not
so mad! Time will make you think God is like your selves! and he will neither
do good nor evil! Because judgment is deferred, your hearts are set in you
to play the whores and villains still: But your damnation sleeps not! he
shall come upon you, and set your disordered ways in order before you, and
bring (as Solomon did Shemeis) all your pranks, old and new at one view into
your eyes, and then shall it not be possible for your shoulders, your
consciences to stand under your load, nor endure those terrors that shall
sting you, as the handsels of hell which is ready to devour you!

Instruction to be subdued by t'^ererrors of God.
against uncleanness; as not to dare to think of committing it. I have seen
many wretches, and one the other day* whom flaited in his conscience by the
fear of sudden death, unloading his guilty spirit into the bosom of Gods
Minister, even his filthy haunts with many close queanes, unsuspected: and
under this he lay as long as the dint lasted: but having found no further
favor with God, relapsed to his old course, as a cony though taken in her
hole, yet if let go, has no shift but to run to her old burrow and harbor!
If Christ be not the cover from the storm and rain, sin must needs be; and
although it be but a sorry one, which will one day wet to the skin, yet it must
serve the whilst. Subdue therefore thy soul with these terrors: as Christ
says, let them sink deeply into thine heart! It is thy self, it serves to
keep thee from the paths of death. As our Savior then when he bids watch:
Mark 13. 37.
tell us he says it to the Disciples, and to all: so, I wish that this
watchword might reach to all, none excepted, even forward professors
themselves. I much fear, Fotward professors beware of his snare.
this sin is rise among many even of such: for profession cannot alone quit us
of secret profanenes. So near is the flesh, so sly is Satan, so copious is a
false heart of evasions, that no sort of people is free. There want not fearful
examples at this day of each degree of men and women. I need not silence that
which all tongues jangle, and the ears of the good might tingle withal: what
debauched varlets there are of late brought forth from among the^, who have
crept in amongst the zealous servants of Christ, and taken upon them to be the
forwardest. To conceal, is now too late, too late to say, tell it not Gath:
for its all over the places about their dwelling. One being reprooved for
attempting the maids (who came to his house) to folly: answered, though I may
not covet my neighbors maid, yet for his own maids, or those that offered
themselves, he thought he might. Its time now (my brethren of of all sorts) to
cease striving, to hold ^^le in your palm; its rather time to apply
corrasives. The best way now, is in taking notice of these, to say, they were
among us: they were not of us, if they had, they would not so foully have gone
out of us. And yet (were it not that I fear doing hurt) I would add, that I
must not nor dare finally to censure every own as lost, who is guilty of this
sin: but I know, ten to one of these, are hypocrites, though for causes, God
may leave some odd person, whose repentance he purposes to make as eminent, as
ever his sin was: and moreover, to use this sin in others, as a forcible
occasion to convert them from all sin. But of this after. Of the hypocrites I
say, let him that is filthy, be filthy still; of the other, the Lord give them
grace, with Achan in the midst of their reproach, to give glory to God: woeful
creatures the whiles weltering in their misery from whom the unclean spirit
seemed to be cast out* and they to have escaped the pollution of the world
through lust: but through their looseness, the devil has returned into their
hearts, and brought seven spirits with him, worse then the former: so that if
that stronger man throw not out this strong, the end of such will prove worse
then the beginning.

Consider all such, Profession cannot dispense with this sin.
profession cannot dispense with you! rather it shall make your sin treble,
and heat hell seven times hotter! If we never found any other effect of the
sins of our ignorance, save shame and death: what are we like to find for
sins against knowledge! Truly men are strangely impudent and hardened in these
days! this makes me insist as I do! Fear not him, who can destroy the body
only and not the soul: but him who can cast both bodies and souls into hell,
I say, fear him! Get we our spirits truly molded into this terror of God!
Those Corinthians pretended the liberty of the Gospel, against the terror of
the Law: But, how does Paul answer them? Surely by a fit instance of the
Isralites in the wilderness, committing filthiness, at Peor. Are you better
then they? had not they the word, the ordinances, the cloud, the manna, and
rock? but God was never the better pleased with them, for that I Their
carcasses all fell, and were made dung in the wilderness. Therefore deceive
not your selves; Be not you fornicators as they ^ and were destroyed of the
destroyer; 1 Cor. 10. 10.
Their Angel of presence, turned their destroyer, for their uncleanness. If
this be all the privilege of your bare profession, let whose will venture,
but venture not ye! well (may some say) we would feign be of Gods mind, but
our hearts are so giddy and slight in this point, that we cannot get them to
be seriously awed by Gods judgments: I answer, I shall refer it to the
Exhortation following in the next Chapter: in the mean time, consider what
has been said in this.

CHAP. XVII.
And last; Containing the use of Exhortation, with Counsels and Motives to
preserve Chastity, and avoid uncleanness.

Exhortation.
that all who truly tremble at this judgment of God against Adulterers and
fornicators, do preserve their vessels with as much holiness and honor as
is possible. To all such (as in the end of this point I shall touch) belongs
consolation: but let it lie by a while, until thou be able to apply it to thy
self by the experience of what I shall now say. Wherefore, I exhort all such,
be chaste, and pure in body and spirit, passing the whole time of their
conversation here in holy prevention and caution against uncleanness. A
sollemne duty, to bring a clean body to the marriage bed: to maintain it
so, and bring it so to the grave! But how (will some say) may this be effected?
I answer, by observing three counsels: Counsels three.
and first to Abhor somewhat. Secondly to meditate upon somewhat. Thirdly by
practicing. Touching the first, Abhor somewhat within, and somewhat without.
In the prosecution of which three, if I shall happily trench upon any thing
before touched, through the neernesse of the argument, let the reader consider,
that when I wrote, that before upon the point of chastity, I intended not the
handling of this latter part of the verse: but I hope, I shall avoid any
purposed repeatings of ought, which the necessity of the order does not enforce
upon me, for the avoiding of any interruption. First Counsel.
For the first of Abhorring: First with David, Abhor thy self, Abhorring
somewhat
that inward original corruption of nature, the foment of this flame: he
begins at the right end of the staff, with that poison, wherewith his mother
had warmed him in her womb. Abhorring of some outward acts or penalties of
this sin, may go without any loathing of the fountain. Had it not been
(says David) for my Thine own self.
I had never committed such an actual abomination as this. Alas! as the feelde
of a poor man vanishes in the Map of a whole town, so does this evil of
concupiscence vanish in most men's eye, when they take a survey of sin;
whereas this inward is the body: and that which we se breaking out, is but a
member, as it might be here a toe, there a finger of defiled old Adam. Till
then the mother be abhorred, the daughter will never be renounced. Put case,
thou could bitterly inveigh, yea incense thine heart, against some actual
filthiness, yet, till this inward dunghill be raked, which is able to steame
forth into an hundred Adulterers, yea sins without number; I say till this
furnace kindled by hell, as ready to defile thee again (when thou have seemed
to wash out many stains as they appear) with ten fold more wickedness; look
for no redress of thy disease. Its a running soar, an issue of uncleanness,
and must first be dreined, ear the passages dry up: Theseely man who saw the
stream of the River run very swift, sat him down upon the bank and slept,
thinking by that time all would be run out, and he might go over dry shod!
Poor soul! for that river ran still, ever did, and ever will. So is it here:
till God dry up, or turn the current, it can be no otherwise. The due sight of
this thy bent of heart, thy frame of spirit, always inclining one way, never to
Purity, first tiring thee as a traveller, wurry thee as a dog, pursue thee at
heels, as the Avenger of blood did the Man slayer; is one of the best ways to
quit thee of this mischief. Get an inward abhorring of thy self, see what an
huge heap of filth lies there; mark how its like the door rolling the same
way on his hinges; and this wearisome sight may (perhaps) drink up thy spirit,
and casheire all thy dawbings, colors, and excuses. I say, This may raze thy
forte it self, and shake it from the foundations, and then the out works will
soon yield and fall to the ground. Look upon this sin in that Glass with
that eye, which Paul looked in, when he beheld lust forbidden: and, (if any
thing) this shall swallow thy ship wholly up in the quicksands of
selfe-abhorring. Say to thy soul thus, were I washed with nitre, yea scoured
with soap, yet the clothes I wear will defile me as fast: Alas! I get nothing
by all my outward abhorrings, lust will not be scared away with Holy Water. I
have a Bosom Orator within, which will draw me to lust, twenty times, one
after another, and pull me faster to filth, then all my own, or others
disswasives can withdraw me from it: Lord then, draine this flood and
overflow! teach me to abhor my self in dust and ashes, if ever I get
victory over my actual corruptions!

Secondly, abhor thy inward Actual thoughts, of contemplative Things to be
abhorred,
set before him, in all his projects and attempts: Thoughts of Contemplative
uncleannes.
so does the Adulterer. The heart (says our Savior,) is the Adulterer, all
the mischief is hatched there. What contemplations of villainy, does the
forlorn stie of Thoughts nourish in many? What unclean man or woman is there,
whose thoughts do not plod and contrive their meetings, the places, the time,
manner, and circumstances? What a Thoroughfare of such scurfe, is that defiled
spirit of theirs, which they carry about them? Once, a learned man was called a
walking library: But of these, it may be said, They are a walking Stews. Its
as easy to pull their hearts out of their bellies, as to alter and turn the
course of these suggestions: the Devil being the Presenter, and the fancy
the Receiver. Mortify then and nip these thoughts; which have the whole man at
command: Senses do not so much hurt to thoughts, as thoughts to them and to the
bodily performance. The loathing of base, vain, wanton, and capering thoughts,
in this kind, were half the cure. These vapouring up from the heart to the
brain, do so possess and beleaguer it that the affections are fired, and on
thorns, till they come to practice. Now, when the fuel is gone, or lessened,
the fire must cease: let original corruption be once abhorred truly, and this
will follow. Think that God speaks to thee in St. James his phrase, James 4. 8.
cleanse your thoughts ye sinners, and purge your hearts, ye wantonly minded ^
Howlong shall your unclean thoughts abide with and within you? Know you not
that Imaginations are the first moover of the whole frame of corrupt Nature? If
they moove, must not all inferior ones dance after their Pipe? And tell me,
when Satan fires the whole man, whither does he inject first his fireballes? Is
it not into the thoughts? If he would tempt, accuse, terrify, how goes he to
work but by raising up a commotion in the thoughts? And in what part is hell
fire kindled in the damned? Is it not first in the thoughts? Keep then thy
thoughts with all diligence! Forestall Satan and uncleannes by good thoughts,
chaste, pure, contrary thoughts; let the Chambers of the thoughts be
prepossessed with these guests: and they will sparre the door from such
encroachers. Especially if the pure spirit be the usherer of them in, by the
word.

Things to be abhorred, Colors and Excuses of it.
which the fertile heart, can devise abundantly, to alleniate and lessen this
sin! The Heart is the forge of all these tricks, and evasions. If the Lord have
called this sin so terrible; let it be enough to thee; abhor the Devils
figleaves; and behold the filth of this skirte with detestation. Blaunch it not
over with thy Nature, (that worst of all) the propension of thy constitution,
the strength of allurements, the difficulty of preserving thy self, the
Generality of the sin, the slighty opinion of the Multitude. Abhor these
cordially, or else the sin abides still, under dispensation and connivence. All
inward fomenters.
hope of impunity, hiding thine uncleannes under the shroud of a married whore,
or of thy wicked friends and Abettors; such as the Devil will raise up to
stick to thee, or any such as for a base bribe, will aid thee, and keep thee
from open shame; Such impunity being forecast in the mind is an hardnor of the
Adulterer in his sin: Abhor a luskish lasy heart, that delights in ease and
ydlenes, loath softness, effeminatenes and impurity of spirit, (a throughfare
for lust) Also unarmednesse of the Soul, lying open and exposed to occasion,
empty, swept and garnisht, fit for the next Devil that comes: Abhor rashness
and unstayednesse, which will on the suddeine betray thee, to the occasions of
lust. Renounce all selfconfidence, and ventrousnes upon thy stength, as rather
scorning to be snared, then humbly fearing snares, (for Alas! poor worm, who
art thou, if left to thy self?) Know this, that lust will give small warning,
it comes as a torrent: as the necessity of an armed man: There is the same
metal in thee, which is in others; and they are soonest snared, who fear
least.

Beware of selflove, which gives it self Allowance of the largest sise, as
loath to deny it self nothing which it covets, and counting nothing too
precious, no liberty or delight too dear for it self; Abandon inconstancy and
giddines of spirit, which cannot stand its own ground, nor rest in one place,
cleave to one task. For the bent of spirit to one settled object, study,
calling, or lawful object, will divert the vain mind from frothie fancies,
and ideas of unclean thoughts, companies, and allurements. A spirit whose
banks run full of employment, will hardly be unsettled: but holds Satan at
staves end. Ask thy gadding, roaving heart, whither she will, whence she
comes, and what is her business, (as watchmen do Roagues) Examine the ground and
warrant of thy journeys, travailes, errands, and wanderings up and down,
forsaking thy station, and family: Set thy kinfe to thy throat, if thou be an
Athenian, daily lusting after new places, companies, pleasures, meetings, and
delight? And whatsoever savors of carnal and sensual desire, know it cannot,
but threaten mischief, and dispossess thee of thy watch: I speak still of
such, as in appearance have given their names to Chirst, even these, (for I
judge none, let every man judge himself) have so sarre taken liberties to
themselves, in the brink, that they have fallen into the water. One of them
once much pleasing himself in admiring the features and beauties of women, and
stroaking the cheeks of one with Wantonness, was by his wiser neighbor
warned thereof, saying, These crimson faces (so he called them) will sadly cost
you the setting on, one day: and so it fell out soon after; for such an
aspersion was soon after cast upon him, whether true from man, or just with
God) as brought his hoary head to the grave with sorrow. To teach all such
gnats to beware how near they fly to the candle, lest they be burnt.

All outward temptations.
in the chastity of Prevention; only, whatsoever occasion, threatens any
affront to the fort of Chastity, and the preseving of the whole man in
integrity and honor, renounce it. And so much for the first of the four heads
of counsel against this sin of uncleanness, to wit, Abhorring of somewhat,
be spoken.

The second counsel is, Second Counsel.
to meditate of somewhat. And whereof? Surely of such things as might help to
quash and quell lust: Meditate of some what.
and that partly concerning the sin it self, and partly the penalties
thereof. And both these specialls of Meditation, must be attended with two
properties in general. First, that this meditation be wise, and secondly, that
it be deep. 2. Properties of it.
First I say, wise: for I would have this noted, that some things are of that
nature, that some kind of musing of them, 1. It must be wise.
is rather an incensing of the heart unto the sin, then any checking thereof.
As are all such evils, as border upon the sensual appetite, and concupiscible
faculty: of which sort especially is this sin of uncleanness. Many
complain, that they muse much, of the odiousness thereof, that so they might
abhor it. But they find it more and more to follow their hand: and to snare
their spirit. And so the remedy proves much worse then the disease. And it
fares with such, as it does with two men at variance: who put their quarrels to
comprimise: But when wise men should set them at one, they fall on ripping up
all circumstances of unkindnes, offered each to other, that they part worse
enemies then they met, and so make the wound incurable. So here, men meditate
of the sensual and carnal occurrents of this sin, their base meetings,
words, gestures, unchaste looks and acts, under pretense of a purpose more
fully to detest and abhor them: But by this mean, the devil casts fire
into the dry powder of their concupiscence; and inflameth them to it the more.
The reason is, because the sense and fleshly familiarity of the thoughts, do
prevail against the spiritual hatred thereof. So it fares in other
temptations, of an hideous nature, as Atheistical thoughts against the Majesty
of God, or blasphemous thoughts against the Scriptures, or the essence, and
Attributes of God: the baseness whereof the more we plod upon, (especially
while Satan's wild fire is in the spirit) the more we are snared therewith.
Therefore in such cases as these, the practice of Elisha to the servant of
Jehoram, is to be followed: We must pray against the tenacity thereof, and
force our selves to handle such thoughts roughly at the door; and in no sort
to give place to them: as knowing their Masters feet is not far behind them.
Toss not thoughts off and on, about passages, which tickle the fancy, and wind
in deeplier into it, then it can be rid thereof, yea though they were most
irksome to it: But take up the sin in the whole lump and bundle: muse of
the bitter root whence it comes, Psalm. 51.
as David did, in his Meditations: Incense thy soul against the body of
corruption, whence it flows, that wherein thy Mother conceived thee; and
thence descend to the fruits of it, as, the wound which it leaves upon the
conscence, the wrath of God, which it pulls upon it self; the curse of it, how
it makes all the soil barren, blastes and wastes the grace of God, or the
least show of any: Keep it thus at staves end, but tamper not much with pitch,
lest we be defiled. Such unwise meditation is not water to quench, but oil to
increase the flame.

Secondly, 2. Property.
let this meditation be deep and solemn, both about the properties and the
penalties of this sin. It must be deep about the properties and pen^dties.
Touching the former, the first meditation about it is, how spiritual a
wickedness it is, especially under the Cospell. Its like Absaloms Of the
^p^^itu ^^nesse of this sin.
It does not only sin against moral light of the natural conscience, but
also against the grace of God; and the remedy offered thereby. For the grace of
God has appeared to all, and teaches them to deny all ungodliness, and
fleshly lusts, and to live soberly, godly and purely in this present world.
David's adultery was a moral act; but yet inseparable from spiritual
wickedness: for he resisted conscience in point (not of moral light only, as
any heathen might do) but of grace, and mercy from God, teaching him to
abhor it. Yea, this very thing was the thing that made the Lord so severely
punish it, both then and after; even because he fought against his spiritual
light, embracing a lust, and the sweet of a base heart, with the loss of that
sweet mercy of God, which he had tasted: Yea, against that sweet communion with
God, which he had formerly enjoyed: both which he knew would be wasted
hereby, as also that hereby the spirit of God was displeased and vexed with
this rebellion, and the effects thereof, and h^s conscience gulled down and
defiled with sensuality and security, yea hardened by the deceitfulness of
sin: And hereby the enemies of God were caused to blaspheme God, his worship
and the generation of the righteous. For our better conceiving of this point
(in my judgment the most weighty of all to gaster a soul from such
Abomination) let us observe, how the holy Ghost has described it. Read and
ponder that Heb. 3. 12. where the Apostle in effect tells us, that this is the
nature of all sin committed against the light, and it has these degrees: as
the words do express. Take heed, lest there be in any of you, an evil heart
of unbeleefe, to depart from the living God, but exhort one another, lest you
be hardened by the deceitfulness of sin. Steps of spiritual sin.
Mark: first there is an evil heart of averseness from God, and enmity, or
alienation from God, in each child of old Adam. David confesses himself
guilty hereof, An ev^ll heart.
in committing Adultery. Evil works.
as ill humors in the body, into soars and botches. So says our Savior, an
evil man, out of the evil treasure of his heart brings forth evil things;
for out of the heart proceed all such draffe: that's the nest and forge of them
all. Both these make the heart, an evil heart.

Unbeleefe.
That is, whereas God has ordained a blessed remedy of pardon and clensing of
both, lo, the love of an evil heart to her evil works will not suffer it to
part with them, but chooses rather to forsake mercy it self. They that
embracelying vanities, forsake their own mercy. Iona. 2. 8.
And our Savior plainly, This is the condemnation of the world, Ioh. 3. 9.
that light came into the world: But loved darkness rather then light, because
their works were evil. Jesus Christ received by faith, would have destroyed
such works. But men loving them, and that darkness which nourisht them, more
then light, they added drunkenness to thirst, that is unbeleefe, to morral sins.
And so sins which at the first were but dipped in the color of Nature, being
died in grain by contempt of light, became spiritual evils, consisting in a
treacherous refusal of grace, that it might nouzle it self in sin more and
more, which by embracing of grace, it might have been rid of. So that this
unbeleefe, defending it self, in the practice of darkness, causes the soul
to be guilty of horrible villainy against the grace of God, and that spirit of
Christ, which offreth it self to purge and wash it from sin.

Delusion and defilemen.
of the soul: by the sweetness and deceitfullnesse of sin. That is, a Desertion
of the soul, whereby its left by the just hand of God, to the error of her own
way, and choice: to be as it desired to be: so, that it becomes of
avoluntarily, a necessarily seduced heart, thinking evil to be good, feeding
upon ashes, as a perverted appetite will do upon coals, or chalk; it suffers
conscience to be blindfolded and baffled, and the accusing power thereof, to
become a defiled power; so that though it know sin to be sin, (as this of
Adultery; yet being luld asleep upon Dalilas lap, it feels no sting, but
dreams of ease, as Samson and David, who differd not in this from Balaam, save
only in this that the spirit susteind and reserved their judegments, that they
sinned not upon the last practical understanding, and choice of free will, but
by prevention and temptation; But to their own sense, they had shaken off the
spirit.

Hardness of heart.
Thus David, being once defiled and snared, so that he could go neither
backward nor forward: he grew so hardened, that he resolved upon al those ways,
whereby his sin might be concealed, extenuated, defended, and that with odious
Circumstances; which what was it save (as much as in him lay) to put off the
spirit of God, and to fulfill his lust, providing that he might not be
unsettled. Departing from the living God.
a disabling of the spirit from returning back to him again, through an heart
which cannot mourn, relent and, repent: and so finally a pouring forth of the
heart to all other sin, without control, or restreint; yea some go so far
herein, that they fight not only against the revealing light of the spirit but
against the spirit it self, out of malice: And what wonder, if the restreyning
power of the spirit be taken from such as have despised the saving power of it?
Now, to gather up all into one, how woeful an hazard do all they run, as play
the unclean beasts under the clear light of the Gospel? How do they lay the
stumbling block of their own iniquities before themselves? For although I
deny not a possibility of returning, so long as the spirit is greeved only,
except it be despited also, yet who knows how far he may go in his descent,
being not able to stop himself? And as for the Elect, how many bear
themselves upon it, till they prove errant hypocrites? This Meditation
therefore, let all such ponder deeply, who are given to slight this sin! 1. Tim.
1.
what God may do for ignorant ones (as Paul speaks) I say not (though we see
but few of these repent.) But for them, that sin wilfully after light, its far
worse.

Things to be meditated of, the peculiarnefle of this sin.
That of the Apostle is notable for this, fly fornication: why? All other sins
part from the body, this abides in it: what is that? Other sins of wrath,
theft, swearing, the like, abide not in, but pass away from the instrument
acting them; (I say not in guilt but in act of cleaving: But this of
uncleanness as it leaves no less scarre in the Body then they, (rather more)
so it leaves a far greater and more loathsome stayne in the body: causing it to
be a more yrkesome dwelling for the spirit of God, to be more loathsome to it
self, and bears mark in the open sight of others of it own filthiness. That
other sins are out of the body, but this is (as it were) within it.
If God then have set such a mark of this sin upon the body, as upon no other:
and now much more then when Paul speaks; if other sins (in comparison) are
without, but this within it: others by the body out of the body, this by et,
and in it: that is, it is a more real and bodily sin, requiring more of a
sinner for the perfecting of it, then others, yea forfeiting a piece of the
body, in the committing of it; how odious is it? Again, if it be a more
fulsome vice, and hardlier washtout (as before has been said) If it shut God
out of his Temple, yea, out of Poarch and all: I conclude, it behooves all, to
beware lest they conceive that a more slight sin then others, which God has
branded with more peculiarnesse then others. I do not here speak of that
loathsomeness which follows the act: of that before; But I say, The Lord
loathes these leprous walls; what should such a one have to do with Prayer,
Reading, Hearing, Sacraments, whose lips, eyes, hands, whole flesh is defiled
with this sin? Who sees not the unsutablenesse hereof? So that as the leper was
wont to be shut out of company, to have his lips sown up, scarce suffered to
breath, and to try out, unclean so here. This sinner shuts out himself from
God, in that he cannot approach to him with auy) member without loath somns. I
speak not this to exclud any Penitent from the free grace of God (though God
who gives each penitent, grace, gives not each sinner to be Penitent:) for
Rahab, Bathsheba, Tamar, yea a worse the^ al Mary Megdalene found mercy, and
sorecoverd the honor of each member: but I speak odious the sin is, in
peculiar. Let it therefore be a second Meditation against it.

Seperat^s, from God.
be the root of all other Previledges, and a restoring us to our integrity:
what then is separation from him, and cutting off from the fountain, save a
curse? Now, who so is one with an harlot is cut off from God: For how can a man
be at once a member of an harlot, and a member of Christ? Know you not, that
who so is one with Christ, is one spirit? And what is he then, who is one with
an harlot? Can he, with and in the same spirit, be united to one and to other
at the same time? Does he not, what lies in himself to disjoynt himself for
ever from God, who is joined with an whore? Is it so easy to unlinke the chain
of uncleannes, and to be knit to God, who is once enchained in the band of this
sin? Or, can there be communion and influence mainteyned with God, while
fellowship continues with Harlots? Is pureness and filthiness, so easily
reconciled. A spirit of of hol^ies, with a spirit of Adultery? What communion
between Christ and Beliall? Or, how can two walk together, except agred? If
the^ the spirit be sadded, and grieved, what joy can it have to walk with the
soul? Where was David's fellowship with God become, when he had defiled
himself? with what a conscience (think we) did he walk? What peace, joy,
going in and out with God, had he? Or, why does he so crave for the spirit,
and for washing, and renned grace, save that he felt them withdrawn from him?
And, if the Spirit of Christ be gone, what is the Name of Christ and of
Communion, worth? Perhaps many an Adulterer pleases himself in this, that he
is not yet cast out from the church! But why is he not cast out? Is Gods
judgment changed? Where then is that censure become, of which Paul speaks of,
1. Cor. 5.
That ye being gathered together with my spirit in the Name of the Lord Jesus,
deliver such an one, (an unclean wretch) unto Satan, for the destruction of
the flesh, that his soul may be saved, in the day of the Lord Jesus. Is not
here solemn excommunication against u^dcleannes urged? Neither let any cavil
and say, This was in a case of high degree of this sin. And from the Church by
Excommunication either inflicted or deserved.
For Gods netres take all open sinners, in foul kinds, be the degrees what
they what else means that speech, Withdraw your selves from every brother,
who walks inordinately? How? Except, by the censure, excommunicating him from
Communion of Sacraments, and secret fellowship? Thus once it was: But the sin
of man interverting the Censure, disanulles not the Ordinance, If such be not
cast out, the greater is the shame of Neglecters, and the offender has the
greater wrong.

And say, that he be not formally cast out by Discipline: has he not really
cast out himself by his Desert? As he once said of his Books, That they were
published, and they were not, in effect: for none could understand, or be the
better for them: so say I. They are in Communion, and they are not: locally, by
intrusion, not spiritually, not by acceptance, so that (save for his pleasing
himself sinfully) he is never the better for it. For why? Does not Conscience
within tell him, All who would thrive by the Ordinances, must cast up their
gorge? So says Peter, Casting out all superfluity, as newborn babes, covet
the sincere milk of the word to grow by? The spirit of God Excommunicates him
in the Court of his own Conscience.
And, are not all things unclean to the unclean? Does not such a man's spirit
say to him, as God to Elya, what do thou here Elia? Why take thou my word
(pure as my self) into thy mouth, hating to be reformed? Minister into thy
mouth, hearer into thine ears, being both in thy body and spirit polluted?
Can wrath or doubting (as the same Apostle speaks) hinder the lifting up of
pure hands, and must not an unclean conscience much more? Can such a swine,
coming into the Assembly to Sermon, or Sacrament, think himself to be in
his place? Does he not tell himself, a Stews, an whores bosom are fitter for
thee, then such a place as Gods house? Now, if outward Communion (which yet
many a sinner will buy with his money, or thrust himself into boldly) be so
unproper for him, what then is Communion with the Graces of God, with his
Saints, with the Duties of both Tables? Has such an one any joy in his soul,
peace with God, delight in his Service, exercise of graces, as seal, faith,
meeknes, compassion, patience? Or can he lay claim to an holy example? Are not
these irksome objects to such, more fit to tear them in pieces to think
themselves cut off, then to comfort them! So then let this be a meditation of
great weight, to gaster the soul from all uncleanness, or to humble it being
fallen, to consider, what a Gulf it sets between the Lord, and the soul, so
that one cannot come at the other. And, woe be to him, that is alone! All
ordinances, all duties, all graces, speaking thus to him, If God help not, how
can I help thee, with the Barn, or the winepresse? Influence being wanting,
presence gone, what can second comforts avail? Do not all issue from union
with the head? Do not all Conduit-comforts rise and fall with the fountain?
Except then, thou carest not for God, for his spirit, or Christ, beware of
uncleanness. For that laies-all Channels of the spirit dry, embarrens the
soul of all heavenly savor: making it, as careless to have it, as it is
empty of it. And these three may serve for a short description of the nature of
this sin, and how we may derive Arguments from thence, to deter us from
it. Now to the penalties.

Touching which, Secondly he must meditate of the penalties of this sin.
they are either spiritual, or outward. In word.
seeing a drove of Adulterers going toward the den of the Dragon (the Devil I
mean) with their foresteps, Awofu^l gid^y dru^k^nnes disabling the Sinner from
repenting.
and observing so few backsteps coming from thenceward, would think any
other, save that there they were devoured? And, who would dare to hasard
himself upon such a point, as whether he should come back from tha^pit, from
which its ten to one, if any at all return? That heathen Philosopher
Xenocrates, may teach us wisdom herein: who was a Stoic of most exact
cha^tity and morallity: He, having read to his scholars deep Lectures of
austerity, and abstinence from all pleasures; seeming to his Scholars to speak
more then he had strength to perform: was attempted by them, what he was: they
got an harlot of exquisit beauty, and laid her in his bed, to provoke him to
folly. But he, according to his rules, abhorring the temptation, answered them,
he would not buy repentance at so dear a rate: Surely, if he who had no more
to lose, save his morrall conscience, and feared, lest the forfeit thereof,
would prove so irrecoverable; what should we Christians say who have our souls
to lose, what should it profit, to win the world and lose them? or what shall
be given in exchange of them? And, having no hope of recovering repentance any
more, how should they tremble at so great a loss? In one word, this I say,
that this sin has a woeful spiritual giddiness and drunkenness annexed
unto it, disabling the sinner from laying it to heart, except strange mercy
prevent him; so that as Solomon speaks, in comparing the two sexes, so may I
say, in comparing these with other sinners, I have seen of them, one of a
thousand to repent, but of this, scarce one of a thousand. Its the Lords course
to give over these sinners to their haunt and custom. Its said of Queen
Tomyris, that having overcome Cambyses a bloody Tyrant in battle, and
surprised his person, she cut off his head, and sous'd in a barrel of blood,
saying, satiate thy self, with that whereof thou have been always so
insatiable. So says the Lord to the Adulterers, since fleshly pleasure has
been that which thou have always so hunted after: fill thy self with it for
ever. Split thy soul against the rock and stone-wall of my seventh Command,
at which thou have so stumbled; let that grind thee in pieces. This curse of
God, sealing up the heart of the Adulterer, gives him over, to his own sinful
sweetness; so that, the surfeit thereof, does so wast, and embezell the spirit
of such an one, that he walks up and down staggering in the drunken pleasure
of his uncleanness: he is quite a sleep as Jona under the hatches; If any of
Gods Mariners (Ministers I mean) cry out, Arise thou Adulterer, call upon
God, and pray, if possi^ly this tempest of wrath may be prevented; Alas! he
is as that fellow upon the top of the mast, ready to topple into the Sea, and
yet neither awakes, nor fears any danger.

Once I knew (and still there be some alive, A fearful example of a
debauched Adulte^er, urged.
who will bear me witness) a most o^ious Adulterer, of seventy year old, who
having long consumed his strength with harlots, (as he in the Proverbs) wasted
himself and all; at last being laid in a barn (good enough for him) for no
man could endure the vermin and savor which came from his rotten body, was
requested thus, Potter (so was his forename) call upon God: he replied, with
his ordinary oaths, Pox and wounds, is this a time to pray? thus he spoke at
death: All his life long, the season of Prayer, and Repenting, was not come?
And now at his death, lo, its gone! As he merrily said of Marriage, either its
not yet time, or past time! Oh! its just with God to bereave such of all list
to apprehend any sound notion of their misery! they are held off, from
capablenesse to mourn after God: and in a following deceit of sin, M. Bol.
even to death. I heard once an Oxford man of worthy Memory in a Sermon relate
of two students of eminent parts in that University, who were sunk in a
brutish Custom of Tobacco, and Sack, and then, into a loathsome habit of
unclean Pleasures, and in time, grew into such a slavish Impotency of spirit
in those ways; that when Necessity urged them to return to their Chambers,
they could not there rest, till they had pitched a new meeting, and so another;
till in time they grew so enfeebled and past all sense of Sobriety, that with
their pipes and Pots at their mouths, they were feign to be had into their
beds, and so miserably died. Alas no wonder! If drink and riot alone can do
it, how much more when lust is added to it, as a threefold cord not easily
broken? Both streams meeting in one channel, to overflow the banks? This is
that Arrow of God shot through the livor of all such unclean ones; to be so
enthralled to their lust, that all sap of the spirit is dried up, and a
kingdom of uncleannes set up in their hearts and bodies, to carry them beyond
all hope of repenting. Muse of this seriously, if thou would root up the
love of lust and kindle a deadly fewd with it, never to be razed out.

Touching the outward Penalties, Meditation of the temporal penalties of
uncleann^sse.
what should I say? Or what can I add to that I have already said of Gods
judgments against this sin? Look to the former doctrine. Only I add this
Exhortation, Suffer not thy self (when thou read the judgments of God,
against the Name, body, person of an unclean wretch) to pass away without
Meditation, till they have wrought thy heart to a due abhorring thereof: yet,
lest I might seem to mention this point for nothing, let me add one outward
Penalty to all the former, and that is, That even Repentance it self is not
able wholly to wast off the stain of this sin, from the Committers of it. Such
is the wound that those men give to the Name of God; his religion and truth do
suffer so deadly by their means, that God in justice suffers them to expiate
it by an outlasting infamy. This was Gods threat to David, Thou have made the
Enemies of God to blaspheme, therefore, lo, the sword shall never depart from
thy house, nor reproach from thy name. That same text which shall most eternize
thee for a man according to Gods heart: shall again crocke thee, saying* Save
in the matter of Bathsheba: That's a back blow: yet just, for he thought his
secret conveyance would cover all, but he saw not this; That the thing he had
done, displeased the Lord: therefore he must feel it to his smart! His
repenting God knew: but yet that must not serve to quit him of a work of
sorrow, as before I noted. He that comitteth folly with a woman, is destitute
of understanding: his blot shall never go out. Courts of men, absolve such
from all aspersions, but when they are white and fair in them, they are foul
and black in Gods. No time, no concealment of witnesses, no dwelling far
off, no oaths of purging, no bribes must ever look to do it, when as
Repentance cannot do it. Who should imagine a possibility of it, seeing what
the name of David, Lot, Solomon, till this day, suffer for it! As a blur in
fair cambrique, so is this always cast upon him as his shame. God does not
usually upbrayde his people: But this he always casts him in teeth withal: yet
this Caution I add by the way, It is not lawful hereby, to condemn whom God
has justified: but to cover it rather for our parts: But for caution to
others, the Lord will rather make a Record of it, and hang it on the file, then
it shall be forgotten. And when we hear the uncharitable imputations of men,
fret not at them, but say, God is in it, he will keep it on foot: he will
check the soul with it, and caufe the guilty thereof to possess the sin of
their youth, as Job did. If God shall conceal the shame of any, guilty of this
sin, let them praise him, and make an end of all in his privy Chamber of mercy
and Repentance, that so his open judicial proceeding in court may be stopped.
Let this also add some weight of terror, and divorce thee from this sin: whip
the slaves back with this rod: But the son will be drawn by love. So much for
this second of Meditation.

The third and last is, Third Coun^^ll, P^^c^sing of somewhat.
to practice somewhat. And this is the main of all other helps, to rid us of
this muscheefe. And it consists of sundry particulars. Touching all which, let
the Reader understand, that they properly concern such as have been actually
defiled with uncleanness in one kind or other. And these men, are either
guilty of their Crime, during their estate of ignorance and unregeneracy; or
else, Whom this co^cernes especially.
such as have revolted from that grace, which they have (either soundly, or
seemingly) received. To both, I would give some advise; Viz. 2. Sorts.
and Such as are guil^y of it only.
do lay them close to their hearts, that as that pearking presumptuous Asahel
was met with and pierced in the fifth rib by Abners spear; 1. Branch.
so may these wild creatures be, Adulterers ought to humble themselves for it.
in their ventrous provoking of God. Surely, such a giddy lightness is in every
unclean heart: yea the religious: they cannot be solid, when as they would,
(they are so drunken with this sin) except the law, or else that old Simeon
speaks of, which must open and let out the thoughts of many hearts, Luc. 1.
do let out these wild and unbrideled affections. And, as that Asahel, 2. Sam.
2. being once darted through, was tame enough, and stopped in his wantonness; so
let thy soul be earnest with God to step out of his ordinary way, to make an
high sense and sharp hedge of Thorns, (which he does but for few in this
kind) yea to set an Angel before the door of that harlot, shaking a sword,
that thou may no more venture to return. This will not be, till a fire be
thrust into thy soul, to feel the intolerable wrath of God, upon all
Whoremongers; which may so sting thee, that, as a man scalt or burnt, has
small joy or mirth, so the feeling of thy self in the suburbs of hell, may
cause thee to feel small list or edge, to thy former occupation! Hell (my
friend) is no paynced sire on the wall, (such as thou see in Alehouses to
make drunkards merry) but is kindled with the breath of God, who has vowed to
be a terrible judge, and consuming fire to all defilers of themselves with
whores or harlots, single, or married: yet, entreat him, that this terror of
his, may not be extreme and desperate, (as his was of whom I last spoke)
ending in violent laying of hands upon himself, and preventing of Repentance;
but rather break the force of lust, pull down thy jollity, that it may be as
sad an object to thee, as was the murdering of the Lord of life to Peter's
hearers, Act. 2. 37.

And not only so, An ^b^^sement under the migh^y h^nd of God.
but stoop and quail under this terror of God; we see, prisoners at the
bar, do not descant or quarrel with the Judge; all their language is
confession and supplication; for why? They know the Judge has them at
advantage, their lives stand at his courtesy. Do thou likewise. Will God judge
Adulterers? Stoop then at his bar; he can save or destroy. Other Judges
admit appeal, themselves may, and must be judged: their judgments may be
questioned, disannulled, they sit but upon the breath and life of a man; Not so
the Lord: he is Judge of the high Court, a Sovereign, King, and Judge. If he
once pass sentence, no revocation, it touches the life of thy precious soul!
This should affright all unclean persons! What suing and seeking is there, to
the Judges of spiritual Courts, if they threaten but the sheet? Oh! but here is
a greater Judge, that can damn thee in hell for ever! No bribes prevail here:
he is like that enemy of Babell, who should scorn all gifts, and be above
gold and silver. Submit therefore under his hand: confess thy damnation is
just: lie prostrate upon the earth, with thy mouth in the dust, and say, oh
thou the Sovereign God of the Creatures, enemy of all unclean wretches, if
thou send me to hell, I have nothing to allege, if I perish, I may thank my
self, thou have power to destroy! Tremble at this Sovereignty, do not
quarrel, nor shift, with him, there is nothing to be pleaded save mere
favor, I can say nothing, why the sentence of death should not be pronounced
against me.

Secondly, seeing all repentance stands not in a preparative, go on, They must
gather hope out of the promise to pardon it.
be earnest with God, to give thee a glimpse of hope in the Lord Jesus, who was
made all sin, and this by name (not only for David, but for the nature of
man, and for thine) and has satisfied the wrath of this Judge, that he might
say, deliver him, I have accepted a ransom. The law of Moses knew no such
atonement: stoning and strangling was the end of it. As the Judge tells some
felons, that the law has no mercy for them: their sins exceed it, so here.
But the Gospel affords more grace: refuses to pardon no sin, no offense,
which the soul can be humbled for: I grant this will not easily enter so
debauched a spirit, to dream of a possibility of such a grace; For, when that
conscience which was so deeply benumbed, is once stirred to the bottom, it
becomes as sensible, as ever it was senseless before; and while conscience
holds under bondage, its no easy thing to fee such an hope of grace by the
Gospel. But yet, in this thy amasement, utter loss an despair in thy self,
thou must wait upon God, who can sustain thy bottomless spirit, from sinking
altogether; till in due time, he open a crevis of light into thy dark dungeon.
See and consider.
And, when it shall please him, to turn thine eye toward some likelihood of
finding mercy, in the way of promise; Jerem. 3. 2. 3.
follow this work hard. It belongs to the hopeless: not to such as turn this
hope to a snare. Beg of the Lord to turn a terrified heart, into a melting
one: that it is, which must mould an unclean soul, to a clean, and chaste
one: no hammer can do this: mercy must dissolve it in the furnace of grace.
Lin not, till thou feel that heart, which has been drencht in the sweetness
of lust, to be steept in bitterness, over head and ears, for thy wounding
the Lord of life, and his Virgin-pure flesh, to death, by thy unclennesse.
Look not upon other sinners: thy self were murderer sufficient of his sacred
person: thou soughtest to destroy his Godhead as well as his flesh, if it had
been in the power of thy sin! though there had been no other sinner in the
world, thou had been enough. And should thou not care (for thy base lust
sake) to kill not a man only, an innocent Vrija, but the person of the Son
of God? If this melting spirit be wrought in thee by the spirit of grace, thou
shall behold him, 'as pierced willingly and of his own accord for thee; who
did as little deserve it as Judas the Traitor, but yet, seeing thou have a
melting heart, which he wanted, and can with Peter, weep bitterly, its a
sign that the curse shall turn to a blessing; yea thou shall see God so
ordering the matter for thee, and Christ so giving up his soul to the spears
point of wrath for thee, that thine eye shall behold another sight, that is an
enwrapped hope of forgiveness in this satisfaction of his: and of life in his
Resurrection: so that now thine horror shall turn to hope. And know it, only
this glimpse of Sunshine in thy dungeon of fear, can dissolve thy hard heart,
and prepare thee for pardon.

Thirdly, Branch 3.
let this hope, rip up all the seames of thine unclean heart; G^or^fie God in
the confession of it.
and all that filth which lay hid in the entralls thereof, never like to have
come to light, had not God revealed it, and uncased thee. Let, I say, this seed
of hope discover that, which an habitual love of thy sin would have
smothered for ever. For, this opening and ingenuous confessing of thy sin,
will make way for further mercy. Its none of thy work, but the spirit of
grace, that makes way for it. Now a frank heart is put into thee, to be as
open, as ever thou were close before, yea and to take as much pains with thy
self, how thou may give glory to God, in a full confession, and turning up
that cursed poake of falsehood from the bottom, pouring out all thy sin, as
ever thou tookest care before to swear thine heart to an hellish secrecy. Its
with thee, as with a woman who has many old pieces of gold and jewels lying
by her, which she is loath to forgo, although she might thereby make a sum
for the purchase of fair house and land, yet perhaps rather then quite forgo
the purchase, she will fetch them all, and pour them down upon the table. So,
when hope of mercy offers it self, oh the pearl thereof (exceeding all petty
shreds) will make thee freely disburden thy soul of whatsoever loads it, thy
most beloved lusts: (I speak not now of abandoning the habits of them, that's
mortification following after; but of the clear intention and meaning of thy
heart to abandon without any base hollownesse.) Oh! thou desire now to spare
God a labor of proclaiming thy sin before men and Angels! and, if it were
meet (as it is, where Gods ordinance may prevail) thou would choose that
place ratherest to shame thy self in, where the solemn presence of God, his
Angels and Church are gathered together. Still I speak with caution, if thy
sin have broken out publicly: but if thou have kept it secret, thou art not
tied to make thy self public: nor to take witness, except thy hard heart
require it, to confess to others, for the breaking thereof; the reason is,
because the way of Church-correction for open sins, is one, and the
Evangelicall correction of the spirit of Christ in private is another. But
usually these sins are open: and therefore openly to be proclaimed in
confession, as in the committing: If mercy have touched thee at the heart never
so little, it will work in thee, as Gods voice in the Whale, when she vomited
up Jona, upon the dry ground. thou shall no more take care what become of thy
lust, so thou may be rid of it: nor who shame thee, so thou be shamed, and
sin have her due! Thou take more care, how God may be honored, in the
abhorring of thy rebellion: how others may be flaited from the like; how thine
own heart may be melted upon melting: not, how thou may may escape in an
whole skin, and lie hardened in thy stie of uncleanness! No, This is as
their bringing of their curiot's books, and burning them.
rather shall litter and whelps, and all, be raked together, and cast to the
dunghill. I tell thee of a sollemne thing, rarely seen: yet I will not say, I
have not seen such a confessing spirit: Ephraim had it, when she smote upon
her thie, Act.
the Publicant, the Prodgall, the Thief on the Cross: and here and there (as
a berry left upon the bush) I have seen such as u^fained Penitent, but, when I
did so, I never pleased my self, with any object like it, I was almost ravished
with it! and took it as a real mark of the Lords pardoning of it, in heaven,
which was so performed on earth.

And good cause, And why?
for, what should thou care to nourish that in thy self, which thou
purposest for ever to be divorced from! Therefore, here on Lord (say thou)
comes the most tainted Adulterer that ever lived! Agravation o^ sin needf^^^
for unclean Penitents.
These were my first allurements to silthinesse, such and such companies, I
haunted, such baits for my lust I maintained, so many base harlots, married,
or single, I clave unto! Such were the places I frequented, the filthy Sonnets
I sang, the music, dauncings, revellings, and wantonness I was defiled
withal! yea, such and such were the colors whereupon I hardened my heart in
sin, such fees, such bribes, such perjuries, such friends in Courts and
Proctors I corrupted with money: and in this confusion I had lien for ever, had
not mercy cast an eye upon me! No day, no Sabbath, or season of worship came
amiss: no light of conscience could bear down my sin; no shame of world,
no patience of thine, long winking at me, no good education, no hope of my
friends, no terror by thy judgments could dissuade, I sinned against all. Here
therefore, I uncase my self oh Lord! Against thee, thee Lord, have I done this
villainy, in it self moral, in me spiritual, and in an high degree! I was
ever tainted, even from the womb, and this my sin, is but one of a thousand,
which the forge of my heart has sent forth: If for this thou had drowned me
in perdition, even in the act, burying me up in the bed of my lust, thou had
been just; yea thy deserting of my spirit, cutting off my days, and sending
me into the hottest place of hell, had been little enough for me! But oh! if
thou shall wash this spot away, and cleanse me with hyssop, I shall be whiter
then the snow: what I am, is not the thing, confusion belongs to me for it, its
all I can plead: But there is mercy with thee, that thou may be feared: and
some little hope has opened my heart, to confess my sin, as, rather relying
upon thy word, then upon my own fears, that thou will deal rigorously, and,
of mine own mouth (as thou moughtst) condemn me!

Set before thine eyes the promises.
and the sheet of thy shame upon thy back, as one shut out, and excommunicated
from the Assemblies, upon whose face thy father has spit: But thou must set
before thine eyes a double promise; One this. That if the Lord shall once
accept thee, all thy former sins shall never be so imputed, as to cast thee
off: Look that place in Jeremy, full of Comfort, If an harlot be divorced from
her husband, shall he return to her any more? No surely. But lo, thou
Adulterer, thou harlot, you have defiled the B^d which I made Honorable; yet, I
will deal better with you; return, and I will accept you, Ier. 3. 2. 3.
says the Lord! And what upon tha^? Surely it shall be with thee in my account,
as if thou had never sinned. The Lord will open to such, a fountain for sin
and uncleannes; This may seem as a cable to the eye of a Needle! such mercy
for so graceless a wretch! yes, be encouraged: for the Lord looks not at the
greatness of the sin, (if thy Traitors heart distrust him not;) but at the
expression of his own grace, and getting himself a name, in pardoning it;
that, where sin has abounded, grace might abound much more. A dog will catch
at this moisell, and poison himself, for he will sin, to try a conclusion: But
this must not east off a poor penitent soul, who has sinned already, and
been carried by the stream of his Sensuality. Neither must an hypocrite be
bolstred: nor yet the grace of God to his own frustrate. The second.
And secondly, consider, What thou have been, the Lord looks not at: he
beholdes thee in his Son, as washed, and purified, therefore wilbee honored,
even by these members, which have most served the lusts of thy uncleannes. The
Lord delights to see it so, if once the property be altered. Witness Mary
Magdalene, (so highly honored by Christ, to be the first witness of his
Resurrection,) and so enrolled in the book of God, that wheresoever the Gospel
should come, her Name should be honorable. How did our Lord Jesus admit her to
come to his body, and with those eyes, hands, wherewith she had beheld,
embraced, those tresses and forelocks which had allured so many unclean
lovers, yet he was content to be washed, anointed, and wiped! what exceeding
love is this, thus to restore an Adulterer to his blood, and to entertayne him,
to that dignity and service, which he had forfeited? Try thine own heart, in
this Case; no other Medicine save this made of the blood of Christ, can satisfy
for thy sin, nor wash off the guilt and stayne of it!

Believe the promise.
Faith will carry thee to the Cross of the Lord Jesus, tell thee thus, I have
seen him bleed and breath out his last conflict with wrath, and overcome it,
for the full expiation of thy uncleannes: if it could have overcome him, thou
had lost the day, for ever: but seeing he got the victory, thy sin shall not
damn thee, so long as he prevailed against death and hell for thee. Christ
only, can make a divorce between thee, and thy sin, Till he shed his precious
blood in the defiance of sin, the soul and sin could never be made Enemies.
Only death, which separated his soul and body asunder can divide them. If
then thou seek no other morrall shifts, nor carnal Popish ways of
abhorring this sin, (at least do rest in no other) all is well. Thou take a
sure course to part with it for ever I Come in therefore, and claspe to this
pardon, offered thee in the promise, sue it out, and apply it to thy soul.
Perhaps thy base heart will choose rather to lose it then to take it Gods way:
But consider, since God will not stoop to thy way, and there is but one way to
come to him, be it never so unwelcome, stoop to that way, and come in. Any
way of thine own dawbing with untempered mortar, will please thy flesh better
then this. But, seeing, in them thou must perish, by this thou may be saved,
to use Esai's words, in the promises there is continuance; Esaias. 64 5.
in the other, lying vanity: cleave to this, and know, this only can satisfy
God, and change thy lepers Hereby thy heart must be changed from it and part
with it.
perish: yet know, much more sure it is, thou must perish, except thou believe.
If thou (like those nasty lepers) sit still in the city, die thou must, no
shift of it; here thou may live; value thy life at no greater rate, then the
life of a desperate man is worth: if elsewhere there were hope, thou might
shrug at it: But, worse then thou art thou can not be! if thou find more
favor, then thou deservest, count it for a vantage. But howsoever, do not
prefer assured death, before hope of recovery: nor lose it for venturing.

Fifthly, Branch 5.
rest not here neither, but, if more mercy be showed thee, Sue out the
destroying power of sin from Christ.
then thou lookedst for, (for God is best to a sinner, when he is past
pleading) then, let this persuade thee to follow him, for further Grace. I
mean, when the guilt of thy Conscience is gone, sue to him for Repentance; for
the mortifying and subduing the rage, power, defiling and snaring property of
thy sin: And begin with the root, kill there first, begin not with
Adoni-bezek, at the fingers ends: Christ stabbes the old man at heart first:
As himself told the Pharisee, nothing, which comes from without can defile the
man: But that which defiles the man, comes from within. From the heart proceed,
as other sins, so uncleannes, and all the fruits: Therefore, either purge the
root first, or else let all alone. Thou shall find this, a new work? Yet
that faith, which has washed thy Conscience and inner man from guilt and fear,
and hell: Can purge thee a second way, from all slavery to thy lust. Mercy will
act the part of a Priest, it will both set an eternal odds, between thee and
thy lust: And it will mortify thy Concupiscence daily, till it be quite dead.
It will trvely set thee on mourning; Truly work thee to an hearty indignation
against thy self. It will teath thee the art of sin detesting; which no wit
of man, no skill of hypocrites can teach thee. It will intercept all thy
succors of lust, thy provision to fulfill thy lusts: When the Court is pulled
down who needs to fear suires in it? It will cause thee, (not, morally, but
from a Principle of grace) to shun all means motives, provocations, and
snares of uncleannes, which the Devil shall straw in thy way! That so, the
oil being gone, the flames may vanish. It shall change thy unclean thoughts,
affections, eyes, ears, into clean and pure ones. If thy harlot meet thee,
and say, It is I: thou shall answer, but I am not I, not my self. Another is
become that in me which my cursed self was wont to be.

The sign is pulld down, the Alehouse is let to a man of trade, no more
harlots nor adulterers come there; new Lords, new Laws, all old things are
done away, behold all things, are become new. I am redeemed with a price, not
to be mine own: if my Lord and Master will endure lust, if any accord between
Christ's body and an harlot ask him leave, and I obey: else, I am not my own.
Oh! this Grace, shall bring thy lust to the horns of the Altar, bind it
thereto with cords, cut the throat of it, with the sacrificing knife of the
Priest. Thy Priest will teach thee to do that office very handsomely, to let
out the rank blood of thy lust, and the strength and sway which it bare in
thee; yea, it shall drag thine unclean heart to Golgotha, and nail it to the
cross of thy Priest, with the same nails which nailed the body of Christ. It
is happier to find out those Implements, Cross, blood, nails, tomb, and all,
then ever Helen was, or any Popish relique-monger: and to make use of them too,
to better end then at this day that Popish Covent of Friats do, who have hired
those places of the Turk, built Temples, Altais, and silver floores in honor
of the Passion. It shall cry in thy soul, Oh lust, I wilbee thy death! oh
Concupiscence, I will be thy destruction! The sting of fin is death, and the
strength of lust, is the law: But, thanks be to God in Jesus Christ, who has
condemned sin in the flesh, and mortified it by the flesh of his holy body! hat
neither guilt nor dominion might prevail, Pursue the victory, the Lord is with
thee thou valiant man, and in this thy strength, fight and lin not while
through thy Captain, both sin, and lust die in thee.

Return to the Lord, in chastity for ever.
with full bent of soul to renounce all cleaving to the flesh, and to cleave
to him, without separation. That grace which has killed lust, will quicken the
life of pureness in thy soul; it will indeed make thee a true Pentient, not
only to renounce uncleanes, but to embrace a Chaste spirit, and live a Chaste
life; to return to God in a contrary practice of unblameablenesse, all thy
days: so far as weakness will permit; As he took off from thy jaws the
yoke of servitude: so he shall make his own joake easy, and his burden light.
He shall be as one that lays meat before thee! thou shall be so preserved by
the sweetness of grace, that all the sweetness of lust, of adultery, of lascivi
usnes, shall stink before thee! so that they shall never have hope to recover
thee into their possession any more. And what then remains? but when lust
knows not what to do with thee; then thine ear be bored with Gods awle, that
so thou may be his servant, and walk in pureness and holiness, all thy
days! The Lord bless this maine Direction, with all other unto thee, and
remember, none but Christ can heal this sore. And so much for the former
branch of Counsel, to them, who are only guilty of the sin. I pass lastly to
the other, who have revolted from this Grace once obtained.

Lastly therefore, The second general in practice for such as have revolted to
it again.
if thy uncleannes be yet of a deeper die, as being a revolt from the Grace of
God, and the vow of thy spiritual baptism, once made; then know, the Cure is
somewhat different from the former; Here then Remember that the seed of God in
his, dies not: Therefore, if once God has awakned thee out of this thy
relapse, 1 Counsel.
and the dead sleep of security under it, What such are to do.
which if he love thee, he will do by some three string'd whip or other which
he shall make for thee, (as once he did for those defilers of his Temple) by
some cross or stirring terrors of the word in thy soul, then take David's
course. Beseech the Lord first that the despair and extreme horror which an
ill conscience (sick of a relapse) might work in thee, through unbeleefe
added to it, may graciously be kept off and so, thine heart may be stayed from
utter departing from the living God, upon fear that he is wholly departed from
thee.

Secondly, 2 Counsel,
remember, that the covenant of God, cannot be repealed: it comprehends thee,
when thou can not it. Therefore apply those mercies of old, and be comforted.

Thirdly, 3 Counsel,
take heed, lest Satan confound and oppress thy spirit by the conscience of
thy base revolting, sinning against such mercies, and snarling thy soul with
so many successive evils as thou have heaped upon one another, without an
heart to get out. For its an easy thing to lose a man's spirit and self in the
devils maze.

Fourthly, 4 Counsel.
with a penitent heart for thy treachery, that thou should kick up thy heel
against former mercies and covenants; behold that promise, of which I formerly
spoke, and apply it unto thy soul, as thou art able, knowing that (whatsoever
Satan has to gainsay) the Lord Jesus was made all sin, both of rebellion
against, and also revolt from God, that thou might be his righteousness, and
recover it, having lost it.

Fifthly, 5 Counsel.
let the affliction of thy soul, so deeply cease upon thee, till (through
mercy) it have soaked into thee, and pierced thee as deep as thy sin has
peirced God: as the tent must go as deep as the sore is festered, and fetch
out the bottom scurfe: content not thy self with such an humbling, as thy
slight heart would admit: For this is one attendant of this sin, to be light
and wanton, and not to be able to be serious. Therefore, set thine heart to
it, mock not God: make not the remedy worse then the disease, that thou
should even be fetched in again by Satan's claws, ere thy repentance is
finished, which were to unsettle the work of God in thee, and work thy heart
to a despair of recovery. It has been the portion of many unclean ones,
never to get a serious spirit. If therefore thine heart be once down, hold it,
as if thou should keep cork under water, and trust it not: pray thus,
withdraw from me all objects of vanity, and teach me thy law graciously!
Arraigne, accuse, condemn thy self, judge thy self, lest God judge thee: and
till God raise thee, be content to lie low, bear the indignation of the Lord,
because thou have sinned: and be glad, if any such vein of wrath may be let
into thy soul, as may truly subdue thee under the mighty hand of God, that he
may raise thee up. Think not the time long, take leisure; an heart long
defiled, a vessel once fustie, will hardly change her hiew, nor be sweetened.

Sixthly, 6 Counsel.
let faith always come between thy sinning and thy repenting: soder not up a
repentance of thine own: its bad in any sin, but deadly in this: such sudden
leapings out of one contrary to another, may admit as easy a relapse from this
to the former. And so thou may make thy fall, to become a falling sickness,
if the power of pardon and purging come between thy sin and thy redress, then
is the cure from God, and from Christ the sure Physician, whose healings are
sound, and perfect. Let his blood come into thy nasty soul, come between thy
sin and thy spirit, loosening the sweetness and the defilement thereof from
thee, or else it will return. Moral plasters may hold, while the soul is in
fear: But when sensuality returns, she breaks all such cords in sunder.

Seventhly, 7 Counsel.
when God has healed thee, go thy ways: and think thou meetest with him,
that said, Sin no more, lest a worse thing happen to thee, John.
even an impenitent spirit: Let the experience of thy revolt, bind thee to a
double care and fear of time to come: 2 Cor. 7.
as that incestuous Corinthian, a kindly Convert (and as fit an object as any,
to be set before a relapsing Adulterers eye) approved his repentance, so do
thou thine! How rare a sight were it in these days to see such an one, so
swallowed up with sorrow, that the Church had need to comfort him, in all the
haste, for fear of despairing? Oh! mourn for the wasting of the spirit of
grace, by an unclean spirit of thine own! count thy self cut off, moan thy
condition in the ears of God, and beseech him to set thee so in joint again,
that thine heart may be stronger then ever, to resist: think thy self
unworthy to be restored to the Communion of Saints: be as an excommunicate in
thine own eyes: as those offenders in the ancient times, who were hardly and
by degrees admitted to the Assembly: Then the judgments of the Ministers, were
so harsh, as if such might not be admitted; (as Cyprian and others erroniously
thought) but to be sure, they were admitted with great difficulty, for fear of
second relapses. But now our discipline is in a contrary extreme: be thou a
law to thy self. 8 Counsel.


Eighthly, if thy revolt have been open and public, let thy repentance be so:
Think not, that remarkable offenses will be huddled up in the Court of
heaven, without open repentance, and more then ordinary humiliation. Most men's
plasters are too narrow for their sores. But if we observe Gods penitents,
you shall see that their revolts were never so famous, as their repentings have
been eminent. Thou have sinned with David: repent also with him, and let the
Church be well satisfied, she has not lost a member.

Ninthly, 9. Counsel.
be content to bear the reproach of thy sin, for ever, as a burden, upon thy
back: yea to carry it written in great letters upon the forehead, if God think
meet to exercise thee in that kind. Not thou, but he, must judge of the
breadth of thine offense. Its to keep down thine heart, which would ever be
pearking up, and floating aloft, and running to the like excess. Better, have
thy faggot always upon thy back.

Tenthly, 10. Counsel.
return to so much the more close and narrow walking with God, watching to a
chaste and inoffensive course not only against open evils, but even
secret-suspicions; and learn to sanctify the marriage bed against such
^orraine provocations. But, if any desire to read more of this Argument, I
refer him to my Treatise of the Sacraments, part 2. and the Chapter of
Sacramental Repentance. So much here may suffice.

Caveat.
thundering out such threats against them; let it be a caveat to all
Magistrates, Magistrates to whom this work belongs must look strictly to the
Censure of God.
and Governors, both Civil and Ecclesiastical, who take upon them the
censures of such Delinquents, to look to themselves: you are in the place of
Gods Officers, you should execute the authority of God: Do in these cases, as
the great judge would do: If he sat in judgment, he would verefy this threat
here in my Text* Perhaps its not in your power, to do as he would do, if he
sat in Commission against Whooremongers; But yet, as far as lies in your
power, show your selves swift witnesses, against this crew, which does now so
swarm in Cities, great towns, and generally every where, and among all sorts,
that they will make the land rue it, and spew out her inhabitants, as once
Canaa^ did hers. Consider what a vengeance this one sin (not to speak of
others, both spiritual and moral) might justly bring upon this our land,
which groaneth under it as much as ever Israel and Judah did, to which God does
threaten such terrible plagues by Esaias, Jeremy, and other Prophets, for their
fulness of bread, the sins of Sodo^, and their neighinglike horses after their
neighbors wives, or else after other harlots, which perhaps in England is the
more frequent. Suffer not vile Adulterers (making open profession of it) to
live with their Harlots and Bastards, under their noses, nay in the beds of
their wives, expelling them, and harboring the other in their bosoms, with
despite. Do not through bribes, and flattery, or an ill Conscience (privy to
the like evils) through sloth and ease, or love of sin, seek pretenses, to
shift your hands of censuring such, and so connive at them! But by what means
possibly you can, vindicate the honor of God, assoyle the land of the just
plagues which she is liable unto, for hatching such vipers in her Bosom. Be
vicegerents of God! will you not judge them? Yes judge these sinners, I say not
stone them (for its beyond your power, and the long impunity of this sin, has
hardened the hearts of men in their Impudence,) but send them to the Carte, to
the house of Correction, to the sheet and shame of their uncleannes; to
excommunication from the Sacraments, and the fellowship of Christians. Post
not off these men from one Magistrate to the other, as if neither were willing
to brand them with shame, they have sinned both against Church and
commonwealth, let them pay for both. But in no wise harden them by alaying,
releasing, exchanging of Censures. If you discharge those, whom God holds
guilty, turning such heinous sins, to mere Pageants, huddling up that which the
Lord would have proclaimed on the tops of houses, know it, your lives shall go
for theirs: God will call you over himself, and when he punishes Adulterers
themselves, he will judge you, for not executing his judgment upon them: which
have prevented it, and spared their souls.

Lastly, let this Point be also Encouragement and Consolation, to all such as
are pure in heart and body: without shall be Dogs, and Swine, sensual
Epicures, unclean persons: within shall be all clean and chaste ones. And this
conclusion, I cannot omit, as having before grounded it in the text. Marriage
is Honorable, and the bed undefiled, and God will bless all that so preserve
it: But whoredom and Adultery are odious and base in Gods esteem, and he
will judge all such as pollute themselves thereby: you see that the Parallel of
the two members of the Text does necessarily import it, Blessed art thou that
fear the Lord in this particular: Thy wife shall be as the vine about thine
house: Thy Children as olive plants about thy Table: The Lord shall bless thy
Stock and store, thy goings out, and coming in: thou shall eat of the fruit
of thy labors, and see the travail of thine hands: with peace and prosperity
to Israel. As all the plagues of the unclean shall pursue the former: so,
shall all the blessings of the clean, follow thee. Thy body shall be clean,
thy health continued, thy posterity shall be pure and be free from pollution, as
an holy seed: thy estate shall prosper: thy Name shall be savory, and as an
Ointment powrd out: Thy self shall see God, for so shall all pure in heart do:
and the Lord shall bring thee forth with honor one day with chaste Joseph, whom
God released from all false aspersions; lo here are they that have washed
their garments in the blood of the Lamb, walk undefiled, have not touched any
unclean thing, therefore I will be a father unto them, and they shall be Sons and
Daughters of the Lord Almighty: yea thy foul garments shall be all taken from
thee, and the clean linen of the Saints shall be put upon thee, and thou shall
walk with Christ in white, for he has c^unted thee worthy! Only, preserve thy
soul in suitable purity with thy Body: keep both in holiness and honor: and thou
shall inherit all the promises of God, made to such.

The Papists do not so much magnify their vestall virgins, because they are not
defiled with men (though many of them are) as the Lord shall honor thee before
men and Angels, as his chaste and undefiled spouse, and set a Crown of glory
upon thine head. Thy marriage shall not prejudice nor stain this virginity,
fear it not, such as have abused this honorable estate, calling it a life of
the flesh, shall not come where thou have to do, to interrupt, to disturb thy
happiness. Enjoy this thy Comfort here: Separate thy self from all uncleannes
of body and spirit; yea hate the Garment spotted with the flesh. Separate the
precious from the vile, and thou shall be honorable! Oh ye Ministers of the
Lord that carry his vessels in your hands, and draw near to him, be ye
clean, and handle not his matters with unclean hands: defile not his Bible,
his Church, ^acraments, Ordinances with polluted hands, ^er. 15. 19.
bodies: and the Lord shall say to you as to his Prophet, you shall be precious!
Finaly, to conclude, All ye his people, who have got out of this depthe of
uncleanness, be truly thankful to God, never cease to magnify him, for so
narrow a escape, and so great a Deliverance; its a thousand to one, that ever
you got out of this pit: do not try conclusions, put it not to the venture, by
sinning again, whether God will pluck you out the second time. If you will
try, know, that if ever at all, you get to heaven, you shall find it an hard
work. Play not the Mountebankes, to thrust your flesh through, because you
have balm at command to thrust after it: you may perhaps miss of it when you
would have it: and if God save you, it shall be as through fire: though God
cannot repent, if ever you were his, yet he shall make every vein in your
hearts to ache, ere you come to feel it: and that Kingdom of God, which else
might have affoarded large entrance unto you shall now become a narrow
passage: If you love your souls, bring not such a needless sorrow upon your
selves: Its enough, too much, that^ you spent so much of your former days, in
the vanity of the flesh, and the service of your Iusts: spendther in holy awe,
and godly fear! Say with Hezekia and David, The living shall praise, thee, the
dead will not; Jonah 2. 8. 9.
can not. But I will sacrifice to the Lord, with the voice of thanksgiving.
Salvation is of the Lord. To him, Father, Son, and Spirit, Unity in Trinity,
and Trinity in Unity, be all honor and praise for ever! Amen.

A Table of the principal things of this Treatise Alphabetically framed.
A.
THe Analyze of the Text. Page 1. Admonition to prevent the dishonor of
Marriage. 14. Admonition to the religious party Married to the irreligious. 37.
Advice of the most judicious friends requisite for marriage. 54. Aptness and
sutablenesse required in marriage. 60. Acceptions against the general rule.
62. 63. Who are Apt or unapt. 62. ibid. Admonition against overweening our own
strength in unapt marriage. 65. Affecters of unequal marriages, to learn to
be wiser. 69. Admonition to all parties to beware of their marriage promises.
102. Admonition against discord in marriage; Sundry Caveats. 1. Be not
consident of your own strength. 2. Pray for this Grace of Amiablenesse. 3. Put
on the Lord Jesus Christ his meeknes. 4. Renounce not God to use Carnal
shifts. 5. Each parts keep the several bounds of their place. 6. Be prepared
before for the hardest. 194. 195. 196. 197. 198. 199. 200. Instructions to
forward Professors to beware of the sin of Adultery. 352. Admonition to
usurping women in matters of God, taxed. 284. Admonition to the wife against
the evil of priding her self in her diligence and houswifery. 295. Attire of
women subject to their Husbands direction. 275. Adultery a great sin;
Objections against it answered. 329. God will have all uncleannes laid open in
his colors us odious. 330. Reasons of the point. 333. 1. Uncleanness is a
very near and natural affection. 2. Men are very pro^e to blanch it over. 3.
This sin enchanteth and bribe^h the judgment. 4. Adultery is full of Colors
and excuses to hide it self under. 5. Either for prevention of the sin, or
stopping the mouth of the Sinner. 6. that sensuality might have the more strong
disswasives to 337. Gods judgments against Adultery and uncleanness in many
Branches. See, Judgments. Instructions to be subdued by the Terror of God
against it. 315. Admonition to all unclean ones. 348. in two Branches. 1.
Desace not Gods way. 2. To preve^t the sin. 349.
B.
IN Couples where both are Bad, the woman commonly is the worst. 24. in ^ine.
Good admonitions to Bad Couples. 36. When the good and Bad join together,
seldom is the worse bettered by the good, but often the better is marrea by
the worser party. 37. 38.
C.
COmfort and encouragement to good couples who honor their marriage. 17.
Jewish Contracts what and how solemnized, Page vid. Contracts. Civil ones and
no more, unsafe matches for religious ones. 33. Connivers only at, and not
approovers of religon in their Yokefelowes taxcd. 39. Comenders of religion in
their wives for by ends reprooved. ibid. Counsel for such as draw in an evil
yoke. Page 41. 1. Rip up thy state to God. 2. Red^eme old errors and pray for
pardon 3. Pass by pardonable faults. 4. Fret not at thy Lot. 5. Utter not thy
greivances easily. 6. Justify not th^ne own sins by another. ibi and seq.
Continency a rare gift of God, therefore to be sought for of him* 49. No
Curiosity to marry aptly. 64. Corruption always affects a contrariety to the Law
of apt marrying. 67. Contemners of equal marriage reprooved. 69. Counsel to
such as are already unaptly married. 70. Contract and ^onsent of Parents in
marriage handled. 71. Consent of Parents necessary for marriage, and why. 71.
ibid. Exceptions against the strict rule of Parents Consent in marriage. 77.
Childrens objections against Parents carelessness in their marriages answered.
79. Counsel given them what to do in their supposed wrongs. 80. Parents
obstinate to Consent to be curbed. 81. Question about Parents Consent answered.
81. ibid. Cavills of such answered as plead for maintenance and respect from
Parents whose consent they neglected. 84. Dissembled and forced consent of
Parents by children is sinful. 85. Half Consent of Parents, or consent after
contract, is faulty. 86. Contract of marriage in what sense here used. 96. In
what r^spects such Contracts may be said to be essential. 104. Contracts very
ancient and of general use. 105. Jewish Contracts what, and how solemnized.
ibid. Act and performance of a solemn Contract how to be done. 106. Disdainers
of Contracts taxed. 121. Contracted couples must prise their Contract. 123.
Special Counsel touching it. 124. Cause of the unhappy and unprosperous
estate of many Couples is the want of their joint Religion. 137. Chastity the
maine joint duty of marriage. 163. Proofs of it. 164. Amplification of the
point. 166. Reasons for it. 1. Chastity is the main support of union 2. The
de^ilement of each party, defiles the whole marriage. 3. God has ordained one
for one. 4. It covers all other defects, but is covered by no other endowments.
5. It is the corner stone holding in all the building. 6. Because it honors
marriage in many respects. 1. In the fruitful^esse of the womb. 2. Blessing of
legitimation. 3. A curse is turned to a blessing hereby. 167. to 171. Chastity
to be preserved and in how many things it consists 172. Chastity of spirit
necessary, and why. 172. 173. ibid. Chastity of prevention necessary; wherein
it consists? why here urged. 173. 174. 175. Chastity of Bed needful; heathen
men shame Christians in this* Two Extremes here to be avoided. ibid. 175. 176.
177. 178. Some marks to know moderation. ibid. 178. Popish forced Chastity and
affected abstinence from the benefit of the Bed, compared. 179. Inconvenience
of both unjust abstinence, and excess of liberty compared. ibid. Chastity of
Body needful: what is meant thereby; Exhortation thereto. 180. 181. Consent
between Couples a joint duty and needful. 184. Reasons. 1. by the experience,
both bad of such as want it, and sweet of such as enjoy it. 2. The
pretiousnesse of it. 3. It has a divine instinct in it. 4. It brings God into
the Marriage. 184. 185. 186. 178* 188. The praise of consent. 186. Consent
stands in three things. 1. Consent of Heart. 2. Of speech. 3. Of Life. 188.
189. Consent exhorted unto and urged, 200. What ought to be done by both after
their differences, with the conclusion of the point. 201. 202. Cohabitation of
Husband with Wife a necessary duty. Many abuses of this kind taxed. Humiliation
to such, 217. Reproach of seperaters. 218. Conditions requisite in a Wife in
the acting of Gods matters. 286. Whether wives may give to Charitable uses or
not. 272. The mothers Consent in Marriage not absolutely required. 81.
Exhortation to Chastity to keep our Vessels with holiness and honor. 354.
Three counsels propounded. To abhor somewhat. 1. Thine own self. 2.
Thoughts of contemplative uncleanesse. 3. All colors and excuses of it. 4. All
inward fomenters of it. 5. All outward Temptations. Counsel. 2. To meditate of
Somewhat. 2. Properties of it. 1. That it be wise. 2. That it be deep and
serious; About both the Properties and penalties of this sin. First the
Properties and they are three. 1. the Spiritualues of this sin showed in six
steps or degrees. 1. An evil heart. 2. Evil works. 3. Unbelief. 4. Delusion
and defilement. 5. Hardness of heart. 6. Departing from the living God.
Secondly, meditate of the peculiarnes of this sins evil. The third thing that
it seperates from God; And from Communion through Excommunication if not
inflicted yet deserved. The spirit of God excommunicates him in the Court of
his own conscience. Then secondly meditate on the penalty of this sin. 1. A
giddiness and drunken security, disabling the sinner to lay it to his heart. A
woeful example of it, from 354. to 368. Then secondly temporal penalties of
it. 369. The third Counsel to practice somewhat: and that concerns either
such as have been only guilty of it, or else relapsed to it after conversion.
For the former they must practice 1. Due humiliation and abasement, under the
hand of God. 2. They must gather hope out of the promise of God to pardon it.
3. Glorify God in the confession of it. 4. Set before thine eyes the Promise
in 4. respects. 5. Sue out the killing power of Christ to destroy lust. 6.
Return to the Lord in chastity for ever. Lastly such as have revolted to it
again, must take counsel in diverse particulars. to 384. Encouragement to all
undefiled ones. 385. Magistrates both Civil and Ecclesiastical to whom the
censure of lust pertaines, must be in Gods stead to judge and censure all
unclean persons. 384.
D.
DIverters of their wives from Religion to other matters reprooved. 39. Duties
of Parents toward children unwisely suffered to link themselves. 78.
Dissentions of religious couples the shame of profession. 190. Difference in
Couples, wherein it stands. 313.
E.
ENtrance into good marriage requires Marrying in the Lord, and apt marrying in
the Lord. 21. Exhortation to it in many branches. 45. 46. 48. Error of the time
and prejudice of outward complements must be abhorred by him who would marry in
the Lord. 51. Exceptions against the general rule of apt Marriage many. 62.
Exhortation to Parents not to fail their Children in the business of their
Marriage. 95. Exhortation to all good couples, to close together in Religion
both inward as Faith; and outward in Family worship and private, 138. 141. 143.
Exhortation to private intercourse with God. 145. Exhortation to wives to be
helpful in their places. 302. Encouragement to such. 303.
F.
FAith the maine Duty for couples to join in: The infinite miseries of a
married life, for lack of it. 140. Family duties and private worship,
necessary for the married to join together, closely in. The causes why. The
duty opened, urged. 141. 143. 144. Counsels about it. ibid. Forced and loveles
marriages dangerous. 154. and in what respects. ibid. How far the wife may
undertake the service of God in her Family. 268. Of choice of wives out of Bad
Families see Wife. Fornication a great sin. 331.
G.
GOd is seldom found out of his way. 26. Grace levels all disproportions in
Marriage. 27. Grace must be preserved, yea all counted as dross to Grace for a
good Marriage. 52. Good Marriages must be bought. 53. Guardians and Governors
and bound to look to Orphans Marriages, as well as Parents to Childrens. 73.
How they fail therein by sundry abuses. 93. The woeful fruit of it. 94.
Gracefulnes, a third peculiar duty of the wife to her husband. 304. what this
gracious virtue is, ibid. Two things in it. Matter, and that is Grace.
Especially these 7. 1. Humility 2. Self denial. The 3. Faith, and both in the
truth, and in the life of it. A. 4. Innocence. 5. Zeal and piety. 6. Mercy and
compassion. 7. Confidence with others as cheerfulnes and sincerity etc. from.
305. to 312. Secondly, The Form or temperature of it, in what it consists.
ibid. graceles and bad Wives what miseries to their Husbands. 314. Graceful
wives must express it to their Husbands. 315. Husbands that are happy in the
grace of their wives, must return the like. ibid. General uses arising from
the whole Treatise. 316. Objection about degrees of Grace in either party of
the Married. 56.
H.
HEathen opinions of fornication. 3. Honor of marriage upheld by two means,
viz. Good entrance and good continuance. 21. Honor of marriage stands both in
joint acts and several. 128. Motives to the Husband to love his wife. 160. To
the wife to love him. 162. Humiliation meet for all couples who have lived in
dissension. 192. the duty urged. 193. Ill Husbandry what it is. 233. Husbands
especial duty to be a man of understanding. 203. What that understanding is;
what particulars it stands in. 1. In what not, viz. Not in an high spirit. 2.
Not in a rash selfe-wildnesse 3. Not in knowledge without practice. 4. Not in
yielding to good counsel without embracing it. 5. Not in giving counsel to
others, taking none our selves. 204. 205. 206. Secondly, in what it consists?
1. In renouncing our own understanding. 2. To be first subject to God, and so
to guide the wife. 3. To be more sensible of a burden, then of an honor. 4.
To be qualified with a spirit of Grace, for all ^ccasions. 206. 207. 208.
Wastfull Heirs overthrowers of their marriages. 232. Unnatural Husbands
language. 244. Several duties of the Husband to the wife. Look Wise. Husbands
though but meanly parted deserve subjection by the Ordinance. 260. Men's Hearts
not so tender as women's if they be right. vide Men.
I.
Jew confuted in his conceit of marriage. 2. Joint acts of the married 4. 1.
Joint Religion 2. Joint Love. 3. Chastity. 4. Consent. 128. Jealousy between
couples most odious. p. 182. Remedy for the wronged party. ibid. The duty
urged. ibid. Idleness in a man's calling to be avoided. 225. Engrossing many
farms at once ill husbandry. 234. Impudency in usurping wives in matters of
God taxed. 284. God deals with his own by Judgments and threats, and why.
328. Godly persons have a slavish part in them as well as a free. 329.
Judgments of God grievous against uncleanness: In many Branches declared. 1.
Gods dearest servants not excluded from this sentence of punishment. 2. The
offspring of the Adulterer excluded for many generations, from the Tabernacle or
Temple worship. 3. The old penalty of Adultery, death without Remedy. 4. Severe
Judgments executed upon Adulterers do show it; sundry of them in Scripture and
from experience mentioned. 5. Manifold marks of wrath upon uncleanness. 1.
Upon the Soul. 2. Upon the Name: When men have have failed God has struck in.
3. Beggary. 4. Coherence of uncleanness. 1. Upon the Soul. 5. Its the Devils
Nest-egge. 6. Consequences of mischief upon it. 7. Upon the Body. 337. to 346.
Instruction to men to be subdued by the terrors of God against it 351.
L.
COnjugall Love the second mutual duty of the married, handled. 146. Love
Matrimonial being preserved causes marriage to be honorable. ibid. Love of
the married not only bred by instinct, but oftentimes also by other occasions
outward inducements and motives. 147. 148. Love conjugall neither only a
natural, nor yet a religious thing, but a mixture of both. 150. Love necessary
for sundry reasons. ibid. Love though a joint duty of both the parties, yet
has a different carriage in either, and what? 152. Love will not nourish it
self but must be nourished daily between couples. 155. and by what means it
may be so. 156. Admonition to the joint practice of conjugall Love. 157. Danger
of the breach thereof. 158. Exhortation to Love jointly. 159.
M.
Marriage is honorable: The maine doctrine proved and reasoned at large by 4.
reasons 1. In respect of the party. 2. The nature of marriage. 3. The use of it.
4. The sacrednes from p. 4. to the 9. Marriage abhorred by the base life of many
couples. 13. Marriage no buckler to fence off reproach in bad causes. 15.
Marriage no loose nor idle way of service. 18. Encouragement to religious Married
couples. 19. Miseries shunned by good couples. ibid. Married couples must serve
God in their time. 20. Marying in the Lord, what? Some marks of it. 1. Sight
of unworthiness of this favor. 2. They see a reconciliation. 3. Their hearts
are broken by it. 4. They being convinced of Gods ends believe it. 5. From
hence they are encouraged to obey. Other lesser marks added. 22. to 24. Rash
Matches unblest. 24. Jewels of the Marriage Ring 4. 1. Faith, with humility and
self denial. 2. Peace. 3. Purity. 4. Righteousness. 25. Trials of Marriages
many. ibid. By ends in Marriage often plagued by God. 26. Objections concerning
Marriage answered. 28. 29. 30. 31. The Man having the leading hand in the onset
of Marriage, had need be the wiser in his choice. 57. Touching Marying in the
Lord three questions answered. 58. Apt Marying is as necessary for entrance, as
Religious Marying. 60. Marriage must be honored in preserving the same
unsteined during the conversation of it. 126. Married persons who forsake their
own fellowship in worship, and run to strangers with complaints, faulty. 136.
Marriage dishonored by base trades and courses of life. 232. Men's hearts not
generally so tender and zealous as women's if they be right. 309. Marriage is a
shadow of the spiritual union of Christ and the Church p. 321. 1. In their
meeting and Marriage it self, and how. 2. In their mutual converse. 1. What
Christ is to his Church 2. What his Church is to him. 322. 323. Doubts
concerning Marying in the Lord answered eight of them. p. 28. 1. Many do well
wanting Religion. 2. It may grow in time afterward. 3. Many have failed in
seking good wives. 4. Many Religions ones have perilous qualities. 5. What
shall become of the It religions. 6. But we are snared already. 7. Very few
such are to be found. 8. Parents cross good Matches. p. 28. to 31. Papists
taxed for their dishonouring of Marriage. 9. Papists have their personal
Sacraments. ibid. Practice and life of Papisticall uncleanness justly plagued
by God. 10. Marriage with them that are only civilized, unsafe. 33. By-respects
in Marriage, as Portion, and Beauty, and the like, oftentimes by the just
judgment of God, prove unfortunate. 33. 34. 52. Advice to be taken in
Marying. See Advice. Marriage why called a Match. 61.
N.
Women ought to Nurse their own Children. 279.
O.
OBservation of the spirits of each others, meet for such as would mary well.
55. Objection of the fruitfulness of hearts and the barrenness of some chaste
wives answered. 170. The personal offices of each party, the husband and the
wife. 203.
P.
Profane scorners to mary in the Lord terryfied. 31. Prayer requisite for good
marriage. 53. Parents cannot do as they would in matching of their Children. 73.
Parents must observe the condition of their children. 79. Questions about
Parents consent answered 81. Terror to all Rebellious children who mary
against their Parents consent. 83. Parents may be shy to rebellious children,
and why 84. Exhortation to mary with consent of Parents. 87. Dignity of
Parents. 89. Reproof of them that neglect the care of their children. 89.
Parents must walk in a middle way between austerity and folly toward their
children. 89. Base shifts and respects of Parents in disregard of their
children to be taxed. What those are. 90. Parents offense in the extreme of
over-providing for children by undoing of themselves. p. 91. Two degrees of it.
ibid. Promise of Marriage the Root of an explicate Contract. 97. To be very
cautiously made. ibid. The properties of them, ibid. What Promise for marriage
does bind. 99. viz. A mutual one. 2. A free one. 3. A plain and undeceiving
one, and what that is. 101. Rash inconsiderate promises of marriage very foolish
and sinful. 103. Providence a second peculiar duty of the husband necessary.
219. Opening of the point. ibid. Reason of it. Because its honor to marriage,
and how. 220. 221. Providence of the husband in what it consists. 1 In skill in
the trade of his way. 2. Wisdom, insight and experience in it. 3, Curiosity in
Trades abhorred. 4. A stock necessary to occupy with. 5. Application of
himself to his Object diligently. 221. 222. 223. Vusubjectednesse of mind to
the rule of Providence, an ill sign of good husbandry. 235. Exhortation to
husbands to be provident. ibid. Providence of the Wife in conjugall estate a
third part of her helpfulnesse. 296. In what particulars it stands. 297. 298.
299. 300. Forward Professors to take heed of uncleanness. vid. Adultery.
Because Professors cannot dispense with this sin. 353.
Q.
QVestion about publication of contract answered. 109. Question about marying
by a Minister, answered. 110. Question whether Cozen-Germans may mary,
answered. 111. Question wherein marriage and a contract differ. 115. Why a space
is allotted twixt contract and marriage. 118. What space is most convenient. 119.
Quest. what if either party defile him or herself after contract. 120. Three
Questions touching marying in the Lord answered. 58. Q. Whether a Parents
forbi^ding marriage with such a person upon his deathbed may be lawful and
binding, and how far. 81. 82.
R.
REligion the best object in marriage. 43. Reasons. 4. ibid. Reasons why married
persons must enter in the Lord are four. 24. 25. 26. 27. Rational respects,
three in number of using a contract. 107. 1. The sutablenes of so weighty a
thing. 2. The preventing of inconstancy. 3. Good of the parties so contracted.
108. Religion jointly used a maine preservative of the honor thereof. 128. In
what it consists and the duty urged. 129. Six Reasons for it. 1. God is their
mutual God. 2. The grace of either furthers both. 3. They enjoy all things
both good and had in common. 4. Religion is the Cement of all fellowship. 5. By
instance of one joint necessity of trusting God. 6. Blessing annexed to it.
130. 131. 132. A Question what if one party Refuse to join with the other.
133. Hinderers of each other in such joint Religion to be taxed. 135. Such as
remain in each others Religion taxed. ibid. Reproof of wastfull wives. 300.
S.
SCorners to be drawn by their wives Religion, blamed. 40. 50. Single life more
free from troubles then the married condition. 47. Sound judgment, Self
denial and subduing of rebellious lusts meet for him who would prepare for
marriage. 48. 50. Severalnesse in the married sinful, if affected, 133.
Subjection of the wife to her husband, one principal part of her duty. 254.
Reasons of the point. 1. From the law of Creation. 2. From the penalty of
disobedience. 255. Proofs of the point. 256. Reasons. 3. Hereby she preserves
the honor of her marriage. 258. Subjection what it is. 259. It is two fould. 1.
Of the spirit. ibid. Objections against it answered. 260. Qualification of the
wives Subjection in many respects. 1. In prompting the husband with religious
counsel. 2. In Causes of difficulty. 262. 263. 264. Secondly, Subjection
stands in his practice, wherein 3. particulars. 1. In matters of God. A
Question answered, How far a woman has liberty to perform the Service of God
in Family. 266. 267. 268. If they be denied this liberty by bad husbands they
must be subject. 269. Secondly, Subjection in respect of their husbands estate.
270. Limitation of the woman's Subjection in worldly business. 270. A Question
answered. May the woman give to Charitable Uses? Ordinarily not. How she may,
in sundry respects, whereof seven are mentioned. 272. the occasion of this
argument. ibid. The third branch of Subjection in marriage conversation in many
things. 1. Attire and fashion. 2. Gesture. 3. Domestical deportment. 4.
Abroad. 5. In his tongue and company. 6. In Nursery. Uses 2. First, Admonition
to shun rebellion against the Husbands. Secondly, Exhortation to embrace
subjection. from 275. to 282. Wives not subject to the unlawful commands of
their husbands. 262.
T.
TErrors to all dishonourers of marriage. 9. Profaners of it. ib. and 12. Trials
of marriage many. 25. Terror to affecters of unequal marriage. 66. Unlawful
Trades to be shunned. 222. Curiosity of Trades to be abhorred. 223. Neglecters
to learn the way of their trade reproved. 231. Rushing upon courses of
manifold trading ill husbandry. 233. Tenderness and respect due to the wife.
Vide Wife.
V.
POpish magnifying of Virginity confuted. 11. Vows of single life unwarranted.
49. Vulgar guise and garb of the married, rude and barbarous, wholly
unpeaceable, and without consent. 190. To be a man of understanding, what it
is. 206. Understanding in matters of God needful for an husband. Instances
wherein. 208. 209. For the managing of the soul of his wife many ways. 210.
Understanding in other externals requisite. 211. Husbands not walking as men of
understanding, blamed. 212. Husbands who cannot guide themselves, terrified.
213. Exhortation to husbands to be men of understanding. 216. Diligent
improvement of the husbands vocation stands in eight things. 1. Begin with God.
2. Destroy not thine own providence. 3. Pick not quarrels with thy calling.
4. Be subject to God in thy calling. 5. Aim not at hoarding up or multiplying
Riches. 6. Serve God with thy increase. 7. Take losses as well as gains,
patiently. 8. Be joyful, and enjoy all thy labors under the Sun. From 224. to
229. Livers upon Usury odious. 233. Neglect of ones calling under pretense of
Religion, vicious. 231. We must not beweary of our Vocation by reason of some
discontents that may fall out in it. 225. Indiscreet ways of improvidence, as
overstocking, rack borrowing, underselling, and the like, signs of a bad
husband. 233. Change of calling dangerous. 234. In what respect a man may
change his calling. ibid. God will have all uncleanness laid open in her
colors. See Adultery.
W.
Wants and weaknesses of religious couples pardoned. 17. Women wooers threaten
woe. 57. Wives do oftentimes justly stumble at the folly of their husbands.
214. Passages of such folly named. ibid. Four instances mentioned. 215.
Careless deserters of their wives in the affairs of the family, odious. 230.
Honor and respectivenesse to the wife the third and last personal duty of the
husband. 236. The opening of the point. ibid. The root of this is union of two
in one flesh. 237. Reasons of it. 1. Nothing gained by austerity. 2. Wise ones
willingly bear with fools. 3. Gods command requires it. 4. We owe it to a
Christian, even to lay our life down; how much more here. 239. 240. Wives must
not have any peculiar wealth apart from their husbands, but common. 289. If
they desire any stroke that way, they must deserve it by their good carriage.
290. Women's providence and huswifery stands in three things. 1. In bringing in
somewhat. 2. In storing safely that which he prepares. 3. In dispencing family
expenses and provisions. 291. 292. 293. What kind of helpers wastfull wives
are. 301. Provident wives must not be conceited of their parts, nor proud and
upbraiding: their right hand must not know what their left hand does. 294. A
pround woman can never be an obedient wise. 275. in fine. Wedding Ring, and the
Jewels thereof. Vide Marriage A good wife not to be refused, though found in a
bad Family, but rather to be chosen. 59. and preferred before one out of a
good. ibid. And why. Tenderness and respect to the wife. The true model of it
is Christ's tenderness to his Church. 240. In what particulars it consists. 1.
In tendering her Soul above al things. 2. Tenderness to her person, to wit,
in her estimation. 3. Integrity and openheartednesse. 4. Comfort in heaviness.
5. Sparing her from excessive toil. 6. Indulgence in lawful refreshings. 7.
Connivence at unavoidable infirmities. 8. Commending her virtues. 9. Supply of
necessaries and comfortable supports. 10. Respectivenesse must be the
Counselor. 241. 242. 243. 244. 245. 246. 247. 248. 249. 250. 251. Terror to
all Nabals and blocks: their description. Counsel to the wronged party. 251.
252. Description of the husbands tenderness to the wife. 245. Two extremes of
tenderness. viz. Roughness, Vxoriousnesse. 25. Respectivenesse to the person
of the Wife consists in Protection. In preserving her reputation. In relieving
her bodily infirmities. 242. No work so honorable as to make the Wife a
vessel of honor first, and then for marriage. 252. Duties from the Wife to the
Husband three. 1. Subjection. 2. Helpfulnesse. 283. Wherein it stands. Answer
in 3. Branches. 1. In Gods matters. 2. To the estate outward. 3. in respect of
the married condition. 284. 285. 286. 287. 288. 289. 290. 291. 292. 293. 294.
295. 296. 297. 298. 299. 300. 301. 302. 303.
Y.
YOuth ought to redeem her golden season in respect of marriage, and how. 46.
Young wastfull Heirs overthrow their marriages. 232. Admonition to Parents in
that kind. ibid.
FINIS.

