Saving-Beliefe: OR, THE READY AND RIGHT WAY to Believe and be Saved. Wherein
is the * Mystery of Faith laid open: [* 1 Timothy 3.9.]

By Timothy Rogers, Minister of the Gospel (twixt Essex and Suffolk) in
Sudbury.

Mark 5.36. Be not afraid, only believe.

Luke 7.50. Thy Faith has saved thee, go in peace.

LONDON: Printed by G. M. for Edward Brewster at the Bible on Fleet-bridge.
1644.

TO THE Right Worshipful Mr JOHN EDEN OF Ballindon Hall in Essex Esquire, my
godly Patron.
Right Worshipful,
HAVING this small Treatise lying dead by me, or at least asleep; and being
provoked to give it more room and some breath, that it might be awakened by
the Press and Printers hand to come to light; I could not bethink my self to
make Dedication of it (as the use is) to any one more fitly then your self,
and that for these reasons: First, you have been a good Disciple in the school
of Piety from your very nonage, and education by that pious Lady your ancient
Mother (whom I much honor) with the rest of that virtuous brood, some of whom
it was my lot to seal up in their sepulchers, besides some of your own.
Secondly, you have been a constant hearer of these and other my Collations when
you have been in these parts. Thirdly, you are my loving Patron, by whose
means and instigation, according to the desire of the Congregation, I was
(some years since) brought to this place. Fourthly, I therefore am peculiarly
engaged unto you, and love not to live or dye wholly in debt, (I look to lay
down my tabernacle daily) accept, I pray, this small Testimony of Gratitude: I
must say as Peter, Act. 3.6. Silver and gold have I not, but such as I have
give I you, a little plain fruit of my own grafting, I therefore dedicate it
unto your self, and by you to my well-affected friends, my constant,
conscionable, and profitable hearers: (Never more need of Faith and living by
it, then in this terrible tempest) the blessing of the Lord go with it.

Yours faithfully obliged in the Lord, Timothy Rogers.

The Contents of the several Chapters contained in this Book.
Saving Belief
What it is. Chap. 1. How it is called. Chap. 2. How the Law works toward it.
Chap. 3. How the Gospel works to bring to it. Cha. 4. Questions resolved about
the Gospels working of it. Chap. 5. The true Grounds of it. Chap. 6. Objections
answered that hold back (one thoroughly humbled) from it. Chap. 7. The maine
Lets to the getting of it. Chap. 8. Helps for distressed souls to it. Chap. 9.
The seat or subject of it. Chap. 10. The immediate effects following it. Chap.
11. The Excellency of it. Chap. 12. The Necessity of it. Chap. 13. 14. Sorts
of Professors that want it. Chapter 14. General notes of trial whereby to know
it. Chap. 15. More special notes whereby it may be tried, and known. Chap.
16. The degrees of it. Chap. 17. What we must do with it, when we have it.
Chap. 18. What we must do when we want it, and more of it desired. Chap. 19.
Imprimatur

JA. CRANFORD.
August. 12. 1644.
SAVING-BELIEF: OR, The Ready and Right way to believe and be saved.
CHAP 1. What it is; and the Definition of it explained.
THat every one must believe that would be saved, is a truth out of question,
confessed by all that profess Christ; but yet every kind of Believing is not
saving, General and common faith
for the Devils believe, Iam 2.19. and Simon Magus believed Acts. 8.^3. and
was baptized, and yet St Peter says, he was in the gall of bitterness and bond
of iniquity: now then what kind of Belief it is that will save, and that
only, this Treatise shows; not therefore to meddle with historical
temporary or miraculous faith, which are not saving.

What is true saving Belief? Saving belief. The definition of it.


A right applying of Christ to ones self: viz. by an hearty accepting of him,
and a true persuasion of our Souls welfare by him.

1 For better understanding whereof. 1 I say it is an applying of Christ, for as
Manna did no good unless it were fetched home, and fed upon, nor Physic does
good without applying, no more does Christ unless he be applied to the soul.

2 It Is an applying to ones self, for to apply Christ to another, as when you
are persuaded of such a ones Salvation by him, will no more save thy soul then
another bodies feeding will nourish thee, or preserve thy life.

3 It Is a right applying, for if it be wrong, it saves not.

Q. How may one know, whether it be a right applying of Christ?

A. If it set an impression of the likeness of Christ on the soul, so as
Christ is Gal. 4.19.
formed in it, and it becomes like unto him in holiness and true
righteousness; as a seal being rightly set and applied to the wax leaves the
right print of it self, behind it.

2 If it apply not a bare Christ, but Christ with his benefits, and one of
them, as well as another; holiness and mortification, Romans 6.4. as well as
pardon of sins and mercy.

3 If it make us let go our hold of sin: as a full hand must first open and
let go what is in it, before it can take hold of a better thing.

And this is the definition of true faith; but I further add for Explanation,
[by an hearty accepting of him and a true persuasion of our souls welfare by
him] because an hearty and unfeigned accepting of Christ is the true conception
of faith, and a true persuasion is the birth of it, as shall be further showed.
Chap. 5.

I say also a true persuasion, for in a Temporary Hypocrite is found a
particular persuasion or applying to himself, but it is not true.

Q. Is not true believing a resting upon Christ?

A. Yes; for a persuasion includes a resting on him; and a resting on him,
implies some (at least implicit) persuasion.

CHAP. 2. How it is called and the working causes thereof.
SAving belief, to difference it from that believing that will not save, is
called by peculiar names, setting out the dignity of it, as says of Gods
elect. Tit. 1.1. the faith of Saints. Rev. 13.10. the faith of Jesus. Rev.
14.12. most holy faith. Jude. 20. work of faith with power. 2 Thessalonians. 1.11.
faith unfeigned. 1. Tim. 1.5. Precious faith. 2. Pet. 1.1. No other faith can be
properly so called.

The working causes thereof are either principal or in strumentall: the
principal is God himself. Faith of the operation of God. Col. 2.12. and
therefore the blessed work of Father, Son and Holy Ghost.

Lo how goodly a thing it is, as a rare piece of a famous Artist.

The isntrumental causes are Gods Ministers with the word preached in their
mouths; Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. Romans 10.17.
and how shall they hear without a Preacher. verse. 14. for though God could
work faith in men wihout this, yet he will not; as he could, if it pleased him,
preserve our life without food, but we do not therefore expect, he will do
it, and so refuse our food, because he can do it, but rather consider what he
will do.

There are two parts of Gods Word, Law and Gospel, they both conduce to the
work of faith, and go to the making up of saving belief the Law, begins the
work, the Gospel finisheth it: the Law makes way for Christ (and therefore is
called our schoolmaster to bring us to Christ. Gal. 3.24.) the Gospel brings
him into the soul, and brings the soul into saving acquaintance with him.

Q. May not one believe rightly without the working of the Law first?

A. No: 1. Because no part of Gods Word is in vain, but serves to special use
to bring men to salvation.

2. This were to have the work finished before it be begun, for the Law begins
the work, and Christ is the end of the law. Romans 10.4.

3. They that believe by the Gospel without the working of the Law first do
but as one that is full fed, having a dainty morsel offered him, takes it
indeed, but lays it by: or puts it in his pocket, not receiving it into the
Stomach to nourish him.

CHAP. 3. How the Law works toward the bringing us to believe.
1. The Law first enlightens us, and makes us see our misery. Romans 3.20.

2. It wounds us, and makes us feelingly affected with our misery, and
therefore is said to slay us. Romans 7.9, 11. by both these it is said to humble
us.

Q. Must one needs be wounded and humbled, distressed in soul for his sin
and misery?

A. Yes; there cannot be healing before there be a wound, nor a cure wrought
till the patient be willing to put himself into the Physicians hands to use
his skill; he cannot be willing till he see and feel his danger of death; To
see our misery is to be lost in our selves; to feel it is to be sick, Christ
came to seek and save them that are lost. Luke. 19.10. and to be a physician
to those that are sick (of their sins) Mark. 2.17. and to heal the broken
hearted, and bruised ones. Luke. 4.18. and none else.

2. Morever it is a condition which God requires, Humble your selves in the
sight of the Lord, and he shall lift you up. Iam. 4.10. and verse. 9. Be
afflicted and mourn and weep, etc.

3. It is the way to have a pardon, as a condemned subject or lewd child must
first humble themselves before they be taken to favor.

4. It makes us willing, that Christ should take us up and bear us, or do any
thing with us, as Saul. Acts. 9.6. Lord what will thou have me to do? As a
wearied Traveller ready to sink under his burden is willing and thankful to
be taken up and carried, whereas a fresh and lusty Gentleman, that walks upon
his pleasure, scorns to be carried on a porters back, therefore of necessity
we must be first humbled before there can be any good done on us, for believing
to Salvation.

The law (I say) by inlightning and wounding the soul is said to humble us, of
which legal humiliation, are diverse steps and degrees; for the law makes us
see, and certainly believe.

1. That we are unbeleevers; for none will seek after believing, that thinks
he has it already.

2. Our woeful case and danger therefore, for he that believes not shall be
damned. Mark. 16.16. yea is condemned already. John. 3.18.

3. That we are nothing but sin and vileness. Tit. 1.15, 16. all we have, or
ever have done, being without faith; and therefore no better then Splendida
peccata.
matter of damnation displeasing God. Heb. 11.6.

4. It makes us abhor, and loath our selves therefore. Ezekiel. 20.43.

5. Bitterly to lament for our lost miserable soul, as Zach. 12.10.

6. To be weary of our sins (and therefore would be ridd of them) and weary
of our selves, and therefore cannot endure in that estate wherein we are. Math.
11.28. You that are weary come to me, says Christ.

7. To be willing to forgo our sins, and do any thing, God shall bid us.
Acts. 9.6. yet not out of true hatred of sin, or love to God (that the law
works not) but out of mere terror and fear of hell.

8. To despair of our selves, or as Homil. Falling from God First part.
touching any hope that may be in our selves or any possibility to help our
selves, but that all we can do rather increases Gods wrath, against us, being
still without faith.

But note that this despairing of ourselves is not the despairing of the grace
of God; which faith coming in upon it, prevents, and keeps all those from, in
whom it succeeds; for the Law now has brought the soul to the mouth of the
gulf of despair ready to be swallowed up; but here comes in faith in his
proper place to do the soul good in all such as attain it, who else would
wholly despair as Judas.

1. Ob. You named in the 4. and 7. places an abhorring our selves for our
sins and a willingness to forgo them etc. how may these be before faith?

Answ. There is a kind of abhorring of our selves and our sins and a
willingness to be rid of them before faith wrought, but not out of love to God
or hatred of sin, as it is sin and unrighteousnes contrary to the pure
nature of God, but as it is our torment; as a rare delicious confection that
exceedingly delights the taste, yet has a malignant quality, and being eaten,
torments extremely and burns the bowels, the party tormented therewith,
abhorres to see, or think of it, and cries away with it, fling it into the
fire, and yet it it as pleasant to his taste as it was before: and as it was
with Judas his thirty pieces when his conscience was tormented.

2 Ob. You speak of seeing and feeling our misery, must there needs be both
these, will not seeing alone serve turn?

Answ. No. Our seeing of our souls misery, is the Laws inlightning us; Our
feeling it, is the wound it gives us, as Peter's hearers were pricked in their
hearts Acts. 2.37. Many only seeing their misery, but their hearts not wounded
with a sense of it, go on still in their natural state, and come not to the
honor to be true believers in Christ; as one may see his dangerous soar and
Ulcer hazarding his life, and the Surgeon coming to him with his lancing
knife, but yet unless he endure the launcing, and feel the smart, he cannot
be cured.

Thus the Law having done its part in humbling the soul both by inlightning
and wounding it in those eight particulars aforementioned, next comes in the
Ephesians. 1.13.
Gospel to do its part.

CHAP. 4. How the Gospel works to the bringing us to believe savingly in
Christ.
THe working of the Gospel in this humbled soul consists in eight things
also for the bringing forth of faith in him.

1. It inlightens him, to see two things.

First that God of his mere good will and mercy to miserable lost sinners has
provided them a sufficient means, viz. Christ whereby to be saved and
delivered 1 These. 5.9.
from his eternal wrath. John. 3.17. 1 John. 2.2. not excluding any that will
accept of it. Revel. 22.17. upon Gods terms; and in his order; that is by
being first humbled and so made capeable thereof.

Secondly. That God is as willing to show him mercy as any other Ioh. 3.16. yea
will do it, and save him by this means, Christ; if he will but trust God, on
his word, and believe this his goodwill to him, and that he has provided this
means for him, so that if he be not saved, it is because he would not trust
God; but thinks that God means not so well to him, as he speaks. John. 3.16.
That whosoever believes in him shall not perish.

Thus the doctrine of the Gospel inlightning the humbled sinner, is as a voice
that comes from the Holy One, saying, Hear thou poor Soul and hearken unto
me, now thou can do nothing for thy self, see what God is willing to do
for thee: hereupon follows.

2. Admiration, wherewith he is so rapt, as that it is with him, as it was with
the Church, upon their so strange Return out of Captivity, Psalm. 126.1.
they were like them that dream. He wonders much at this a thing so admirable,
that God should offer a Remedy (and that such an one) to man so great a
sinner, whereas not one of the Angels that sinned ever had such a favor
offered them, though there be millions of them, this (I say) is wonderful to
him, though as yet, he believes not this Remedy to himself, but understands a
possibility wherein he may be included; as to a miserable captive, the news of
a release for some of the Company is admirable to him, upon the general
intelligence, though as yet he know not whether he be one of them.

3. Conviction, the Gospel holds him to it, whereas he goes about to put it
from himself: O thinks he, this is good indeed, but too good for me; that is
not for me, I am so great a sinner; nay, says the Gospel, Whosoever believes
shall not perish, and therefore (if thou will) that is for thee as well as any
other, unless by not believing it, thou deprive thy self of it, and a broken
heart, Psalm. 51.17.
God will not despise, (being offered to him) such an one is thy heart.

4. Consultation. He falls to reasoning with himself, what he were best to do.
What (thinks he) does God indeed bid me believe his good will to me by Christ,
and to be persuaded thereof? yes: and gives me good leave and warrant? yes:
What, God to show me mercy? Why to me? What is in me? What reason have I to be
so persuaded? none at all, but only because God bids me; that is great reason:
What danger is it, if I do not? oh the greatest sin of unbelief and contempt of
the Grace of God, thus offered me, and it will be unrecoverable loss of my
Soul: What danger is it if I do now believe this his good will and meaning to
me by Christ? None at all, but shall please God best, and shall find sure
mercy and Salvation.

5. Resolution. He comes to resolve, and puts himself upon this point with
unfeigned Resolution thus to do, he gives his mind and inclines his heart to
it, thus; well then, seeing it pleases God best, and is best for my Soul, and
no danger in it (I being rightly humbled) I will then venture my Soul upon
Gods word and bidding; and rest persuaded, that he means me well, even me and
my poor soul by Christ. Yet now there is difference between this his
Resolution and his doing of it, which follows afterward.

6. Longing affection: finding for all this his Resolution, how unable he is to
perform it, he falls to an hearty desiring and earnest longing for it; very
highly prising of it; Oh (thinks he) that I could so do, that I could be so
happy; the Lord, the Lord give me Grace to do it, whatsoever betides me in
this world, though I beg my bread: this desire is very earnest; longing for
this rather then any thing, as one pressed to death, desiring water; or a
condemned man a pardon, as David for the waters of Bethlehem, and the chased
heart after the water brooks: Psalm. 42.1.
this is the hungring and thirsting of the Soul, whereof the Scripture
speaks, and whereto the Promise is made, Matthew. 5.6. John 7.37.

7. Supplication. This his desire is so strong and vehement, that it can no
longer hold in, but breaks forth in Prayer to God. provided for him, even Jesus
Christ; that he may be well persuaded of it, to his Souls Comfort; and thus
continues every day praying, which is his hanging upon Christ, and crying after
him, he will have no nay, nor let him go, but thus clings closely to him.

8. At length God graciously answers his request, with Son thy sins are
forgiven thee, be it unto thee as thou have desired, and so works it in him,
as in the Creation, when God said, Let there be this or that, it was so; so now
works in him a true persuasion of his good will in Christ, even to him, and of
bestowing Christ a Remedy on his Soul, and that by him, he shall have Grace
and Mercy, and be saved: and that in this sort, the humbled sinner thinks
thus, God has given me an heart to desire it, and to pray unfainedly for it,
and it is according to his will I should do so; now he hears the desire of
the humble, Psalm. 10.17. and, If we ask any thing according to his will, he
hears us. 1 John 5.14. Therefore I am persuaded he will grant it me, even the
blessed Remedy Christ, with all his benefits to the everlasting Salvation of
my Soul.

This now is a true persuasion, and thus is faving Belief wrought and brought
forth at length by the Gospel.

Object. But his prayer for it, is not altogether according to the will of God,
and therefore is he not mistaken for his ground, 1 Job. 5.14. and so his
persuasion false?

Ans. Nor is any good thing we do altogether according to Gods will; but,
first, it is that which God requires, and so according to his will. Secondly,
it is upright, unfeigned, and therefore also accepted, the weakness not
imputed. Thirdly, he does not desire to maintain himself in doing it
otherwise then Gods will is, nay, it is all his care, it may be according to
his will every way, therefore It is accepted according to that he has, and not
according to that he has not. 2 Cor. 8.12.

2. Object. But it is not in Faith, he prays thus; seeing Faith is not yet
brought forth till after his praying for it.

Ans. It is not void of all Faith, as is showed in the Chap. following.

CHAP. 5. Questions resolved concerning the manner of the Gospels working of
Saving Belief.
Quest. HAd this humbled sinner saving Belief till now that he is come to this
true persuasion of mercy by Christ?

Ans. Yes; now it is brought forth, but it was conceived and in breeding
before, namely in his Act. 11.21, 23.
resolving, and earnest desiring it; the 5. and 6. points of the Gospels
working mentioned before; then it was in him more unsensibly and in conception;
but when he comes to be truly persuaded, this is the birth of it, now it is in
him more sensibly, now he sees that he believes; as a woman has a child in her
womb before it be brought forth and she hold it in her arms and look upon it.

Quest. How can you prove that there was saving Faith begun in him then?

Ans. 1. Because in his resolving upon, and earnest desiring of Christ, Gods
Remedy, he gave his heart and will to Christ; for what we greatly desire that
has our heart.

2. The Promise is made to this kind of desiring, Matthew. 5.6.

3. He then yields to Gods demand and condition, which is willingly to accept
and make choice of Christ as God is willing to bestow him; the Soul in this
desiring him, says, Yea, I make choice of him above all.

4. This resolving on, and accepting of Christ, Gods Remedy, is to believe,
for the Soul says to Gods proffer, I will, and consents thereto; as in
Marriage, Will thou have this man to thy wedded Husband? I will: This makes the
match; so between Christ and the Soul, God by his Proffer asks; the humbled
soul by resolving and desiring it answers, yea, and consents thereto.

Plainly thus, the sinner rightly humbled by the Law, and being also convinced
in Conscience by the Gospels enlightening, of Gods free proffer of the Remedy
to him, as well as to any other, does by his resolving on it, and fervent
desiring it, show his good liking thereof, yea, accepts thereof, as if he
should say, yea let me have it, this accepting is weak implicit believing; the
very beginning of it; but to be persuaded is stronger believing, the making up
of it: but right applying of Christ (the definition of Faith, Chapter 1.)
comprehends both.

Quest. But what if this desire and resolution be not sound and unfeigned?

Answ. Then it does no good, neither is it saving Belief, but only a
counterfeit of it, but I speak all this while of that which is true and
unfeigned.

Quest. How may it be known?

Ans. 1. It is a desiring of Christ above any other thing that can be thought
or named, as one ready to die for thirst desires water above any thing else.

2. It is very earnest, proceeding from the very Agony of Conscience, and will
have no Nay, (as Rachel, Give me Children, or else I dye) it cannot be
satisfied, nor endure without him whatsoever else it has.

3. It desires the Remedy not by haves, but as God has provided it, whole
Christ, as well for a sanctifying Remedy, as a saving, else it is not a true
desire, nor a right accepting of him, such an one does not apply the true
Christ, but an half Christ, or an Idol-Christ of his own making; viz. to save
without sanctifying, which is not the Christ, that God has appointed for a
Remedy.

And for as much as our first coupling and uniting unto Christ consists in
this point, we must be so much the more careful of it, that it be well done,
for by Humiliation we are plucked out of the old Stock, by believing we are set
into the new, that is Christ, there must be great Care had that we be rightly
joynted in, as the Science well set into the Stock at first, thrives more in
one year, then another will do in four, if it grow at all.

1. First then, we must desirously and resolvedly accept of whole Christ (this
is to be rightly joynted into him) that is a Sanctifier as well as a Saver of
us, to make us holy, as well as to make us whole; as a Act. 2.36
Lord to have the whole command of us, and we to be ruled by him, to follow
him, and do as he would have us; we must be joined to him as our Ephesians. 4.15, 16.
Head, to infuse spiritual life and power of Grace into us, to vanquish
corruption, and to delight in God, and to glorisie him in holiness; else we
shall be, as it were, ingraffed into a dead or saplesse Stock, Can such a
Science grow or prosper? Therefore we must take the whole Remedy, not a Jesus
only, but a Christ too, and that not partly, viz. a Priest to die for us, but
a King also to rule over us, and a Prophet to teach us.

2. We must be wholly joynted into him, not partly into our selves, and partly
into him, as to think that though we have need of Christ, yet that Non
intelligit beneficia divina qui se tantummodo a Deo juvari putat. Lac. li. 1.
c. 11. Divi. Inst.
there is some goodness in our selves.

3. To an holy end, viz. Not to take liberty to sin more, but with a Covenant
in our hearts to sin no more; that is, what we know to be sin, not willingly
to give our selves leave to do it for a world.

That humbled sinner, that by unfeigned desire and Resolution thus accepts of
Christ is rightly joynted into him and a true Believer.

Quest. But can such be in danger of believing wrong, that have been rightly
humbled?

A. Not so, but they that are not thus rightly joynted into Christ, have not
been rightly humbled, but only in part, to wit, to see themselves in danger of
damnation by sin, which therefore, they would have forgiven, but not to abhor
their sins and be weary of them, willing to be rid of them, and to do any
thing that God shall bid them, or would have them do, which are parts of sound
Humiliation, as CHAP. 3. was showed: thus as they are humbled only in part, so
they apply Christ only in part (for one cannot desire or accept of Christ any
further then he is sensible of his own necessity) this is to divide him;
therefore a false affection of desire to him, as the false mother, 1 King.
3.26. would have the child divided.

Quest. Whether are the Promises to be applied to one truly humbled by the Law,
and enlightened by the Gospel, etc. touching the Remedy proffered to him,
though not yet ressolved to rest persuaded thereof, but puts it from himself,
because of unworthiness?

Ans. Apply the Promises to him we may not, because they do not belong to him
till he Gal. 3.22
believe, but the precept of Believing ought to be applied to him, that is, he
is to be exhorted to give his mind to be persuaded of Gods good will to him,
in offering him the Remedy in good earnest, and is as willing to show him
mercy and to bestow the Remedy on him, as on any other, so that be refuse it
not and so judge himself Act. 13.46.
unworthy of everlasting life, therefore he is to be required by resolving
thereon desirously, to accept thereof, which is to Believe.

CHAP. 6. The Grounds of true Believing.
Qu. YOu have showed how the humbled sinner, by the working of the Gospel,
comes to believe, but upon what Grounds does he thus believe?

A. He has his Grounds, for else, that were as a building without a
Foundation; but it is not any thing in himself (only he is prepared for, and
made capable of the Remedy, by sound Humiliation, as CHAP. 3.) his Grounds are
all in God: as

1. His Free Proffer and good leave, whosoever will, Rev. 22.17. and any one
that thirsts, Joh. 7.37.

2. His Will, who would have him do so, Ioh. 6.40.

3. His Desire, as though God beseech you by us, says the Apostle. 2 Cor. 5.20.

4. His Command requiring and charging him to believe, This is his
Commandment, that we should believe on the Name of his Son, 1 John 3.23. so
that he should highly offend God, Make him a liar, 1 John 5.10. and set the
Grace of God at naught if he did not.

5. His Promise, that he shall not in so doing have the Repulse: Him that
comes to me, I will in no wise cast out, says Christ, Ioh. 6.37. and
therefore most safety herein.

Thus though he see no cause why in himself (any more then his own necessity)
yet because it is Gods Will, and Desire, Command, with Promise, etc. he gives
his mind and bends his will to rest persuaded of Gods good will to his Soul
by Christ.

This is to believe merely upon Conscience, when we see in our selves no
reason, why we should do so, yet because it is Gods will, this is the best
believing; (for the less there is of our selves in believing, the better it
is) and this will stick surest by us, nor is so subject to waverings and
reelings, as otherwise; Let it be well marked, for diverse mistaking their
Grounds, and looking for something in themselves to ground on, loose their way,
and are so woefully bewilderd, that thereupon they are in great perplexity See
more Chap 9. the 6. help
.

Now the party drawing to a persuasion upon the foresaid right grounds, this
is such a thing as should be done, once for all, seeing it is done in
Conscience and according to truth; therefore he should do it with this mind and
meaning to rest thus persuaded now and for ever, and never to deny it, or yield
to doubting of it afterward: it must be advisedly done, as in Marriage once for
ever, wherein there is an accepting and covenanting, not for the Marriage day
only, but for all their life: this is a great settling to Faith.

Q. How may one know whether he believe thus on Conscience, because God wills
and commands it?

A. Then he will as well make Conscience of obeying God in other things,
because he Commands us to be humbled for sin, to repent thereof, to renounce
all known sin, yea, to part with our best beloved sins: and to take up the
Cross and follow Christ, to embrace self-denial, true holiness and
Sanctification, and the like.

CHAP. 7. Diverse Objections answered which hold back ones believing after he is
thoroughly humbled.
THE brokenhearted and humbled sinner (for of such an one I speak, and the
Answers to the Objections following are only meant to such an one) is pestered
with many Objections to keep him off from believing, some before the birth of
Faith, and while it is in conception, some afterward: for now Satan assaults
him, as the red Dragon stood before the woman ready to be delivered, Rev. 12.4.
to devour her Child, as soon as it was borne; now that a Soul is breaking
loose, or broken from him, he bestirres himself to fetch back his prisoner:
some of which objections most usual are these:

1 Object. If I be not elected, I cannot believe, do I what I can, and whether
I be elected, I cannot tell.

A. Trouble not your self with Gods secret will; Believe, and you are elected,
then you shall know, and before you cannot; you must first know that you
believe, before you can know that you are elected.

2 Obj. I cannot believe unless God enable me.

A. True; yet God requires you to be willing to take ability, when he offers
you as now he does. 2. To use ability as he bestows it on you; in making you
willing, therein he inables you in some measure, he would have you put forth
this Strength to the uttermost, and do what you can for your heart to believe,
else it is as if one deadly hungry, having Food offered him, should say, I
cannot feed unless God give me ability, and so not assay, nor try to do
what he can to eat: or for leaving of sin, as if one should say, I cannot leave
sin, unless God enable me, and so continue in sin; nay, thou must give thy
mind and will, and yield thy self to do it; and so it is for believing.

3 Obj. I fear I have not been rightly humbled, all my trouble was only for
fear of hell.

Ans. It can be no other till you believe; there is nothing but Law, till Grace
come, there can be no love of God in you, till you taste the sweetness of his
love to you by Christ 1 John 4.19.
first; which is by believing.

2. If it be only therefore, it does indeed prove you do not as yet believe;
but yet it proves withal that you are prepared to believe; and may so do now
safely and without danger.

4 Obj. But I fear I was never humbled enough; and as I see some others have
been.

A. 1. Others must not be your measure, the Lord deals differently. If one
woman have not so grievous pain in Childbearing as another, does it prove her
no mother of a Child?

2. If you fear it, that is a sign you desire to be humbled thoroughly, an
Argument of the Truth of it.

3. If you unfainedly desire whole Christ (to sanctify as well as save you)
above any thing, then you have been humbled enough.

4. If you can feelingly pity others, that are humbled and distressed in soul,
and not be angry with them, nor count them fools (as carnal people do)
that's a sign you know what belongs to it.

5. Have you been driven out of all good conceit of your self, seeing nothing
but matter of damnation in you, not thinking your self better but as bad as
any body, and deserving damnation as much as any one? And secondly, your heart
so oppressed with sorrow thereupon, that it would not let you be at quiet, nor
content your self in the comfort of any thing without Christ, for grief of
your lost Soul, so that no worldly Joy could extinguish it, nor rid you of
this sorrow, but only the Joy of Believing; and thirdly, has made you
therefore resolve to get Christ, if possibly you could, though you loose all
else? if it has been thus with you, you have been humbled enough to make you
capable of believing.

Qu. What should they do that have not been humbled enough?

A. Let them study well and thoroughly of the vile nature of sin which 1 Samuel
3.13.
makes us vile, what infinite wrong it does to God, what daring and provoking
of him: what a poysonfull thing, and murderer of our souls, not the least Job
33.27.
good to be gotten by it, but the greatest loss, most hateful to God and
hurtful to our selves; they that plod well on this, it will make them think
more basely of themselves, and humble them more: He that would be a meet
subject of mercy, must be thoroughly abased in him self; the world accounts of
us thereafter as we set forth our selves; but God thereafter as we abase our
selves.

5 Object. How is it likely, that God favors me so well as to give me Christ,
whenas all good people have discountenanced me, and not cared for me for my
naughtiness?

A. Both God and they have; so long as you followed your ignorant, profane, or
mere civil course, but now that you are changed, as sure as Gods people, so
surely God himself makes reckoning of you, and likes you well.

6 Obj. But now my old friends and companions cast me off.

A. It Is a sign of Gods better liking of you, for that which the world most
despise is most welcome to God, namely a dejected Soul and broken heart, this
is a sweet Psalm. 51.17.
Sacrifice to him.

7 Obj. But I am so unworthy, etc.

A. If you stand upon worthiness, Christ can profit you nothing, the more you
see your unworthiness and groan under it, the fitter you are for him, and he
for you: as if one ready to starve, having an Alms offered him, by one
extremely wronged by him, should say, O nay, I am unworthy, and so choose
rather to die, than to receive it; just so do you.

8 Ob. If I could prevail more over my corruptions, I should have some good
hope, but they alas are so many, and so strong, that my heart fails me.

A. The cause why your corruptions prevail so much, is want in Believing, and
because you do not as God bids you, to believe, that he will save you by
Christ; he will have you know, if you get any Grace at his hand, it must be by
doing as he bids you, and not by disobedience: if you would believe this
better, you should find such admirable sweetness in Gods love, as should
constrain you to love him more, and the more you love him, the more should you
hate sin and corruption, which is contrary to him; and the more you hate that,
the more it would wast in you; for it is your love to it, that nourishes it,
and makes it thrive, and shoot up in you; In a word, your Belief must be
stronger, that your corruptions may grow weaker, therefore give your mind to
it as good at first as at last; Believe steadfastly in the Grace of God.

9 Object. But I fear, if I should thus persuade my self, I should presume.

Ans. Fear not that, you being rightly humbled, for that persuasion, that goes
before sound Humiliation is presumption, but not that which follows it; if
you can attain to a grounded persuasion after, safe and good: to presume is to
be persuaded, when one should not, not when he should; as now you should and
ought, feeling the burden of your sins, God requires it of you, Matthew. 11.28.

10 Object. But there are a very few Believers; therefore I am afraid I am none
of them.

A. Few indeed, yet not because God is unwilling to save more, but because so
few will accept of his proffer on his Terms; which if thou will, it is all one
to thee, few or many.

11 Obj. I fear I have sinned against the Holy Ghost, because I have often
resisted that good Spirit, and gone against my Conscience.

A. But thou will not renounce Gods Truth, nor as an enemy maliciously
persecute it, therefore have not committed that unpardonable sin.

2. Thou grievest forthy resisting the Spirit, and wilt be more careful not to
do so; how then have thou committed that sin whereof one cannot repent, when
thou see, thou do even now repent of it.

12 Obj. I fear (if ever I had it) that I have lost it again, because I have
not such Joy and Cheerfulness as I had at first.

A. You cannot loose it, if you had it not before; and if you had it before,
you cannot loose it, because its a thing that 1 Pet. 1.5. and 9.
cannot be lost; as for your Joy it is with you, as with the Church ravished
most with Joy upon their first deliverance out of captivity, Psalm. 126.2. and
yet their deliverance lasted long after; or like the creeple, Act. 3.8. who
upon his unexpected cure, showed greatest Joy at first, and yet he was as sound
of his limbs long after.

13 Obj. I fear I shall not be able to hold out, because Satan and my
corruptions are so strong, and my Faith so weak (if I have any)

Ans. God who has begun the good work, will finish it, Phil. 1.6. and Christ
is both Alpha and Omega, Rev. 1.11. not only the Beginner, but also the
Finisher of our faith, Heb. 12.2. A living member of Christ cannot perish,
unless he should perish with him, as the members of the body cannot be drowned
without the head.

14 Ob. O it is a difficult matter to believe truly.

A. The matter of difficulty is most in the will, be you more willing, and it
will be more easy.

CHAP. 8. The maine Lets to the getting of saving Belief in mere natural
ones.
THere are many Lets and Hindrances that keep men from getting of it, some of
the Chief are these:

1. Ignorance, not knowing what it is, how good, and how they ought to labor
for it, such God swears, shall not enter into his rest, Psalm. 95.10, 11.
because they know not his ways.

2. Fear and Distrust, lest God will not give it them, though they seek it,
whereby they do him no small dishonor, seeing he has promised the contrary.
Matt. 7.7.
Seek, and ye shall find.

3. Spiritual Pride, and well-conceitednesse of themselves, We are all by
nature as full of pride and selfeconceitednesse, as a bladder is of wind, but
when we are pricked with the Law, we find our selves empty and lanke.
and their doings; as he thinks scorn to beg, or be beholding to another, that
has of his own already; Every one that is (thus) proud in heart is
abomination to the Lord. Prove. 16.5.

4. Carnal Security, thinking their Souls are not in danger, nor will be
persuaded of it; he that thinks not himself in any danger of death, will not
use Physic to preserve his life; these are like Sisera fast asleep and
secure, Judge. 4.21.
when Jael was ready to pierce his brains.

5. Carnal Confidence, and trusting to their outward prosperity, because they
thrive and fare well in the world, in body and in outward Estate, therefore
are confident their souls do so too; as if a Traitor in hold, finding good
keeping, should be confident of a pardon.

6. Sloth, and a lazy humor; whiles men, had rather be without it, than to
take pains for the getting of it, and to remove such logges out of the way, as
hinder them toward it; as one in a swoune that had rather go away, then be
rubbed and struggled with, for the saving of his life.

7. Delay, as men putting off so long the getting of a pardon (which they might
have) that they are hanged before it come: thus many an one loses the land of
promise by lingering so long in the wilderness of sin; as the old Israelites.

8. Presumption, which is not saving but deceiving Belief, false believing,
where with Faiths room is taken up, that there is no Room for it to enter;
these are they, that were never made so much as capeable of believing by
getting a broken heart, and yet believe and apply Christ to themselves after
their own fashion, without any ground or warrant from God, nay, against his
Word; They do not take Christ the Remedy, 1. in Gods order, by being humbled
first; nor yet 2. upon Gods terms, viz. to be rid of their sins by him, as
Act. 3.26. They that thus by presumption have falsely laid hold on Christ, it is
an harder matter far to make them loosen, and so take true and good hold of
him, then those that have been ever fearing and doubting, and never yet
apprehended at all; As one at point of being drowned, having taken fast hold of
a Bulrush in the water, it is harder (his Senses being stonied) to make him let
go, and take hold on a strong pole reached to him, then if he had taken hold on
nothing at all.

Carnal people are even shackled and fettered with these forenamed
hindrances, and as it were with strong Chains held in; which if they get not
loose from, they are bondmen to Satan still, no freemen of Christ, to wit, true
Believers; for all their smooth and civil behavior, wronging no body, paying
every one their own, keeping their Church, and professing true Religion.

CHAP. 9. Helps to saving Belief, for distressed Souls.
THese helps are only meant for the afflicted Conscience, and for weak
wavering ones; for to offer help to a dead man is lost labor, but to a weak
man is a benefit; they are therefore for those humbled sinners in whom Faith is
to be conceived, or is conceived (as CHAP. 5.) and come to the birth, but there
is no power to bring forth in a sensible persuasion, which yet their souls
long for, (more then any woman for her deliverie) O say they that I had this
assurance; that I could be so persuaded, (yea, some with many tears, thus
expressing their desires) to whom, I say, consider

1. God has provided Christ a Remedy effectual for every poor distressed
soul, that seeing and feeling it is necessity, is truly willing and As Chap.
5. Q. 4.
desirous to receive him, Isai. 55.1. Beleevest thou this? yes. Then also you
see your soul is such a soul. yes. Therefore of necessity you must yield,
that God has provided him such a Remedy for your Soul: what say you to this?

Ans. I am not able to contradict it; Go to then, now then you are persuaded,
that God has provided the Remedy to be effectual, even for your Soul in
particular, and for the Salvation thereof, which is to believe, yea, the birth
thereof.

2. Are you unfainedly desirous of Grace, the favor of God, and Salvation by
Christ? Lord thou know I desire it with my heart: Well then, know that God
is a thousand-fold more defirous of it, Ezekiel. 33.11. For thy defire is finite,
his infinite, and if God be willing and you to, what should hinder? God and you
are agreed upon it, therefore so it shall be.

Object. The doubt is of his willingness, for I find willingness in my self
to it.

Ans. Do you believe you have deserved hell, because Gods Word says so? yes.
Why then do you not believe, that Gods will and desire is to save you, seeing
his Word says so to; if it be true in one thing, it is true in another:
Remember, If we (with humble and upright hearts) confess our sins, he is
faithful and just to forgive us, 1 John 1.8 so then he is willing to show you
mercy; and that he can, you cannot doubt; if you think him Almighty, and
seeing he both can and will, you must be persuaded so it shall be.

3. Further consider, that in a yielding Resolution of an humbled Soul to Gods
proffer, and in an hearty desire is faith conceived (though not brought forth)
as was showed CHAP. 5. Thus it is with you, therefore Faith is in you, though
not seen, nor sensibly discerned of you, and seeing it is in you, needs must
you think that Christ is yours, and that you shall be saved by him.

4. To study much and often upon Christ, is a good help and means, to bring
us to come to partake of him by Faith; for what our mind thinks much on, it
is by degrees transformed into, if of worldly things into worldliness; if of
heavenly, into heavenly-mindednesse, if of Christ very much, into Christ at
last; as that which lies soaking in fresh water, grows fresh; but if in salt
water, it will grow brackish: We must not think to catch Christ swimming
aloft, by superficial and slight thinking of him now and then; but must dive
deep in serious study and deep meditation of him, as Ephesians. 3.18, 19.

5. You must bargain for Christ, and so you shall be assured that he is your
own; the Mat. 13.46.
Pearl must be bought, do then as the Buyer, at what Rate it is to be had,
(for there is no having of Christ, but at Gods Rate, you must so take him, or
let him alone.) viz. to give him your heart, to be all for him; to renounce
your sins and sinful lusts, etc. If thus you consent to it, with good liking,
the bargain is stricken up, Christ is yours; yea though, the whole be not
performed in present, but an earnest laid down in true part of payment (for you
must be in good earnest) and the Remainder from time to time continually
afterward, viz. daily to part with sin, and your corruptions more, and to grow
more holy, to give the Lord your heart, in loving and delighting more in him,
and seeking of him, etc. yet the Earnest makes the Bargain, if in good Truth
of heart you consent and begin these things. Act. 8.39. now you may be sure
that Christ is yours, having thus made the Bargain, unless you think God
will fly from his bargain, and not perform; which far be it from your
thoughts. Number. 23.19.
He is not as man that he should repent.

6. It is an especial help to believing to observe well the right grounds
thereof, showed before CHAP. 6. and to take heed of the wrong grounds, which is
when the humbled sinner looks to find something in himself, to persuade him
to it, as the fruits of Sanctification, and Evangelicall Repentance, to forsake
his sins out of love to God, etc. and is afraid, and dares not be persuaded he
shall be saved by Christ, unless he find these first, which as they appear
more or less, so he believes accordingly; but when this humbled Soul longing
truly after Christ finds not (for that follows upon our apprehension of Gods
love to us by Christ) though faith be conceived in him, yet has he no power to
bring forth in a settled persuasion, nay, he is so stumbled, that in stead of
drawing on to the persuasion of Faith, he is further set off from it.

So then there are two ways in use with those that are honestly minded,
thirsting after Christ, whereby they labor to bring forth Faith, in getting a
true persuasion. The first is by pitching on the right grounds mentioned CHA.
6. whereto I refer you, not looking to any thing in themselves, any more then
Preparation by sound Humiliation: The other way is when they look to find
first some fruits of sound Grace, before they be persuaded of their Salvation
by Christ, else think they should presume (but that's a great mistake) this is a
further way about, and more unco^fortable, wherein also when they have wheeled
about, perhaps a great part of their life, it must fall into the other way at
last to.

1. These the Temptor plays upon exceedingly, as if a man should let a young
Tree lie above ground, and not set it in the Soil, till he first see what
fruit it will bear, or as if one should be afraid, and refuse to eat, till he
first feel some working and Effect of food in him.

2. They that take the former way, shall thrive and grow more in a month, then
the other shall do in a year, as a Science skilfully put into the Stock
grows more in one year then another in three, that is not well set in, and
besides often cropped to, though some sap in it.

3. The latter way is full of continual uncertaintie, perplexed with more
cares, fears and doubtings; for as they find abatings and coolings, ebbes and
flows, so does their persuasion ebb and flow; If one be set forward in it one
day, he will be set back again two for it; he is so cloyed and tired with
thoughts of his own unworthiness, with fruitless fears and doubts, that he
cannot apply himself to go on cheerfully in godly practice.

4. They that take this latter way, hang longer in the Birth with pain and
discomfort; yea, they put themselves to a great deal more pain then they need,
Pain which shall not profit: Jer. 12.13.
whereas the former with more comfort are more speedily delivered, and to their
great Joy bring forth Faiths true persuasion.

Obj. To what use then serve sanctifying Graces and Fruits, the signs of our
Salvation? are they needless?

Ans. No: they are of excellent use, for they serve,

1. To discover to men their Estate that they believe, for all that truly
believe have these things undoubtedly upon their believing, but not before;
they serve not to put the Sience into the Stock, that is, to set us into
Christ, but to declare that we are in him.

2. They serve comfortably to confirm us in Believing, not to bring us to
believe; as love tokens between friends, which are not the Ground of their
first good will, but lively Demonstrations thereof, and so serve to confirm it
further, as to this use serve the holy Sacraments.

3. They are Faiths sunbeames (as the Sunbeames are to the Sun) whereby it
has its working and operation in us and by us to the glorifying of God.

2 Object. Does not the Scripture say, The unrighteous shall not inherit the
Kingdom of God. Were it not folly then for me to believe I should be saved
before I find my self such an one?

Ans. Believe, and thou art righteous, for first thy Faith is accounted to thee
for Righteousness; and Christ's Righteousness becomes thine; and secondly, by
Faith thou partakest of inherent personal Righteousness.

3 Obj. None shall be saved, but they that are sanctified, Gods Word tells us;
How can it then be safe or true for me to believe I shall be saved, till I see
my Sanctification?

Ans. It is true, you cannot be saved, unless you first be sanctified; but
it is as true, you cannot be sanctified unless you first Immundi omnes quos non
mundat sides Christi. Aug. Enclir c. 75.
believe; and unless it be by this means you shall never be sanctified:
Sanctification comes by Believing.

2. You are as soon sanctified as justified, and you might as well object,
Should I believe that I unjustified shall be saved? No; for in believing thou
art justified; and so it is for Sanctification. But remember I have spoken all
this while of the brokenhearted sinner, sufficiently humbled and prepared at
least for believing, whatever more he has attained; I speak of no other, so
understand me, and then you take me right.

CHAP. 10. The seat or subject of saving Belief.
THis is of some use, for one may the better find a good thing, if he once
know the very right place where it lies; the Seat and proper place of its
abode and residence, I take to be the Soul, rather then any one particular
faculty of it alone; for Faith shows it self, and its virtue in the several
faculties of the Soul; as in the Will by accepting of Christ, in the Heart by
trusting and relying on him, in the Understanding by persuasion, in the
Conscience by Assurance: And I conceive it to be after this order thus: after
that the understanding of a distressed Soul is enlightened to see a sufficient
means [Christ] offered freely to him, then first the heart (if one belong to
God) is affected therewith, and earnestly desires it, viz. whole Christ; here
Faith begins, for this (in the humbled Soul) draws with it inseparably
secondly an act of the Will, to wit, the accepting of it, (for whatsoever is
desired, the will chooses and accepts of) it accepts of it in making
choice of Christ above all, and in Resolution to hold fast to him, and never to
forgo him; then the work runs back again to the heart to rest and trust on
him; thence to the understanding to be persuaded of our Souls welfare by him,
thence to the Conscience, when as the party by a reflected act knows that he
believes, that is, that he is persuaded truly, and so is assured of his
Salvation, etc.

Object. Romans 10.10. With the heart man believes.

Ans. He says not only with the heart; but the heart here is put for the
whole Soul, as it is frequently in Ezekiel. 36.26. Psalm. 108.1. Job 38.36 1 Pet.
3.4. 1 John 3.20. Isai. 6.10.
Scripture elsewhere; and that it is so meant here, appears by the contra
distinction it bears to the mouth and outward man. ver. 9.

CHAP. 11. The immediate Effects following upon sound Believing.
HE that has it wrought in him, is presently brought as it were into a new
world, and like as it was with Peter, when he was come to himself, after his
miraculous deliverance out of prison by an Angel, loosed from his Chains, and
passing through the iron gate, the case was much altered, and he in an Ecstasy.
These Effects or gracious dispositions immediately follow in the true believer.

1. True Love to God, which could not be before, for the apprehension of his
love to us, kindles love in us to him, as a Spark or burning Coal lights the
Candle, or sets the wood on flame: Now we love God cordially, more then one
that should save our life: it appears thus:

1. It makes us love him above our selves, or any other; in that we see he has
done more for us then we could or would do for our selves, or any other could
do for us.

2. To study how to gratify him, and to think what shall I render to the Lord?
Psalm. 116.12. and willing to be at cost and pains for him, and how to please
him best.

3. To love as he loves, and hate as he hates.

2. Hatred of sin, not as before, viz. because our bane only; but because it is
clean contrary to God, and his holy and pure Nature, for if we love one thing
of necessity, we hate the contrary to it, thus loving sweet we hate sour,
loving Light we abhor darkness, loving pleasure, we cannot abide pain.

3. Godly or Evangelicall Sorrow, which is sorrow for our sins, out of love
to God, and because they are offense and wrong to him, who is so infinitely
good to us: It differs far from worldly sorrow which was in Nabal, Ahab, etc.
for that works death, 2 Cor. 7.10. but this life: and it differs from Legal
sorrow for sin, which was in Judas, for,

1. That breaks the heart, but this melts it, as if the Icicles have the Sun
shine on them, they must needs melt, and if Christ the Sun of Righteousness be
rightly applied to the Soul, this melting Effect will undoubtedly follow in
the heart, making it pliable to receive any gracious Impression.

2. That is chiefly in time of Humiliation, for as Godly sorrow comes on, so
the other wears out.

3. That arises out of horror of Conscience, but this out of love of God and
his goodness.

4. That is only for the punishment, but this for the sin.

4. Sound and sweet peace inwardly, which though it is not perfect, yet
Consciences trouble is finely allayed, and it is better satisfied and finds
more ease then before; as after the plucking out of a sting or thorn is more
ease, yet not perfect riddance of all pain; Being justified by Faith, we have
peace with God, Romans 5.1. the sting of sin is the damning power of it, which
upon our believing is plucked out and taken away. Romans 8.1. hereupon follows
ease in Conscience.

Q. How may one know whether it be sound peace?

Ans. If it follow a sound cure of the wound first made and felt in Conscience;
for else it is but a still and secure Conscience, and like one that has a
thorn in his flesh, and he asleep, though he feel it not, the raging of it is
as much and the danger greater, for so long he uses no means against it.

5. Spiritual Joy, The God of hope fill you with all Joy and Peace in
believing, says PAUL, Romans 15.13. and my heart trusted in him, therefore my
heart greatly rejoices, says DAVID, Psalm. 28.7. This is not natural Joy,
rejoicing in things pleasing to nature; nor worldly Joy, in the things of this
world, much less wicked Joy in doing evil, but spiritual; Joying in the
Spiritual benefits and privileges of Grace, called Joy of the Holy Ghost,
very like that new Song, which no man could learn, but they which were
redeemed from the earth. Rev. 14.3.

6. An holy Consecration or Resigning up our selves wholly to Christ, Romans
12.1. For if we believe truly that Christ gave himself to death for us, it
will make us according to reason give our selves wholly to him again; as in
Marriage, very Reason requires a mutual giving of themselves each to other.

Q. How?

Ans. By making a Covenant in good earnest with Christ to be all for him, and
not to be any more for the world, or for dearest Friends, or our own selves
any further then will agree with our being for him.

7. Love to the Godly, which before we could worst abide, as Paul newly
converted cleaves heartily to those whom before he persecuted, Act. 9.19, 26.
and as new kindred that come by Marriage, are much made on, being before but as
strangers and of ordinary account: Faith in Christ and love to all the Saints
go together, Ephesians. 1.15. Such now are called to us, Ps. 66.16. Come all ye that
fear God, others are shaken off and sent packing, Psalm. 119.115. Depart from
me, ye evil doers; though before our greatest Companions.

8. Unfeigned Wishing, and endeavoring of others believing, Act. 26.29. Romans
10.1. because now (and not till now) we have true love in us to God, and
others; for true Charity is a proper fruit of true Faith only; making us aim
at the greatest good of others, that is of their Soul.

These are some immediate Effects, or holy stirrings following instantly upon
our quickening by Faith in Christ, in every one more or less, though not in all
alike: wherewithal note, that Faith quickens, as soon as it is conceived, as
in CHAP. 5.

CHAP. 12. The Excellency of saving Belief.
WHo is able to sound forth all its praise, whose Price is above the Pearls?
yet to give a taste, It is more worth then the whole world, or any precious
thing therein, yea, then Gold, 1 Pet. 1.7. we may say, Glorious things are
spoken of thee, thou Grace of God, and (as the queen of Sheba of Solomon) thou
exceedest the fame that we have heard: no money, or monies-worth can buy it if
one have it not, and if he have it once, nothing can make him part with it.

1. It is a defense against all evil, as against the Devil, it is a shield
wherewith we quench his fiery darts, yea, a shield of Gods own making, Ephesians.
6.11. and 16. so against the world, the victory that overcomes the world, Joh.
5.4. against sin and the flesh, They that are Christ's have crucified the
flesh with the affections and lusts, Gal. 5.24. against men: Heb. 11.33, 34.
etc.
It made David not afraid of ten thousands of people, Psalm. 3.6. against the
Creatures, the very Lions could do Daniel no manner of hurt, because he
believed in his God. Dan. 6.23.

Object. But sometimes they both hurt and kill the faithful.

A. It is no hurt, though it seems so, Romans 8.28. what hurt does the
Surgeon in lancing the flesh to cure an Imposthume and save the life? nay,
they hurt not the faithful, though they kill them; for what hurt is death to a
good man? so that Faith is a Coat of Male, and Armor of proof against all
evil, yea spiritual also, as death of Soul, He that believes in me shall
never dye, says Christ. Ioh. 11.26. the curse; Christ has redeemed such from
the curse of the Law, Gal. 3.13. Condemnation there is none to such. Romans 8.1.

2. It is as all the five Senses to the Soul, It tastes and sees that the Lord
is good. Psalm. 34.8. It hears the Lord speak peace. Psalm. 85.8. It smells the
savor of Christ's good Ointments. Cant. 1.3. It touches Christ, and feels his
virtue. Luke 8.46, 47, any one Sense is of much esteem, but all in one is of
most excellent worth, such a thing is Faith to the Soul, and that Soul that
wants it may be said to want its Senses.

3. As the Soul is to the Body, that which keeps it alive, so is Faith to the
Soul; nay more, for it keeps it alive for ever, that it shall never die more:
What would men give for such a thing as would keep the body ever alive? how
much better is this? It is as Salt that keeps the Soul from corruption, nay,
which is more it fetches it again when before it was most odiously corrupted.

4. It is a dear Friend indeed unto us, that will stand us more in stead, and
do more for us then all our friends, then all the world, yea then our own
father and mother, wife or husband, etc. It does us many excellent Offices:
It Is as the hand to receive Christ, Ioh. 1.12. to help the hungry soul to
food, and the thirsty Soul to drink, Isai. 55.1. to clothe the naked soul
with the best Raiment, it puts the Lord Jesus on us, Romans 13.14. It pulls out
sin as a Thorn in the heart, Act. 15.9. and applies Christ as a plaster to
the wound. All these offices it does as a blessed hand.

5. It helps us to every good thing. Whatsoever you shall ask in Prayer
believing, ye shall receive. Matthew. 21.22. so that if we want not faith, we
cannot want any good thing.

6. It is of that excellent virtue, that it turns all our Crosses and Losses
into gain unto us, Romans 8.28. if not one way, yet another; if not in one
year, yet in another; that our losses shall be but as the letting out or loss
of superfluous blood, for the gaining of more health and saving of life.

7. It prevents time, and makes things future to be present, as an Optic
Glass, that draws things near and presents them to the sense, that were a
great way off before. Heb. 11.13.

8. It is our Ballast in the dangerous Seas and waves of Temptations, that
keeps us well settled; and from perishing by an unballast lightness tottering
and reeling every way, 1 Cor. 15.58.

9. This of all things is that for which God respects us; our wealth,
beauty, wit, learning, honor may make us accepted of men, but it is our Faith
only, that makes God in love with us.

10. It is like the Loadstone, for as that points ever at the North, and has
power attractive; so Faith points ever at Christ, for any thing the Soul
needs: yea, draws him to the Soul.

11. It is such an admirable thing, as Christ himself wonders at it, as we see
in the Centurion, Mat. 8.10. we never find him wondering at Silver or Gold, or
costly apparel, or goodly sights, no not at the Frame of Heaven and earth, but
at this he does: Oh then how good, how great a thing is true Faith! how rich a
Jewel!

12. It is our Credit and good report, Heb. 11.2, 3, 13. it pays all our
souls debts, that none can claim any thing. Romans 8.33.

CHAP. 13. The Necessity of it.
SAving Faith is of absolute Necessity; not such a Thing as is convenient and
useful as a good help, yet so as that a man may make shift without, like a
Staff to a Travellor, this is not so; but as Legs and Eyes to a Travellor,
without which is no traveling in the way to Heaven possibly.

1. Without this we are destitute of all Friends, we have never a friend to
help us, being forsaken of all, of God, of Christ, and the Creatures, for they
take part with the Creator, and are Friends to none but his Friends.

2. Without this all such only materialiter.
good works are lost unto us, as 1. Hearing Gods Word. The Word preached
profited not them, being not mixed with faith. Heb. 4.2. yea, though we go
never so far, or hear never so often, with great pains, and no less cost.
2. The Use of the Sacraments, as the Israelites that did eat the same
spiritual meat, and drank the same spiritual drink, sacramentally as we
do, yet With many of them God was not well pleased. 1 Cor. 10.4, 5. for want
of Faith. 3. Even Prayer is but prating and lying without this, Psalm. 78.34,
36. and for all other works either of piety toward God, or Charity toward
men, they are all but merely lost unto us, if we have not saving Belief within
us, as it was with them that took pains in helping to build Noah's Arc, but
perished themselves at last in the flood: or as they which take pains in
digging, setting, and planting seere boughs of Trees, do but loose their
labor and show their folly.

3. Nay one cannot possibly do a viz. Formaliter.
good work without this, for without faith it is impossible to please God.
Heb. 11.6. It being a Christians chiefest instrument, as the workman can do
no work, if he want his principal Tool as Axe, or Hammer, etc. or if he do
any thing, it will be but a Botch, that will give no good liking: therefore
this we must have, and that of Necessity whatsoever shift we make for it,
whatsoever it cost to get; or else it had been better for us, if we had never
been born.

Which seeing it is of such absolute necessity, it behooves every one to make
as much speed to get it as may be.

Quest. But may not one make too much haste to believe?

Ans. Yes, if they overrun sound Humiliation, they make more haste then good
speed, but if one have been soundly humbled as was showed CHAP. 3. then let him
make as much have as he can to believe; for these Reasons:

1. We cannot believe too soon, if we believe truly; we cannot make too much
haste to obey God, who bids such believe. Matt. 11.28.

2. God does not stint us to any certain time of continuance, in the
comfortless condition of Humiliation, so it be sound.

3. Those Act. 2.37. and Lydia, Act. 16. and the Jailer, Act. 16.34. and the
Eunuch, Act. 8.30. and Paul, Act. 9. and many others believed immediately upon
the proffer: yea, God himself preached comfort to Adam and Eve immediately
upon their Legal Consternation.

4. One may be in danger of doing himself mischief in the Interim, out of
horror before some spark of Believing bring light and comfort to prevent it.

5. As to delay our repenting when God bids us is a great sin, so to defer
our Believing, is no less, if not a greater sin.

CHAP. 14. How to know whether we have this saving Belief or no.
THe first way to know whether we have it, is duly to consider whether we be
not of the number of those that have it not: Who are they?

1. Gross ignorant ones, I mean such, who as they have not heavenly
knowledge; so they desire it not, nor care to take pains for it, this is a
blind Faith which cannot see to get into Heaven; Flaming fire is provided for
such, 2 These. 1.8. if the Sun look into a dungeon it must needs be enlightened,
so is Christ to the Soul.

2. Loose ones, and such as are of profane life, who shall receive the same
reward of Vengeance with the former in flaming fire at Christ's coming, because
they obey him not now, 2 These. 1.8. Gal. 5.21.

3. Worldlings, they are enemies to God. Jam. 4.4.

4. Such as are mere Civil ones, in whom the Plague Sore of sin is but
stricken in, not cured, but more dangerous: they cannot be saved. Matthew. 5.20.

5. Such as have not so much as historical Faith, viz. to believe that God
speaks true in all points: as that giving is the way to have more, Luke 6.38.
that we must not labor to be rich, Prove. 23.4. that Godliness is most
gainefull, 1 Timothy 6.6. that nothing is to be gotten by sin, Job 33.27. that ill
gotten wealth shall do us no good, Prove. 10.2. that a broken heart pleases
God best, that to loath our selves is the way to have the Lord to love us, etc.

6. Hypocrites, Mat. 24.51. contenting themselves with the forms of
Godliness, but care not for the inward power and true efficacy of it: these
have but a rotten heart skinned over.

7. Such as make light of it, and think it is easily gotten without any great
ado; they that slight it, want it.

8. They that think it impossible to be got; these (...)
Cowards are unbeleevers. Rev. 21.8. who shall have part in the burning lake.

9. Slothful ones, Prove. 19.15. that though they think it may be had, yet are
so lazy, they will not take pains for it; remember Mat. 25.26. thou wicked
and slothful servant.

10. Presumers, who are like dreamers, Isai. 29.8. that have always thought
they had it already, and therefore never went about the getting of it.

11. Such as were never rightly humbled and broken hearted for their sins; the
Grace of Faith, and Grace by Faith is given to none but the humble, 1 Pet. 5.5.
The stout-hearted are far from righteousness, says God, Isa. 46.12.

12. They that content themselves with some flitting motions and vanishing
flashes of desire after it sometimes; but being quenched with the world come to
nothing, as the young man, Matthew. 19.16.

13. Entire Familiars and Associates with the ungodly; for they that give their
heart to Gods enemies, give it not to him, he wants it if they have it: David
liked not such fellowship, Psalm. 26.5.

14. Ambitious persons, Christ says, how can they believe? Ioh. 5.44. Here are
14. several forts of unbeleevers (though professing the Gospel) if you find
your self of the number of any of these, you may easily know how it is with
you for the matter of saving Faith, namely that you have it not.

CHAP. 15. General Notes of Trial whereby to know it.
I Hope none will be offended with me, for letting in more light into their
hearts, to see themselves the better by it. Thus then you may know whether you
have this saving Faith.

1. If it has something to show for that which it believes concerning your
Salvation, that is some word or writing from God to prove it to you, as one
that is confident of a State of Land, or sum of Money belonging to him, will
have something to show for it.

2. If you be willing to prove and try it your self, 2 Cor. 13.5. and willing
that any body else should try it, yea the Lord himself, Psalm. 139.23.

3. If there be a Spiritual Struggling and Conflict in you between the flesh
and Spirit, not, that between Conscience convinced and will, as was in Joh.
19.12. and 16.
Pilate, but that, between the part regenerate and unregenerate, as was in
Paul, Romans 7.22, 23. which goes with an hatred of the flesh, and love of the
Spirit, holding with the Spirit against the flesh, as true a Sign of our
conceiving Christ by Faith, as Rebekahs struggling was of her Conception.

4. If it grow, 2 These. 1.3. as a living Child, or Tree is known from a dead
one by the growing of it.

Object. I feel not a Growth and stronger Believing, though I much desire it.

Ans. If you grow stronger in desire, and endeavor, then it grows stronger
inward and in the Root, though not to sight.

2. If it make you daily more conscionable and give you better warning of sin,
as a Clock giving warning is known to go on, though you cannot see it move
forward.

5. If it gain by Opposition, and wax stronger by Resistance (as one by often
wrestling grows more expert) and holds faster to Christ, as the Travellor
being assaulted by stormy weather holds his Cloak the faster to him.

6. If your End and Aim in believing, be (not to sin more boldly and securely,
for then it is naught, but) to be able by that means to leave sinning, and only
to please GOD in all things, then well and good.

CHAP. 16. More special Notes whereby saving Belief may be tried, and known.
DIstinctly thus; It may be known, first, by its Antecedentia.
foregoers; and secondly, by its Gonsequentia.
followers.

For the first, if it be lawfully come by, viz. by good and lawful means, as
Gods Word and working of his Spirit, not by flattering Nature, selfeconceit,
etc. That Faith is but as a stolen thing.

2. If it be well bred, that is both by Law and Gospel (as CHAP. 3. and 4.)
things of the right breed, are of the right kind.

3. If it were much longed for, and with difficulty obtained, as Hannah
obtained her Samuel.

4. If it came by way of bargayning for Christ, as CHAP. 9. was showed.

For the second, it may be known by its Followers, as a Noble man by his Train
and Reteinue; Nay, Faith may be more readily and easily known by the A
Posteriori.
Fruits and Effects following, then by A Priori.
the Causes, and things foregoing (though this be the surer) but both together
do best, as life by motion, fire by heat, the Sun by its Reflection on the
wall, or in the water, a Seal by the print on wax may be as verily known, as
if you look upon the things themselves: Now then besides those immediate
effects of true Believing, mentioned CHAP. 11. it may be discerned by diverse
other, in time and afterward, as thus:

1. It is a Living Faith, both because it has Life and Operation in it Gal.
5.6. (It will Si male and non been operatur mortua est. Aug. Enchir. cap. 67.
work for God and against sin) as also because it makes us alive to God, Romans
6.13.

2. It loves and desires the Word, Gods Ordinances, and holy means. Psalm.
84.2. because first it is begotten thereby (as a Child or young thing bears
love to the breeders) secondly, they are nourishment to it, as we being hungry
love our food.

3. It makes a new Creature, purifying the heart, Act. 15.9. and playning the
life. Romans 6.4. It makes them virtuous, knowing Gods will, temperate, patient,
godly, which before were contrary. 2 Pet. 1.5. they therefore that join not
to their Faith, virtue, but vice; not knowledge, but ignorance; not Temperance,
but intemperance; not Patience, but impatience; not Godliness, but
ungodliness, their Faith is vain: and they not being new Creatures, are not
true Believers; For Christ will draw all those his way in conformity after
him, that partake of him; as the Loadstone will draw the iron after it that
comes within the reach of its virtue.

4. It works repentance, and abandoning of sin, for a true hold of Christ, will
make us let go our hold of sin.

Obj. There is sin in the best.

Ans. Sin in the faithful is like an harlot beaten out of doors, which yet
lies lingering in corners and out-roomes of the house, though detested and not
endured in sight; but sin in unbeleevers is like an harlot harbored and
maintained in the best rooms, and delighted in.

Faith makes us grudge sin any room in this house of Christ, whose honse are
we. Heb. 3.6. and this is Repentance.

5. It will make one not content with thinking he has it, but to be very
desirous, and take pains to be sure and certain he has it. 2 Cor. 13.5.

6. It will work selfedeniall in us; because we have given our selves away to
Christ now, (as the wife to her husband,) Romans 7.4. 1 Pet. 4.2, 3.
Self-denial. First, in regard of God, for having, doing, suffering as he
will, and not as we would our selves; so Christ, Not as I will, but as thou will. Matt. 26.39. Secondly, in regard of our neighbor (in and for God) Romans
15.2. in Col. 3.13.
forgiving, for bearing, not doing them the least wrong, to do our selves the
greatest benefit, seeking and heartily desiring their good, as if it were our
own, 1 Cor. 13.5. well requiting, though they illdeserving.

7. A true Touch of Christ by Faith will draw virtue from him as Luke 8.46.
Matt. 14.36. as to the health of their Bodies, so will it for the Soul much
more; and for the working of a Cure thereon, it draws from Christ the virtue
of Holiness; and the closer we stick to him, the more shall we draw from him,
as a plaster, the closer it sticks, the more it draws.

8. It makes us complain of much want in our Faith, and weakness in our
Believing, out of a sense of unbelief in us, as a burden to us, as Mark 9.24.
Lord help my unbelief.

9. It desires more and more earnestly the Favor of God, and still better
Assurance of it, and therefore will make us:

1. Not to favor our selves so much in sin, which stands not with Gods
Favor.

2. Not to be contented in any prosperity without it.

10. To long more after the Sweetness of Christ, as Lovers that are agreed and
contracted, long for the Marriage day, and the perfecting of their loves: and
as a Child that has once tasted the sweetness of the bigg, hunts more
earnestly after it. Faith longs therefore for Christ's coming. 2 Cor. 5.28.
Cant. 8.14. Rev. 22.20.

11. It expels worldliness (from ruling in us) 1 Ioh. 5.4. with 2.16. Heb.
11.26. So as a true Believer cannot be a worldling (that is, to love worldly
things more then Grace and Godliness) no more then he can be a Judas; because
Faith finds All-sufficiencie in Christ; as Jacob for his Joseph, Genesis 45.28.
so the true Believer for his Jesus; he can be content to want all, so he have
him.

12. It exchades boasting of our gifts, good parts, good deeds; Romans 3.27. For
first, the more we perceive Gods mercy and love to us; the more his Excellency
and bountifulness appears, which will make us adore and reverence him in the
more humility, as a great personage, the better he is known, the more he is
honored. Secondly, the more we comprehend his mercy and Favor, the more we
apprehend our misery, standing in need thereof; which will make us the more
humble.

13. It works in us inward Spiritual Life, now Christ lives in us, Gal.
2.20. and we in him, which may be known (as the natural life.)

1. By the Palpitatio cordis.
working of the heart, panting after God, Psalm. 42.1. and by beating of the
pulses in our regular motions of constant endeavors, and Holy Obedience, Psalm.
50.23.

2. By the Operation of the Senses, Discerning good and evil (effectually)
Heb. 5.14.

3. By breathing a spiritual and a sweet breath of Grace. Eccl. 10.12. Col.
4.6.

4. By the motion of hand and foot, which move to God and for God in all holy
Actions, contrary to the wicked man's speaking with his feet, and instructing
with his fingers, Prove. 6.13.

14. It cannot abide, but drives out Hypocrisy (which serves not God for
love, but for by-ends) for hypocrisy is all in feigning, but Faith is
unfeigned, 2 Timothy 1.5. as contrary as light and darkness.

15. It will not let us make haste, to use ill, or forbidden means to help our
selves, Isai. 28.16. Psa. 40.1. as it kept David from killing of Saul, to
hasten into the Throne; for, believing in God will not make us go away from
God; as to hasten by evil means is to run away from him, and we must be feign
to come back again by Repentance.

16. True believing obtaines what it believes, viz. things for present, in
present, Mat. 8.13. Things to come, in their due time, Matthew. 21.22. so the
benefits of Christ, as deliverance from the reigning power of sin, Romans 6.14.
Sanctification and Grace (as well as Salvation) dependence on God, sufficiency
in him, patience, contentedness, etc. which if it obtain it is true, else
false; for how shall thou think thy believing thy Salvation shall bring thee
that; when as thy believing thy Sanctification does not bring thee this? nay,
no more the one then the other, as the one is false, so is the other; how shall
thy Faith prove true for another world, when it proves false in this? But if
thy believing thy Sanctification brings thee this, the^ as certainly thy
believing thy Salvation shall obtain that.

CHAP. 17. The Degrees of saving Belief.
THere is a weak believing and a strong, Examples many in Scripture of both,
and 1 Job. 2.13. Children and strong men. Weak

1. In regard of knowledge, for the Faith that sees but dimly, believes but
weakly in comparison.

2. In regard of Application, apprehending weakly, as a palsy hand, that
receives a gift, but with much shaking.

There is also weak believing,

1. In those that were never yet strong as a Child, that after becomes a man.

2. Sometimes in those that have been strong, but now fallen weak, as a strong
man weakened by some sore sickness; so David, Psalm. 27. etc. with Bsa. 22.14.
and so Peter.

Strong Faith, some; but in regard of that which is weak, for elfe there is
some want and weakness in the strongest Faith, something lacking, 1 These.
3.10. with Chap. 1.7, 8.

Things common to both, these are

1. Sight and Sense of our sins driving us out of our selves.

2. High-pricing of Christ, and hungring after him, even whole Christ.

3. Earnest prayer, daily.

4. Use of good means out of good affection thereto.

5. Discerning and lamenting some unbelief in us, with desire of
strengthening: It is neither weak nor strong, nor any true believing at all,
that wants these things.

The difference between them is, weak Faith is,

1. More troubled with quaking fears and doubtings.

2. Sooner damped and discouraged when it is checked.

3. Relyes more on seeing and feeling, as it was with Joh. 20.25.
Thomas.

4. Has less Experience, as it was with Samuel at first.

5. Is in more danger of sinning, and so of sorrow, and is put more to its
shifts.

Strong Belief 1. Has Known it self in former times very weak and much
weaker then now: as 1 Cor. 13.11.

2. Is fuller of Courage for God, as was Nehemiah Chap. 6.11.

3. More constant in the holy course, as 2 Samuel 6.22.
David being mocked by Michal.

4. Has a more undaunted apprehension of death, as Paul, Act. 21.13.

5. It makes one of strength and ability to beget other Christians, as a man
grown.

If thy Faith be weak:

1. Slight it not, for Good Will from God is in it, (a small gift of a very
friend must not be slighted) yea, a blessing is in it.

2. Be thankful and acknowledge it, it is the way to have more, and as small as
it is, it is more then thou can be thankful enough for.

3. Rest not in it, but get more, as one that has weak diet, defense against
danger, evidence for land, rests not satisfied, but labors to be better
provided.

Object. Weak Believing will save me, if it be true.

Ans. True; but with more difficulty and discomfort, as a crazie, or leaking
vessel, that with much ado makes shift to get to shore, and that is all; but
what fear and disheartment in the mean time?

If thy Faith be strong,

1. Be not high-minded, but more humble, for thou art the more indebted to God,
and the strongest may take a fall, and become weak as a Child; as a lusty man
with a bruise by a Fall, may go halting to his grave.

2. Despise not weak Believers, but bear with them, yea, bear them in your
arms. Romans 15.1. use them tenderly, as men do with their weaker lambs, bring
them home, and lap them up: and as a strong man does not scorn a little child,
or kick it up and down, because its a weak thing; but dandles it in his lap.

CHAP. 18. What we must do with saving Belief, when we have it.
WE must be very careful to use it well, when we have gotten it, and that thus:

1. Setting great store by it, not to blow it away at every word, nor pawn it
for every Trifle, as it is too usual a Custom.

2. Be very charie of it, not to wrong it in any kind; as Parents are tender
and doile of their only Darling.

3. Allow it good keeping, as an husband that has all his means by his wife,
will be careful of her, and keep her well: We must keep it as our life.

Quest. How must Faith be well kept?

Ans. Thus:

1. It must be fed with holy means, Word and Sacraments, for as the body, if
it want food awhile, grows weak and faint, so surely will Faith, if it want
its spiritual Feeding: yea, it must be fed with the Word of God every day,
specially, that provision we made at Gods Market in his public Ordinance the
last time, which we must by daily meditation and practice feed on, till new
Supply come, hereby our Soul shall be satisfied as with marrow and fatness,
Psalm. 63.5.

More principally our Faith must be fed with the Promises, and that every day;
for which purpose, we must get a good stock and store of Promises, both
concerning temporal things, and this present life; as also spiritual and
eternal life, as the Book of God, like a rich Treasure, is full of both sorts.

These I counsel every good Christian to cull out and get by heart, as he
meets with them, to stand him in stead upon every Occasion, that he may be able
to bring forth a special Promise to comfort his heart, and cheer his Faith,
at all times, whatsoever Occasion happen; Oh, that more would be persuaded
hereto, thus to do; they that have done so, have found by Experience how good
it is, and that a Promise sometimes has been better to them then all their
Friends. Make a beginning then, get some principal Promises by heart, and
though your stock be small to begin with, yet increase it, by gathering and
adding still more to it, and so make use of any Promise, as each Occasion shall
require, you shall find it a very great maintainer of Faith, and to keep it
in excellent thriving case; Try, and you will say so.

2. Join good works to your Faith, they that believe in God must be careful
to maintain good works. Tit. 3.8. These strengthen Faith; as Children begotten
and brought up by their parents at length are able to defend and maintain
them, and become a stay unto them.

3. Experience is a great help to Faiths good keeping, as David's Lion and
Bear stood his Faith in great stead, when he had to do with Goliath: Make use
of your former Experience you have had of Gods dealing with you. Psalm. 77.5, 6.

4. Examples of others that have believed, and how well they have sped, must be
much thought on, Our fathers trusted in thee, (says David) and thou
deliveredst them. Psalm. 22.4, 5.

Yea, the weak Believing of some, and how they have overcome, it may hearten us
much this way; One says, THOMAS his doubting has done me more good then
MARY'S ready believing. Plus mihi prosuit dubitatio Thomae quam credulitas
Mariae. Gre. Mag.


5. Keep a good Conscience, which is a great nourisher of Faith, and Nurse
unto it. 1 Timothy 1.19.

CHAP. 19. What we must do when it is wanting, and more of it desired: with
Exhortation to all.
1. LET every one for himself apply himself unto the means and manner of
working thereof, showed in the beginning of this Treatise with a yeeldable
heart: especially attend upon Gods Ordinance the Ministry of the Word.

1. Acknowledge Gods 1 Cor. 3.4.
Ministers his Instruments for it, yea being well persuaded, they are the
parties God has appointed (especially your own faithful Pastor) purposely
to work Faith, or more of it in you.

2. Acquaint them how it is with you for believing, as Act. 8.37.

3. ^ Cor. 16.16.
Put your self into their hands, to be ordered by them (having more skill then
your self) concerning your Believing, and how to do therein; as a sick
patient puts himself into his Physicians hands for his body.

And thus lie waiting at the poole of Bethesda for the stirring of the water by
divine power.

2. Let every one endeavor the bringing of others also to believe. Ioh. 4.29.
and Joy therein, Act. 15.3. We account it a good and blessed work to help one
into this, though a miserable sinful world; and therefore every one thinks
himself beholding to the Midwife; how much better work is it, to help one into
that other most happy and blessed world by believing?

To conclude; let my Counsel be acceptable to three sorts of people.

1. To those that were never humbled; Consider if your breath were but gone,
you were in Hell; Be content therefore to suffer the pain of a broken heart
(and to be cut to the heart, as Act. 2.37. now) rather then torment in hell for
ever: as we see some are persuaded to be cut for the Stone, or searched of a
wound, which else will cost them their life, and will not you be persuaded to
endure this for your Soul?

2. To those that are, or have been rightly humbled I say; to believe is to
betake our selves to a safe place, as the usual Chasab.
Hebrew word signifies, and as David did, Psalm. 57.1. Therefore fly with all
speed to Christ, as the City of Refuge, to get into him. For if death, the
Avenger of blood overtake you first, you are undone for ever. And know that
when the distressed Soul, seeing its self pursued with sin and spiritual
dangers, fears and flies out of its self to Christ, desiring to be sheltered
under him, it is sure and safe.

Object. But will not he refuse it?

Ans. No. Ioh. 6.37. Psalm. 9.9, 10. figured by the City of Refuge, to which
the manslayer flying for safety, could not be kept out.

2 Object. May not an Hypocrite do so much?

Ans. No: he only dreams of coming to Christ, but does not so indeed; or
else makes some flourish of coming, but comes not home to Christ.

3. To those that believe in truth; I say, Cast not away your confidence, which
has great recompense of reward. Heb. 10.35. Holy Confidence is like a Garment
which the Soul wraps it self in; the flesh and world go about subtly to
steal it from us, but the devil with his terrible blasts of Temptation, to
make us let go, or loosen our hold at least: but God bids us hold fast, for
else the poor Soul will be naked and destitute. Hold fast therefore what you
have. Rev. 3.11. Go on in this your Strength, you Saints of God; and the Lord
be with you, and send you good speed to Heaven.

FINIS.

