The true and lively Portraiture of the Honorable and learned Knight Sr Walter
Ralegh.


THE PRINCE, OR MAXIMS OF STATE.

Written By Sir WALTER RAVVLEY, and presented to Prince HENRY.

Sapere and Silere.

London, Printed, MDCXLII.

THE CONTENTS.
OF Government. Of Policy. Of Monarchy. Of Aristocraty, or Senatory State. Of
Free State, or popular State. Of Tyranny. Of Olygarchy, or the Government of a
few. Of a Commonwealth. Of causes of States, and Commonwealths in general.
Of founding a State. Of causes preserving a State or Commonwealth. Of
Mysteries or Sophismes. Of Axioms or rules of preserving a State. Rules for
preserving of a Kingdom. Hereditary. Conquered.
Kingdoms hereditary are preserved at home by the ordering of a Prince.
Kingdoms new gotten, or purchased by force, are preserved by 10. Rules. Rules
politic of Tyrants. Sophismes of a barbarous and professed tyranny. Sophismes
of the Sophistical, or subtle tyrant to hold up his State. Of preservation
of an Aristocraty. Of preservation of an Olygarchy, by Sophismes. Rules.
Of conversion of States in general. Causes of conversions of States are of
two sorts: General and Particular. Particular causes of Conversion of State,
are of two sorts. Of sedition. Causes of sedition are of two sorts. Of
alteration without violence. A Method, how to make use of the book before, in
the reading of story. Old age is not ever unfit for public Government.
Example of the like practice in Charles the fif^. Of observation for the
Affirmative and the Negative. Of defense for David in marrying Abishag.
Political Nobility.
Of Adoniah aspiring to the Kingdom.
Observations.
Of ways of such as aspire to the Kingdom, and marke^ to discern them.
OF GOVERNMENT.
GOvernment is of two sorts. 1. Private of himself. Sobriety. Of his Family;
called Oec^nomy.

2. Public of the Commonwealth; called Policy. A man must first govern
himself, ere he be fit to govern a Family: And his Family, ere he be fit to
bear the Government in the Commonwealth.

Of Policy.
POlicy is an Art of Government of a Commonwealth, and some part of it
according to that State, or form^ of Government wherein it is settled for the
public good.

State, is the frame or set order of a Commonwealth, or of the Governors that
rule the same, specially of the chief and Sovereign Governor that commands
the rest.

The State or Sovereignty consists in 5. points.

1. Making or annulling of Laws. 2. Creating and disposing of Magistrates. 3.
Power over life and death. 4. Making of War, or Peace. 5. Highest or last
appeal. Where these 5. a^e, either in one or in more, there is the State.

These 5. points of State rest either in; 1. One Monarchy or Kingdom. 2. Some
few chief of men for virtue and wisdom, called an Aristocra^y. 3. Many,
called a Free State or a Popular State. These three sorts of Government have
respect to the Common good, and therefore are Just and Lawful States.

These 3. degenerate into 3. other Governements. 1. Monarchy. 2. Aristocraty.
3. Popular Estate.
Into 1. Tyrany. 2. Oligarchy, or Government of a few, rich or able. 3.
Commonwealth or Government of all the common and baser sort, and therefore
called a Common wealth, by an usurped Nickname.


These all respect there own, and not the public good, and therefore are
called Bastard Governements.

1. Monarchy.
A Monarchy, or Kingdom, is the Government of a State by one head, or Chief,
tending to the Common benefit of all.

Monarchies or Kingdoms are of 3. sorts touching the right or possession of
them; viz.

1. Hereditary, by descent, as the English, French, etc. 2. Elective, by
suffrage of the other Orders, or some of them, as the P^l^nian. 3. Mixed, or of
both kinds; viz, by Descent yet not tied to the next of blood, as the ancient
Jewish State.
Monarchies are of 2. sorts touching their power or ^uthority: viz.

1. Intier. Where the whole power of ordering all State matters, both in peace
and war, does by law and custom appertain to the Prince, as in the English
Kingdom, where the Prince has power to make Laws, League and War, to
create Magistrates; To pardon life: Of appeal, etc. Though to give a
contentment to the other degrees, they have a sufferage in making Laws; yet
ever subject to the Princes pleasure, nor negative will.

2. Limited, or restrained that has no full power in all the points or matters
of State, as the Military King that has not the Sovereignty in time of peace,
as the making of Laws etc. But in War only as the Poloni^^ Kings.

2. Aristocraty or Senatory State.
AN Aristocraty is the Government of a Commonwealth by some competent number
of the better sort, preferred for wisdom and other virtues for the public
good.

Aristocraties are of 3. sorts, viz, where the Senators are chosen, for 1.
Virtue, Riches, and the Common good, as the Venetian.

2. Virtue and the public good without respect of wealth, as sometimes the
Roman when some of the Senators, were fetched from the plough, and some from
the Schools.

3. Virtue and Wealth, more respecting their private, then the public good
which inclines toward an Oligarchy, or the Government of the Richer or Nobler
sort, as in Rome toward the end.

3. Free State or Popular State.
THe Popular State is the Government of a State by the Choiser sort of people,
tending to the public good of all sorts; viz. with due respect of the better,
nobler, and richer sort.

In every Just State, some part of the Government is, or ought to be imparted
to the people; As in a Kingdom, a voice or sufferage in making Laws; and
sometimes also, in levying of Arms (if the charge be great, and the Prince
forced to borrow help of his Subjects) the matter rightly may be propounded
to a Parliament, that the tax may seem to have proceeded from themselves. So
consultations, and some proceedings in Judicial matters may in part be
referred to them. The reason, least seeing themselves to be in no number, nor
of reckoning, they mislike the state or kind of Government: And where the
Multitude is discontented, there must needs be many Enemies to the present
state. For which cause, Tyrants (which allow the people, no manner of dealing
in State matters) are forced to bereave them of their wits and weapons, and all
other means, whereby they may resist, or amend themselves, as in Rusheland,
Turkey, etc.

4. Tyranny.
A Tyranny is the swarving, or distorting of a Monarchy, or the Government of
one tending not to the public good, but the private benefit of himself, and
his followers. As in the Russe and Turkish Government, where the State and
Wealth of other orders are employed only to the uphoulding of the greatness
of the King, or Emperor. This is the worst of all the Bastard States, because
it is the perverting of the best Regiment, to wit, of a Monarchy, which
resembles the Sovereign Government of God himself.

5. Obligarchy, or the Government of a few.
AN Oligarchy is the swarving, or the corruption of an Aristocraty; or the
Government of some few that are of the Wealthier or Nobler sort, without any
respect of the public good. The chief end of these Governors is their own
greatness and enriching. And therefore there manner is to prepare fit means
to uphold their Estates. This State is not wholly so bad, as is the Tyra^nny,
and yet worse then the Commonwealth, because it respects the good of a few.

6. Commonwealth.
A Commonwealth is the swarving or depravation of a Free or Popular State, or
the Government of the whole Multitude of the base and poorer sort, without
respect of the other orders.

These two States, to wit; The Oligarchy and Commonwealth, are very adverse
the one to the other, and have many bickerings and dissentions between them.
For that the Richer or Nober sort suppose a right of superiority to appertain
unto them in every respect, because they are superior, but in some respects
only, to wit, in riches, birth, parentage, etc. On the other side, the Common
people suppose, there ought to be an equality in all other things, and some
State matters; because they are equal with the rich or noble, touching their
Liberty, whereas indeed neither the one nor the other are simply equal or
superior as touching Government and fitnes thereunto, because they are such,
to wit, because they are Rich^ Noble, Free, etc. But because they are wise,
virtuous valiant etc. and so have fit parts to govern a State.

These several States are sometimes mixed and interwrought one with the other,
yet ever so, as that the one has the preheminent predomination over the other,
as in the humors and complections of the body. So in the Roman State, the
people had their Plaebiscita, and gave the sufferage in the election of
Magistrates: Yet the Senate (as the State stood) for the most part swayed the
State, and bare the chief rule. So in the Venetian State, the Duke seems to
represent a Monarch, and, the Senate to be his Council: Yet the Duke has no
power in State matters, but is like a head set on by art that bears no
brain. And so that State is Senatoricall or, Aristocraticall.

Causes of States and Commonwealths in general.
Causes of States or of Commonwealths are of 3. sorts, viz. 1. Founding or
settling a State where to be considered. 2. Preserving a State. 3. Changing and
alltering a State.
1. Measure. 2. Parts and their Qualities.


Founding a State.
In founding a State are to be considered 2. things. 1. Proportion. 2. Parts.

PRoportion is a Just Measure or Mediocrity of the State, whereby it is framed
and kept in that order, as that neither it exceed nor be defective in his
kind; to wit, so that a Monarch be not to Monarchical, nor strict, or
absolute, as the Russe Kings; nor Aristocraticall, that is overmated; or
ecclipsed by the Nobility, as the Scottish Kingdom; but ever respective to the
other degrees. That an Aristocraty be not to magnificent nor intier to it
self, but communicate with the people some commodities of State or Government
as the Venetian, and sometimes the Roman allowed the people to elect certain
Magistrates out of themselves, to have a Tribune, to make Plaebiscita etc. So a
free State or Commonwealth that it be not over popular, viz. That it depresse
not to much the richer, wiser, nor learneder sort; but admit them to offices
with a Caution out of the rules and mysteries of that State. That they seek no
alteration of the present State. The reason, because the moderate States in
their several kinds (as all other things that observe the mean) are best
framed for their continuance, because they give less cause of grudge, envy,
and affecting the wealth, honor, and liberty which they see in others, that
govern the State; And so are less subject to stirs, and commotions, and
easiest kept in their present State wherein they are set.

Parts.
THe Parts of the State, or those Magistrates that bear place or sway in the
public Government.

Parts or Partakers of public Government, are 1. Counsel or Senate, which
consulteth of all matters pertaining to War and Peace, Magistrates, etc. in
admitting of whom there ought to be a more special care that they be men
expect in matter of Policy, because it is their trade and vocation, as men use
to choose Pilots and Masters of ships such as know the Art of Navigation, and
not Husbandmen etc. And so the contrary.

2. Magistrates and Officers which are to be executioners of that which is
consulted and found to be expedient for the Commonwealth, wherein are to be
observed the kinds of Magistrates, that they be such as fit that kind of
Government; The time of their continuance, and the manner of their election or
appointing, by whom, out of whom, and in what manner they be choosen.

3. Judges; To determine in civil and criminal matters, where are to be
observed, out of whom they are to be chosen; what kinds are necessary, and the
manner of Judgment and Judicial proceeding.

I^ Magistrates are to be observed, 1. Kinds of Magistrates, as 1. Civil. 2.
Ecclesiastical.
1. Superior, which are to be such and of that kind as agree with the State;
as Consuls for a year, and not Perpetual Dictatours in a Senatory State.
Preators and Censors that oversee manners and orders of the people.

For a Kingdom Lieutenants of Shires, Marshals, Masters of Horse, Admirals,
etc.

Inferior, as Conservatours of Peace, Constables, etc.

Overseers of Youth, that take care of their education for civil and warlike
exercise.

Clerks of the Market that provide for the quantity and prize of victual.

Ediles for Buildings, Streets, Bounds.

Quaestours or Treasurours to keep and despence the public treasury.

Actuaries or Recorders, which keep the public records.

Gaolers, to keep Prisons, and Prisoners.

Surveyours of Woods and Fields, etc.

As Bishops, or Pastors, Elders, Wardens.

2. Time of Magistrates, whereof some are perpetual, some for a time, viz.,
for more years; a year, half a year, according to the necessity of the
Commonwealth, and not perpetual; or at least not hereditary in a Kingdom.
Yearly in an Aristocracy, or half yearly in a free State. 3. Manner of
choice, by whom and how to be chosen, where especially they are to be chosen
by sufferage, and not by Lot.


Causes preserving a State or Commonwealth.
In preserving of States, two things required. 1. Mysteries or Sophis^es. 1.
General to all States. 2. Particular for every several State.
2. Rules or Actioms. 1. General for all States. 2. Particular for every State.



Mysteries or Sophismes.
MYsteries or Sophismes of State, are certain^ secret practizes, either for the
avoiding of danger; or averting such effects as tend to the preservation of the
present State, as it is set or founded.

State Mysteries are of 2. sorts. 1. General: That pertain to all States; as
first, to provide by all means, that the same degree or part of the
Commonwealth do not exceed both in quantity and quality. In quantity as that
the number of the Nobility, or of great persons, be not more then the State or
Commonwealth can-beare. In quality, as that none grow in wealth, liberty,
honors, etc. more then that is meet for that degree; For as in weights, the
heavier weights bear down the Skale; So in Commonwealths, that part or
degree that excels the rest in Qu^lity and Quantity, overswayeth the rest
after it, whereof follow alterations and conversions of State. Secondly, to
provide by all means, that the middle sort of people exceed both the extremes
( viz.) of Nobility and Gentry, and the Base, Rascal and beggarly sort. For
this makes the State constant and firm, when both the Extremes are tied
together by a middle sort, as it were with a band, as for any conspiracy of the
rich and beggarly sort together, it is not to be feared. To these two points,
the Particular Rules or Sophismes of every Commonwealth are to be applied.

2. Particular: That serve for preservation of every Commonwealth in that
form of State, wherein it is settled as in a Kingdom. That the Nobility may
be accustomed to bear the Government of the Prince, especially such as have
their dwelling in remote places from the Princes eye, it is expedient to call
them up at certain times to the Princes Court under pretense of doing them
honor, or being desirous to see and enjoy their presence; and to have their
children, especially their eldest, to be attendant upon the Prince, as of
special favor toward them and theirs, that so they may be trained up in
duty and obedience toward the Prince, and be as Hostages for the good
behavior and faithful dealing of their Parents, especially if they be of any
suspected note. To that end, serves the Persian practice in having a band or
train of the Satrapaes children; and other Nobles to attend the Court which
was well imited by our train of Henchm^n, if they were of the Nobler sort.
Again, sometimes to borrow small sums of his Subjects, and to pay them
again, that he may after borrow greater sums and never pay: So in an
Oligarchy, least it decline to a Popular State, they deceive the people with
this and the like Sophismes ( viz.) They compel their own sort, to wit, the
rich men by great penalties to frequent their assemblies for choosing of
Magistrates, for provision of Armor, warlike Exercise, making an Execution of
laws, etc. By that means seeming to bear a hard hand over the richer; but to
suffer the poorer and meaner sort to be absent, and to neglect those
assemblies under pretense, that they will no^ draw them from their business
and private earnings: Yet withal to cite thither some few of them ( viz.) so
many as are easily over-matched by the richer sort, to make a show, that they
would have the people, or poorer sort partakers likewise of those matters, yet
terrifying those that come to their Assemblies with the tediousness of
consultations, greatness of fines, if they should mi^doc. To the end to make
them unwilling to come again, or to have to do with those consultations; by
which means the Richer sort do still govern the State with the people^
liking and good contentment.

Axioms.
Axioms or Rules of preserving the State, are 1. General, that serve for all
Commonwealths. 2. Particular, that serve for every several State.

General Rules.
1. THe first and principal Rule of Policy to be observed in all States is to
profess, and practice, and maintain the true worship and religion of Almighty
God, prescribed unto us in his word, which is the chief end of all Government.
The Axiom, that God be obeyed simply without exception, though he command
that which seems unreasonable, and absurd to humane Policy, as in the Jews
Commonwealth, That all the men should repair yearly to one place to worship
God four times, leaving none to defend their coast; though being beset with
many Enemies. Not to sow the seventh year, but to suffer the ground to rest
untilled without respect or fear of famine, etc.

2. To avoid the causes of conversions, whereby States are overthrown that are
set down in the title of conversions; For that Commonwealths (as natural
bodies) are preserved by avoiding that which hurts the health and State
thereof, and are so cured by contrary Medicines.

3. To take heed, that no Magistrate be created or continued contrary to the
Laws and Policy of that State. As that in a Senate, there be not created a
perpetual Dictator, as Caesar in Rome. In a Kingdom, that there be no Senate
or convention of equal power with the Prince, in State matters; as in Poland.

4. To create such Magistrates as love the State as it is settled, and take heed
of the contrary practice, as to advance Popular persons in a Kingdom, or
Aristocraty. And secondly, to advance such as have skill to discern what does
preserve, and what hurts or alters the present State.

5. To that end to have certain Officers to pry abroad, and to observe such as
do not live and behave themselves in fit sort, agreeable to the present State;
but desire rather to be under some other form or kind of Government.

6. To take heed that Magistracies be not sold for money, nor bribe in their
Offices, which is specially to be observed in that Commonwealth which is
governed by a few of the Richer sort: For if the Magistrate gain nothing but
his Common Fees, the Common sort and such as want honor take in good part,
that they be not preferred, and are glad rather that themselves are suffered
to intend private business. But if the Magistrate ^uy and sell matters, the
Common people are do^bly grieved, both because they are debarred of those
preferments and of that gain which they see to grow by them, which is the
cause that the German Olygarchies continue ^o firm, for both they suffer the
poorer sort to grow into wealth, and the Richer sort are by that means freed,
and secured from being under the poor.

7. To take heed that the State as it is settled and maintained be not over
strict, nor exceed in his kind; ( viz.) That a Kingdom be not too
Monarchical; Nor a Popular State be too Popular: For which cause it is good,
that the Magistrates sometimes yield of his right touching honor, and behave
themselves familiarly with those that are equal unto them in other parts,
though inferior for place and office; And sometimes popularly with the Common
people, which is the cause that some Commonwealths, though they be very
simply and unskilfully set; yet continue firm, because the Magistrates behave
themselves wisely, and with due respect toward the rest that are without
honor; And therefore, some kind of Moderate popularity, is to be used in
every Commonwealth.

8. To take heed of small beginnings, and to meet with them even at the first,
as well touching the breaking and altering of Laws, as of other Rules which
concern the continuance of every several State. For the disease and
alteration of a Commonwealth does not happen all at once but grows by
degrees, which every Common wit cannot discern, but men expert in Policy.

9. To provide, that that part be ever the greater in number and power which
favors the State, as now it stands. This is to be observed as a very Oracle
in all Commonwealths.

10. To observe a mean in all the degrees, and to suffer no part to exceed; or
decay overmuch. As first for pre^erments, to provide that they be rather small
and short, then great and long; And if any be grown to overmuch greatness,
to withdraw or diminish some part of his honor. Where the Sophismes are to be
practiced ( viz.) to doc it by parts and degrees; to do it by occasion or
color of Law, and not all at once. And if that way serve not, to advance some
other, of whose virtue and faithfulness, we are fully assured, to as high a
degree, or to greater honor: and to be the friends and followers of him that
excels, above that which is meet. As touching wealth, to provide, that those
of the middle sort (as before was said) be more in number; and if any grow
high, and overcharged with wealth, to use the Sophismes of a Popular State; (
viz.) to send him on Emba^s^ages, and forram^ Negotiations, or employ him in
some office that has great charges and little honor, etc. To which end the
Edelishi^ served in some Commonwealths.

11. To suppress the factions and quarrels of the Nobles, and to keep other
that are yet free from joining with them in their partakings and factions.

12. To increase or remit the Common taxes and contributions, according to the
wealth, or want of the people and Commonwealth. If the people be increased in
wealth, the taxes and subsidies may be increased. If they be poor, and their
wealth diminish, specially by dearth, want of traffic, etc. to forbear taxes
and impositions, or to take little. Otherwise grudge and discontentments must
needs follow. The Sophismes that serve for impositions are these, and other of
like sort, to pretend business of great charge, as War, building of Ships,
making of Havens, Castles, Fortifications, etc. for the Common defense;
sometimes by Lotteries and like devises, wherein some part may be bestowed,
the rest reserved for other expenses; but Princely dealing needs no pretenses.

13. To provide that the Discipline and training of Youth of the better sort
be such as agrees with that Commonwealth: As that in a Kingdom, the Sons
of Noblemen to be attendant at the Court, that they may be accustomed to
obedience toward the Prince: In the Senatory State, that the Sons of the
Senators be not idly, no^ over daintily brought up, but well instructed and
trained up in learning tongues and Martial exercise; that they may be able to
bear that place in the Commonwealth, which their Father held, and contrary
wise in a Popular State.

14. To take heed, least their Sophismes, or secret practizes for the
continuance and maintenance of that State be not discovered, least by that
means they refuse and disappoint themselves, but wisely used and with great
secreflie.

Particular Rules.
Rules and Axioms for preserving of a Kingdom; Hereditary. Conquered.

Kingdoms Hereditary are preserved at home by the ordering.
1. Himself; (viz.) By the tempering and moderation of the Princes power, and
prerogative. For the less and more temperate, their power and state is; the
more firm, and stable is their Kingdom and Government, because they seem to
be further off from a Master-like and Tyrannical Empire; and less unequal in
condition to the next degree; to wit, the Nobility, and so less subject to
grudge and envy.

2. Nobility; (viz.) By keeping that degree and due proportion, that neither
they exceed not in number more then the Realm or State can bear, as the
Scottish Kingdom, and sometime the English, when the Realm was overcharged
with the numbers of Dukes, Earls, and other Nobles; whereby the Authority of
the Prince was ecclipsed, and the Realm troubled with their factions and
ambitions. Nor that any one excel in honor, power or wealth, as that he
resemble another King within the Kingdom; as the House of Lancaster within
this Realm. To that end not to load any with too much honor or preferrement,
because it is hard even for the best and worthiest Men to bear their
greatness and high fortune temperately, as appears by infinite examples in
all States. The Sophismes for preventing or reforming this inconvenience, are
to be used with great caution and wisdom. If any great person be to be
abated, not to deal with him by calumniation, or forged matter, and so to cut
him off without desert, especially if he be gracious among the people after
the Machivilian policy, which besides the Injustice, is an occasion many times
of greater danger toward the Prince. Nor to withdraw their honor all at once,
which makes a desperate coffeehouse in the party, and a commiseration in
the people, and so greater love, if he be gracious for his virtue and
public service. Nor to banish him into foreign Countries, where he may have
opportunity of practizing with foreign States, whereof great danger may ensue,
as in the Examples of Coriolanus, Henry the fourth, and such like. But to use
these, and the like Sophismes: (viz.) To abate their greatness by degrees, as
David, Ioabs, Justinian, Bellisarius, etc. To advance some other Men to as
great or greater honor, to shadow or over-mate the greatness of the other. To
draw from him by degrees his friends and followers, by preferrements, rewards,
and other good and lawful means; especially, to be provided that these great
men be not employed in great or powerful affairs of the Commonwealth,
whereby they may have more opportunity, to sway the State.

3. People: (viz.) so to order and behave himself, that he be loved and
reverenced of the people. For that the Prince need not greatly fear
home-conspiracies, or foreign invasion, if he be firmly loved of his own
people. The reason, for that the Rebel can neither hope for any forces for so
great enterprise; no^ any refuge being discovered and put to flight, if the
multitude affect their Prince: But the Common people being once offended has
cause to fear every moving, both at home and abroad. This may be effected by
the Prince, if he use means and art of getting the favor of the people, and
avoid those things that breed hatred and contempt: ( viz.) if he s^^me as a
^utor, or a Father to love the people and to protect them, if he maintain the
Peace of his Kingdom; For that nothing is more Popular, nor more pleasing to
the people then is peace.

4. If he show himself oftentimes graciously, yet with State, and Majesty to
his people, and receive complaints of his suppliants, and such like.

5. If he sit himself sometimes in open Courts and place of Justice, that he
may seem to have a (...) of Justice among his people. If he bestow many
benefits and graces upon that City which he makes the seat of his Empire, and
so make it sure and faithful unto him, which is fit to be in the middle of
his Kingdom, as the heart in the middle of the body, or the Sun in the
middle of Heaven, both to divide himself more easily into all the parts of his
Dominions; and least the furthest parts at one end move, whilst the Prince is
in the other. If he go in progress many times to see his Provinces,
especially those that are remote.

6. If he gratify his Courtiers and Attendants in that sort, and by such
means as that he may seem not to pleasure them with the hurt and injury of
his people, as with Monopolies, and such like.

7. If he commit the handling of such things as procure envy, or seem
grievous to his Ministers, but reserve those things which are grateful and
well pleasing to himself, as the French Kings, who for that purpose^ as may
seem, have erected their Court at Paris, which (...) the Prince from grudge
and envy, both with the Nobles and the people.

8. If he borrowes sometimes sums of money of his people, though he have no
need, and pay the same (...) without defalcation of any part by his Exchequer
or other Officers.

9. If he avoid all such things as may breed hatred or contempt of his person,
which may be done, if he show himself not too light, inconstant, hard,
cruel, e^^eminate, fearful, and dastardly, etc. But contrariwise, Religious
grave, just, valiant, etc. Whereby appears the false Doctrine of the
Machivilian Policy; with fear, the better means, to keep the people in
obedience, then love, and reverence of the people toward the Prince.

9. If the Prince be well furnished with Warlike Provision, which is to be
rumored and made known abroad: If it be known, that he is revereneed and
obeyed by his people at home.

10. If he provide so much as lies in him, that his Neighbor Kingdoms grow
not overmuch in power and Dominion; which if it happen, he is to join
speedily with other Princes, which are in like danger to abare that greatness,
and to strengthen himself and the rest against it. An overfight of the
Christian Princes toward the King of Spain.

11. If he get him Intelligencers by Reward, or other means, to detect or
hinder the de^ignes of that Prince, with whom he has differences, if any
thing be intent^ed against his State. Or at least have some of his own
Lydging abroad about that Princes Court, under color of Embassage, or some
other pretense; which must be Men of skill and Dexterity to serve for that
turn.

12. To observe the Laws of his Conntrey and not to encounter them with his
Prerogative, nor to use it at all where there is a Law, for that it makes a
secret and just grudge in the peoples hearts, especially if it tender to take
from them their commodities, and to bestow them upon other of his Courtiers and
Ministers.

13. To provide especially that that part which favors the State as it
standeth^ be more potent, then the other that favors it not, or desires a
change.

14. To make specially choice of good and sound men to bear the place of
Magistrates, especial of such as assist the Prince in his Councels, and
Policies, and not to lean overmuch to his own advise, contrary to the rule of
Machivill, who teaches that a Prince can have no good Council except it be
in himself; his reason, because if he use the Council of some one; he is in
danger to be overwrought and supplanted by him: And if he Council with more,
then he shall be distracted with the differences in opinion. As if a Prince
of great, or mean wisdom could not take the judgment of all his
Counselors in any point of Policy, or of so many as himself thinks good,
and to take it either by word or in wr^ting; and himself then in private
peruse them all, and so after good (...) mature deliberation make choice of the
best, without any destraction or binding himself to the direction of one. For
the Proverb is true, that two eyes see more then one; and therefore, the
advises and consultations of a Senatory State is compared by some to a feast,
or dinner, where many contribute toward the Shot, by which means they have
more variety of dishes, and so better fare: And yet every man may make choice
of that dish that serves him best for his health and appetite.

15. The Prince himself is to sit sometimes in place of public justice, and
to give an experiment of his wisdom and equity, whereby great reverence and
estimation is gotten, as in the example of Solomen; which may seem the reason,
why our Kings of England had their Kings bench in place of public Justice,
after the manner of the ancient Kings that sat in the Gate; where for better
performing of this Princely duty, some special causes may be selected, which
may thoroughly be debated and considered upon by the Prince in private, with
the help and advise of his learned Counsel, and so be decided publicly, as
before is said, by the Prince himself; At least the Prince is to take account
of every Minister of public Justice, that it may be known, that he has a
care of Justice, and doing right to his people, which makes the Iusticers also
to be more careful in performing of their d^ties.

16. To be moderate in his taxes, and impositions; and when need does require
to use the Subjects purse, to do it by Parliaments, and with their consents,
making the cause apparent unto them, and showing his unwillingnesse in charging
them. Finally, ^o to use it, that it may seem rather an offer from his
Subjects, then an exaction by him.

17. To stop small beginnings, unto this end to compound the dissentious that
arise amongst the Nobles, with Caution that such as are free, be not drawn
into parts, whereby many times the Prince is endangered, and the whole
Commonwealth set in a combustion; as in the example of the Barons Wars, and
the late Wars of France, which grew from a quarrel betwixt the Guision
faction and the other Nobility.

18. To stir up the people, if they grow secure and negligent of armor and
other provision for the Commonwealth, by some rumor or fear of danger
at-home, to make them more ready when occasion requires. But this seldom to
be used least it be supposed a false Alarm, when there is need indeed.

19. To have special care, that his children, especially the heir apparent,
have such bringing up as is meet for a King ( viz.) in learning, specially of
matters pertaining to State, and in Marshall exercise, contrary to the practice
of many Princes, who suffer their children to be brought up in pleasure, and
to spend their time in hunting etc. which by reason o^ their defects afterward
is a cause of mis-government and alteration of State.

2. Kingdoms new gotten, or purchased by force, are preserved by these means.
1. FIrst, if they have been Subjects before to his Ancestors, or have the
same tongue, manners, or fashions as have his own Country, it is an easy
matter to retain such Countries within their obedience, in case the Princes
blood of the said Country be wholly extinct. For men of the same quality,
tongue, and condition, do easily shole and combine themselves together, so
much the rather if the people of that Country have served before and were not
accustomed to their own liberty, wherein specially is to be observed, that
the laws and customs of that purchased Country be not altered nor
innovated, or at least it be done by little and little. So the Burgundians and
Acquitaines were annexed to France. The rea^on^ because partly they have bin
accustomed to serve; and partly, for that they will not easily agree about any
other to be their Prince, if the blo^d Royal be once extinguished. As for
the invasion of a foreign Country, whereunto the Prince has no right, or
whereof the right heir is living; It is not the part of a ju^t Civil Prince,
much less a Prince Christian to enforce such a Country; and therefore, the
Machivilian practizes in this case to make sure work by extinguishing wholly
the blood Royal i^ le^d, and impertinent: The like is to be said, of
murdering the natives, or the greatest part of them, to the end he may hold
the rest in sure possession. A thing not only against Christian Religion: but
inhumane Justice, cruel, and barbarous.

2. The safest way is, (supposing a right) that some good part of the Natives
be transplanted into some other place, and our Colonies consisting of so many
as shall be thought meet be planted there in some part of the Province,
Castles, Forts, and Havens, seized upon, and more provided in fit places, as
the manner was of the Babylonian Monarch which transplanted 10. tribes of the
Jews: And of the Romans in France, Germany, Britany, and other places. The
reason: 1. For that otherwise forces of horse and foot, are to be maintained
within the Province which cannot be done without great charge. 2. For that the
whole Province is troubled and grieved, with removing and supplying the Army
with victuals, carriages, etc. 3. For that Collonies are more sure and
faithful then the rest. As for the Natives that are removed from their former
seats, they have no means to hurt, and the rest of the Natives being free
from the inconvenience, and fearing that themselves may be so served, if they
attempt any thing rashly, are content to be quiet. The Turks practice in
Asia, where the chief grounds and dwellings are possessed by the Soldiers,
whom they call Timariotae. That the Prince have his seat and his residence in
his new purchase, especially for a time, till things be well settled;
especially if the Province be great and large, as the Turk in Greece. The
reasons: 1. Because the presence of the Prince avails much to keep things in
order, and get the good will of his new Subjects. 2. They conceive that they
have ref^ge by the Princes presence, if they be oppressed by the Lieutenants
and inferior Governors: Where it will be convenient for the winning the
peoples hearts, that some examples be made of punishing of such as have
committed any violence or oppression. 3. Because being present he sees and
hears what is thought and attempted; and so may quickly give remedy to it,
which being absent, he cannot do, or not do in time.

3. If the Prince himself cannot be present to reside, then, to take heed
that the charge of Governing, on new purchases be committed to such as be
sure men, and of other meet quality, that depend wholly upon the Princes
favor; And not to Natives, or other of their own Subjects, that are gracious
there for their Nobility, or virtue; especially if the Province be great, and
somewhat far distant, which may soon seduce the unsettled affections of those
new Subjects. As for such Governors as depend wholly upon the Princes favor
being not bor^^, but created Noble, they will not so easily suffer themselves
to be won from their du^y; and in case they would revolt, yet they are not
able to make any great strength, for that the people obey them but as
Instruments and Ministers to keep them in subjection, and not for any good
will.

4. To have the children of the chief Noble men, and of greatest authority,
Hostages with them in safe keeping; the more the better: For that no Bound is
stronger, then that of Nature to contain the Parents and Allies in obedience,
and they the rest.

5. To alter the Laws, but by degrees one after another, and to make other
that are more behovefull for the establishing of the present Government.

6. To keep the people quiet and peaceable and well affected so much as may
be, that they may seem, by being conquered, to have gotten a Protector,
rather then a Tyrant; For the Common People if they enjoy peace, and be not
distracted, nor drawn from their business, nor exacted upon beyond measure
are easily contained under obedience^ Yet notwithstanding, they are to be
dis-used from the practice of Arms, and other Exercises which increase
conrage, and be weakened of Armor, that they have neither Spirit nor will to
rebel.

7. If there be any faction in the Country, to take to him the defense of the
better, and stronger part, and to combine with it, as Caesar in France.

8. To look well to the Borders and confining Provinces, and if any rule there
of great, or equal power to himself, to join league with some other
Borderers, though of less strength to hinder the attempts (if any should be)
by such Neighbor Prince. For it happens often, that a Country insested by
one Neighbor Prince calls in another of as great or greater power to assist,
and rescue it from the other that invadeth it; So the Romans were called into
Greece by the AEt^lians; The Saxons by the Britains, the Danes by the Saxons.

9. To leave their Titles and Dignities to the Natives, but the command and
authority wholly to his own.

10. Not to put much trust, nor to practice to often the Sophisimes of Policy,
especially those that appertain to a Tyrannical State, which are soon
detected by m^n of Judgment, and so bring discredit to the Prince, and his
Policy among the wiser and better sort of his Subjects, whereof must needs
follow very evil effects.

The Sophisimes of Tyrants, are rather to be known, then practiced, (which
are for the supporting of their Tyrannical States,) by wise and good Princes,
and are these, and such like as follow.

Rules Politic of Tyrants.
RVles practiced by Tyrants are of 2. sorts: viz. 1. Barbarous and Professed,
which is proper to those that have got head, and have power sufficient of
themselves without others helps, as in the Turkish and Russe Government.

2. Sophistical and Dissembled; As in some S^tes, that are reputed for good
and lawful Monarchies, but inclining to Tyrannies, proper to those which are
not yet settled nor have power sufficient of themselves; but must use the power
and help of others, and so are forced to be Politic Sophisters.

1. Sophisimes of a Barbarous and Professed Tyranny.
1. TO expel and banish out of his Country all honest means, whereby his
people may attain to learning, wisdom, valor, and other virtues, that they
might be fit for that estate and servile condition. For that in these two,
learning, and Martial exer^ise, effect two things most dangerous to a Tyranny:
( viz.) Wisdom and Valor. For that men of Spirit and understanding can
hardly endure a servile State. To this end to forbid learning of liberal Arts,
and Martial exercise; As in the Russe Government, so Julian the Apostata
dealt with the Christians. Contrariwise, to use his people to base occupations,
and Mechanical Arts, to keep them from Idleness, and to put away from them
all high thoughts, and manly conceits, and to give them a liberty of drinking
drunk, and of other base and lewd conditions that they may be sotted, and so
made unfit for great enterprises. So the Egyptian Kings dealt with the
Hebrews; So the Russe Emperor with his Russe people^ And Charles the fifth
with the Netherlanders, when he purposed to enclose their Privileges, and to
bring them under his absolute Government.

2. To make sure to him and his State, his Military men by reward, liberty, and
other means, especially his Guard, or Praetorian band; That being Partakers of
the spoil and benefit, they make like that State, and continue firm to it; as
the Turk his Ianizaries, the Russe his Boyarent, etc.

3. To unarme his people of weapons, money, and all means, whereby they may
resist his power; And to end, to have his set and ordinary exactions, viz. once
in two, three, or four years; and sometimes yearly, as the Turk, and Russe;
who is wont to say, that his people must be used as his flock of sheep: viz.
Their fleece taken from them, least it overlade them, and grow too heavy; that
they are like to his Beard, that the more it was shaven, the thicker it would
grow. And if there be any of Extraordinary-wealth to borrow of them in the
mean while, till the tax come about, or upon some devised matter to
con^iscate their goods, as the Common practice is of the Russe and Turk.

4. To be still in Wars, to the end, his people may need a Captain; and
that his forces may be kept in practice, as the Russe does yearly against the
Tartar, Polonian, and Sweden, etc.

5. To cut off such as excel the rest in wealth, favor, or nobility, or be
of a pregnant, or spiring wit, and so are fearful to a Tyrant, and to suffer
none to hold office, or any honor, but only of him; as the Turk his Bashaes,
and the Russe his R^ezzes.

6. To forbid Guilds, Brotherhoods, Feastings, and other Assemblies among the
people, that they have no means or opportunity to conspire or confer together
of public ma^ters, or to maintain love amongst themselves, which is very
dangerous to a Tyrant, the Russes practice.

7. To have their Beagl^s, or Listners in every corner, and parts of the
Realm, especially in places that are more suspect, to learn what every man
says, or thinks, that they may prevent all attempts, and take away such as
mislike their State.

8. To make Schism and Division among his Subjects, ( viz.) To set one Noble
man against another, and one Rich man against another, that through faction and
disagreement among themselves, they may be weakened, and attempt nothing
against him; and by this means entertaining whisperings and complaints, he
may know the secrets of both parts, and have matter against them both, when
need requires. So the Russe made the faction of the Zemsky and the Oppress^ie.

9. To have Strangers for his Guard, and to entertain Parasites, and other
base and servile fellows, not too wise, but yet subtle, that will be ready
for reward to do and execute what he commands, though never so wicked and
unjust. For that good men cannot flatter, and wise men cannot serve a Tyrant.

All these practices and such like, may be contracted into one or two, ( viz.)
To bereave his Subjects of will and power to do him hurt, or to alter the
present State. The use is Caution, not Imitation.

2. Sophismes of the Sophistical, or subtle Tyrant to h^ld up his State.
1. TO make a show of a good King by observing a temper and mediocrity in his
Government, and whole course of life; to which end it is necessary, that this
subtle Tyrant be a cunning Politician, or a Machivilian at the least, and
that he be taken so to be, for that it makes him more to be feared and
regarded, and is thought thereby not not unworthy for to govern others.

2. To make show not of severity, but of gravity, by seeming reverent, and not
terrible in his speech, and gesture, habit, and other demeanor.

3. To pretend care of the Commonwealth; and to that end to seem loath to
exact Tributes and other charges; and yet to make necessity of it, where none
is, To that end to procure such War as can bring no danger toward his State,
and that might easily be compounded, or some other chargeable business; and
to continue it on, that he may continue his exaction and contribution so long
as he list. And thereof to employ some part in his public service, the rest
to hoord up in his Treasury, which is sometimes practiced even by lawful
Princes; as Edward the fourth in his Wars against. France, when having levied
a great sum of money throughout his Realm, especially of the Londoners, he
went over Seas, and returned without any thing doing.

4. Sometimes to give an account by open speech and public writing of the
expense of such taxes and impositions as he has received of his Subjects,
that he may so seem to be a good Husband, and frugall, and not a Robber of
the Commonwealth.

5. To that end, to bestow some cost upon public Buildings; or some other
work for the common good, especially upon the Ports, Forts, and chief Cities
of his Realm, that so he may seem a Benefactour, and to have a delight in
the adorning of his Country, or doing some good for it.

6. To forbid Feastings and other meetings, which increase love, and give
opportunity to confer together of public matters, under pretense of sparing
cost for better uses. To that end, the Curfieu bell was first ordained by
William the Conqueror to give men warning to repair home at a certain hour.

7. To take heed, that no one grow to be over great, but rather many-equall
great, that they may envy and contend one with another; and if he resolve to
weaken any of this sort, to do it warily and by degrees, If quite to wrack him
and to have his life, yet to give him a Lawful trial after the manner of his
Country; And if he proceed so far with any of great power and estimation as
to do him contumely or disgrace, not to suffer him to escape, because
contumely and disgrace are things contrary unto Honor, which great Spirits do
most desire, and so are moved rather to a revenge for their disgrace, then to
any thankfulness, or acknowledging the Princes favor for their pardon or
dismission; True in Athiests, but not in true Christian Nobility.

8. To unarme his people, and store up their weapons under pretense of keeping
them safe, and having them ready when service requires, and then to arm with
them, such and so many as he shall think meet, and to commit them to such as
are sure men.

9. To make scisme or division under hand among his Nobility, and betwixt the
Nobility and the People, and to set one Rich man against another, that they
combine not together, and that himself by hearing the griefs and complaints
may know the secrets of both parts, and so have matter against them both, when
it lists him to call them to an account.

10. To offer no man any contumely or wrong, specially about Women's matters, by
attempting the chastity of their Wives or Daughters, which has been the ^^^e
of many Tyrants, and conversion of their States. As of Tarquinius, by Brutus,
Appius, by Virginius, Pisistratus, by Harmodius, Alexander Medices Duke of
Florence, Aloisus of Placentia, Rode^icus King of Spain, etc.

11. To that end to be moderate in his pleasures, or to use them closely that
he be not seen; For that men sober or watchful, or such as seem so, are
not lightly Subject to contempt, or conspiracies^ of their own.

12. To reward such as achieve some great or commendable enterprise, or do any
special action for the Commonwealth in that manner as it may seem, they
could not be better regarded, in case they lived in a free State.

13. All Rewards and things grateful to come from himself but all
punishments, exaction^ and (...)gs; ungrateful to come from his Officers and
public Ministers; And when he has effected what he would by them, if he
see his people discontented withal, to make them a Sacrifice to pacify his
Subjects.

14. To pretend great cure of Religion and of serving of God, (which has been
the manner of the wickedest Tyrants) for that people do less fear any hurt
from those, whom they think virtuous and religious, nor attempt lightely to
do them hurt, for that they think that God protects them.

15. To have a strong and sure Guard of foreign Soldiers, and to bind them
by good turns, that they having at least, profit, may depend upon him, and the
present State; As Caligula, the German Guard, where the Nobility are many and
mighty. The like is practifed by lawfuls Kings, as by the French King.

16. To procure that other great persons be in the same fault, or case with
them, that for that cause^ they be forced to desend the Tyrant, for their own
safety.

17. To take part, and to join himself with the stronger part; if the Common
people, and mean degree be the stronger to join with them; if the Rich and
Noble, to join with them. For so that part with his own strength will be
ever able to over match the other.

18. So to frame his manners and whole behavior, as that he may seem, if not
perfectly good, yet tollerably evil, or somewhat good, somewhat bad.

These Rules of Hipocriticall Tyrants are to be known, that they may be
avoided and meet withal, and no drawn into imitation.

Preservation of an Aristocraty.
RVles to preserve a Se^atory State, are partly taken from the Common Axioms,
and partly from those that (...) a Kingdom.

Preservation of an Olygarchy; by Sophisimes. Rules.

1. IN Consultations and Assemblies abo^^ public affairs so to order the
matter, that all may have liberty to frequent their Common Assemblies and
Councels: But to impose a fine upon the richer sort if they omit that duty. On
the other side to pardon the people, if they absent themselves, and to bear
with them under pretense, that they may the better intend their occupations,
and not be hindered in their trades and earnings.

2. In election of Magistrates and Officers: To suffer the po^^er sort to vow
and abjure the bearing of office under color of sparing them; or to enjoyne
some great charge as incident to the office, which the poor cannot bear. But
to impose some great fine upon those that be rich, if they refuse to bear
office, being elect unto it.

3. In Judicial matters: In like manner to order that the people may be absent
from public Trials, under pretense of following their, business. But the
richer to be present, and to compel them by fines to frequent the Court.

4. In Warlike Exercise and Arms, that the poor be not forced to have
Armor, Horse, etc. under pretense of sparing their cost, nor to be drawn
from their trades by Ma^tiall Exercises; but to compel the richer sort to
ke^pe their proportion of Armor, Horse, etc. By excessive fines, and to
exercise themselves in Warlike matters, etc.

5. To have special care of instructing their Children in liberal Arts,
Policy, and Warlike Exercise, and to observe good order and discipline. For as
Popular States are preserved by the frequency and liberty of the people, so
this Government of the richer is preserved by discipline and good order of
Governors.

6. To provide good store of Warlike furniture, especially of Horse, and
Horsemen; and of Armed men, viz. ^^ke, etc. which are proper to the Gentry; as
shot and light furniture are for a popular Company.

6. To put in practice some points of a Popular State, viz. To lade no one man
with too much preferrement; to make yearly or half years Magistrates, etc.
For that the people are pleased with such things, and they are better secured
by this means from the rule of one. And if any grow to too much greatness, to
abate him by the Sophis^^^ fit for this state.

7. To commit the Offices and Magistracies, to those that are best able to
bear the greatest charges for public matters, which both tends to the
conservation of this State, and pleases the people, for that they ^^ape some
releife and benefit by it.

8. To the same end to contract marriages among themselves, the rich with the
rich, etc.

9. In some things which concern not the points and matters of State as
electing Magistrates making Laws, etc. to give an equality, or sometimes a
preferment to the Common People, and not to do, as in some Olygarchies they
were wont, viz. To swear against the people, to su^presse and bridle them; but
rather contrary, to minister an oath at their admission, that they shall do no
wrong to any of the people; and if any of the richer offer wrong to any of the
Commons, to show some example of servere punishment.

For other Axioms that preserve this State, they are to be borrowed, from
those other Rules that tend to the preserving of a Popular and Tyrannical
State; for the strict kind of Olygarchy is kin to a Tyranny.

Preservation of a Popular State; Sophismes. Rules or Axioms.

1. IN public Assemblies and consultations, about matters of State, creating
of Magistrates, public Justice, and Exercise of arms, to practice the
contrary to the former kind of Government, to wit, an Olygarchy. For in Popular
States, the Commons and meaner sort are to be drawn to those Assemblies,
Magistracies, Offices, Warlike Exercises, etc. By mulcts and rewards, and the
richer sort are to be spared, and not to be forced, by fine, or otherwise, to
frequent these Exercises.

2. To make show honoring and reverencing the richer men, and not to swear
against them, as the manner has been in some Popular States; but rather to
prefer them in all other matters, that concern not the State and public
Government.

3. To elect Magistrates from among the Commons, by Lot, or Ballating, and not
to choose any for their wealths sake.

4. To take heed, that no man bear office twice, except it be Military, where
the pay, and salery, etc. is to be reserved in their own hands, to be
disposed of by a Common Council, etc. And to see that do man be to highly
preferred.

5. That no Magistracy be perpetual, but as short, as may be, to wit, for a
year, half year, etc.

6. To compel Magistrates, when their time expireth to give an account of
their behavior and Government, and that publicly before the Commons.

7. To have public Saleries and allowance for their Magistrates, Judges, etc.
And yearly dividence for the Common People, and such as have most need among
them.

8. To make Judges of all matters, out of all sorts, so they have some aptnes
to perform that duty.

9. To provide that public Judgments and Trials, be not frequent; and to
that end to inflict great fines and other punishments upon Pettifoggers and
Dilatours, as the law of requital; etc. Because for the most part the richer
and nobler, and not the Commons are indicted and accused in this Commonwealth,
which causes the rich to conspire against the State; whereby, many times, the
Popular State is turned into an Olygarchy, or some other Government. Hereto
tends that Art of Civil law, made against Accusers and Calumniatours: Ad
Senatos Consultum Turpilianu^, lib. 1. di Calumniatoribus.

10. In such free States as are Popular, and have no revenue, to provide that
public Assemblies be not after: because they want salery for Pleaders and
Orators; And if they be rich; yet to be wa^y. that all the revenew be not
divided amongst the Commons. For, that this distribution of the Common revenue
among the Multitude is like a purse or barrel without a bottom. But to
provide, that a sufficient part of the revenue be stored up for the public
affairs.

11. If the number of the poor increase too much in this kind of State, to
send some abroad out of the Cities into the next Country places, and to
provide, above all, that none do live idly, but be set to their trades. To
this end, to provide that the richer men place in their Farms and Coppiholds,
such decayed Citizens.

12. To be well advised what is good for this State, and not to suppose that
to be fit for a Popular State, that seems most popular; but that which is
best for the continuance thereof. And to that end, not to lay into the
Exchequer, or Common Treasury, such goods as are confiscate, but to store them
up as holy and consecrate things, which except it be practiced, confiscations,
and fines of the Common people would be frequent, and so this State would
decay by weakening the people.

Conversion of States in General.
COnversion of a State, is the declining of the Commonwealth, either to some
other form of Government, or to his full and last period appointed by God.

Causes of Conversions of States, are of two sorts: General and Particular.
General, (viz.) 1. Want of Religion ^ viz. of the true knowledge, and worship
of God, prescribed in his word; and notable sins that proceed from thence in
Prince and people, as in the examples of Saul, Vzziah, the Jewish (...); the
four Monarchies, and all other.

2. Want of wisdom, and good Council, to keep the State, the Prince, Nobles
and People in good temper, and d^^ proportion, according to their several
orders and degrees.

3. Want of Justice, either in administration (as ill Laws, o^ ill
Magistrates) or in the execution, as rewards not given where they should be,
or there bestowed where they should not be, or punishments not inflicted where
they should be.

4. Want of power and sufficiency (...) maintain and defend it self; viz Of
provision, as Armor, Money, Captains, Soldiers, etc. Execution when the
mea^es or provision is not used, or ill used.

2. Particular: To be noted and collected (...) (...) the contraries of those
rules that are prescribed for the preservation of the Commonwealths.

Particular causes of Conversion of State, are of two sorts.
1. Foreign: By the overgreatnesse of invasion of some foreign Kingdom, or
other State of mean power, having a part within our own, which are to be
prevented by the providence of the chief, and rules of policy for the
preserving of every State. This falls out very seldom for the great
difficulty to overthrow a foreign State.

2. Domestique: Sedition or open violence by the stronger part. Alteration
without violence.

Sedition.
SEdition is a power of inferiors opposing it self with, force of Arms
against the superior power, Quasi diti^ secedens.

Causes of Sedition are of two sorts.
1. General. Liberty. Riches. When they, that are of equal quality in a
Commonwealth, or do take themselves so to be, are not regarded equally in
all, or in any of these 3. Or when they are so unequal in quality, or take
themselves so to be, are regarded but equally, or with less respect, then
those that be of less defect in these 3. things, or in any of them. Honor.

1. IN the Chief: Covetuousnesse or oppression, by the Magistrate or higher
Power, ( viz.) when the Magistrates, especially the Chief increases his
substance and revenue beyond measure, either with the public or (private
calamity, whereby the Governors grow to quarrel among themselves as in
Olygarchies) or the other degrees conspire together, and make quarrel against
the chief, as in Kingdoms: The examples of Wat Tyler, Iarke Straw, etc.

2. In the Chief: Injury, when great Spirits, and of great power are greatly
wronged and dishonored, or take themselves so to be, as Coriolanus, Cyrus
minor, Earl of Warwick. In which cases the best way is to decide the wrong.

3. Preferment, or want of preferment; wherein some have overmuch, and so wax
proud and aspire higher: or have more or less, they deserve as they suppose;
and so in envy, and disdain seek Innovation by open faction, so Caesar; etc.

4. Some great necessity or calamity; So Xerxes after the foil of his great
Army. And Senacheris after the loss of 185. in one night. 2. P^rticular. 1.
ENvy, when the chief exceed the medio^^ity before mentioned, and so provokes
the Nobility, and other degrees, to conspire against him; as Brutus Cassius,
etc. against Caesar. 2. Fear, viz. Of danger, when one or more dispatch the
Prince, by secret practice or force to prevent his own danger, as Artabanus
did Xerxes. 3. Lust or Lec^ery, as Tarquinius Superbus, by Brutus;
Pisistratinde, by Armodius, Appius by Virginius. Chief. 4. Contempt; For vile
quality and base behavior, as Sardanapalus, by Arbaces; Dionisiu^ the younger
by Dion. Other degrees. 5. Contumely; When some great disgrace is done to some
of great Spirit who stands upon his honor and reputation, as Caligula, by
Chaereas. Other degrees. 6. Hope of Advancement, or some great profit, as
Mithidrates, An^barsanes.

Alteration without violence.
CAuses of alteration without violence are; 1. Excess of the State; when by
degrees, the State grows from that temper and mediocrity, wherein it was, or
should have be settled, and exceeds in power, riches and absolutnes in his
kind, by the ambition and covetousness of the Chiefes, immoderate taxes, and
impositions, etc. applying all to his own benefit without respect of other
degrees, and so in the end changes it self into another State or form of
Government, as a Kingdom into a Tyranny, an Olygarchy into an Aristocraty.

2. Excess, of some one or more in the Commonwealth; viz. When some one, or
more, in a Commonwealth grow to an excellency or excess above the rest,
either in honor, wealth, or virtue; and so by permission and popular favor,
are advanced to the Sovereignty: By which means, Popular States grow into
Olygarchies; and Olygarchies, and Aristocraties into Monarchies. For which
cause, the Athenians and some other free States made their Laws of Ostrocismos
to banish any for a time that should excel, though it were in virtue, to
prevent the alteration of their State; which because it is an unjust law, it is
better to take heed at the beginning to prevent the means, that none should
grow to that hight and excellency, then to use so sharp and unjust a remedy.

FINIS.
A METHOD, how to make use of the Book before, in the reading of Story.
DAVID being seventy years of age, was of wisdom, memory, etc. sufficient to
govern his Kingdom; 1. Reg. Chap. 1.

Old age is not ever unfit for public Government.
DAvid being of great years, and so having ^ cold, dry, and impotent body,
married with Abishag a fair Maid of the best complexion through his whole
Realm, to revive his body and prolong his life^ 1. Reg. Chap. 1. Verse 3.

Example of the like practice in Charles the fifth.
DAvid being old and impotent of body by the (...) of his Nobles and
Physicians, married a young Maid called Abishag, to warm and preserve, his
old body.

Observation.
Whether David did well in marrying a Maid; and whether it be lawful for an
old decayed and impotent man to marry a young woman; or on the other side, for
an old-worne, and decrepite woman to marry a young and lusty man.

For the Affirmative.
ARG. The end of marriage is Society and mutual comfort; but there may be
Society and mutual comfort in a marriage betwixt an old, and young party. Ergo
it is lawful.

Answ. Society and comfort is an use and effect of marriage; but none of the
principal end is of marriage, which are: 1. Procreation of Children, and so,
the continuance of mankind. 2. The Avoiding of ^ornication.


As for comfort and society, they may be betwixt man and man, women and women
where no marriage is^ And therefore no proper ends of marriage.

The Negative.
ARG. 1. That conjunction which has no respect to the right and proper ends,
for which marriage was ordained by God, is no lawful marriage. But the
conjunction betwixt an old impotent, and young party has no respect to the
right end, for which marriage, was ordained by God. Therefore it is no lawful
marriage.

2. No contract, wherein the party contracting, binds himself to an
impossible condition, or to do that which he cannot do, is good, or lawful.
But the contract of marriage by an impotent person with a young party binds
him to an impossible condition to do, that which he cannot do ( viz.) to
perform the duties of marriage; Therefore it is unlawful.

For the same ca^se, the civil law determines a nullity in these marriages,
except the woman know before the infirmity of the man, in which case she can
have no wrong, being a thing done with her own knowledge and consent, because
Volenti ne fit injuria: -- In legem Julian. de adulteriis leg. Si uxor etc.

It provideth further for the more certainty of the infirmity, that three
years be expired before the dissolution of the marriage, because that men,
that have been infirm at the first, by reason of sickness, or some other
accident, afterward proved to be sufficient: De repudiis leg. in causis.

Defense for David in marrying Abishag.
1. IT was rather a Medicine then a marriage, without any evil or disordered
affection.

2. It was by the persuasion of his Nobles and Physicians.

3. It was for the public good to prolong the life of a worthy Prince.

4. It was with the knowledge and consent of the young Maid, who was made
acquainted with the Kings infirmity, and to what end she was married unto him;
who if she did it for the Common good, and for duties sake, having withal the
gift of continency, she is to be commended; if for ambition, or some vain
respect, it is her own, and not David's fault.

Political Nobility.
Adoniah aspiring to the Kingdom.
FIrst, took the advantage of David's affection and kindness toward him, and
made him secure of any ill dealing.

Secondly, of his age and infirmities, disabling his father as unfit for
Government.

Thirdly, blazed his title, and right to the Crown.

Fourthly, got him Chariots, Horsemen, and Footmen, and a guard to make show
of State.

Fifthly, being a comely and goodly person, made a Popular show of himself, and
his qualities.

Sixthly, joined to himself in faction Ioab, the General of the army, who was
in displeasure for murdering of Abner and Amasa, and feared that David would
supply Benajah into his place, and so was discontented. And Abiather the high
Priest, that was likewise discontented with David, for the preferrement of
Zadoch.

Seventhly, had meetings with them, and other his confederates, under a
pretense of a vow and offering at the Fountain of Raguell, in the confines of
Iudaea.

Eighthly, made a show of Religion by Sacrificing; etc.

Ninthly, made himself familiar with the Nobles and people, and entertained
them with feasting.

Tenthly, drew into his part the chief officers of the Court, and Servants to
the King, by Rewards, Familiarity, etc.

Elevently, disgraced and abased the Competitour, and such as he knew, would
take part with him, and concealeth his ambition, and purpose from them.

Twelftly, had Jonathan a favorite of the Court, and near about the King to
give him intelligence, if any thing were discovered, and moved at the Court,
whilst himself was in hand about his practice.

Observations.
Ways of such as aspire to the Kingdom, and Marks to discern them.
FIrst, they wind into the Princes favor, by service, officiousness,
flattery, etc. to plant him in a good opinion of their loyalty and
faithfulness, thereby to make him secure of their practices.

2. They take advantage of the Princes infirmities, age, impotency, negligence,
sex, etc. And work upon that by disabling the Prince, and secret detracting
of his person and Government.

3. They blaze their Title, and claim to the Crown, (if they have any) with
their friends, and favorers.

4. They provide them in secret of extraordinary forces and furniture for the
wars, make much of good soldiers, and have a pretense (if it be espied) of
some other end, as for the Kings honor, or service, and to be in readiness
against foreign enemies, etc.

5. They make open show of their best qualities and comlines of their person
(which though it be vain as a dumb show, it is very effectual to win the
liking of the popular sort, which according to the rule of the election of
Kings, in the Bees Commonwealth; think that Fo^ma est digna imperare)
Activity, Nobility, Ancestry; etc.

6. To have their blazers abroad to set out their virtues, and to prepare their
friends in every Province.

7. To draw into their part, and make sure unto them, of the chief Peers, and
men of best quality, such as are mightiest, and most gracious with the
Soldiers, and the Military men, and most subtle and politic, especially
such as be ambitious, and discontent with the State.

8. To have meetings f^r conference under some pretense of some ordinary ^a^^er
in some convenient place, not to^ near, nor too far of, but where friends
may best resort and assemble unto them without suspicion.

9. To take up a show and pretense of Religion more then before, and beyond the
practice of their former life.

10. They use popular courtesy (which in a great person is very effectual)
feasting, liberality, gaming, etc.

11. To be over liberal, and win to them by gifts, familiarity, etc. the
chief Officers of the Court, and Governors of Shires.

12. To have some near about the Prince, to keep them in credit, and remove
suspicion, if any rise.

13. To disgrace such as they know to be sure and faithful to the Prince, and
present State, or to the Competitour, and to bring them into contempt by
slander, detraction, and all means they can, and to conceal^ the designs from
them, least they be discovered before they be ripe.

14. To have some spy near about the Prince, to advertise them if any
inckling of suspicion arise whilst themselves are practicing.

Note the practices of Absolon: 2. Sam. Chap. 16. and of Cyrus minor, in
Xenophon: (...) cap. 1.

Political Prince.
David being a most worthy and excellent Prince for wisdom, valor, religion,
and justice, and so highly deserving of the Commonwealth, yet grown into age,
grew withal into contempt, and had many, both of his Nobles and Common People,
that fell from him; first with Absolon, then with Adoniah, who affected the
Kingdom and rebelled against him: For remedy whereof, he stirred up himself
to public actions which might show his vigor and sufficiency to manage the
affairs of his Kingdom.

1. AFter the victory against Absolon, he forced himself to forbear
mourning, and showed himself to his discontented Army, when all were like to
fall from him, for his unreasonable sorrow and lamentation for his Son.

2. After the victory, he caused a general convention to be assembled of the
whole nation, to bring him home with honor to Jerusalem, which was a renewing
and reestablishing of him; 2. Sam. 19. 12.

3. He gave an experiment of his power and authority, by deposing a person of
great authority and estimation, to wit, Ioab, General Captain of the Army,
and advancing Amasa to his place.

4. He sent kind Messengers to Jerusalem, and to other chief and head Towns,
and special men of Iude^, his contributes, putting them of their alliance with
him, with these words, that they were of his own flesh and blood, with
protestation of his special love and affection toward them, to provoke them
with like kindness and affection toward him.

5. He assembled a Parliament of his whole Realm, and took occasion upon the
designing of his Successor, to commend unto them the succession of his House,
and the continuance and maintenance of Gods true worship and religion, then
established, and gave a grave and public charge to his Successor, now
designed, touching the manner of his government, and maintaining o^ Religion,
1. Chron. 12. 13.

6. He showed his bounty and magnificence in congesting matter for the
building of the Temple, as gold, silver, brass, etc. And caused it to be
published and made known to the Parliament and whole Nation, 1. Chron. 22. 13.

7. He revived the Church Government, and set it in a right order, assigning
to every Church Officers his place and function.

8. He suppressed the faction of Adoniah, and ordained Solomon his Successor;
1. Reg. 1. 22. By these means. he retained his Majesty and authority in his
old age, as appears by the effect; for that being bedred, he suppressed the
faction of Adoniah, (which was grown mighty, and was set on foot) with his
bare commandment, and signification of his pleasure, and so he died in peace.

FINIS.

