LETTERS BETWEEN Mr. ROBERT ROGERS, OF WAKEFIELD, AND Mr. THOMAS WALKER, The
present VICAR there, TOUCHING BAPTISM.

decorative flourish

LONDON, Printed by J. G. for Richard Lowndes at the White Lion in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1656.

The occasion of these following Letters was this:
AN urgent necessity (an Infant unbaptized, and in imminent danger of death)
put me upon it to go to Mr. Walker our present Vicar at Wakefield upon the
week day, to desire from him (what I conceive was his duty, the Charge of
Souls being at present upon him) that he would administer the Ordinance to my
weak Child, partly that I might discharge the office of a Father, and that my
Child might not want the benefit of the Ordinance. After much impertinent
discourse, as of Christ's going 50. miles to John to be Baptized, and the like,
the main ground of his refusal seemed to be the want of a Congregation on the
week day; and though I offered to bring ten or twenty persons for a
Congregation, and my Child (notwithstanding its weakness) to the Church, yet
he still refused, saying, It was contrary to his Judgment: although he had
done it formerly to others) so the result was, That he neither would Baptize my
child in that necessity, nor give way to any other to do that Christian and
charitable office for me within his parish.

Upon the Lords day following, after forenoon Sermon, I desired him to satisfy
me from the Word of God, how he could in conscience dispense with that neglect,
and what the Scripture made out against Private Baptism in A case of
necessity; He promised, and I expected satisfaction in the afternoon, where in
stend of Scripture he produced the Rubric of the Common Prayer before Public
Baptism, and read it publicly to his People, so far as he thought it might
conduce to his purpose: but when he came to that expression. Nevertheless, (if
Necessity so require) Children may at all times be Baptized at home, he left it
out, and read it not, nor gave the Congregation any satisfaction in it; not
much unlike the Devils quotation of Scripture, when he would have persuaded
Christ to have thrown himself from the battlements of the Temple, so that
wanting that satisfaction which he promised, and I expected from him, I sent
him this following Letter;

Sir,
It is the Word of God, not the Rubric of the Common Prayer must satisfy me
in my desire, whin you shall give me such satisfaction, I hope you will do it
ingenuously, without adding or diminishing. I rather desire an Argument ad rem,
then ad hominem, I am unwilling to make any farther noise in the business, if
I may receiver satisfaction from you in writing under your hand, which when I
have received, I shall submit and remain

Your friend, ROBERT ROGERS.


Wakefield, March 6. 1655.
SIR,
Could heartily wish, that you were not rather inclined to cavil, then
desirous of satisfaction, which I have good ground to suspect not only from
your carrige toward me, but also from your slighting and undervaluing the
constant (...) God* There is no sober-minded, intelligent Christian, but will
both suspect and suspend his Judgment, if differing from the generality of
those, that are Pious, and Learned; You cannot but know, if you understand any
thing, that it is more proper for me than you in this particular to require
satisfaction, because you desire me to do that (which as I told you, when you
were with me) is against my judgment: according to which I am bound to act,
otherwise I should condemn my self in the things which I allow, contrary to
that of the Apostle, Romans 14.22. But however I shall propound (according to
your desire) one or two particulars to your serious consideration, and shall
pray that God may set them home upon your spirit.

1. Duly weigh that Christ's Baptism was not private, but public, yea though
Christ were put to much inconvenience thereby, as will appear from Math. 3.13:
Now it is an unquestioned maxim amongst Divines, both Episcopal and others,
grounded upon Math. 11.29. that Christ's moral acts (as this of submission to
Baptism was, as appears from Math. 3.15.) are to be imitated by his people.

2. Consider the nature of the Sacrament of Baptism, its a public ordinance,
not private; now public Ordinances are to be dispensed in a public manner:
That it is a public Ordinance, I prove from Scripture, Math. 28.19. and also
from the nature of the Ordinance it self, It being a Sign and Seal of
Initiation into the Visible Church. Whereas you desired from me an express
text of Scripture, that Baptism ought to be public. I answer, that it is
sufficient if it be proved by direct consequence from Scripture, though it be
not expressed in terminis: There is no express example or precept in
Scripture, either for Infant Baptism, or for admission of Women to the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, yet none of the Orthodoxe do question either,
because they may be gathered from Scriptures by direct consequence: the
Application is easy. Whereas you were offended that I should leave out some
part of the Rubric in my quotation of it, be pleased to take notice, that I
omitted the last clause therein, because it would (had I read it) have
occasioned the reading of the Rubric before private Baptism, for which there
was then no time, however I desire you read it at your leisure, because I
think it will be of concernment to you, in reference to your child; although
I do not own it as Scripture, yet I look upon it as agreeable unto Scripture.
I shall rejoice if God be pleased by these few lines to convince you of your
error, so as to reclaim you; but if you persist to cavil as heretofore, I
shall endeavor to heed you no more therein, then Christ did the Pharisees in
the like case: Whereas you say you are not willing to make any farther noise in
this business, I do not see how with convenience or modesty you can; but if
you think the noise thereat will prejudice me, I shall not desire you to spare
me: One thing more I shall hint to you (which (...) you will close with) that
no Infants have right to the privilege of Baptism, but those that are born of
Christian Parents; whether you do own the Principles of the Christian Faith I
know not, (you never professed so much to me, which in such a case was
requisite) This I am sure of, and others have been witnesses thereof, that your
carriage in this business has been no whit Christi^^ toward

Yours so far as you are in Gods way, T. WALKER.


SIR,
I should not have either troubled my self or you with (...) reply, if I could
possible have picked the least satisfaction from your letter, the doubt is thus
stated; Whether (in case of necessity a Minister) be not bound to private
Baptism, (though not upon the Lords day) the whole drift of your writing it to
prove the practice and convenience of public Baptism, a thing never by me
denied or questioned, nor I think by any sober Christian, so that your letter
in effect is in my thoughts no more then a begging of the question or shooting
at Rovers without ever coming near the mark.

Sir, I shall no further take notice of your uncharitableness in censuring,
and the recrimination wherewith you have stuffed your paper, then to tell you
how sorry I am to see in a Preacher of the Kingdom of Christ so little of the
Spirit of love and meekness; when you shall satisfy me in the generality of
the opinions of pious and learned men in the true point in question, it is
probable I may be convinced, in the mean time you cannot blame me if I dare not
rely upon your own judgment, and by I know not what kind of implicit faith pin
my conscience upon your or any other man's sleeve.

I have but two things to speak to in your letter, and I shall do it, without
any bitterness; the one relates to your self, the other to me; first, in one
place you say you are not bound to act against your Judgment; in another that
you look upon the Common prayer though not as scripture, yet to be agreeable
to Scripture; in my thoughts here is either a flat contradiction or some thing
worse; if in your judgment, the Common Prayer be agreeable to Scripture, you
act against your judgment and conscience, in denying my child private
Baptism, which is a part of it, if it be not agreeable to Scripture you act
against your judgment, and conscience in quoting it, and affirming it to be
so: if this be not either to contradict or condemn your self in that which you
allow, having done that to others you denied to me, I refer it to every
judicious and sober-minded Christian.

The other relating to my self, it the doubt you make of my Christianity, in
the close of your letter, and you seem to keep this as your great engine to
batter the fabric, what cause you have in a settled Church for many hundred
years to raise such a doubt I know not, the rather where you have no cause to
suspect, and where you see a constant frequenting of the Ordinances, my earnest
desire to you, for the Baptizing of my child, was I think a sufficient Argument
of my faith, to any moderate Christian Spirit, where if you had doubted you
might have examined me, though even in that of Examination I am dubious whether
it be in your power; I believe there are still many good Christians in
Wakefield who never were under your examination, and I do think it to be very
hard and uncharitable to judge or sensure any man for want of it. Other things
thets are in your letter of less moment, which I am unwilling to take notice
of. Sir, my prayers shall be for your self, and for all that serve at the
Altar, that you may rather study to be ensamples to your flocks, then to Lord
it over Gods heritage. If you please to give me an account or the Question
wherein not only my self but the Parish is concerned, I shall not make use of
any other Ministers for my satisfaction in the point, in the means time I rest

Yours ROBERT ROGERS


SIR, I am very glad, that you are satisfied about the practice and convenience
of publ^que Baptism, this had been enough, had you duly weighed it, to have
engaged you to bring your child to public Baptism, it was the rule which the
Apostle observed, not to use his liberty in all things, that were lawful, but
only those things which were convenient. And it is an approved rule among
Divines, that he that would keep a good conscience in such cases, wherein there
appears any doubt, will make choice of the surer part, that is, that part
wherein he may be sure not to offend against the Lord; now I think you will not
deny but you bad been on the surer part, had you brought it into the public
Congregation: Whereas you urge necessity, I answer, that it did not appear to
me to be a case of necessity, nor does yet appear that it was so, if I should
grant to you that private Baptism were lawful in case of necessity, yet I
suppose you will not say that every one must be judge of the necessity, and if
the Minister do not so judge, I see not (that being duly considered
above-written) how he can in conscience proceed to Administer it privately? you
may accuse me as far as you please of want of love and meekness, and have as
low thoughts of me as you please in other respects, I bless God he has so
far given me a sight of my self, that none that know me think worse of me,
then I do of my self: All your tart expressions and harsh censures, together
with your charging me with self-contradiction, or (to use your own words,
somewhat worse) shall not (I hope) make me out of charity with you, neither
you, nor any other shall find me backward to express my self, in any thing
(wherein I may lawfully) as becomes a Minister of the Gospel: that private
Baptism is against the judgment of the Generality of Protestant Divines is
clear to me, and also may be to you, if you will but consult Dr. Vshers body
of Divinity, the judgment of the last Assembly of Divines sitting at
Westminster, as also the Common Prayer book, for that the compilers thereof
were in their judgments against private Baptism appears clear to me, in that
there is an express Injunction in case any had been baptized privately to make
it afterward public: This you will find if you read the private Baptism. The
contradiction with which you charge me is easily reconciled, if you do but
look upon my words, upon which you ground the aspersion, you shall find that
they relate not to all the Common prayer in the whole Systeme of it, but only
to the Rubric before private Baptism, which I look upon as agreeable to
Scripture, let any unprejudicated understanding person read that passage of my
letter, and if they do not agree with me herein, I shall willingly be
accounted a self-contradicter, though I look upon that Rubric as agreeable to
Scripture, yet I am not obliged thereby to Administer baptism privately,
especially when I am not satisfied that it is a case of necessity. Whereas you
charge me with denial of that to you which I did to others, I answer that the
case was very different: And I find the Apostle did the like, as you may see
Acts 16.3. compared with Gal. 2.3. he Circumcised Timothy, yet would not
Circumcise Titus, nor suffer it; you constant attendance upon Ordinances I
commend; but this together with a desire of having your child Baptized does not
necessarily speak you to be a Christian though (for my own part) I never denied
your Christianity, but only affirmed (which I still think) that your carriage
in this business had not been Christian I have known many that have done both
these, and yet have been guilty of such gross ignorance as was inconsistent
with Christianity, taken in the largest sense Whereas you question my power of
Examination, I shall refer you to what you heard lately in public about that
subject, from a person more able to satisfy you then I am, I have not ever yet
heard one syllable of Reason or Scripture against it, no nor any Protestant
Divine: I cannot as yet see any thing that should make against it, except
Ignorance, or Pride, or both: if you can show me sufficient grounds against it,
I will leave it, and also give you many thanks, for it is a work that a man
shall have little thanks for, and incur much prejudice and displeasure by
which I have experimentally found, yet dare not leave it; wherein you see me
domineer over the flock, or give ill example to it, tell me privately, and I
shall endeavor to rectify it: That the Church of England has been for many
hundred years, or one hundred years settled, unless in a Popish way, is wholly
denied by

Sir, Yours as far at he may for Christ's sake, T. WALKER.
Wakefield, March 1655.

SIR, You should have received a quicker answer to your Letter, but my (...) at
York, and some other necessary occasions hindered me, I was upon the opening of
your Letter full of expectance, in reference to my satisfaction in the case
propounded, but upon perusal of your paper, instead of arguments from
Scripture you fly to a poor shift of selfe-satisfaction, and make your self
the Judge of the necessity, I shall refer my self to any impartial person in
your Congregation whether the Mother with the Midwife, and others employed in
business of tha^ nature, be not the fitter Judges of the Sickness and danger
of an Infant, and consequently of the pressing necessity then your self,
except you will take upon you the office of a Midwife, as well as of the
Minister:

What you still urge in reference to Public Baptism, I still say is far
from the matter in hand, or a mere begging or declining the Question, I never
denied it, nay I proffered you twenty persons for a Congregation (Christ admit
of a less number) because you seemed to stand upon that, also to bring my
child to the Church, though then in great weakness, did not I herein choose
the surer part? but it seems twenty are not a Congregation without a Sermon, o^
Exposition, and that is not to be had on the week day without hire. How wel^
Demetrius plays his part, while good Souls grieve to see Christ and his
Ordinance thus bought and sold!

That the Compilers of Common Prayer were in their judgments against Private
Baptism, where Public might be had without danger of the Infant, (...) deny
not, but in such a case (which is the question in hand) their judgment are for
it, as appears by the Rubric, else they man not Compiled it, nor subscribed a
form for it, your own argument returns upon your self, I could have wished
satisfaction rather then sophistry; Dr. Usher I have an honorable and reverend
opinion of, when you shall satisfy me out of him, I shall say no more to you,
in the mean time I have so much charity as to think you will no belie him.

That contradiction is not yet solved, though your own interpretation be
allowed, if private Baptism in a case of necessity be agreeable to Scripture,
why do you not accordingly Administer it? if not, why do you say it is, and
quote it publicly as an Authority? this is either to contradict or condemn
your self in what you allow, that poor starting hole of self-satisfaction into
which you run again when all helps fail you, will not clear the
contradiction in the eye of any knowing man.

That of the holy Apostles circumcising of Timothy and not of Titus, whereby
you would justify the Administering of Baptism to other men's Children and not
to mine, is (if you had well understood your self) little to the purpose, the
Apostle did it to avoid offense to Jew and Gentile, he became all things to all
men, that he might by all means save some; it was that he might gain both and
lose neither: how far this is from your practice, I refer to the whole
Congregation and to your own heart, offenses are multiplied, weak Christians
troubled with your practices, a party so adhered unto, that the rest are wholly
cast off, your partiality noted by all the people, besides Saint Paul's example
in the infancy of the Church in matter of practice, cannot always be a rule to
us, witness one example for all, his shaving at Concrea, Act. 18.18: I know
not whether your Argument be guilty of more irreverence or folly.

For your great Diana of examination, you refer me I know not whom, and
therefore leave it: you tell me that neither Reason nor Scripture speak against
it, methinks it is a weak way of arguing, yet if you allow but the same for
private Baptism, your argument destroys your self, what ever the Scriptures
say of Examination, I am sure your practice makes it necessary to the
Ordinance, so as it cannot be had without it, and the neglect of it dangerous:
and if that practice be without positive grounds from Scripture, you know where
your thanks must be.

My Christian wish you apply your self, but since you desire it, I shall with
privacy propound these questions to you, what think you of him who shall in the
face of a Congregation examine the Father of a child upon the account, passing
by all others who had their Children baptized the same time, what think you of
him who shall Baptize a child without prayer before, or Thanksgiving after
Baptism? what think you of him who for want of examination and not giving in
his name, shall turn a man out by head and shoulders from the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper? what think you of him who before morning Sermon shall refuse to
Baptize a weak child upon the entreaty of the Parent, and then Baptize it
after Sermon when it is either dead or at the point of death? what do you think
of him that shall publicly deny the Supremacy of the civil power in causes
Ecclesiastica^^ distracting the flock, and withdrawing them from their
obedience? if this be not to Lord it over Gods heritage, I know not what is, I
hope you will letter consider of these things, in the mean time I am

Yours so far as you are a Son of Peace. ROBERT ROGERS.
Wakefield the 12 of April 1656.

I have not received any answer of this last Letter, therefore I Printed these
Letters in hope that they may fall into the hands of some Godly and Learned
Divine, that will endeavor to give the Church of God satisfaction in this
point.

FINIS.

