^am Marti, Quam Mercurio.

The Ho.ble and learned Knight Sr. Walter Raleigh.

To: Vaughan sculp.



REMAINS of Sir Walter Raleigh; viz. Maxims of State. Advise to his Son: his
Sons advise to his Father. His Sceptick. Observation concerning the causes of
the Magnificencie and Opulency of Cities. His Letters to diverse persons of
quality.

With The Prerogative of Parliaments, being a Dispute between a Counselor of
State and a Justice of Peace.

LONDON, Printed for William Sheares Junior, in Westminster Hall. 1657.

MAXIMS OF STATE. With Instructions to his SON, and the SONS advice to his aged
FATHER. Whereunto Is added Observations touching Trade and Commerce with the
Hollander and other Nations, Proving that our Sea and Land Commodities enrich
and strengthen other Countries against our own.

By Sir WALTER RALEIGH.

LONDON. Printed for Will. Shears Junior at the Blue Bible in Bedford Street in
Covent Garden. 1656,

The Contents.
OF Government. Page 1 Of Policy. 2 Of Monarchy. 3 Of Aristocracie, or
Senatorie State. 5 Of Free State, or Popular State. 6 Of Tyranny. 7 Of
Olygarchie, or the Government of a few. ibid. Of a Commonwealth. 8 Of causes
of States, and Commonwealths in general. 10 Of Founding a State. ibid. Of
Causes preserving State or Commonwealth. 15 Of Mysteries or Sophisms. ibid. Of
Axioms or Rules of preserving a State. 1-9 Rules for preserving of a Kingdom
Hereditarie 25 Rules for preserving of a Kingdom Conquered 25 Kingdoms
hereditarie are preserved at home by the ordering of a Prince. ibid. Kingdoms
new gotten, or purchased by force, are preserved by Rules. 10 35 Rules politic
of Tyrants. 41 Sophisms of a barbarous and professed tyranny. 42 Sophisms of
the sophistical, or subtle Tyrant, to hold up his State. 46 Of preservation
of an Aristocracie. 53 Of preservation of an Olygarchie, by Sophisms ibid. Of
preservation of an Olygarchie, by Rules. ibid. Of Conversion of States in
general. 59 Causes of conversions of States are of two sorts: General and
Particular. ibid. Particular causes of Conversion of State, are of two sorts.
60 Of sedition. 61 Causes of sedition are of two sorts. ibid. Of Alteration
without violence. 64 A Method, how to make use of the Book before, in the
reading of the story. 67 Old age is not ever unfit for public Government,
ibid. Example of the like practice in Charles the Fifth. 68 Of observation for
the Affirmative and the Negative. ibid. Of defense for David in marrying
Abishag. 70
Political Nobility.
Of Ado^ijah aspiring to the Kingdom 71
Observations.
Of ways of such as aspire to the Kingdom, and marks to discern them. 73
Political Prince. 75
The TABLE of the Chapters containd in Sr WALTER RALEIGH'S INSTRUCTIONS to his
SON.
CHAP. Page. VIrtuous persons to be made choice of Friends. Great care to be
had in the choosing of a Wife. Wisest men have been abused by flatterers.
Pr^v^^e Quarrels to be avoided. Three Rules to be observed for the preservation
of a man's estate. What sort of servants are most fit to be entertained. Brave
rags wear soonest out of fashion. Riches not to be sought by evil means. ibid.
What Inconveniences happen to such as delight in Wine. Let God be thy
protector and directour in all thy Actions. The Sceptick does neither affirm,
neither deny any Position but doubts of it, and proposes his Reason against
that which is affirmed or denied, to justify his not Consenting. Observations
concerning the causes of the Magnificencie and Opulencie of Cities. Safety for
defense of the people and their goods in and near a Town. Causes that concern
the Magnificencie of a City. That the Seat of Government is upheld by the two
great Pillars thereof, viz. Civil Justice, and Martial Policy, which are
framed out of Husbandry, Merchandise, and Gentry of this Kingdom. Sir Walter
Raleigh's letter to Mr Secretary Winwood before his Journey to Guiana. To his
Wife from Guiana. To Sir Ralph Winwood. To his Wife copied out of his own hand
writing. To his Wife after Condemnation. To King James at his return from
Guiana. His third Letter to Secretary Winwood. His Letter to Prince Henry
touching the model of a Ship. His Speech immediately before he was beheaded.
Sir Walter Raleigh Observations touching Trade and Commerce with the Hollander
and other Nations, Proving that our Sea and Land Commodities enrich and
strengthen other Countries against our own.
FINIS.
MAXIMS OF STATE.
OF GOVERNMENT.
GOVERNMENT is of two sorts. 1. P rivate, of himself. Sobriety. Of his Family;
called Economy.

2. Public, of the Commonwealth, called P^licy A man must first Govern
himself, ere he be fit to Govern a Family: And his Family, e're he be fit to
bear the Government in the Commonwealth.

Of Policy.
Policy is an Art of Government of a Commonwealth, and some part of it
according to that State, o^ form of Government, wherein it is settled for the
public good.

State, is the frame or set order of Commonwealth, or of the Governors that
rule the same, especially o^ the chief and Sovereign Governor that commands
the rest.

The State of Sovereignty consists in five points.

1. Making or anulling of Laws. 2. Creating and disposing of Magistrates. 3.
Power over life and death. 4. Making of War, or Peace. 5. Highest or last
appeal.
Where these five are, either in one or in more, there is the State.

These five points of State, rest either in, 1. One Monarchy or Kingdom. 2.
Some few chief men for virtue and wisdom, called an Aristocracie. 3. Many,
called a Free State, or Popular State.


These three sorts of Government have respect to the common good, and therefore
are just, and Lawful States.

These 3. degenerate into 3. other Governments viz. 1. Monarchy into 1.
Tyrrannie. 2. Aristocracie, into 2. Oligarchie. 3. Popular state, into 3.
Commonwealth or Government of all the common and baser sort, and therefore
called a Commonwealth by an usurped Nickname.


These all respect their own, and not the public good, and therefore are
called Bastard Governments.

I Monarchy.
A Monarchy, or Kingdom, is the Government of a State by one head, or chief,
tending to the common benefit of all.

Monarchy, or Kingdoms, are of three sorts touching the right or possession of
them, viz. 1. Hereditary, by descent, as the English French, etc. 2. Elective,
by suffrage of the other Orders, of some of them, as the P^loni^^ 3. (...), or
of both kinds, viz. descent, yet not tied to the next blood, as the ancient
Jewish State.


Monarchies are of two sorts touching their power, or Authority, viz. 1.
Int^re. Where the whole power of ordering all State matters, both peace and
war, does by law and cust^^ appertain to the Prince, as in the ^^^gest Kingdom,
where the Prince hat^ power to make Laws League, and Wa^ To create Magistrates;
to pardon life Of appeal, etc. Though to give a contentment to the other
degrees, th^^ have a suffrage in making Laws, y^^ ever subject to the Princes
pleasure nor Negative will. 2. (...) or restrained, that ha^^ no full power in
all the points or matters of State, as the Military King that has not the
Sovereignty in time peace, as the making of Laws, and But in War only, as the
P^loni^^ Kings.


II. Aristocracy, or Senatory State.
AN Aristocracie is the Government of a Commonwealth by some ^ompetent number
of the better sort, ^referred for wisdom and other virtues ^f the public good.

1. Aristocracie are of three sorts, viz. There the Senators are chosen, for
Virtu, Riches, and the common good, as the Venetian.

2. Virtue, and the public good without respect of wealth, as sometimes the
Roman, when some of the ^enatours were fetched from the ^ough, and some from
the Schools

3. Vir^ue and wealth more respecting their private, than their public good,
which inclines toward an Oligarchie, or the Government of the Richer or
Nobler sort, as in Rome toward the end.

III. Free State, or Popular State.
THe Popular State is the Government of a State by the choicest sort of people,
tending to the public good of all sorts, viz. with due respect of the better,
Nobler, and Richer sort

In every Just State, some part of the Government is, or ought to be imparted
to the people; As in a Kingdom, a voice or suffrage in making Laws; and
sometimes also, in levying of Arms (if the charge be great, and the Prince
forced to borrow help of his Subjects) the matter rightly may be propounded to
a Parliament, that the tax may seem to have proceeded from themselves. So
consultations, and some proceedings in Judicial matters, may in part be
referred to them. The reason, least seeing themselves to be in no number, nor
of reckoning, they mislike the state, or kind of Government: And where the
multitude is discontented, there must needs be many Enemies to the present
State. For which cause, Tyrants, which allow the people, no manner of ^ealing
in State matters) are forced to bereave them of their wits and wea^ons, and all
other means whereby they may resist, or amend themselves, ^^ in Rushland,
Turkey, etc.

IV. Tyranny.
A Tyranny is the swerving, or distorting of a Monarchy, or the Government of
one, tending not the public good, but the private benefit of himself, and his
followers. As in the Russ and Turkish Government, where the State and Wealth of
other orders, are employed only to the upholding of the greatness of the King
or Emperor. This is the worst of all the ^astard States because it is the
pervering of the best Regiment, to wit, of a Monarchy, which resembles the
Sovereign Government of God himself.

V. Oligarchie, or the Government of a few.
AN Oligarchie is the swerving, or the corruption of an Aristocracie; or the
Government of some few, that are of the Wealthier or Nobler sort, without any
respect of the public good. The chief end of these Governors, is their own
greatness and enriching. And therefore their manner is, to prepare fit means to
uphold their Estate. This State is not wholly so bad, as if the Tyranny, and
yet worse than the Common wealth, because it respects the good of a few.

VI. Common wealth.
A Commonwealth is the swerving of depravation of a Free, or popular State, or
the Government of the whole multitude of the ba^e and poorer sort, without
respect of the other Orders.

These two States, to wit; The Oligarchie, and Commonwealth, are very adverse
the one to the other, and have many bickerings between them. For that the
Richer or Nobler sort, suppose a right or superiority to appertain unto them in
every respect, because they are superior, but in some respects only to wit,
in Riches, Birth, Parentage, etc. On the other side, the Common people suppose,
there ought to be an equality in all other things, and some State matters;
because they are equal with the Rich or Noble, touching their Liberty,
whereas indeed neither the one nor the other are simply equal or superior, as
touching Government and fitness thereunto, because they are such, to wit,
because they are Rich, Noble, Free, etc. But because they are Wise, Virtuous,
Va^ant, etc. and so have fit parts to Govern a State.

The several States are sometimes mixed, and inter-wrought one with the other,
yet ever so, as that the one has the preheminent predomination over the other,
as in the humors and complexions of the body. So in the Roman State, the
people had their Plebescita, and gave the suffrage in the election of
Magistrates: Yet the Senate (as the State stood) for the most part swayed the
State, and bare the chief rule. So in the Venetian State, the Duke seems to
represent a Monarch, and the Senate to be his Council: Yet the Duke has no
power in State matters, but is like a head set on by art, that bears no
brain. And so that State is Senatorica^l or Aristocraticall.

Causes of States and Commonwealths in general.
Causes of States, or of Commonwealths are of 3. sorts, viz.
1. Founding, or settling a State where to be considered. 1. Measure. 2. Parts,
and their Qualities.
2. Preserving a State. 3. Changing, and altering a State.
Founding a State.
In founding a State are to be considered 2. things.
1. Proportion. 2. Parts.
PRoportion, is a just measure or Mediocritie of the State, whereby it is
framed and kept in that Order, as that neither it exceed nor be defective in
his kind, to wit, so that a Monarch be not too Monarchical, nor strict, or
absolute, as the Russe Kings; nor Aristocratical, that is over^mated or
eclipsed by the Nobility, as the Scottish Kingdom, but ever respective to the
other degrees. That Aristocracie be not to magnificent nor entire to it self,
but communicate with the people some commodities of State or Government, the
Venetians and sometimes the Ro^^ allowed the people to elect certain
Magistrates out of themselves, to have a Tribune, to make Plebiscita, etc. So a
Free State or Commonwealth that it is not over popular, viz. That it depress
not too much the richer, wiser, nor leaneder sort; but admit them to offices
with a Caution out of the rules and masteries of that State. That they seek no
alteration of the present State. The reason, because the moderate States in
their several kinds (as all other things that observe the mean) are best framed
for their continuance, because they give less cause or grudge, envy, and
affecting the Wealth, Honor, and (...), which they see in others that (...)
the State; and so are less subject to stirs and commotions, and easiest kept in
their present State wherein they are set.

Parts.
THe parts of the State, or those Magistrates that bear place or sway in the
public Government.

Parts or partakers of Public Government, are 1. Council or Senate, which
consulteth of all matters pertaining to War and Peace, Magistrates, etc. in
admi^ting of whom there ought to be a mo^^ special care, that they may be men
expert in matter of Policy, because it i^ their Trade and Vo^ation, as men use
to choose Pilots, and Masters of Ships, such as know the Art of Navigation, and
no^ Husband men, etc. And so the contrary. 2. Magistrates and Officers, which
are to be executioners of that which consulted, and found to be expedient for
the Commonwealth, wherein are to be observed, the kinds of Magistrate than
they be such as fit that kind of Government; The time of their continuance, and
the manner of their election or appointing, by whom, out t^ whom, and in what
manner they be chosen. 3. Judges; To determine in Civil and Criminal matters,
where are to be observed, out of whom they are to be chosen; what kinds are
necessary, and the manner of Judgment and Judicial proceeding.


In Magistrates are to be observed.
1. Kinds of Magistrates. 1. Civil. 1. Superior, which are to be such and of
that kind as agree with the State, as Consuls for a year, and not perpetual
Dictatours in a Senatorie State. Praetors and Censors, that over-see manners
and orders of the people.

For a Kingdom Lieutenant of Shires, Marshals, Masters of Horse, Admirals, etc.

Inferior, as conservatours of Peace, Constables, etc.

Overseers of youth that take care for their education for civil and warlike
exercise.

Clarks of the Market that provide for the quantity, and price of victual.

Ed^^es for Buildings, Streets, Bounds.

Questours, or Treasurers, to keep and dispense the public Treasury.

A^u^^ies, or Recorders, which keep the public Record.

Goalers to keep prison and Prisoners.

Surveyours of woods and fields, etc. 1. As Bishops or Pastors, Elders,
Wardens. 2. Time of Magistrates, whereof some are perpetual, some for a time,
viz. for more years, a year, half a year, according to the necessity of the
Commonwealth, and not perpetual; or at least not Heredetary in a Kingdom.
Yearly in an Aristocracie, or half yearly in a Free State. 3. Manner of choice,
by whom and how to be chosen, where especially they are to be chosen by
suffrage, and not by Lot.


2. Eclesiastical.

Causes preserving a State, or Commonwealth.
In preserving of States a things required.
1 Mysteries, or Sophisms 1. General to all States. 2. Particular for every
several State.
2. Rules, or Actions. 1. General, for all States. 2. Particular, for every
State.

Mysteries, or Sophisms.
MYsteries, or Sophisms of State, are certain secret practices, either for the
avoiding of danger, or averting such effects as tend to the preservation of the
prefent State, as it is set or founded.

State Mysteries are of two sorts.

1. General: That pertain to all States; as first to provide by all means,
that the same degree, or part of the Commonwealth, do not exceed both in
Quantity and Quality. In Quantity, as that the number of the Nobility, or of
great persons, be not more, than the State or Commonwealth can bear. In
Quality, as that none grow in wealth, Liberty, Honors, etc. more than it is
meet for that degree; For as in weights, the heavier weights bear down he
Scale: So in Commonwealths, that part of degree that excels the rest in
Quality and Quantity, overswayeth the rest after it, whereof follow
alterations, and conversions of ^tate. Secondly, to provide by all means, that
the middle sort of people exceed both the extremes, ( viz.) of Nobility and
Gentry, and the base rascal, and beggarly sort. For this makes the State
constant and firm, when both the Extremes are tied together by a middle sort,
as it were with a band, as for any conspiracy of the rich and beggarly sort
together, it is not to be feared. To these two points, the Particular rules in
Sophisms of every Commonwealth, are to be applied. 2. Particular: That serve
for preservation of every Common wealth, in that form of State wherein it is
settled as in a Kingdom. That the Nobility may be accustomed to bear the
Government of the Prince, especially such as have their dwelling in remote
places from the Princes eye, it is expedient to call them up at certain times
to the Princes Court, under presence of doing them honor, or being desirous to
see, and enjoy their presence; and to have their children, especially their
eldest, to be attendant upon the Prince, as of special favor toward them and
theirs, that so they may be trained up in duty and obedience toward the
Prince, and be as Hostages for the good hehaviour, and faithful dealing of
their Parents, especially, if they be of any suspected note. To that end serves
the Persian practice, in having a Band, or Train of the Satrapa's children, and
other Nobles to attend the Court; which was well imitated by our Train of
He^^^^^r, if they were of the Nobler sort. Again, sometimes to borrow small
sums of his Subjects and to pay them again, that he may after borrow greater
sums and never pay: So in an Oligarchie, least it decline to a Popular State,
they deceive the people with this and the like Sophisms, ( viz. They compel
their own sort, to wit, the rich men, by great penalties, to frequent their
Assembly, for choosing of Magistrates, for provision of Armor, warlike
Exercises, making an Execution of Laws, and. By that means seemin; to bear a
hard hand over the richer, but to suffer the poorer, and meaner sort to be
absent, and to neglect those Assemblies under pretense, that they will not draw
them from their business, and private earnings: Yet withal to cite thither
some few of them, ( viz.) so many as are casily over-matched by the richer
sort, to make a show, that they would have the people or poorer sort, partakers
likewise of those matters, yet terrifying those that come to their Assemblies,
with the tendiousnesse of consultations, greatness of Fines, if they should
mis-do, to the end, to make them unwilling to come again, or to have to do with
those Consultations, by which means, the richer sort do still, govern the
State, with the peoples liking, and good contentment.
Aixoms.
Axioms or Rules of preserving the State are, 1. General, that serve for all
Commonwealths. 2. Particular, that serve for every several State.


General Rules.
1. THe first and principal Rule of Policy to be observed in all States, is to
profess, and practice, and maintain the true worship and Religio of Almighty
God prescribed unto us in his word, which is the chief end of all Government.
The Axiom, That God be obeyed simply without exception, though he command that
which seems unreasonable, and absurb to Humane policy; as in the Jews
Commonwealth: That all the men should repair yearly to one place to worship
God four times, leaving none to defend their coast, though being beset with
many Enemies. Not to sow the seventh year, but to suffer the ground to rest
untilled without respect or fear of famine, etc.

2. To avoid the causes of Conversion, whereby States are over thrown, that are
set down in the Title of conversions; For that Common wealth (as natural
bodies) are preserved by avoiding that which hurts the health and State
thereof, and are so cured by contrary medicines.

3. To take heed, that no Magistrate be created or continued, contrary to the
Laws and policy of that State. As that in a Se^at^, there be not created a
perpetual Dictaetor, as Caesar in Rome. In a Kingdom, that there be no Senate,
or Convention of equal power with the Prince in State matters, as in Poland.

4. To create such Magistrates as love the State as it is settled, and take heed
of the contrary practice, as to advance Popular persons in a Kingdom, or
Aristocracie. And secondly, to advance such as have skill to discern what does
preserve, and what hurreth or alters the present State.

5. To that end to have certain Officers to pay abroad, and to observe such as
do not live and behave themselves in fit sort, agreeable to the present State,
but desire rather to be under some other form, or kind of Government.

6. To take heed that Magistracies be not sold for money, nor bribe in their
Offices, which especially to be observed in that Common wealth, which is
governed by a few of the richer sort; For if the Magistrate gain nothing but
his Common Fees, the common sort, and such as want honor, take in good part
that they be not preferred, and are glad rather that themselves are suffered to
intend private business. But if the Magistrate buy and sell matters, the common
people are doubly grieved, both because they are debat'd of those preferments,
and of that gain they see to grow by them, which is the cause that the German
Oligarchies continue to firm for both they suffer the poorer sort to grow into
wealth, and the richer sort are by that means freed, and secured from being
under the poor.

7. To take heed that the State, as it is settled and maintained, be not
overstrict, nor exceed in his kind; ( viz.) That a Kingdom be not too
Monarchical, nor a P^^ul^ State too P^^u^ar: For which cause it is good, that
the Magistrates sometimes) yield of his right touching honor, and bahave
themselves familiarly with those that are equal unto them in other parts,
though inferior for place and office; And sometimes popularly with the common
people, which is the cause that some Common wealths, though they be very
simply, and un kilfully set, yet continue firm, because the Magistrates behave
themselves wisely, and with due respect toward, the rest that are without
honor; and therefore some kind of Moderate Popularity is to be used in every
Commonwealth.

8. To take heed of small beginnings, and to meet with them even at the first,
as well touching the breaking and altering of Laws, as of other rules which
concern the continuance of every several State. For the desease and a teration
of a Commonwealth, does not happen all at once, but grows by degrees, which
every common wit cannot discern, but men expert in POLICY.

9. To provide, that that part be ever the greater in number and power, which
favors the State as now it stands. This is to be observed as a very Oracle in
all Commonwealths.

10. To observe a mean in all the degrees, and to suffer no part to exceed, or
decay overmuch. As first for preferments, to provide that they be rather small
and short, than great and long; and if any be grown to overmuch greatness, to
withdraw or diminish some part of his honor. Where these Sophisms are to be
practiced (viz.) to do it by parts and degrees; to do it by occasion, or color
of law, and not all at once. And it that way serve not, to advance some other,
of whose virtue and faithfulness, we are fully assined, to as high a degree, or
to a greater honor; and to be the friends and followers of him that excels,
above that which is meet. As touching wealth, to provide, that those of the
middle sort (as before was said) be more in number; and if any grow high, and
over charged with wealth, to use the Sophisms of a Popular State, viz to send
him on Embassages, and Foreign Negotiations, or employ him in some Office that
has great charges, and little honor, etc. To which end, the F^^^^ful served
in some Commonwealths.

11 To Suppress the Factions, and quarrels of the Nobles, and to keep other
that are yet free from joining with them in their partakings and Factions.

12. To increase or remit the Common Taxes and Contributions; according to the
wealth, or want of the People and Commonwealth. If the people be increased in
Wealth, the Taxes and Subsidies may be increased. If they be poor, and their
Wealth diminish, specially by dearth, want of Traffic, etc. to forbear Taxes
and Impositions, or to take little. Otherwise grudge and discontentments must
needs follow. The Sophisms that serve for impositions, are these, and other of
like sort, To pretend business of great charge, as War, building of Ships
making of Havens, Castles, Fortifications, etc. for the common defense;
sometimes by Lotteries and like devises, wherein some part may be bestowed, the
rest reserved for other expenses; but Princely dealings needs no pretenses.

13. To Provide that the Discipline and Training of youth of the better sort to
such as agrees with that Commonwealth: As that in a Kingdom, the sons of Noble
men to be attendant at the Court, that they may be accustomed to obedience
toward the Prince. In the Senatory State, that the sons o^ the Senators be
not idly, nor over daintily brought up, but well instructed and trained up in
Learning, Langues, and nartiall exercise that they may be able to bear that
place in the Commonwealth, which their Father held, and c^nt any wise, in a
Popular State.

14. To take heed, least their Sophisms, or secret practices for the
continuance and maintenance of that State, be not discovered; least by that
means they refuse and disappoint themselves, but wisely used, and be with great
secrecy.

Particular Rules.
Rules and Axioms, for preserving of a Kingdom. Hereditary. Conquered.


Kingdoms Hereditary, are preserved at home by the ordering.
1. HImself, viz. By the tempering and moderation of the Princes Answer and
Prerogative. For the less and more Temperate their Power and State is the more
firm, and stable is their Kingdom and Government; because they seem to be
further off from a Master like, and Tyrannte all Empire; and less unequal in
condition to the next degree, to wit, the Nobility, and so less subject to
grudge and envy.

2. Nobility, etc. By keeping that degree and due proportion, that neither they
exceed in number more than the Realm, or State can bear, as the Scottish
Kingdom, and sometime the English, when the Realm was overcharged with the
number of Dukes, Earls, and other Noble; whereby the Authority of the Prince
was eclipsed, and the Realm troubled with their Factions and Ambitions. Nor
that any one excel in Honor, power, or wealth, as that he resemble another
King within the Kingdom, as the house of Lancaster within this Realm. To that
end, not to load any with too much Honor or preferment, because it is hard
even for the best, and worthiest men, to bear their greatness, and high
Fortune temperately, as appears by infinite examples in all States. The
Sophisms for preventing, or reforming this inconvenience, are to be used with
great caution and wisdom. If any great person be to be abated, not do real with
him by calumniation or forged ^atter, and so to cut him off without desert,
especially if he be gracious among the people, after the ^^chiav^an Place,
which besides the injustice, an occasion many times of greater danger toward
the Prince. Not to withdraw their Honor all at once, which makes a desperate
(...) in the party, and a commiseration in the people, and so greater love, he
be gracious for his virtue, and public service. Not to banish him into
Foreign Countries, where he may have opportunity of practicing with Foreign
States, whereof great danger may ^n^e, as in the example of ^ortulanus, Henry
the fourth, and such like. But to use these, and the like Sophisms, viz. To
abate their greatness by degrees, as David Joabs, fa^^^^a Bellisarius, etc. To
advance some other men to as great, or greater Honor, to shadow, ^^ over-mate
the greatness of the other. To draw from him by degrees his friends, and
followers by ^^vefer^^^, rewards, and other good and lawful means; especially,
to be provided that these great men be not employed in great or powerful
affairs of the Common wealth, whereby they may have more opportunity to sway
the State.

3. People, viz. So to order and behave himself that he be loved, and
reverenced of the People. For that the Prince need not greatly fear home
conspirac^es, or foreign Invation, she be firmly loved of this own people.
That reason, for that the Rebel can neither hope for any forces for so great
enterprise, not any refuge, being discovered and put to flight, ^t the
multitude affect their Prince: But the common people being once offended, has
cause to fear every moving, both at home and abroad. This may be affected by
the Prince, the use means and art of getting the favor of the people, and
avoid those things that breed have and contempt; viz. if he seem as Tutor, or a
Father to love the people and to protect them, if he maintain the peace of his
Kingdom; For that nothing is more popular, nor more pleasing to the people than
is peace.

4. If he show himself oftentime graciously, yet with State and Majesty to his
people, and receive complaint of his suppliants, and such like.

5. If he sit himself sometimes in Open Courts, and place of justice that he
may seem to have a care of I^^stice among his people. If he bestow many
benefits and graces upon that City, which he makes the seat of his L^^^^, and
to make it sure and faithful unto him, which is fit to be in the middle of his
Kingdom, as the heart in the middle of the body, or the Sun in the middle of
Heaven, both to divide himself more easily into all the parts of his Dominions;
and least the furthest parts at one end move, whilst the Prince is in the
other. If he go in progress many times to see his Provinces, especially, those
that are remite.

6 If he gratify his Cou^tiers and ^^^^ians in that sort, and by such means,
as that he may seem not to pleasure them with the hurt and injury of his
people, as with M^n^^ol^es, and such like.

7 If he commit the handling of such things as procure envy, or seem grievous
to his Ministers, but reserve those things which are grateful, and well
pleasing to himself, as the French Kings, who for that purpose, as may seem,
have erected their Court at Paris, which acquitteth the Prince from grudge and
envy, both with the Nobles and the scope.

8. If he borrows sometimes sums of money of his people, though he have no
need, and pay the same justly without defalcation of any part by his Exchequer,
or other Officer.

9. If he avoid all such things as may breed h^tre^ or contempt of his person
which may be done, if he show himself not too light, unconstant, hard, cruel,
esteminate, fearful, and ^asterdly, etc. But contrariwise Religious, Grave,
Just Valiant, etc. Whereby appears the false doctrine of the Machiavilian
Policy, with far the better means to keep the people in obedience, than love,
and reverence of the people toward the Prince.

10. If the Prince be well furnished with Warlike provision, which is to be
rumoured, and made known abroad: if it be known, that he is reverenced, and
obeyed by his peoples at home.

11. If he provide so much as lies in him, that his neighbor Kingdoms grow
not over much in power and Dominior; which if it happen, he is to join speedily
with other Princes, which are in like danger to abate that greatness, and to
strengthen himself and the rest against it. An oversight of the Christian
Princes toward the King of Spain.

12 If he get him Intelligencers by reward, or other means, to detect or hinder
the designs of that Prince, with whom he has differences, if any thing be
intended against his State. Or at least have some of his own Lydging abroad
about that Princes Court, under color of Embassage, or some other pretense;
which must be men of skill and Dexterity to serve for that turn.

13. To observe the Laws of his Country, and not to encounter them with his
Prerogate, nor to use it at all where there is a Law, for that it makes a
secret and just grudge in the peoples hearts, especially if it tender to take
from them their comm^d^t^es, and to bestow them upon other of his COURTIERS and
Ministers.

14. To provide especially, That that part, which favors the State as it
stands, be more potent, than the other which favors it not or desires a
change.

15. To make special choice of good and sound men to bear the place of
Magistrates, especially of such as assist the Pr^^^^^ on Counsels, and
Policie^, and not to lean overmuch to his own advise, contrary to the rule of
Ma^li^^ who teaches, That a Prince can have no good ^^^^sul, except it be in
himself; his reason, ^^ use if he use the (...) is in dang^r to be over w(...)d
by him; and if he counsel with more, then he shall be(...) in opi^i^^s. As if a
Prince of great, or mean wisdom, could not take the Judgment of all his
c^nc^llours in any point of Po^^^^, or of so many as he himself think he good,
and to take it either by word, or in writing; and himself then in private
peruse them all, and so after good and mature deliberation, make choice of the
best, without any distraction of binding himself to the direction of one. For
the Proverb is true. that two eyes see more than one; and therefore the
advises, and Consultations of a Senatory State is compared by some to a Feast,
or dinner, where many contribute toward the ^^^t, by which means they have
more variety of dishes, and so better fare: and yet every mean may make choice
of that dish that serves him best for his (...)e.

16. The Prince himself is to sit sometimes in place of public justice, and to
give an experiment of his wisdom and equity, whereby great reverence and
estimation is gotten, as in the example of Sol^man, which may seem the reason,
why our Kings of England had their Kings Bench in Place of public justice,
after the manner of the ancient Kings that sat in the Gate; where for better
performing of this Princely duty, some special causes may be selected, which
may thoroughly be debated and considered upon by the Prince in Private, with the
help and advice o^ his learned Council, and so be decided publicly, as before
is said, by the Prince himself; At least, the Prince is to take account of
every Minister of public Justice, that it may be known, that he has a care of
justice, and doing right to his people, which makes the Iusticers also to be
more careful in performing of their duties.

17. To be moderate in his Taxes, and in positions; and when need does require
to use the Subjects purse, to do it by Parliament, and with their consents,
making the cause apparent unto them, and showing his unwillingnesse in charging
them Finally, so to use it, that it may seem rather an offer from his Subjects,
than an exaction by him.

18. To stop small beginnings; unto this end to compound the dissentions that
rise amongst the Nobles, with caution, that such as are free be not drawn into
parts, whereby many times the Prince is endangered, and the whose Commonwealth
set in a combustion; as in the example of the Barons, War, and the late Wars of
France, which grew from a quarrel betwixt the ^^^^o^ Faction, and the other
Nobility.

19. To stir up the people, if they grow secure, and negligent of Armor, and
other provision for the Commonwealth, by some rumor or fear of danger at home,
to make more ready when occasion requires. But this seldom to be used, least
it be supposed a false Alarm, when there is need indeed.

20 To have special care, that his children, especially, the heir apparent,
have such bringing up as is meet for a King, viz. in learning, specially of
matters pertaining to State, and in Martial exercise, contrary to the practice
of many Princes, who suffer their children to be brought up in pleasure, and to
spend their time in hunting, etc. which by reason of their defects, afterward
is a cause of mis-government and alteration of State.

II. Kingdoms new gotten, or purchased by force, are preserved by these means.
FIrst, if they have been Subjects before to his Ancestors, or have the same
tongue, manners, or fashions, as have his own Country, it is an easy matter
to retain such Countries within their obedience, in case the Princes blood of
the said Country be wholly extinct. For men of the same quality, tongue, and
condition, do easily s^ole, and combine themselves together, so much the
rather, if the people of that Country have served before, and were not
accustomed to their own Liberty, wherein especially is to be observed, that the
Laws and customs of that purchased Country be not altered nor innovated, or at
least it be done by little and little. So the B^rgundians and oquitans were
annexed to France. The reason, because partlty they have been accustomed to
serve, and partly, for that they will not easily agree about any other to be
their Prince, if the Blood Royal be cas^ extinguished. As for the invasion of
a foreign Country, where into the Prince has no right, or whereof the right
heir is living: It is not the part of a just Civil Prince, much less a
Christian Prince to enforce such a country: and therefore, the Machiavillian
practices in this case, to make sure work by extiguishing wholly the Blood
Royal, is lewd and impertinent: The like is to be said of murdering the
Natives, or the greatest part of them, to the end he may hold the rest in sure
possession. A thing not only against Christian Religion, but it is inhumane
injustice, cruel, and barbarous.

2. The safest way is, (supposing a right) that some good part of the Natives
be transplanted into some other place, and our Colonies, consisting of so many
as shall be thought meet, be planted there in some part of the Province,
Castls, Forts, and Havens, seized upon, and more provided in fit places, as the
manner was of the Babylonian Monarch, which Transplanted 10. Jews: And of the
Romans in France, Tribes of the Germany, Britain, and other places. The reason:
1. For that otherwise Forces of Horse and Foot, are to be maintained within the
Province^, which cannot be done without great charge. 2. For that the whole
Province is troubled and grieved with removing and supplying the Army with
victual, carriages, etc. 3. For that Colonies are more sure and faithful, than
the rest.


As for the Natives that are removed from their former seats, they have no
means to hurt, and the rest of the Natives being free from the inconvenience,
and fearing that themselves may be so served if they attempt any thing rashly,
are content to be quiet.

The Turks practice in Asia, where the chief grounds and dwellings are
possessed by the Soldiers, whom they call Timari^tae.

That the Prince have his seat and his residence, in his new purchase,
especially, for a time, till things be well settled; especially if the Province
be great and large, as the Turks in Greece: The reasons; 1. Because the
presence of the Prince avails much to keep things in order, and get the good
will of his new Subjects 2. They conceive that they have refuge by the Princes
presence, if they be oppressed by the Lieutenants, and inferior Governors:
Where it will be convenient for the winning the peoples hearts, that some
example be made of punishing of such as have committed any violence or
oppression. 3. Because being present, he sees and hears what is thought and
attempted; and so may quickly give remedy to it, which being absent he cannot
do, or not do in time. 4. If the Prince himself cannot be present to reside,
then, to take heed that the charge of Governing, or new purchases be committed
to such as be sure men, and of other meet quality, that depend wholly upon the
Princes savor, and not to Natives, or other of their own Subjects, that are
gracious for their Nobility, or Virtue; especially, if the Province be great,
and somewhat far distant, which may soon seduce the unsettled affections of
those new subjects, As for such Governors, as depend wholly upon the Princes
savor, being not born, but created Noble, they will not so easily suffer
themselves to be won from their duty, and in case they would revolt, yet they
are not able to make any great strength, for that the people obey them but as
instruments and ministers, to keep them in Subjection, and not for any ill will
5. To have the children of the chief Noble men, and of greatest Authority,
Hostages with them in safe keeping, the more the bettter: For that no bond is
stronger, than that of nature, to contain the Parents and Allies in obedience,
and they the rest. 6 To alter the laws but by degrees one after another, and to
make other that are more behoovefull for the establishing of the present
Government. 6. To keep the people quiet and peaceable, and well affected so
much as may be, that they may seem by being conquered, to have gotten a
protector, rather than a Tyrant; For the Common People, if they enjoy peace,
and be not distracted nor drawn from their business, nor exacted upon beyond
measure, are easily contained under obedience; Yet notwithstanding, they are to
be dis-used from the practice of Arms, and other Exercises which increase
courage, and be weakened of Armor, that they have neither spirit, nor will to
rebel. 7. If there be any faction in the Country, to take to him the defense
of the better and stronger part, and to combine with it, as Caes^r in Fr^nce.
8. To look well to the Borders, and confining P^ovinces, and if any rule there
of great, or equal power to himself, to join leage with some other Borde^^^,
though of less strength, to hinder he at^empts: if any should be) by such
neighbor Prince. For it happens, often, that a Country infested by one
neighbor Prince, calls in another, of as great, or greater power, to assist
and rescue it from the other that invadeth it; So the ^^^mans were called into
G^^^, by the AEt^^ians; the ^^^^ns, by the Britai^s, the Danes, by the Saxon^.
9. To leave their Titles and dignities to the Natives, but the command and
Authority, wholly to his own. 10. Not to put much trust, nor to practice too
often the S^p^^sm of Policy, especially those that appertain to a Tyrannical
State, which are soon detected by men of Judgment, and so being discredit to
the Prince, and his Policy among the wiser, and better sort of his Subjects,
whereof must needs follow very ill effects.


The S^^^^^ of Tyrants, are rather to be known, than practiced, (which are for
the supporting of their Tyrannical States,) by wise and good Princes, and are
these, and such like as follow.

Rules Politic of Tyrants.
Rules practiced by Tyrants are of 2. sorts, viz. 1. Barbarous, and Professed,
which is proper to those that have got head, and have power sufficient of
themselves, without others help, as in the Turkish, and Russe Government. 2.
Sophistical, and Dissembled; As in some States that are reputed for good and
lawful Monarchies, but inclining to Tyrannies, proper to those which are not
yet settled, nor have power sufficient of themselves; but must use the power and
help of others, and so are forced to be Politic Sophisters.


I. Sophisms of a Barbarous and professed Tyranny.
TO expel and banish out of his Country all honest means, where. by his
people may attain to learning, wisdom, valor and other virtues, that they
might be fit for that estate, and servile condition. For that these two,
learning, and martial exercise, effect two things most dangerous to a Tyranny:
viz Wisdom, and Valor. For that men of spirit and understanding, can hardly
endure a Servile State. To this end, to forbid learning of liberal Arts, and
Martial exercise; As in the Russe Government so Julian the Apostata dealt with
the Christians. Contrariwise, to use his people to base occupations, and
Mechanical Arts, to keep them from idleness, and to put away from them all
high thoughts, and manly conceits, and to give them a liberty of drinking
drunk, and of other base and lewd conditions that they may be sorted, and so
made unfit for great enterprises. So the Egyptian Kings dealt with the Hebrews;
So the Russe Emperor with his Russe people: And Charles the fifth with the
Netherlanders, when he purposed to enclose their privileges, and to bring them
under his absolute Government.

2. To make sure to him, and his State, his Military men by reward, liberty,
and other means, especially. his Guard, or Praetorian Band; That being
partakers of the spoil and benefit, they make like that State, And continue
firm to it; as the Turk, his Janizarie; the Russe, his Boyarens, etc.

3. To unarm his people of weapons, money, and all means, whereby they may
resist his power; And to that end, to have his set and ordinary exactions etc.
Once in two, three, or four years, and sometimes yearly, as the ^^rk and Russe;
who is wont to say, that his people must (...)ed as his flock of sheep, viz.
Their people taken from them, least it overlade ^, and grow too heavy; That
they are like to his beard, that the more it was shaven the thicker it would
grew. And if there be any of extraordinary wealth, to borrow of them in the
mean while, till the Tax come about, or upon some divised matter, to confiscate
their goods, as the common practice is of the ^uss^ and Turk.

4. To be still in Wars, to the end, his people may need a Captain; and that
his Forces may be kept in practice, as the Russe does yearly against the
Tartar, P^lonian, and Sweden, etc.

5. To cut off such as excel the rest in wealth, favor, or nobility; or be of
a pregnant, or aspiring wit, and so are fearful to a Tyrant; and to suffer
none to hold Office, or any Honor, but only of him; as the Turk his B^shae^;
and the Russe, his R^zzes.

6. To forbid Guilds, Brotherhoods, Feastings and other Assemblies among the
people, that they have no means or opportunity to conspire, or confer together
of public matters, or to maintain love amongst themselves, which is very
dangerous to a Tyrant, the Russes practice.

7. To have their Beagles, or l^stener in every corner, and parts of the Realm;
especially, in places that are more suspect, to learn what every man says, or
thinks, that they may prevent all attempts, and take away such ^s mislike
their S^^^.

8. To make Schism, and Division among his Subjects, viz. To set one Noble man
against another, and one Richman against another, that through Fact on and
disagreement among themselves they may be weakened, and attempt nothing against
him, and by this means entertaining whispering, and complaints, he may know the
secrets of both parts, and have matter against them both, when need requires.
So The Russe made the Faction of the Zemsky, and the (...).

9. To have strangers for his Guard, and to entertain Parasites, and other base
and ^ervile fellows, not too wise, and yet subtle, that will be ready for
reward to do and execute what he commands, though never so wicked and unjust.
For that good men can not flatter, and wise men cannot serve a Tyrant.

All these practices and such like, may be contracted into one or two, viz. To
bereave his subjects of will and power to do him hurt, or to alter the present
State The use is Caution, not Imitation.

II. Sophisms of the Sophillicall, or subtle Tyrant, to hold up his State.
1. TO make show of a good King, by observing a temper and mediocrity in his
Government, and whole course of life; To which end, it is necessary, That this
subtle Tyrant, be a cunning Politician, or a Machiavilian at the least, and
that he be taken so to be, for that it makes him more to be feared and
regarded, and is thought thereby: not unworthy for to Govern others.

2. To make show not of severity, but of gravity, by seeming reverent, and not
terrible in his speech, and gesture, and habit, and other demeanor.

3. To pretend care of the Commonwealth; And to that end, to seem loath to
exact Tributes, and other charges; and yet to make necessity of it, where none
is: To that end to procure such War as can bring no danger toward his State,
and that might easily be compounded, or some other chargeable business; and to
continue it on, that he may continue his exaction and contribution so long as
he list. And thereof to employ some in his public service, the rest to hoord
upon his Treasury, which is sometimes practiced even by lawful Princes, as
Edward the fourth in his Wars against France, when have levied a great sum of
money throughout his Realm, especially of the Londoners, he went over Seas, and
returned without any thing doing.

4. Sometimes to give an account by open speech, and public writing, of the
expense of such Taxes and Impositions, as he has received of his subjects,
that he may seem to be a good husband and frugal, and not a rob of the
Commonwealth.

5. To that end, to bestow some cost upon public buildings, or some other work
for the Common good, especially upon the Ports, Forts, and chief Cities of his
Realm, that so he may seem a benefactour, and have a delight in the adorning of
his Country, or doing some good for it.

6. To forbid feastings, and other meetings, which increase love, and give
opportunity to confer together of public matters, under pretense of sparing
cost for better uses, To that end the Curficu Bell was first ordained by
William the Conqueror, to give men warning to repair home at a certain hour.

7. To take heed that no one grow to be overgreat, but rather, many equally
great, that they may envy, and contend one with another; and if he resolve to
weaken any of this sort, to do it warily and by degrees; If quite to wreck him,
and to have his life, yet to give him a lawful trial, after the manner of his
Country; And if he proceed so far with any or great power and estimation, as to
do him contumely, or disgrace, not to suffer him to escape, because contumely
and disgrace, are things contrary unto Houour, which great spirits do most
desire, and so are moved rather to a revenge for their disgrace, than to any
thankfulness, or acknowledging the Princes favor for their pardon or
dismission: True in Ath^ists, but not in true Christian Nobility.

8. To unarm his people, and store up their weapons, under pretense of keeping
them safe, and having them ready when service requires. and then to arm with
them such, and so many as he shall think meet, and to commit them to such as
are sure men.

9. To make schism or division under hand among his Nobility, and betwixt the
Nobility and the people, and to set one Rich man against another, that they
combine not together, and that himself by hearing the griefs and complaints,
may know the secrets of both parts, and so have matter against them both, when
it lists him to call them to an account.

10. To offer no man any contumely or wrong, specially, about women's matters,
by attempting the chastity of their Wives or Daughters, which has been the
ruin of many Tyrants, and conversion of their States. As of Tarquinius, by
Brutus, Appius, by Virginius, Pisistratus, by Harmodius, Alexander Medices,
Duke of Florence, Aloisus of Placen^^a, Rodericus, King of Spain, etc.

11. To that end, to be moderate in his pleasures, or to use them closely that
he be not seen; For that men sober, or watchful, or such as seem so, are not
lightly subject to contempt, or conspiracies of their own.

12. To reward such as atchieve some great or commendable enterprise; or do any
special action for the Commonwealth, in that manner as it may seem, they
could not be better regarded, in case they lived in a Free State.

13. All rewards and things grateful, to come from himself, but all
punishments, exactions, and things ungrateful, to come from his Officers, and
public Ministers; And when he has effected what he would by them, if he see
his people discontented withal, to make them a Sacrifice to pacify his
Subjects.

14. To pretend great care of Religion, and of serving God, (which has been
the manner of the wickedest Tyrants) for that people do less fear any hurt from
those, whom they do think Virtuous and Religious, nor attempt likely to do them
hurt, for that they think that God protects them.

15. To have a strong and sure Guard of foreign Soldiers, and to bind them by
good turns, that they having at least profit, may depend upon him and the
present State; As Caeligula, the German Guard, where the Nobility are many and
mighty. The like is practiced by Lawful Kings, as by the French King.

16. To procure that other great persons be in the same fault, or case with
them, that for that cause they be forced to defend the TYRANT, for their own
safety.

17. To take part, and to join himself with the stronger part; if the Common
people, and mean degree be the stronger, to join with them; if the Rich and
Noble, to join with them. For so that part with his own strengh, will be ever
able to overmatch the other.

18. So to frame his manners and whole behavior, as that he may seem, if not
perfectly good, yet tolerably evil, or somewhat good, somewhat bad.

These Rules of Hypocritical Tyrants are to be known, that they may be
avoided, and met withal, and not drawn into imitation.

Preservation of an Aristocracie.
RUles to preserve a Senatory State, are partly taken from the common Axioms,
and partly from those that preserve a Kingdom.

Preservation of an Oligarchie, by Sophisms. Rules.

1. IN Consultations and Assemblies about public affairs, to order the matter,
that all may have liberty to frequent their Common Assemblies, and Councels;
But to impose a Fine upon the richer sort, if they omit that duty. On the other
side, to pardon the people, if they absent themselves, and to bear with them
under pretense, that they may the better intend their Occupations, and not be
hindered in their trades, and earnings.

2. In election of Magistrates, and Officers: To suffer the poorer sort to vow,
and abjure the bearing of Office, under color of sparing them, or to enjoin
some great charge, as incident to the Office, which the poor cannot bear. But
to impose some great Fine upon those that be rich, if they refuse to bear
Office, being Elect unto it.

3. In judicial matters: In like manner to order, that the people may be
absent from public Trials, under pretense of following their business. But
the Richer to be present, and to compel them by Fines, to frequent the Court.

4. In Warlike exercise and Arms: That the poor be not forced to have Armor,
Horse, etc. under pretense of sparing their cost, nor to be drawn from their
trades by Martial exercises; but to compel the Richer sort to keep their
proportion of Armor, Horse, etc. by excessive Fines, and to exercise themselves
in Warlike matters, etc.

5. To have special care of instructing their children in liberal Arts, Policy,
and warlike exercise, and to observe good order and discipline. For as Popular
States are preserved by the frequency, and Liberty of the people, so this
Government of the Richer, is preserved by discipline, and good order of
Governors.

6. To provide good store of warlike furniture, especially of Horse and
Horsemen, and of Armed men, viz. Pike, etc. which are proper to the Gentry, as
shot, and light furniture are for a Popular Company.

7. To put in practice some points of a Popular State; viz. To lade no one man
with too much preferment; To make yearly or half years Magistrates, etc. For
that the people are pleased with such things, and they are better secured by
this means from the rule of one. And if any grow to too much greatness, to
abate him by the Sophisms fit for this State.

8. To commit the Offices and Magistracies, to those that are best able to bear
the greatest charges for public matters, which both rendeth to the
conservation of this State, and pleases the people, for that they reap some
relief, and benefit by it.

9. To the same end, To contract marriages among themselves; the rich with the
rich, etc.

10 In some things which concern not the P^i^ts, and matters of State, as
Electing Magistrates, Making Laws, etc. to give an equality, or sometimes a
preferment to the Common People, and not to do, as in some Oligarchies they
were wont; viz. To swear against the People, to suppress and bridle them but
rather contrary, To minister an Oath at their admission, That they shall do no
wrong to any of the People; and if any of the richer offer wrong to any of the
Commons, to show some example of severe punishment.

For other Atioms that preserve this State, they are to be borrowed from those
other rules that tend to the preserving of a Popular, and Tyrannical State;
for the strict kind of Oligarchie is kin to a Tyranny.

Preservation of a popular State; Sophisms. Rules or Axiom.


1. IN public Assemblies and Consultations about matters of State, creating of
Magistrates, public Justice, and Exercise of Arms, to practice the contrary to
the former kind of Government, to wit, an Oligarchie. For in Popular States,
the Commons and meaner sort are to be drawn to those Assemblies, Magistrates,
Offices, Warlike Exercise, etc. By mulcts and rewards, and the richer sort are
to be spared, and not to be forced by fine, or otherwise, to frequent these
Exercises.

2. To make show of honoring and reverencing the richer men, and not to swear
against them, as the manner has been in some Popular State; but rather to
prefer them in all other matters, that concern not the State and public
Government.

3. To elect Magistrates from among the Commons by Lot, or Ballating, and not
to choose any for their wealths sake.

4. To take heed, that no man bear office twice, except it be Military, where
the pay, and salary, etc. is to be reserved in their own hands, to be disposed
of by a Common Council, etc. And to see that no man be too highly preferred.

5. That no Magistracy be perpetual, but as short as may be, to wit, for a
year, half a year, etc.

6. To compel Magistrates, when their time expireth, to give an account of
their behavior and government, and that publicly before the Commons.

7. To have public Salaries and allowance of their Magistrates, Judges, etc.
And yearly dividents for the common people, and such as have most need among
them.

8. To make Judges of all matters out of all sorts, so they have some aptness
to perform that duty.

9. To provide that public Judgments and Trials be not frequent; and to that
end to inflict great Fines and other punishments upon Pettifoggers and
Dilators, as the law of requital, etc. Because for the most part the richer and
nobler, and not the Commons are indicted and accused in this Commonwealth, which
causes the rich to conspire against the State; whereby many times the popular
State is turned into an Oligarchie, or some other Government. Hereto tends
that Art of Civil Law, made against Accusers and Calumniatours: Ad
Senatus-consultum Tarpthanum, l. 1. de Calumniatoribus.

10. In such free States as are popular, and have no revenue, to provide that
public Assemblies be not after: because they want salary for Pleaders and
Orators; And if they be rich; yet to be wary, that all the revenue be not
divided amongst the Commons. For, that this distributions of the Common revenue
among the multitude, is like a purse or barrel without a bottom. But to
provide, that a sufficient part of the revenue be stored up for the public
affairs.

11. If the number of the poor increase too much in this kind of State, to send
some abroad out of the Cities into the next Country places, and to provide
above all, that none do live idely, but be set to their trades. To this end, to
provide that the richer men place in their Farms and Coppie holds, such decayed
Citizens.

12. To be well advised what is good for this State, and not to suppose that to
be fit for a popular State, that seems most popular; but that which is be for
the continuance thereof: And to that end, not to lay into the Exchequer or
Common Treasury, such goods as are confiscate, but to store them up as holy and
consecrate things, which except it be practiced, confiscations, and fines of
the Common people would be frequent, and so this State would decay by weakening
the people.

Conversion of States in general.
COnversation of a State, is the declining of the Common wealth either to some
other form of Government, or to his full and last period appointed by God.

Causes of conversions of States are of two sorts: General and Particular.
GEneral, (viz.) 1. Want of Religion: viz. of the true knowledge and worship of
God, prescribed in his word; and notable sins that proceed from thence in
Prince and people, as in the examples of S^u^, ^lizz^ah, the Jewish State; the
four Monarchies, and all other.

2. Want of wisdom and good Council to keep the State, the Prince, Nobles, and
people in good temper, and due proportion, according to their several order and
degrees.

3. Want of Justice either in administration (as ill Laws, or ill Magistrates)
or in the execution, as rewards not given where they should be, or there
bestowed where they should not be, or punishments not inflicted where they
should be

4. Want of power and sufficiency to maintain and defend it self, viz. Of
provision, as Armor, Money, Captains, Soldiers, etc. Execution, when the means
or provision is not used, of all used.

5. Particular: To be noted and collected out of the contraries of those rules,
that are prescribed for the preservation of the Commonwealth.

Particular causes of Conversion of States, are of two sorts.
1. Foreign: By the over greatness of invasion of some foreign Kingdom or
other State of meaner power, having a part within our own, which are to be
prevented by the providence of the chief, and rules of policy for the
preserving of every State: This falls out very seldom for the great
difficulty to overthrow a foreign State. 2. Domestic. Sedition or open
violence by the stronger part. Alteration without violence.

Sedition.
SEdition is a power of inferiors opposing it self with force of Arms against
the superior power, Quasi ditio secedens.

Causes of Sedition are of two sorts.
1. General
Liberty. Riches. WHen they, that are of equal quality in a Commonwealth, or
do take themselves so to be, are not regarded equally in all or in any of the
these three. or, when they are so unequal in quality, or take themselves so to
be, are regarded but equally, or with less respect than those that be of less
defect in these three things, or in any of them.

Honor.
1. IN the Chief: Couetousness or oppression, by the Magistrate or higher
Power, (viz.) when the Magistrates, especially the Chief, increases his
substance and revenue beyond measure, either with the public or (private
calamity, whereby the Governors grow to quarrel among themselves as in
Oligarchie) or the other degrees conspite together, and make quarrel against
the Chief, as in Kingdoms: The examples of ^at Tyl^r, Jack Straw, etc. 2. In
the ^^^^f: Injury, when great Spirits, and of great power, are greatly wronged
and dishonored, or take themselves to be, as Coriolanus, Cyrus minor, Earl of
Warwick. In which cases the best way is to decide the wrong. 3. Preferment, or
want of preferment; wherein some have overmuch, and so wax proud and aspire
higher or have more or less, than they deserve, as they suppose, and so in
envy and disdain, seck Innovation on by open faction, so Caesar, etc. 4. Some
great necessity or calamity; So Xerxes after the foil of his great Army. And
Senacherib after the loss of 185. in one night.
2. Particular. 1. ENvy, when the chief exceed the mediocrity before mentioned,
and so provokes the Nobility, and other degrees, to conspire against him; as
Brutus Cassius, etc. against Caesar. 2. Fear, viz. Of danger when one or more
dispatch the Prince by secret practice or force, to prevent his own danger, as
Artabanus did Xerxes. 2. Lust or Lechery, as Tarquinius, Superbus, by Brutus;
Pisistrati^^ae, by Armoaius; Appiu^ by Virginiu^. Chief.
4. Contempt, For vile quality and base behavior, as Sardana^alus, by ^^aces,
Dionysius the younger by Dion. Other degrees.
5. Contumely; when some great disgrace is done to some of great Spirit, who
stands upon his honor and reputation, as Caligula by Chaereas. Other degrees.
6. Hope of Advancement, or some great profit, as Mithridates, Anobar^anes

Alteration without violence.
CAuses of alteration without violence are; 1. Excess of the State; when by
degrees the State grows from that temper and mediocrity wherein it was, or
should have been settled, and exceeds in power, riches, and absoluteness in
his kind, by the ambition and covetousness of the chief immoderate taxes, and
impositions, etc applying all to his own benefit, without respect of other
degrees and so in the end changes it self into another State or form of
Government, as a Kingdom into a Tyranny, an Oligarchy into an Aristocracy.

2. Excess, of some one or more in the Commonwealth; viz. When some one or
more in a Commonwealth grow to an excellency or excess above the rest, either
in honor, wealth, or virtue; and so by permission and popular favor, are
advanced to the Sovereignty: By which means, popular States grow into
Oligarchies; and Oligarchies and Aristocracies into Monarchies. For which cause
the Athenians and some other free States, made their Laws of Ostro^ismos, to
banish any for a time that should excel, though it were in virtue, to prevent
the alteration of their State; Which because it is an unjust Law, it is better
to take heed as the beginning to prevent the means, that none should grow to
that height and excellency, than to use so sharp and unjust a remedy.

FINIS.
A METHOD, How to make use of the Book before, in the reading of the Story.
DAVID being seventy years of age, was of wisdom, Memory, etc. sufficient to
govern his Kingdom; 1. Reg. Cap. 1.

Old age is not ever unfit for public Government.
DAVID being of great years, and so having a cold, dry, and impotent body,
married with Abishag, a fair maid, of the best complexion through the whole
Realm, to revive his body and prolong his life, 1. Reg. Chap. 1. verse. 3.

Example of the like practice in Charles the Fifth.
DAvid being old and impotent of body, by the advice of his Nobles and
Physicians, married a young maid called Abishag, to warm and preserve his old
body.

Observation.
WHether David did well in marrying a maid? and whether it be lawful for an
old decayed and impotent man, to marry a young woman; or on the other side,
for an old, worn, and decrepite woman, to marry a young and lusty man.

For the Affirmative.
ARG. The end of marriage is Society and mutual comfort; but there may be
Society and mutual comfort in a marriage betwixt an old, and young party Ergo
it is Lawful.

Answ. Society and comfort is a cause and effect of marriage; but none of the
principal ends of marriage: which are: 1. Procreation of children, and so the
continuance of mankind. 2.The avoiding of Fornication.


As for comfort and society they may be betwixt man and man, woman and woman,
where no marriage is, and therefore no proper ends of marriage.

The Negative,
ARG 1. That conjunction, which has no respect to the right and proper ends,
for which marriage was ordained by God, is no lawful marriage. But the
conjunction betwixt an old impotent, and young party has no respect to the
right end, for which marriage was ordained by God. Therefore it is no lawful
marriage.

2. No contract, wherein the party contracting, binds himself to an
impossible condition, or to do that which he cannot do, is good or lawful. But
the contract of marriage by an impotent person with a young party, binds him
to an impossible condition to do that which he cannot do, viz. to perform the
duties of Marriage; Therefore it is unlawful,

For the same cause, the civil Law determines a nullity in these marriages,
except the woman know before the infirmity of the man, in which case she can
have no wrong, being a thing done with her own knowledge and consent, because
Volenti non fit injuria: -- In legem Julian. de adulteriis leg. Si Uxor, etc.

It provideth further, for the more certainty of the infirmatie, That three
years be expired before the dissolution of the marriage, because that men that
have been infirm at the first, by reason of sickness, or some other accident,
afterward proved to be sufficient: De repudiis leg, in causis.

Defense for David, in marrying Abishag.
IT was rather a Medicine, than a marriage, without any evil, or disordered
affection.

2. It was by the persuasion of his Nobles, and Physicians.

3. It was for the public good, to prolong the life of a worthy Prince.

4. It was with the knowledge and consent of the young maid, who was made
acquainted with the Kings infirmity, and to what end she was married unto him;
who if she di^ it for the common good, and for ^^^^tes sake, having withal the
gift of continency, she is to be commended; if for ambition, or some vain
respect, it is her own, and not David's fault.

Political Nobility. Adonijah aspiring to the Kingdom.
FIrst, took the advantage of David's affection and kindness toward him, and
make him secure of any ill dealing.

Secondly, of his age and infirmities, disabling his Father as unfit for
Government.

Thirdly, blazed his title, and Right to the Crown.

Fourthly, got him Chariots, Hors-men, and Foot men, and a guard to make show
of State.

Fifthly, being a comely, and goodly Person, made a popular show of himself, and
his qualities.

Sixthly, joined to himself in Faction Joab, the General of the Army, who was
in displeasure for murdering of Abner, and Amaza, and feared that David would
supply B^najah in his place, and so was discontented. And Abiather the high
Priest, that was likewise discontented with David, for the preferment of Zadok.

Seventhly, bad meetings with them, and other his confederates under pretense
of a vow, and offering at the Fountain of Raguel, in the confines of Judea.

Eigthly, made a show of Religion by Sacrificing, etc.

Ninthly, made himself familiar with the Nobles and people, and entertained
them with feasting.

Tenthly, drew into his part the chief Officers of the Court, and Servants to
the King, by rewards, Familiarity, etc.

Eleventhly, disgraced and abased the Competitour, and such as he knew would
take part with him, and concealeth his ambition, and purpose from them.

Twelfthly, had Jonathan a Favorite of the Court, and near about the King to
give him intelligent, if any thing were discovered, and moved at the Court,
whilst himself was in hand about his practice.

OBSERVATIONS. Ways of such as aspire to the Kingdom, and marks to discern them.
FIrst, they wind into the Princes favor by service, officiousness,
flattery, etc. to ^lant him in a good o^^^^on of that loyalty and
faithfulness, hereby to make him him secure of their practices.

2. They take advantage of the Princes infirmities, age, impotencie,
negligence, sex, etc. And work upon that be disabling the Prince, and secret
detracting of his State, and Government.

3. They blaz their Title, and claim to the Crown, (if they have any with their
friends and favorites.

4. They provide them in secret of extraordinary forces, and furniture for the
wars, make much of god Soldiers and have a pretense (if it be espied) of some
other end, as for the Kings honor, or service, and to be in readiness against
foreign enemies, etc.

5 They make open show of their best qualities, and comeliness of their persons
(which though it be vain as a dumb show, it is very effectual to win the
liking of the popular sort, which according to the rule of the election of
Kings, in the B^es Common wealth; think that Forma est digna imperare)
Activitie, Nobilaie, Ancestrie, etc.

6 To have their blazers abroad to see out their virtues, and to prepare their
friends in every Province.

7. To draw into their part, and make sure unto them of the chief Peers, and
men of best quality, such as are mightiest and most gracious with the
soldiers, and the Military men, and most subtle and politic, especially
such as be ambitious and discontent with the State.

8. To have meetings for conference under some pretense of some ordinary
matter in some convenient place, not too near, nor too far off but where
friends may best resort and assemble unto them without suspicion.

9. To take up a show, and pretense of Religion more than before, and beyond
the practice of their former life.

10 They use popular courtesy (which in a great person is very effectual)
feasting, liberality, gaming, etc.

11. To be over liberal, and win to them by gifts familiarity, etc. the chief
Officers of the Court, and Governors of State.

12. To have some near about the Prince, to keep them in credit, and common
suspicion, if any arise.

13. To disgrace such as they know to be sure and faithful to the Prince, and
present State, or to the competitour, and to bring them into contempt by
slander, detraction, and all means they can, and to conceal the designs from
them, left they be discovered before they be too ripe.

14. To have some spy near about the Prince, to advertise them if any inckling
suspicion arise, whilst themselves are practicing.

Note the practices of Absalom, 2 Samuel 16. And of Cyrus minor in Xenophon;
(...). cap. 1.

Political Prince.
David being a most worthy and excellent Prince for wisdom, valor, religion,
and justice, and so highly deserving of the Commonwealth, yet grown into age,
grew withal into contempt, and had many both of his Nobles, and common people,
that fell from him; first with Absalom, then with Adoniiab, who affected the
Kingdom, and rebelled against him: For remedy whereof, he stirred up himself
to public actions, which might show his vigor and sufficiency to manage the
affairs of his Kingdom.

1. AFter the victory against Absalom, he forced himself to forbes mourning,
and showed himself to his discontented Army, when all were like to fall from
him, for his unreasonable sorrow and lamentation for his Son.

2. After the victory, he caused a general convention to be assembled of the
whole Nation, to bring him home with honor to Jerusalem, which was a renowing,
and re-establishing of him, 2 Samuel 19. 12.

3. He gave an experiment of his power and authority, by deposing a person of
great author (...) estimation, to wit Ioab, General Captain of the Army, and
advancing Amasa to his place.

4 He sent kind pssages to Jerusalem, and to other chief and head towns, and
special men of Judea, his contributes, putting them of their alliance with him
with these word, That they were of his own flesh and blood, with protestarian
of his special love and affection toward them, (...) them with the like
kindness (...) toward him.

5. He ^^mbled a Parliament of his (...), and took occasion upon the ^^^^g^^ing
of his successor, to commend into them he succession of his house, into the
con^inuance and maintenance of Gods ^^^mor in and ^^^ good the established and
gave a gr^ve and public charge to his Su^cessour n^w designed, ^uc^ing the
manner of his government, and maintaining of religion, 1. Chron. 12. 13.

6. He feared his (...) and munificence in congesting matter for building of
the Temple, as gold, silver, brass, etc. And caused it to be published and mad
known to the Parliament and whole Nation, 1. Chron. 22. 13.

7. He revived the Church Government, and set it in a right order, assigning to
every Church Officer his place and function.

8. He suppressed the faction of Adonijah, and ordained Solomon his Successor,
1 Kings 1. 21. By these means he retained his Majesty and Authority in his old
age, as appears by the effect; for that being bed rid, he suppressed the
faction of Adonijah, (which was grown mighty, and was set on foot) with his
bare commandment, and signification of his pleasure, and so be died in peace.

FINIS.
SIR WALTER RALEIGH'S INSTRVCTIONS to his SON: and to Posterity.

Corrected, and enlarged according to the Authors own Copy.

LONDON, Printed for W. Shears Junior, and are to be sold at the Blue Bible in
Covent Garden. 1656.

SIR Walter Raleigh, To His SON.
CHAP. I. Virtuous persons to be made choice of for friends.
THere is nothing more becoming any wise man, than to make choice of friends,
for by them thou shall be judged what thou art: let them therefore be wise and
virtuous, and none of those that follow thee for gain; but make election ra^
the of thy betters, than thy Inferiors, shunning always such as are poor and
reedy: for of thou give twenty gifts, and refuse to do the like but once, all
that thou have done will be lost, and such men will become thy mortal enemies:
Take also especial care, that thou never trust any friend or servant, with any
matter that may endanget thme estate; for so shall thou make thy felt a
bond-slave to him that thou t^^^^^^ and leave thy self always, to his mercy:
And be sure of this, thou shall never find a friend in thy young years, whose
conditions and qualities will please thee after thou come to more discretion
and judgment, and then all thou give is lost, and all wherein thou shall
trust such a one, will be discovered. Such therefore as are thy inferiors,
will follow thee but to eat thee out, and when thou leavest to seed them, they
will hate thee; and such kind of men, if thou preserve thy estate, will always
be had: And if thy friends be of better quality than thyself, thou may be
sure of two things: the first, That they will be more careful to keep thy
counsel, because they have more to loethen thou have: the second, They will
esteem thee for thy self, and not for that which thou do possess; but if
thou be subject to any great vanity or ill (from which I hope God will bless
thee) then therein trust no man; for every man's folly ought to be his greatest
secret And although I persuade thee to associate thy self with thy betters, or
at least with thy Peers, yet remember always that thou venture not thy estate
with any of those great ones, that shall attempt unlawful things, for such men
labor for themselves, and not for thee; thou shall be sure to part with them
in the danger, but not in the honor; and to venture a sure estate in present,
in hope of a better in future, is mere madness: And great men forget such as
have done them service, when they have obtained what they would, and will
rather hate thee for saying thou have been a mean of their advancement, than
acknowledge it.

I could give thee a thousand examples, and I my self know it, and have tasted
it in all the course of my life; when thou shall read and observe the Stories
of all Nations, thou shall find innumerable examples of the like: Let thy love
therefore be to the best, so long as they do well; but take heed that thou love
God, thy Country, thy Prince, and thine own estate, before all others: for the
fancies of men change, and he that loves to day, hates to morrow; but let
reason be thy School-mistresse, which shall ever guide thee aright.

CHAP. II. Great care to be had in the choosing of a Wife.
THe next and greatest care ought to be in the choice of a Wife, and the only
danger therein, is beauty, by which all men in all ages, wise and foolish, have
been betrayed. And though I know it vain to the reasons or arguments, to
dissuade thee from being captivated therewith there being few or none, that
ever resisted that Witchery; yet I cannot ^^me to warn thee, as of other
things, which may be thy ruin and destruction. For the present time, it is
true, that every (...) prefers his fantasy in that (...) before all other
worldly des(...) the care of honor, credit, and safety in respect thereof; But
remember, that though these affections do not last, yet the bond of Marriage
dureth to the end of thy life; and therefore better to be borne withal in a
Mistress, than in a Wife, for when thy humor shall change, thou art yet free
to choose again (if thou give thy self that vain liberty.) Remember secondly,
that if thou marry for Beauty, thou bindest thy self for all thy life for that,
which perchance will neither last nor please thee one year; and when thou have
it, it will be to thee of no price at all, for the degree dies when it is
attained, and the affection perishes, when it is satisfied. Remember, when
thou were a sucking Child, that then thou did love thy Nurse, and that thou
were fond of her, after a while thou did love thy Drienurse, and did forget
the other, after that thou did also despise her; so will it be with thee in
thy liking in elder years; and therefore, though thou can not forbear to
love, yet forbear to link, and after a while thou shall find an alteration in
thy self, and see another far more pleasing than the first, second, or third
Love: yet I wish thee above all the rest, have a care thou do not marry an
uncomely Woman for any respect; for comeliness in Children is riches, if
nothing else be left them. And if thou have care for the races of horses, and
other beasts, value the shape and comeliness of thy Children, before alliances
or riches: have care therefore of both together, for if thou have a fair Wife,
and a poor one, if thine own estate be not great, assure thy self that Love
abides not with want; for she is thy companion of plenty and honor, for I
never yet knew a poor Woman exceeding fair, that was not made dishonest by one
or other in the end. This B^^^sh^^^ taught her Son S^lomon; Favor is
de^^^tfull, and Beauty is ^^an t^^: she says further, That a wise woman
ove^seeth the ways of our Household, and cat^th use the bread of ^^lenesse

Have therefore ever more care, that thou be beloved of thy wife, rather than
thy self besotted on her; and thou shall judge of her love by these two
observations: first, If thou perceive she have care of thy estate, and exercise
her self therein; the other, If she study to please thee, and be sweet unto
thee in conversation, without thy instruction, for Love needs no teaching, nor
precept. On the other side, be not sower or stern to thy wife, for cruelty
engendereth no other thing than hatred: Let her have equal part of thy Estate
whilst thou live, it thou find her sparing and honest; but what thou give
after thy death, remember that thou give it to a stranger, and most times to
an enemy, for he that shall marry thy wife, will despise thee, thy memory, and
thine, and shall possess the quiet of thy labors, the fruit which thou have
planted, enjoy thy love, and spend with joy and ease what thou have spared, and
gotten with care and travel: Yet always remember that thou leave not thy wife
to be a shame unto thee after thou art dead, but that she may live according to
thy estate; especially, if thou have few Children, and them provided for. But
howsoever it be, or whatsoever thou find, leave thy wife no more than of
necessity thou must, but only during her widowhood; for if she love again, let
her not enjoy her second love in the same bed wherein she loved thee, nor fl^e
to future pleasures with those feathers which death has pulled from thy wings;
but leave thy estate to thy house and children, in which thou live upon earth
whilst it lasts. To conclude, Wives were ordained to continue the generation
of men, not to transfer them, and diminish them, either in continuance or
ability; and therefore thy house and estate, which lives in thy son, and not in
thy wife, is to be preferred. Let thy time of marriage be in thy young and
strong years; for believe it, ever the young wife betrayeth the old husband,
and she that had thee not in thy flower, will despise thee in thy fall, and
thou shall be unto her but a captivity and sorrow. Thy best time will be
toward thirty, for as the younger times are unfit, either to choose or to
govern a wife and family; so if thou stay long, thou shall hardly see the
education of thy Children, which being left to strangers, are in effect lost,
and better were it to be unborn, than ill bred; for thereby thy posterity shall
either perish, or remain a shame to thy name and family. Furthermore, if it be
late ere thou take a wife, thou shall spend the prime and summer of thy life
with Harlots, destroy thy health, impoverish thy estate, and endanger thy life;
and be sure of this, that how many Mistresses soever thou have, so many enemies
thou shall purchase to thy self; for there never was any such affection, which
ended not in hatred or disdain. Remember the saying of Solomon, There is a way
which seems right to a man, but the issues thereof are the wages of death;
for howsoever a lewd woman please thee for a time, thou will hate her in the
end, and she will study to destroy thee. If thou can not abstain from them in
thy vain and unbridled times, yet remember that thou sowest on the lands and
do mingle the vital blood with corruption, and purchasest diseases,
repentance, and hatred only. Bestow therefore thy youth so, that thou may
have comfort to remember it, when it has forsaken thee and not sigh and grieve
at the account thereof: whilst thou art young thou wile think it will never
have an end; but behold, the longest day has his evening, and that thou shall
enjoy it but once, that it never turns again, use it therefore as the Spring
time, which soon departs, and wherein thou ought to plant, and sow all
provisions for a long and happy life.

CHAP. III. Wisest men have been abused by flatterers.
TAke care thou be not made a fool, by flatterers, for even the wisest men are
abused by these. Know therefore, that flatterers are the worst kind of
Traitors; for they will strengthen thy imperfections, encourage thee in all
evil, correct thee in nothing, but so shadow and paint all thy vices, and
follies, as thou shall never, by their will, discern evil from good, or vice
from virtue. And because all men are apt to flatter themselves, to entertain
the additions of other men's praises is most perilous. Do not therefore praise
thy self, except thou wile be counted a vain glorious fool, neither take
delight in the praises of other men except thou deserve it, and receive it from
such as are worthy and honest, and will withal warn thee of thy faults; for
flatterers have never any virtue, they are ever base, creeping, cowardly
persons. A flatterer is said to be a beast that biteth smiling, it is said by
Isaiah in this manner: My people, they that praise thee seduce thee, and
disorder the paths of thy feet; and David desired God to cut out the tongue of
a flatterer. But it is hard to know them from friends, so are they obsequious
and full of protestations; for as a wolf resembles a dog, so does a flatterer a
friend. A flatterer is compared to an Ape, who because she cannot defend the
house like a dog, labor as an ox, or bear burdens as a horse, does therefore
ye play tricks, and provoke laughter: Thou may be sure that he that will in
private tell thee thy faults, is thy friend, for he adventures thy mislike, and
does hazard thy hatred; for there are few men that can endure it, every man for
the most part delighting in self-praise, which is one of the most uniuersall
follies which bewitcheth mankind.

CHAP. IV. Private quarrels to be avoided.
BE careful to avoid public disputations at Feast, or at Tables, among
choleric or quarrelsom persons; and eschew evermore to be acquainted or
familiar with Ruffians, for thou shall be in as much danger in contending with
a brawler in a private quarrel, as in a battle, wherein thou may get honor
to thy self and safety to thy Prince and Country; but if thou be once engaged,
carry thy self bravely, that they may fear thee after. To shun therefore
private fight, be well advised in thy words and behavior, for honor and shame
is in the talk, and the tongue of a man causes him to fall.

Jest not openly at those that are simple, but remember how much thou art bound
to God, who has made thee wiser. Defame not any woman publicly, though thou
know her to be evil; for those that are faulty cannot endure to be taxed but
will seek to be avenged of thee, and those that are not guilty cannot endure
unjust reproach. And as there is nothing more shameful and dishonest, than to
do wrong, so truth it self cutteth his throat that carries her publikly in
every place. Remember the divine, saying, He that keeps his mouth, keeps
his life. Do therefore right to all men where it may profit them, and thou
shall thereby get much love, and forbear to speak evil things of men, though it
be tru^ (if thou be not constrained) and thereby thou shall avoid malice and
revenge.

Do not accuse any man of any crime, if it be not to save thy self, thy Prince,
or Country, for there is nothing more dishonorable (next to Treason it self)
than to be an Accuser Notwithstanding I would not have thee for any respect
loose thy reputation, or endure public disgrace, for better it were not to
live, than to live a coward, if the offense proceed not from thy self; if it
do, it shall be better to compound it upon good terms, than to hazard thy self;
for if thou overcome, thou art under the cruelty of the Law, if thou art
overcome, thou art dead or dishonored. If thou therefore contend, or discourse
in argument; let it be with wise and sober men, of whom thou may learn by
reasoning, and not with ignorant persons, for thou shall thereby in trust those
that will not thank thee, and utter, what they have learned from thee, for
their own. But if thou know more that other men, utter it when it may do thee
honor, and not in assemblies of ignorant and common persons.

Speaking much also, is a sign of vanity; for he that is lavish in words, is a
niggard in deeds; and as Solomon says, The mouth of a wise men is in his
heart, the heart of a fool is in his mouth, because what he knows or
thinks, he utters: And by thy words and discourses, men will judge thee.
For as Socrates says, such as thy words are, such will thy affections be
esteemed; and such will thy deeds as thy a^^ct^^^s, and such thy life as thy
deeds. Therefore be advised what thou do discourse of, what thou maintainest;
whether touching Religion, State, or vanity; for it thou erie in the first,
thou shall be accounted profane; if in the second, dangerous; if in the third,
indiscreet and foolish: He that cannot refrain from much speaking, is like a
City without walls, and less pains in the world a man cannot take, than to
hold his tongue; therefore, if thou observest this rule in all assemblies, thou
shall seldom err; restrain thy choler, hearken much, and speak little; for
the tongue is the instrument of the greatest good and greatest evil that is
done in the world.

According to Solomon, Life and death are in the power of the tongue: and as
Euripide, truly affirms, Every unbrialed tongue, in the end shall find it
self unfortunate; for in all that ever I observed in the course of worldly
things, I ever found that men's fortunes are oftener made by their tongues than
by their virtues, and more men's fortunes overthrown thereby also, than by their
vices. And to conclude, all quarrels, mischief, hatred, and destruction,
arises from unadvised speech, and in much speech there are many errors, out
of which thy enemies shall ever take the most dangerous advantage. And as thou
shall be happy, if thou thy self observe these things, so shall it be most
profitable for thee to avoid their companies that err in that kind, and not to
hearken to Talebearers, to inquisitive persons, and such as busy themselves
with other men's estates, that creep into houses as spies, to learn news which
concerns them not; for assure thy self such persons are most base and unworthy,
and I never knew any of them prosper, or respected amongst worthy or wise men.

Take heed also that thou be not found a liar; for a lying spirit is hateful
both to God and man. A liar is commonly a Coward; for he dares not avow truth.
A liar is trusted of no man he can have no credit, neither in public nor
private; and if there were no more arguments than thee, know that our Lord in
S. John says That it is a vice proper to Satan, lying being opposite to the
nature of God, which consists in Truth; and the gain of lying is nothing
else, but not to be trusted of any, nor to be believed when we say the truth.
It is said in the Proverbs, That God hates false lips; and he that speaks
lips, shall perish. Thus thou may see and find in all the Books of God, how
odious and contrary to God a liar is; and for the world, believe it, that it
never did any man good (except in the extremity of saving life;) for a liar is
of a base, unworthy, and cowardly spirit.

CHAP. V. Three Rules to be observed for the preservation of a man's estate.
AMongst all other things of the World, take care of thy estate, which thou
shall ever preserve, if thou observe three things; First, that thou know what
thou have, what every thing is worth that thou have, and to see that thou art
not wasted by thy Servants and Officers. The second is, that thou never spend
any thing before thou have it; for borrowing is the canker and death of every
man's estate. The third is, that thou suffer not thy self to be wounded for
other men's faults, and scourged for other men's offenses; which is, to be surety
for another; for thereby millions of men have been beggered and destroyed,
paying the reckoning of other men's riot, and the charge of other men's folly and
prodigality; if thou smart, smart for thine own sins, and above all things, be
not made an Ass to carry the burdens of other men: If any friend desire thee to
be his surety, give him a patt of what thou have to spare, if he press thee
farther, he is not thy friend at all, for friendship rather chooses harm to it
self, than offers it: If thou be bound for a stranger, thou art a fool; if
for a merchant, thou put thy estate to learn to swim: if for a Churchman,
he has no inheritance: if for a Lawyer, he will find an evasion by a syllable
or word, to abuse thee: if for a poor man, thou must pay it thy self: if for a
rich man, it need not: therefore from Suretiship, as from a Man slayer, or
Enchanter, bless thy self; for the best profit and return will be this, that if
thou force him for whom thou art bound, to pay it himself, he will become thy
enemy, if thou use to pay it thy self, thou will be a beggar; and believe thy
Father in this, and print it in thy thought, that what virtue soever thou have
be it never so manifold, if thou be poor withal, thou, and thy qualities shall
be despised: Besides, poverty is often times sent as a curse of God, it is a
shame amongst men, an imprisonment of the mind, a vexation of every worthy
spirit; thou shall neither help thy self nor others, thou shall drown thee in
all thy virtues, having no means to show them, thou shall be a burden, and an
Eyesore to thy friends, every man will fear thy company, thou shall be driven
basely to beg, and depend on others, to flatter unworthy men, to make dishonest
shifts; and to conclude, poverty provokes a man to do infamous and detested
deeds: Let no vanity therefore, or persuasion draw thee to that worst of wordly
miseries.

If thou be rich, it will give thee pleasure in health, comfort in sickness,
keep thy mind and body free, save thee from many perils, relieve thee in thy
elder years, believe the poor, and thy honest Friends, and give means to thy
posterity to live, and defend themselves, and thine own fame, where it is said
in the Proverbs, That he shall be sore vexed that is surety for a stranger, and
he that hates suretiship is sure. It is further said, The poor is hated even
of his own neighbor, but the rich have many friends. Lend not to him that is
mightier than thy self, for if thou lendest him, count it but lost; be not
surety above thy power, for if thou be surety, think to pay it.

CHAP. VI. What sort of Servants are fittest to be entertained.
LEt thy servants be such as thou may command, and entertain none about thee
but Yeomen, to whom thou give wages; for those that will serve thee without
thy hire, will cost thee treble as much as they that know thy fare: if thou
trust any Servant with thy purse, be sure thou take his account ere thou sleep;
for if thou put it off, thou will then afterward, for tediousness, neglect it.
I my self have thereby lost more than I am worth. And whatsoever thy servant
gains thereby, he will never thank thee, but laugh thy simplicity to scorn;
and besides, it is the way to make thy servants thieves, which else would be
honest.

CHAP. VII. Brave Rags wear soonest out of Fashion.
EXceed not in the humor of rags and braverie; for these will soon wear out of
Fashion: but money in thy Purse will ever be in Fashion; and no man is esteemed
for gay Garments, but by Fools and Women.

CHAP. VIII. Riches not to be sought by evil means.
ON the other side, take heed that thou seek not Riches basely, nor attain them
by evil means, destroy no man for his wealth, nor take any thing from the Poor;
for the cry and complaint thereof will pierce the Heavens. And it is most
detestable before God, and most dishonorable before worthy men, to wrest any
thing from the needy and laboring Soul. God will never prosper thee in ought,
if thou offend therein: But use thy poor neighbors and Tenants well, pine not
them and their children, to add superfluity and needless expenses to thy
self. He that has pity on another man's sorrow, shall be free from it himself;
and he that delights ^n, and scorneth the misery of another, shall one time
or other fall into it himself. Remember this Precept, He that has mercy on the
poor, tenact unto the Lord, and the Lord will recom(...) wh^^^ he h^^h given. I
do not understand those for poor, which are vagabonds and beggars, but those
that labor to live, such as are old and cannot travel, such poor widows and
fatherless children as are ordered to be relieved, and the poor Tenants that
travel to pay their Rents, and are driven to poverty by mischance, and not by
riot or careless expenses; on such have thou compassion, and God will bless
thee for it. Make not the hungry soul sorrowful, defer not thy gift to the
needy, for if he curse thee in the bitterness of his soul, his prayer shall be
heard of him that made him.

CHAP. IX. What Inconveniences happen to such as delight in Wine.
TAke especial care that thou delight not in Wine, for there never was any man
that came to honor or preferment that loved it; for it transformeth a man into
a beast, decays health, poisoneth the breath, destroys natural heat,
brings a man's stomach to an artificial heat, deformeth the face, rotteth the
teeth, and to conclude, makes a man contemptible, soon old, and despised of
all wise and worthy men; hated in thy servants, in thy self and companions; for
it is a bewitching and infectious vice, And remember my words, that it were
better for a man to be subject to any vice, than to it, for all other vanities
and sins are recovered, but a Drunkard will never shake off the delight of
beastliness; for the longer it possesses a man, the more he will delight in
it, and the elder he grows, the more he shall be subject to it; for it
dulleth the spirits, and destroys the body, as Ivy does the old Tree; or as
the worm that engendereth in the kernel of the Nut.

Take heed therefore that such a curelesse Canker possess not thy youth, nor
such a beastly infection thy old age; for then shall all thy life be but as the
life of a beast, and after thy death, thou shall only leave a shameful infamy
to thy posterity, who shall study to forget that such a one was their Father.
Anacharsis says, The first draught serves for health, the second for
pleasure, the third for shame, the sourth for madness; but in youth there is
not so much as one draught permitted; for it puts fire to fire; and wastes
the natural heat and seed of generation. And therefore, except thou desire to
hasten thine end, take this for a general rule, That thou never add any
artificial heat to thy body by Wine or Spice, until thou find that time has
decayed thy natural heat, and the sooner thou begin ^ to help nature, the
sooner she will forsake thee, and trust altogether to Art: Who have misfortune,
says Solomon who have sorrow and grief, who have trouble wihout fighting,
stripes without cause, and faintness of ey^^? even they that sit or wine, and
drain themselves to empty Ca^s: Plines says, wine makes the hand quivering,
the eyes waterie, the night unquiet, lewd dreams, a stinking breath in the
morning, and an utter forgetfulness of all things.

Whosoever loves Wine, shall not be trusted of any man; for he cannot keep a
secret. Wine makes a man not only a beast, but a mad man; and if thou love
it, thy own Wife, thy Children, and thy friends will despise thee. In drink men
care not what they say, what offense they give, they forget comeliness, commit
disorders; and to conclude, offend all virtuous and honest company, and God
most of all; to whom we daily pray for health, and a life free from pain: and
yer by drunkenness, and gluttony, (which is the drunkenness of feeding) we draw
on, says Hesiod, a swift, hasty, untimely, cruel, and an infamous old age. And
S. Augustine describes Drunkenness in this manner: Ebrietas est blandus
Doemon, dulce venenum suave peccatum; quam, qui habet, seipsum non habet; quam
qui facit, peccatum non facit, sed ipsi est peccatum.

Drunkenness is a flattering Devil, a sweet poison, a plea ant sin; which
whosoever has, has not himself, which whosoever does commit, does not commit
sin, but he himself is wholly sin.

Innocentius says, Quid turpius ebrioso cut sator in ore, tremor in corpore,
qui promit stulta, promit occul^a, cui men's alienatur, facies transformatur,
nullum secretum ubi regnat ebrie^as, and quid non aliud designat malum,
foecundi calices quem non fecere disertum?

What is filthier than a drunken man to whom there is stink in the mouth,
trembling in the body; which utters foolish things, and reveals secret
things; whose mind is alienate, and face transformed? Whom have not plentiful
cups made eloquent and talking?

When DIOGENES saw a house to be sold, whereof the owner was given to drink, I
thought at the last, quoth Diogenes, he would spue out a whole house; Sciebam
inquit, quod domus tandem evomeret.

CHAP. X. Let God be thy Protector and Directour in all thy Actions.
NOw for the World, I know it too well, to persuade thee to dive into the
practices thereof, rather stand upon thine own guard against all that tempt
thee thereunto, or may practice upon thee in thy conscience, thy reputation, or
thy purse; resolve that no man is wise or safe, but he that is honest.

Serve God, let him be the Author of all thy actions, commend all thy
endeavors to him that must either wither or prosper them, please him with
prayer, lest if he frown, ^e confound all thy fortunes and labors, like the
drops of Rain on the sandy ground: let my experienced advice, and fatherly
instructions, sink deep into thy heart. So God direct thee in all his ways, and
fill thy heart with his grace.

FINIS.
The dutiful ADVICE OF A LOVING SON To his AGED FATHER.
SIR,
I Humbly beseech you, both in respect of the honor of God, your duty to his
Church, and the comfort of your own soul, that you seriously consider in what
terms you stand; and weigh your self in a Christian balance; taking for your
counterpoise the judgments of God: Take heed in time that the word TEKEL,
written of old against Belshazzar, and interpreted by Daniel, be not verified
in you, whose exposition was, You have been poized in the scale, and found of
too light weight.

Remember that you are now in the waining, and the date of your pilgrimage well
nigh expired, and now that it behooves you to look toward your Country, your
forces languisheth, your senses impair, your body droops, and on every side the
ruinous Cottage of your faint and feeble flesh, threateneth the fall: And
having so many harbirgers of death to premonish you of your end, how can you
but prepare for so dreadful a stranger. The young man may die quickly, but the
old man cannot live long: the young man's life by casualty may be abridged, but
the old man's by no physic can be long adjourned, and therefore if green years
should sometimes think of the grave the thoughts of old age should continually
dwell in the same.

The prerogative of Infancy is innocence; of Childhood, reverence; of
Manhood, maturity; and of old age, wisdom.

And seeing then that the chiefest properties of wisdom, are to be mindful of
things past, careful for things present, and provident for things to come: Use
now the privilege of natures talent, to the benefit of your own soul, and
procure hereafter to be wise in well doing, and watchful in the foresight of
future harms. To serve the world you are now unable, and though you were able,
yet you have little cause to be willing, seeing that it never gave you but an
unhappy welcome, a hurtful entertainment, and now does abandon you with an
unfortunate farewell.

You have long sowed in a field of flint, which could bring nothing forth but a
crop of cares, and afflictions of spirit, rewarding your labors with remorse,
and affording for your gain, eternal danger.

It is now more than a seasonable time to alter the course of so unthriving a
husbandry, and to enter into the efild of Gods Church, in which, sowing the
seed of repentant sorrow, and watering them with the tears of humble
contrition, you may hereafter reap a more beneficial harvest, and gather the
fruits of everlasting comfort

Remember, I pray you, that your spring is spent, your summer over-past, you
are now arrived at the fall of the leaf; yea, and winter colors have long
since stained your hoary head.

Be not careless (says Saint Augustine) though our loving Lord bear long with
offenders; for the longer he stays, not finding amendment, the sorer he will
scourge when be comes to Judgment: And his patience in so long forbearing, is
only to lend us respite to repent, and not any wise to enlarge us leisure to
sin.

He that is tossed with variety of storms, and cannot come to his desired Port,
makes not much way, but is much turmoyled. So, he that has passed many years,
and purchased little profit, has a long being, but a short life: For, life is
more to be measured by well doing, than by number of years; Seeing that most
men by many days do but procure meny deaths, and others in short space attain
to the life of infinite ages; what is the body without the soul, but a corrupt
carcass? And what is the soul without God, but a sepulcher of sin?

If God be the Way, the Life, and the Truth, he that goes without him,
strayeth; and he that lives without him, dies; and he that is not taught by
him, erreth.

Well (says Saint Augustine) God is our true and chiefest Life, from whom to
revolt, is to fall; to whom to return, is to rise; and in whom to stay, is to
stand sure.

God is he, from whom to depart, is to die; to whom to repair, is to revive;
and in whom to dwell, is life for ever. Be not then of the number of those that
begin not to live, till they be ready to die: and then after a foes desert,
come to crave of God a friends entertainment.

Some there be that think to snatch Heaven in a moment, which the best can
scarce attain unto in the maintenance of many years; and when they have
glutted themselves with worldly delights, would jump from Di^e Diet to Lazarus
Crown, from the service of Satan, to the solace of a Saint.

But be you well assured, that God is not so penurious of friends, as to hold
himself and his Kingdom saleable for the refuse and reversions of their lives,
who have sacrificed the principal thereof to his enemies, and their own
brutish lust; then only ceasing to offend, when the ability of offending is
taken from them.

True it is, that a thief may be saved upon the cross and mercy found at the
last gasp: But w^l (says S. Augustine) though it be possible, yet it is scarce
credible, that he in death should find favor, whose whole life deserved death;
and that the repentance should be more excepted, that more for fear of hell,
and love of himself, than for the love of God, and loathsomeness of sin, cries
for mercy.

Wherefore, good SIR, make no longer delays; but being so near the breaking up
of your mortal house, take time before extremity, to pacify Gods anger.

Though you suffer the bud to be blasted, though you permitted the fruits to be
perished, and the leaves to dry up; yea, though you let the boughs to wither,
and the body of your tree to grow to decay, yet (alas) keep life in the root,
for fear left the whole tree become fuel for hell fire; For surely where the
tree falls, there it shall lie, whether toward the South or to the North, to
heaven, or to hell; and such sap as it brings forth, such fruit shall it ever
bear.

Death has already filed from you the better part of your natural forces, and
left you now to be Lees, and remissalls of your wearyish and dying days.

The remainder whereof, as it cannot be long, so does it warn you speedily to
ransom your former losses; for what is age, but the Calends of death? and what
imports your present weakness, but an earnest of your approaching
dissolution? you are now embarked in your final voyage, and not far from the
stint and period of your course.

Be not therefore unprovided of such appurtenances as are behooveful in so
perplexed and perrilous a Journey; death it self is very fearful, but much
more terrible in respect of the judgment it summoneth us unto.

If you were now laid upon departing bed, burdened with the heavy load of
your former trespasses, and gored with the sting and prick of a festered
conscience; if you felt the cramp of death wresting your heartstrings, and
ready to make the ruefull divorce between body and soul: If you lay panting for
breath, and swimming in a cold and pale sweat, wearied with struggling against
your deadly pangs, O what would you give for an hours repentance; at what rate
would you value a days contrition? Then worlds would be worth less in respect
of a little respite, a short truce would seem more precious then the treasuries
of an Empire, nothing would be so much esteemed as a short time of truce, which
now by days, and months, and years, is most lavishly misspent.

Oh how deeply would it wound your woeful heart when looking back into your
former life, you considered many heinous and horrible offenses committed, many
pious works, and godly deeds omitted, and neither of both repented, your
service to God promised, and not performed.

Oh how unconsolably were your case, your friends being fled, your senses
affrighted, your thoughts amazed, your memory decayed, and your whole mind
aghast, and no part able to perform what it should; but only your guilty
conscience pestered with sin, that would continually upbraid you with many
bitter accusations.

Oh what would you think then, being stopped out of this mortal weed, and
turned out both of service and house-room of this wicked world, you are forced
to enter into uncouth and strange paths, and with unknown and ugly company, to
be convented before a most severe judge, carrying in your conscience your
Indictment, written in a perfect Register of all your misdeeds, when you shall
fee him prepared to give sentence upon you, against whom you have so often
transgressed, and the same to be your Umpire, whom by so many offenses you have
made your enemy, when not only the Devil, but even the Angels would plead
against you and your own self, in despite of your self, be your own most sharp
appeacher.

Oh what would you do in these dreadful exigents, when you saw the ghastly
Dragon, and huge gulf of hell, breaking out with most fearful flames, when
you heard the weeping, wailing, and gnashing of teeth; the rage of those
hellish monsters, the horror of the place, the terr^^^ of the company, and the
eternity of all those torments.

Would you then think them wise that mould delay into weighty matters, and
idly play away the time allotted, to prevent these intolerable calamities?
Would you then count it secure, to nurse ^n your own bosom so many Serpents as
sins? and to foster in your soul so many malicious accusers, as mortal and
horrible offenses? Would you not think one life too little to repent in for so
many, and so great iniquities, every one whereof were enough to throw you into
those unspeakable and intolerable torments.

And why then (alas!) do you not at the least devote that small remnant, and
surplusage of those your later days, procuring to make an atonement with God,
and to free your Soul and Conscience from that corruption, which by your fall
has crept into it.

Those very eyes that behold, and read this discourse, those very ears that are
attentive to hear it, and that very understanding that considers and
conceives it, shall be cited as certain witnesses of these rehearsed things.
In your own body shall you experience these deadly Agonies, and in your Soul
shall you feelingly find these terrible fears; yea, and your present estate, is
in danger of the deepest harms, if you do not the sooner recover your self into
that fold and family of Gods faithful servants.

What have you gotten by being so long a customer to the World, but false ware,
suitable to the shop of such a merchant, whose traffic is toil, whose wealth
is trash, and whose gain is misery? What interest have you reaped, that might
equal your detriment in grace and virtue? Or what could you find in the vale
of tears, that was answerable to the favor of God, with loss whereof, you
were contented to but it?

You cannot now be inveigled with the passions of youth, which making a
partiality of things, sets no distance between counterfeit and current, for
these are now worn out of force, by tract of time are fallen into reproof, by
trial of their folly.

Oh let not the crazie cowardnesse of flesh and blood, daunt the prowess of an
intelligent person, who by his wisdom cannot but discern how much more cause
there is, and how much more needful it is to serve God, than this wicked world.

But if it be the ungrounded presumption of the mercy of God, and the hope of
his assistance at the last plunge (which indeed is the ordinary lure of the
devil) to reclaim sinners from the pursuit of Repentance. Alas, that is too
palpable a collusion to mislead a found and serviceable man, howsoever it may
prevail with sick and ill-affected judgments: who would rely upon eternal
affairs, upon the gliding slipperinesse, and running streams of our uncertain
life? who, but one of distempered wits, would offer fraud to the Decipherer of
all thoughts; with whom dissemble we may to our cost, but to deceive him, is
impossible.

Shall we esteem it cunning to rob the time from him, and bestow it on his
enemies, who keeps tale of the least minutes, and will examine in the end how
every moment has been employed. It is a preposterous kind of policy, in any
wise conceit to fight against God, till our weapons be blunted, our forces
consumed, our limbs impotent, and our best time spent; and then when we fall
for faintness, and have fought our selves almost dead, to presume on his mercy.

Oh! no, no, the wounds of his most sacred body, so often rubbed, and renewed
by our sins and every part and parcel of our bodies so diverse, and sundry ways
abused, will be then as so many whet-stones and incentives, to edge and
exasperate his most just revenge against us.

It is a strange piece of Art, and a very exorb tant course, when the Ship is
sound, the Pylot well, the Mariners strong, the Gale favorable, and the Sea
calm; to ly idly at the road, burning so seasonable weather: And when the
Ship leaketh, the Pylot sick, the Mariners faint, the Storms boisterous, and
the Seas a turmoyl of outrageous Surges, then to launch forth, (hoise up sail)
and set out for a long voyage into a far Country.

Yet such is the skill of these evening Repenters, who though in the soundness
of their health,and perfect use of their reason, they cannot resolve to cut the
Cables, and weigh the Anchour that withholds them from God.

Nevertheless, they feed themselves with a strong persuasion, that when they
are astonished, their wits distracted, the understanding dusked, and the bodies
and souls wracked, and tormented with the throbs and gripes of a mortal
sickness; then forsooth they will begin to think of their weightiest matters,
and become sudden Saints, when they are scarce able to behave themselves like
reasonable creatures.

No, no, if neither the Canon, Civil, nor the Common Law will allow that man
(perished in judgment) should make any Testament of his temporal substance;
how can he that is animated with inward garboyls of an unsettled conscience,
distrained with the wringing fits of his dying flesh, maimed in all his
ability, and circled in on every side with many and strange incumberances, be
thought of due discretion to dispose or his chiefest Jewel, which is his Soul?
and to dispatch the whole manage of all eternity, and of the treasures of
Heaven, in so short of spurt?

No no, they that will loyter in seedtime, and begin to sow when others reap;
they that will riot out their health, and beg^n to cast their accounts when
they are scarce able to speak; they that will slumber out the day, and enter
their journey when the light does fail them; let them blame their own folly, if
they die in debt, and be eternal beggars, and fall headlong into the lap of
endless perdition.

Let such listen to S. Cyprian's lesson; Let, says he, the grievousnesse of
our sore be the measure of our sorrow; let a deep wound hive a deep and
diligent cure; Let no man's Contrition be less than his Crime.

FINIS.
Sir Walter Raleigh's SCEPTICK.
The SCEPTICK does neither affirm, neither deny any Position: but doubts of
it, and opposes his Reasons against that which is affirmed, or denied, to
justify his not-consenting.

HIs first Reason arises, from the consideration of the great difference
amongst living Creatures, both in the matter and manner of their Generations,
and the several Constitutions of their bodies.

Some living Creatures are by copulation, and some without it: and that either
by Fire, as Crickets in fornaces; or corrupt water, as Gnats; or slime, as
Frogs; or dirt, as Worms; or herbs, as Canker-worms some of ashes, as Beetles;
some of trees, as the Worms Psen^^ bred in the wild Fig Tree; some of living
creatures putrified, as Bees of Bulls, and Wasps of Horses. By Copulation many
creatures are brought forth alive, as Man; some in the egg, as Birds some in an
unshapen piece of flesh, as Bears. These great differences cannot but cause a
diverse and contrary temperament, and quality in those creatures, and
consequently, a great diversity in their fantasy and conceit; so that they
apprehend one and the same object, yet they must do it after a diverse manner:
for is it not absurd to affirm, That creatures differ so much in temperature,
and yet agree in conceit concerning one and the same object?

Seeing.
But this will more plainly appear, if the instruments of Sense in the body be
observed: for we shall find, that as these Instruments are affected and
disposed, so does the Imagination conceit that which by them is connexed unto
it. That very object which seems unto us White, unto them which have the
Iaundise seems Pale, and Red unto those whose Eyes are bloud-shot. For So Much
then as living creatures have some white, some pale, some red eyes why should
not one and the same object seem to some white, to some red, to some pale? If a
man rub his (...), the figure of that which he beholds seems long or
narrow; is it then not likely, that those creatures which have a long and
slanting Pupil of the eye, as Goats, Foxes, Cats, etc. do convey the fashion
of that which they behold under another form to the imagination, than those
that have (...) Pupils do?

Who knows not, that a Glass presents the outward, (...), or greater
according to the making of the glass? If it be hollow, the object seems
smaller than it is, If the glass be crooked, then the object seems long and
narrow. And glasses there be, which present the head of him that looks in
them, downwards, and the heels upwards. Now then, seeing the eye, which is the
instrument of Sight, in some living creatures is more outward, in some more
hollow, in some plain, in some greater, in some less; it is very probable,
that Fishes Man, Lions, and Dogs, whose eyes so much differ, do not conceive
the self same object after the same manner, but diversely, according to the
diversity of the eye, which offers it unto the fantasy.

Touching.
The same reason holds in Touching; for seems it not absurd to think, that
those creatures which are covered with Shells, those which are covered with
Scales, those which are covered with Hairs, and those which are Smooth, should
all be alike sensible in Touching? and every one of them conveigh the image, or
q^ali^ie of the same object which they touch in the very same degree of heat or
cold, of dryness or moisture, roughness or smoothness, unto the imagination?

Hearing.
So might 't be showed in Hearing: for how can we think that the Ear which has
a narrow passage, and the Ear which has an open and wide passage, do receive
the same sound in the same degree? or that the Ear whose inside is full of
hair, does hear in the same just measure, that the Ear does whose inside is
smooth? Since experience shows, that if we stop, or half stop our Ears, the
sound comes not to us in the same manner and degree, that it does if our ears
be open.

Smelling.
The like may be thought of Smelling: for man himself abounding with Fleagm, is
otherwise affected in smelling, than he is, if the pu^s about the head be f^ll
of blood; and many things afford a delightful smell to some living creatures,
which smell to other living creatures seems not to be so.

Tasting.
In the Taste the same reason appears; for to a rough and dri-tongue, that
everything seems bitter (as in an Aga) which to the moister tongue seems
not to be so, ^ivers creatures then having tongues drier, or moister, according
to their several temperatures, when they taste the same thing, must needs
conceit it to be according as the instrument of their taste is affected, either
bitter, or sweet, etc. For even as the hand in the striking of the Harp, though
the stroke be one, yet causes a found, sometimes high, sometimes base,
according to the quality of the string that is stricken: Even so one and the
same outward object is diversely judged of, and conceited, according to the
several and diverse qualities of the instrument of Sense, which conveieth it to
the imagination. Ointment is pleasing to Man; but Beetles and Bees cannot abide
t. Oil to man is profitable; but it kills Bees and Wasps. Cicuta feeds
Quails, and Henbane Sows; but both of these hurt Man. If a Man eat Ants he is
sick; but the Bear being sick, recovereth by eating them.

If then one and the very same thing to the red eye seem red, to another pale,
and white to another: If one and the same thing, seem not hot or cold, dry or
moist, in the same degree to the several creatures which touch it: If one and
the self-same sound seem more thrill to that creature which has a narrow ear,
and more base to him that has an open ear: If the same thing, at the same
time, seem to afford a pleasant and displeasant Smell to diverse and several
creatures: If that seem bitter in taste to one, which to another seems sweet,
that to one hurtful, which to another seems healthful: I may report how
these things appear diverse to several creatures, and seem to produce diverse
effects.

But what they are in their own nature, whether red or white, bitter or sweet,
healthful or hurtful, I cannot tell. For why should I presume to profer my
conceit and imagination, in affirming that a thing is thus, or thus, in its own
nature, because it seems to me to be so, before the conceit of other living
creatures, who may as well think it to be otherwise in each one nature, because
it appears otherwise to them than it does to me?

They are living creatures as well as I: why then should I condemn their
conceit and fantasy, concerning any thing, more than they may mine? They may
be in the truth and I in error, as well as I in truth, and they err. If my
conceit must be believed before theirs, great reason that it be proved to be
truer than theirs. And this proof must be either by demonstration, or without
it. Without it none will believe. Certainly, if by demonstration, then this
demonstration must seem to be true, or not seem to be true. If it seem to be
true, then will it be a question, whether it be so indeed as it seems to be;
and to allege that for a certain proof, which is uncertain and questionable,
seems absurd.

If it be said, that the imagination of Man judges river of outward object,
than the imagination of other living creatures does, and therefore to be
credited above others, (besides that which is already said,) this is easily
refuted by comparing of Man with other creatures.

It is confessed, the Dog excels Man in smell, and in hearing: and whereas
there is said to be a twofold discourse, one of the mind, another of the
tongue and that of the mind is said to be exercised in chasing that which is
convenient, and refusing that which is hurtful in knowledge, justice, and
thankfulness: This creature chooses his food, refuses the whip, fawneth on
his Master, defer dath his house, revengeth himself of these strangers that
hurt him. And (...) mentions Are^^, the dog of U^y^ses, who knew his master,
having been from home so many years, that at his return, all the people of his
house had forgot him. This creature, says Chr^sipp^^, is not void of Logic:
for when in following any beast, he comes to three several ways, he smells
to the one, and then to the second; and if he find that the beast which he
pursues he not fled one of these 2 ways, he presently without smelling any
further to it, takes the third way: which, says the same Philosopher, is as
it he reasoned thus, the Beast must be gone either this, or this, or the other
way; but neither this nor this; Eage, the third: and so away he runs.

If we consider his skill in Physic, it is sufficient to help himself: if he
be wounded with a dart, he uses the help of his Teeth to take it out, of his
Tongue to cleanse the wound from corruption: he seems to be well acquainted
with the Precept of Hipp^crates, who says, that the Rest of the Foot is the
Physic of the Foot, and therefore if his foot he hurt, he ho does it up that
it may rest: if he be sick, he gives himself a Vomit by eating of Grass, and
recovereth himself. The Dog then we see is plentifully furnished with inward
discourse.

Now outward speech is not needful to make a creature Reasonable, else a dumb
Man were an unreasonable Creature.

And do not Philosophers themselves reject this as an enemy to knowledge? and
therefore they are silent when they are instructed; and yet even as Barbarous
and strange people of speech, but we understand it not, neither do we perceive
any great difference in their words: but a difference there seems to be, and
they do express their thoughts and meanings one to another by those words.
Even so those creatures, which are commonly called unreasonable, do seem to
parlie one with another; and by their speech to understand one the other. Do
not Binds by one kind of speech call their young ones, and by another cause
them to hide themselves? Do they not by their several voices express their
several passions of joy, of grief, of fear in such manner, that their fellows
understand them? Do they not by their voice foreshew things to come? But we
will return to that creature we first did instance in. The Dog delivers one
kind of voice when he hunteth, another when he howleth, another when he is
beaten, and another when he is angry. These creatures then are not void of
outward speech.

If then these creatures excel Man in sense, and are equal to him in inward
and outward discourse, why should not their conceits and imaginations conveigh
the outward object in as true a manner as ours? and if so, then seeing their
imaginations are diverse, and they conceit it diversely according to their diverse
temperaments, I may tell what the outward object seems to me; but what it
seems to other creatures, or whether it be indeed that which it seems to
me, or any other of them, I know not.

But be it granted, that the Judgment of Man in this case, is to be preferred
before the Judgment of Beasts; yet in Men there is great difference; both in
respect of the outward shape, and also of the temperature of their bodies: For
the body of the Suth an differs in shape from the body of the (...): the
reason of it arises (say the Dogmaticks) from a predominan use of humors in
the one more than in the other; and as several humors are predominant, so are
the fantasies and conceits severally framed and effected. So that our
contrymen delight in one thing, the Indian not in that, but in another which
we regard not. This would not be, if their conceits and ours were both a like;
for then we should like that which they do, and they would dislike that which
we would dislike. It is evident also, that men differ very much in the
temperature of their bodies, else why should some more easily digest Bief than
Shel-fish; and other be mad for the time, if they drink wine? There was an old
woman about Arbeus, which drunk three drams of C^^u^^ (every dream weighin,
sixty Barley corns, and eight drams to an ounce) without hurt. ^^sis, without
hurt, took four drams of Popple; and (...), which was Gentleman-Sewer to
Alexander, was very cold when he stood in the sun, or in a hot bath, but very
hot when he stand in the shadow. Al(...) felt no pain if a Scorpion stung him.
And the Psill^ (a people in Ly^^^, whole bodies are venom to serpents) if they
be stung by serpents, or Asps, receive no hurt at all.

The Ethiopians, which inhabit the river Hynaspis, do eat serpents and
scorpions without danger. (...) a Chirurgian, at the smell of a Sturgeon, would
be for the time mad. A^dron of Argos, was so little thirsty, that without want
of drink, he traveled through the hot and dry country of Lybia. Tiberius
Caesar would see very well in the dark. Aristotle mentions of Thratius, who
said, that the image of a Man went always before him.

If then it be so, that there be such differences in Men, this must be by
reason of the diverse temperatures they have, and diverse disposition of their
conceit and imagination; for, if one hate, and another love the very same
thing, it must be that their fantasies differ, else all would love it, or all
would hate it. These Men then, may tell how these things seem to them good, or
bad; but what they are in their own Nature they cannot tell.

If we will heathen to men's opinions, concerning one and the same matter,
thinking thereby to come to the knowledge of it, we shall find this to be
impossible; for, either we must believe what all men say of it, or what some
men only say of it. To believe what all men say of one and the same thing, is
not possible; for then we shall believe Contrarieties; for some men say, that
that very thing is pleasant, which other say is displeasant. If it be said, we
must believe only some men, then let it be showed who those some men are; for
the Platonists will believe Plato, but the Epicures Epicurus, the Phytagorians
Pythagoras, and other Philosophers the masters of their own Sects: so that it
is doubtful, to which of all these we shall give credit. If it be said, that
we must credit the greatest number; this seems childish: for there may be
amongst other Nations a greater number which deny that very point, which the
greatest number with us do affirm: so that hereof nothing can certainly be
affirmed.

This Argument seems to be further confirmed, if the differences of the
Senses of Hearing, Seeing, Smelling, Touching, and Tasting be considered; for
that the Senses differ, it seems plain.

Painted Tables (in which the art of Slanting is used) appear to the Eye, as if
the parts of them were some higher, and some lower than the other, but to the
Touch they seem not to be so.

Honey seems to the Tongue sweet, but unpleasant to the Eye: so Ointment does
recreate the Smell, but it offends the Taste. Rainwater is profitable to the
Eyes, but it hurts the Lungs. We may tell then, how these things seem to our
several senses, but what they are in their own nature we cannot tell: for why
should not a man credit any one of his senses as well as the other?

Every object seems to be presented diversely unto the several instruments of
Sense. An Apple to the Touch seems smooth, sweet to the Smell, and to the Eye
yellow; but whether the Apple have one of these qualities only, or more than
these qualities, who can tell? The Organ has many Pipes, all which are filled
with the same blast of wind, varied according to the capacity of the several
Pipes which receive it: even so the quality of the Apple may be but one, and
this one quality may be varied, and seem yellow to the Eye, to the Touch
smooth, and sweet to the Smell, by reason of the diverse instruments of the
Sense, which apprehend this one quality diversely.

It may be also, that an Apple has many qualities besides; but we are not able
to conceive them all, because we want fit means and instruments to apprehend
them. For suppose that some Man is born blind, and deaf, and yet can touch,
smell, and taste; this man will not think that there is any thing, which may be
seen or heard, because he wants the Senses of hearing and seeing; he will
only think there are those qualities in the object, which by reason of his
three Senses he conceives: Even so the Apple may have many more qualities; but
we cannot come to know them, because we want fit instruments for that purpose.

If it be replied, that Nature has ordained as many instruments of Sense, as
there are sensible objects; I demand, What Nature? for there is a confused
controversy about the very Essence of Nature. Some affirming it to be one
thing, others another, few a greeing: so that what the quality of an Apple is,
or whether it has one quality or many, I know not.

Let a man also consider, how many things that are separated, and by
themselves, appear to differ from that which they seem to be, when they are in
a mass or lump the scrapings of the Goats horn seems white, but in the horn
they seem black, but in the lump white. The stone Toenaru, being polished,
seems white, but unpolished and rough it seems yellow. Sands being
separated, appear rough to the Touch, but a great heap, soft. I may then
report, how these things appear, but whether they are so indeed, I know not.

Sir Walter Raleigh's OBSERVATIONS Concerning the Causes of the Magnificencie
and Opulencie of CITIES.
THAT the only way to civilize and reform the savage and barbarous Lives, and
corrupt Manners of such people, is, 1 To be dealt withal by gentle and loving
Conversation among them, to attain to the knowledge of their Language, and of
the multitude of their special discommodities and inconveniences in their
manner of living 2 The next is to get an admired reputation amongst them, upon
a solid and true foundation of Piety, Justice, and wisdom, conjoined with
fortitude and power. 3 The third is, discreetly to possess them with a
knowledge of the condition of their own estate. Thus O^phe^ and Amph^^, were
said to draw after them the beast of the field, etc.


And this must be first wrought by a visible representation, of the certainty,
truth, and sincerity of these, together with the felicity of a reformed
estate.

All which is but to give foundation, bottom, and firm footing unto action, and
to prepare them to receive wholesome and good advise, for the future profit and
felicity of themselves and their posterity.

For the more commodious effecting of this Reformation in a rude and barbarous
people, they are to be persuaded to withdraw and unite themselves into several
Colonies; that by it an interchangeable communication and commerce of all
things may more commodiously be had, and that they may so live together in
civilitie, for the better succor and welfare of one another: And thereby they
may more easily be instructed in the Christian Faith, and governed under the
Magistrates and ministers of the King, or other superior power, under whom
this R^so that on is sought. Which course the (...), that (...) took, after he
had taken upon him the Government of the (...), whereby he united all the
people into one City, that before lived dispersedly in many Villages. The like
is put in practice at this day by the ^^r^^gales and Jesuits, that they may
with less difficulty and hinderance reform the rough behavior, and savage
life of the people of Brazile, who dwell scattered and dispersed in cave, and
cottages made of boughs and leaves of the Palm Trees.

Alexander the Great built more than seventie Cities: Selev^us built three
Cities, called ^pame^, to the honor of his wife; and five called L^^^^ca, in
memory of his mother; and fire called Seleac^, to the honor of himself.

Safety for Defense of the People and their goods, in and near the Town.
Situation for Safety and Plenty.
IN the Situation of Cities, there is to be required a place of Safety, by some
natural strength, commod ousness for Navigation, and Conduct, for the attaining
of plenty of all good things, for the sustenance and comfort of man's life, and
to draw trade and intercourse of other Nations; as if the same be situate in
such ^ort, as many people have need to repair thither for some natural
commodity or other of the Country, which by traffic and transportation of
commodities, whereof they have more plenty than will supply their own
necessity, or for receiving of things whereof they have carcitie. And much
better will it be, if the place afford some notable commodity of it self, from
whence other Nations may more readily, and at better rate attain the same:
Likewise, and withal, be so fertile, pleasant, and healthful of it self, that
it may afford plenty of good things, for the delight and confort of the
inhabitants.

Multitude of Inhabitants.
In former times great Nations, Kings and Potentates have endured sharp
conflicts, and held it high Policy, by all means to increase then Cities, with
multitudes of Inhabitants. And to this end the Romans ever furnished themselves
with strength and power, to make their Neighbor-people, of necessity, willing
to draw themselves to Rome to dwell, and overthrow their Towns and Villages of
mean strength, down to the ground.

So did they for this cause utterly destroy many Cities, bringing always the
vanquished Captives to Rome, for the augmentation of that City.

Romulus, after a mighty fight with the Sabines, condescended to Peace, upon
condition that ^^^^^s their King should come with all their people to dwell at
Rome: ^at^^^ did accept, and made choice of the Capitol, and the Mount
Quirmalis for his seat and P^llace.

The same course h^ld Tamberlane the Great, whereby he enlarged the great
Samar^anda, still bringing unto it, the richest and wealthiest Citizens he had
subdued.

And the Ottoman^, to make the City Constantinople rich and great, brought to
it many thousand Families, especially Artificers out of the subdued Cities; as
Mahome^ the great from Tr^bizond, Selim the First from Cairo, and Seliman from
^aurk.

Authority and necessity, without the consideration of the conveniences, and
commodiousness of Situation above mentioned, are of small moment in the
foundation of a City; thereby only it would be unlikely, either to grow or
continue in Magnificencie or Opulencie: for it Profit, Height, and Delight go
not companions therewith, no authority or necessity can retain much People or
Wealth.

But of the place whereupon a City is to be founded, be commodious for the
aforesaid conveniences, which help greatly for the felicity of this life;
then, no doubt, the same is likely to draw much abundance of people and riches
unto the same, whereby it may, by the help of Arts and Industry, in time,
become magnificent and glorious.

Unto the good estate, greatness, and glory of a City, those things hereafter
mentioned do greatly avail, and are of much importance, viz.

Religigion.
Religion, which is of such force and might, to amplify Cities and Dominions,
and of such attractive virtue to replenish the same with people and wealth, and
to hold them in due obedience, as none can be more; for without adoration of
some Dietie, no common wealth can subsist.

Witness, Jerusalem Rome, Constantinople and all other cities that have been
famous for the prosession of Religion, or Divine worship And no marvel, for
there is not any thing in this world of more efficacy and force to allure and
draw to it the hearts of Men, than God. which is the (...). He is carefully
defined, and continually sought for of all creatures; for all regard Him as
their last end and refuge.

Light things apply themselves upwards, heavy things downwards; the Heavens to
Revolution, the Herbs to flowers, Trees to bear fruit, Beasts to present their
kind and Man in seeking his tranquillity and everlasting glory But forasmuch as
God is of so high a nature as the sense and understanding of Man cannot
conceive it, every man directly turns himself to that place where he leaves
some print of his power, or declares some sign of his assistance. And to such
persons whom he seems more especially to have revealed himself.

Academies.
Academies, and Schools of Learning with convenient immunities and privileges
for Scholars, and means for Recreation for Delight, are of great importance to
enlarge and enrich a city: for as much as men long for honor and profit, and
of Arts and liberal sciences some bring certain wealth to men, and some
promotions and preterments to honorable functions: for by this means, not
only young men, and those that are desirous of Learning and Virtue in the same
Commonwealth, will be retained in their own Country, but also strangers will
be drawn home to them. And the more will this be available if occasion be given
to Scholars and students, to rise to degrees of Honor and preferment by their
learned exercises, and that by the Policy of the same city, good Wits be
accounted of, and rewarded well: that the same Academies and Schools be stored
with plenty of Doctors and learned men, of great same and reputation.

Courts of Justice.
Courts of Justice, with due execution of the same in a city, do much enable,
enlarge, and enrich it; for it fasteneth a great liking in a city to virtuous
men, and such as be wealthy, that therein they may be free, and in safety
from the violence of the oppressions of covetous and wicked men: and there will
be rather resort thither to inhabit, or traffic there as occasions may
minister unto them. And many others that have cause of suite will repair
thither, whereas they may be sure to find Judgment and Justice duly executed,
whereby the city must needs be enlarged and enriched: for our lives, and all
that ever we have are in the hands of Justice: so that if Justice be not
administered amongst men, in vain is there any society and commerce, or any
other thing can be profitable or safe; so much is love and charity failed, and
iniquity increased upon the face of the earth.

Artificers.
The excellency and multitude likewise of Artificers exercising their manual
arts and trades, do marvellously increase and enrich a State, whereof some are
necessary, some commodious for a civil life, other some are of pomp and
ornament, and other some of delicacie and curiosity, whereof does follow con
course of people that labor and work, and current money which does enrich and
supply Materials for laborers, and workmen, buying and selling,
transportation from place to place, which does employ and increase the
artificious and cunning parts of the wit of Man; and this art and exquisitnesse
of work manship and skill is so powerful herein, that to far excels the simple
commodities and materials that Nature produces; and is alone sufficient of it
self to make a City or State, both magnificient and glorious: and the daily
experience we have in these our days, and in former times, does manifestly
approve the same, and make evident without all contradiction.

Some natural benefits that a City also may have for the excellency of Art,
or work manship of some special commodities above any other place, either
through the quality of the Water, or other matter whatsoever, or some hidden
mystery of the inhabitants in working thereof, may be a great help for the
enlargement and enriching of a city.

The command of a Country that affords some proper commodity, is of it self
sufficient mightily to bring a City to great wealth, and to advance it to
great power, and draws thereby dependence and concourse, much advantageous
also, as well for the public weal, as the private person.

A City also may be Lord of much Merchandise and traffic, by means of the
commodious situation to many Nations, to whom it serves and has relation to,
as Ware houses, Roomth and Storehouses, by reason whereof, the nations
adjoining do use to resort thereunto to make their provisions of such things.
And this consists in the largeness of the Ports, the fitness of the gulphs
and creeks of the seas, in the Navigable rivers and channels, and the plain and
safe ways that leads to the City, or that come, our turn by or near it.

Privledge.
Privilege and freedom from Customs and exactions', does greatly increase the
Trade, and draw inhabitants to a city, whereby the same may become both rich
and powerful; whereof the Ma^ts and Fairs, and Markets bear good witness,
which are frequented with great concourse of people, Tradesmen and Merchants,
for no other respect, but that they are there free and frank from Customs and
exactions. And the cities in Flanders are lively testimonies hereof, where the
Customs are very small.

By reason whereof, all such as have erected new Cities in times past to draw
concourse of people unto it, have granted large immunities, and privileges at
the least, to the first inhabitants thereof

The like have they done that have restored Cities emptied with Plague,
consumed with Wars, or afflicted with Famine, or some other scourge of God. In
respect whereof, Freedom of Cities has been often granted to such as would
with their families, inhabit there, or would bring Corn and other necessaries
for provision of victual.

The Romans, to increase their Cities, made the Towns that well deserved of
them (which they after called Municiple) to be partakers of their franchises
and privileges.

The first devises of Rome to allure strangers as is Sanctuary.
The first means the Romans used to allure people to make their habitations
rather in Rome than else where, was the opening the Sanctuary, and giving
liberty and freedom to all that would come unto them. In respect whereof,
there flocked thither, with their goods, numbers of people that were either
racked with exactions, thrust out of their habitations, or unsafe, or unsure
for their lives in their own Countries for Religion sake.

The very same reason in a manner has increased so much the city of Geneva:
for as much as it has offered entertainment to all comers out of France and
Italy, that have either forsaken, or been exiled their Countries for Religions
sake.

Triumps
Likewise, triumphs, goodly buildings, battles on the water fights of
sword-players, hunting of wild beasts, public shows and sights, plays
solemnized with great pomp and preparation, and many other such things do draw
the curious people to a city inspeakably, which leaves behind them much
treasure, and for such cause will rather settle themselves to inhabit there,
than in other places. This was also the devise of Rome in her infancy to
enlarge herself.

The Causes that Concern the Magnificencie of a CITY.
TO confirm a City in her Greatness, Justice, Peace, and Pleantie are the
undoubted means: for Justice assures every man his own Peace causes all Arts
and negotiation whatsoever to flourish: and Plenty of food and victual, that
sustaineth the life of Man with ease and much contentment. To conclude, All
those things that cause the Greatness of a City, are also fit to conserve the
same.

Sir Walter Raleigh's Seat of GOVERNMENT.
That the Seat of Government is up(...)y the two great pillars thereof, viz.
Civil Justice, and Martial Policy, which are framed out of Husbandry,
Merchandise, and Gentry of this Kingdom.

THey say, that the goodliest CEDARS which grow on the high mountains of
Liban^s, thrust their roots between the clifts of hard Rocks, the better to
bear them selves against the strong storms that blow there. As Nature has
instructed those kings of Trees, so has Reason taught the Kings of Men, to
^oot themselves in the hardy Hearts of their faithful Subjects. And as those
kings of Trees have large Tops, so have the Kings of Men large Crowns; whereof
as the first would soon be broken from their bodies, were they not underborn by
many branches; o would the other easily tytter, were they not fastened on their
heads, with the strong chains of Civil Justice and Martial Discipline.

1. For the administration of the first, even God himself has given direction,
Judge and Officers shall thou make, which shall judge the People with righteous
judgment.

2 The second is grounded on the first Laws of the world and nature, that Force
is to be repelled by Force. Yea Moses in the 10 of Exodus, and elsewhere, has
delivered us many Laws and Policies of War. But as we have heard of the neglect
and abuse in both, so have we heatd of the decline and ruin of many Kingdoms
and States long before our days: for that Policy has never yet prevailed
(though it has served for a short season) where the counterfeit has been sold
for the natural, and the outward show and formalitie for the substance. Of the
Emperor Charles the Fourth, the writers of that age witness, that he used but
the name of Justice and good order, being more learned in the Law than in doing
right, and that he had by far, more knowledge than conscience. Certainly the
unjust Magistrate that fancieth to himself a solid and untransparable body of
Gold, every ordinary wit can vitrifie, and make transparent pierce, and
discern their corruptions; howsoever, because not daring, they cover their
knowledge, but in the mean while it is also true, That constrained
dissimulation, either in the proud heart, or in the oppressed, either in
public estates, or in private persons, where the fear of God is not prevalent,
does in all the leisure of her lurking, but sharpen her teeth, the voluntary
being no less base, than the forced malicious. Thus it fared between the Barons
of England and their Kings, between the Lords of Switzerland and their people,
between the Sicilians and the French between the Dolphin and John of Burgoign,
between Charl the Ninth and the French Protestants, and between Henry the
third, his successor, and the Lords of Guise, hereof in place of more
particulars, the whole world may serve for examples.

It is a difficult piece of Geographie to delinate and lay out the bounds of
Authority; but it is easy enough co^ceive the best use of it, and by which it
has maintained it self in lasting happiness, t has ever acquired more honor
by persuading, than by beating; for as the bonds of Reason and Love are
immortal, so do all other chains or cords, both rust^e and rot Noble parts of
their own Royal and Politic bodies.

Huband men.
But we will forbear for a while to stretch this first string of Civil Justice;
for in respect of the first sort of Men, to wit, of those that live by their
own labor, they have never been displeased where they have been suffered to
enjoy the fruit of their own travels, Meum and Tuum, Mine and Thine is all
wherein they seek their certainty and protection. True it is, that they are
the Fruit Trees of the Land, which God in Deuteronomie commanded to be spared,
they gather honey, and hardly enjoy the wax, and break the ground with great
labor, giving the best of their grain to the easefull and idle.

Merchant.
For the second sort, which are the Merchants, as the first feed the Kingdom,
so do these enrich it, yea their trades, especially those which are forcible,
are not the least part of our Martial Policy, as hereafter proved; and to do
them right, they have in all ages and times assisted the Kings of this Land,
not only with great sums of money, but with great Fleets of Ships in all their
enterprises beyond the seas. The second have seldom or never offended their
Princes, to enjoy their trades at home upon tolerable conditions, has ever
contented them for the injuries received from other Nations, give them but the
Commission of Reprisal, they will either Right themselves, or sit down with
their own loss without complaint.

Gentry.
3. The third sort, which are the Gentry of England, these being neither seated
in the lowest grounds, and thereby subject to the biting of every beast, nor in
the highest Mountains, and thereby in danger to be torn with tempest; but the
Valleys between both, have their parts in the inferior Justice, and being
spread over all, are the Garrisons of good order throughout the Realm.

Sir WALTER RALEIGH'S LETTERS.
Sir Walter Raleigh's Letter to Mr Secretary Winwood, before his Journey to
Guiana.
Honorable SIR,
I Was lately persuaded, by two Gentlemen, my ancient Friends, to acquaint your
Honor with some offers of mine, made heretofore for a Journey to Guiana, who
were of opinion, That it would be better understood now, than when it was first
propounded, which advice having surmounted my despair, I have presumed to send
unto your Honor the Copies of those Letters which I then wrote, both to his
Majesty, and to the Treasurer Ceuill, wherein as well the reasons that first
moved me are remembered, as the objections by him made are briefly answered.

What I know of the riches of that place, not by hear say, but what mine eyes
has seen, I have said it often, but it was then to no end: Because those that
had the greatest trust, were resolved not to believe it, not because they
doubted the Truth, but because they doubted my Disposition toward themselves;
where (if God had blessed me in the enterprise) I had recovered his Majesty's
favor and good opinion. Other cause than this, or other suspicion they never
had any. Our late worthy Prince of Wales was extreme curious in searching out
the Nature of my offenses, The Queens Majesty has informed her self from the
beginning. The King of Denmark at both times of his being here was thoroughly
satisfied of my innocence, they would otherwise never have moved his Majesty
on my behalf.

The Wife, the Brother, and the Son of a King, do not use to sue for men
suspect; but Sir, since they all have done it out of their charity, and but
with references to me alone. Your Honor (whose respect has only relation to
his Majesty's service) strengthened by the example of those Princes, may with
the more hardness do the like, being Princes to whom his Majesty's good estate
is not less dear; and all men that shall oppugn it, no less hateful, then
to the King himself.

It is true Sir, That his Majesty has sometimes answered, That his Council
knew me better than he did; meaning some two or three of them, And it was
indeed my infelicitie; for had his Majesty known me, I had never been here
where I now am: or had I known his Majesty, they had never been so long there
where they now are. His Majesty not knowing of me has been my ruin, and his
Majesty misknowing of them, has been the ruin of a goodly part of his
estate: but they are all of them now, some living and some dying, come to his
Majesty's knowledge. But Sir, how little soever his Majesty knew me, and how
much soever he believed them, yet have I been bound to his Majesty both for my
Life, and all that remains, of which, but for his Majesty, nor Life, nor ought
else had remained. In this respect Sir, I am bound to yield up the same life,
and all I have for his Majesty's service; to die for the King, and not by the
King, is all the ambition I have in the world.

Walter Raleigh.

Sir Walter Raleigh's Letter to his Wife, from Guiana.
Sweet Heart,
I Can yet write unto you but with a weak hand, for I have suffered the most
violent Calenture for fifteen days, that ever man did, and lived: but God that
gave me a strong heart in all my adversities, has also now strengthened it in
the hell fire of heat.

We have had two most grievous sicknesses in our Ship, of which forty two
have died, and there are yet many sick. but having recovered the land of
Guiana, this 12 of November, I hope we shall recover them. We are yet two
hundred men, and the rest of our Fleet are reasonable strong, strong enough I
hope to perform what we have undertaken, if the diligent care at London, to
make our strength known to the Spanish King by his Ambassador, have not taught
the Spanish King to fortify all the enterances against us; howsoever we must
make the adventure, and if we perish, it shall be no honor for England, nor
gain for his Majesty to loose among many other, an hundred as valiant
Gentlemen as England has in it.

Of Captain Bayl^^s base coming from us at the Canaries, see a Letter of
Kemishes to Mr cory, and of the unnatural weather, storms and rains and winds,
He has in the same letter, given a touch of the way that has ever been sailed
in fourteen days, now hardly performed in forty days; God I trust, will give
us comfort in that which is to come.

In passage to the Canaries, I stayed at Gomerah, where I took water in peace,
because the Country durst not deny it me; I received there of an English
race, a Present of Oranges, Lemmons, Quinces, and Pome-granates without which I
could not have lived; those I preserved in fresh sands, and I have of them yet
to my great refreshing. Your son had never so good health, having no distemper
in all the heat under the Line. All my servants have escaped but Crab and my
Cook, yet all have had the sickness. Crofts and March, and the rest are all
well. Remember my service to my Lord Carew, and Mr Secretary Winwood.

I write not to them, for I can write of naught but miseries: yet of men of
sort, we have lost our Sergeant Major, Captain Pigott, and his Lieuetenant,
Captain Edward Hastings, who would have died at home, for both his liver,
spleen and brains were rotten. My sons Lieuetenant Payton and my cousin Mr.
Hews, Mr. Mordant, Mr. Gardener. Mr. Hayward, Captain Jennings the Merchant,
Kemish of London, and the Master Chyrurgion, Mr. Refiner, Mr. Moor the
Governor of the Barmoudas. our Provost Marsh. W. Steed, Lieutenant Vescie, but
to mine inestimable grief, Hammon and Talb^t. By the next I trust you shall
hear better of us, in Gods hands we were, and in him we trust,

This bearer, Captain Alley, for his infirmity of his head I have sent back,
an honest valiant man, he can deliver you all that is past. Commend me to my
worthy friends at Loathbury, Sr John Leigh and Mr. Bow^r, whose Nephew Knevil
is well, and to my cousin Blundell, and my most devoted and humble service to
her Majesty.

To tell you that I might be here King of the Indi^n, were a vanity, but my
name has still lived among them; here they feed me with fresh meat, and all
that the Country yields, all offer to obey me. Commend me to poor Carew my son.

From Galliana in Guiana, the 14 of November.

Sir Walter Raleigh's Letter to Sir Ralph Winwood.
SIR,
AS I have not hitherto given you any Account of our proceedings and passages
toward the Indes, so have I no other subject to write of, than of the greatest
misfortunes that ever befell any man: for whereas, for the first, All those
that Navigate between Cape de Vera and America, do pass between fifteen or
twenty days at most, we found the wind so contrary, and which are also
contrary to nature so many storms and rains, as we spent six weeks in the
passage, by reason whereof, and that in so great heat we wanted water: for at
the Isle Prano of Cape de vero, we lost our Anchours and Cables, and our water
Casks, being driven from the Island with a Hu^^^icano, and were like all to
have perished. Great sickness fell amongst us, and carried away great numbers
of our ablest men both for sea and land. The 17 of November, we had sight of
Guiana, and soon after came to Anchour in five degrees at the River Gallian^,
here we staid till the fourth of December, landed our sick men, set up the
Barges and Shallops, which were brought out of England in quarters, washed our
Ships, and took in fresh water, being sed and cherished by the Indians of my
old acquaintance, with a great deal of love and respect, my self being in the
hands of death these 6 weeks, and was not able otherwise to move than as I was
carried in a chair, gave order to 5 small Ships to sail into Orinoque, having
Captain Kemts for their Conductor toward the Mines, and in those five Ships
five Companies of 50 under the command of Captain Parker, and Captain North,
brethren to the Lord Mounteagle and the Lord North, valiant Gentlemen, and of
infinite patience for the labor, hunger, and heat which they have endured, my
son had the third Company Captain Thornix of Kent the fourth Company, Captain
Chidlez, by his Lieutenant, the fifth: but as my Sergeant Major Captain Peggot
of the Low Countries died in the former miserable passage, so my Lieutenant Sir
Warham S. Letter lay sick without hope of life, and the charge conferred on my
Nephew George Raleigh, who had also served long with infinite commendations;
but by reason of my absence, and of Sir Warhams was not so well obeyed as the
Enterprise required. As they passed up the River, the Spaniard began the War,
and shot at us both with their Ordinance and Muskets, whereupon the Companies
were forced to charge them, and soon after beat them out of the Town. In the
Assault, my son (more desirous of honor than safety) was slain, with whom (to
say truth) all the respects of this world have taken end in me. And although
these five Captains had as weak Companies as ever followed valiant Leaders, yet
were there amongst them some twenty or thirty valiant adventurous Gentlemen,
and of singular courage, as of my sons Company, Mr. Knivet, Mr. Hammon, Mr.
Longwirth, Mr. John Pleasington; his Officers, Sir John Hamden; Mr. Simon Leak
Corporal of the Field, Mr. Hammon the elder Brother, Mr. Nicholas of
Buckingham, Mr. Roberts of Kent, Mr. Perin, Mr. Tresham, Mr. Mullinax, Mr.
Winter and his brother, Mr. Wray, Mr. Miles Herbart, Mr. Bradshavv, Capt. Hill,
and others.

Sir, I have set down the names of these Gentlemen, to the end, that if his
Majesty shall have cause to use their service, it may please you to take
notice of them for very sufficient Gentlemen. The other five Ships staid at
Trinidads, having no other Port capable for them near Guiana. The second Ship
was commanded by my Vice Admiral Capt. John Pennington, of whom (to do him
right) he is one of the sufficientest Gentlemen for the Sea that England has.
The third by Sir Warham S. Leiger, an exceeding valiant and worthy Gentleman.
The fourth by Sr John Fern The fifth by Captain Chidley of Devon. With these
five Ships I daily attended their Armado of Spain, which had they set upon us,
our force divided, the one half in Orinoque, an hundred and fifty miles from
us, we had not only been torn in pieces, but all those in the River had also
perished, being of no force at all for the Sea fight; for we had resolved to
have been burnt by their sides, had the Armado arrived: but belike, they staid
for us at Ma^g^^t, by which they knew we must pass toward the Indies: for it
pleased his Majesty to value us at so little, as to command me upon my
Allegiance, to set down under my hand the Country, and the River by which I
was to enter it; to set down the number of my men, and burden of my Ships, and
what Ordinance every Ship carried, which being known to the Spanish
Ambassador, and by him to the King of Spain, a dispatch was made, and letters
sent from Madrid, before my departure out of the Thames; for his first letter
sent by a Barque of Advise, was dated the 19 of March 1617. at Madrid, which
letter I have here enclosed sent to your Honor, the rest I reserve, not
knowing whether they may be intercepted or not. The second by the King, dated
the second of May, sent also by a Coronel of Diego de Polo^eque, Governor of
Guiana, Elderedo and Trinidado. The third by the Bishop of Portricho, and
delivered to Po^oni^que the 15 of July, at Trinidado. And the fourth was sent
from the Farmer and Secretary of his Customs in the Indies. At the same time,
by that of the Kings hand, sent by the Bishop, there was also a Commission for
the speedy levying of three hundred soldiers, and ten pieces of Ordinance to
be sent from Portricho, for the defense of Guiana, an hundred and fifty from
Nuevo Remo de Grando, under the command of Captain Anthony Musica, and the
other hundred and fifty from Portricho, to be conducted by C. Franc. Laudio.

Now Sir, if all that have traded to the Indies since his Majesty's time knew
that the Spaniards have flayed alive all the poor men which they have taken,
being but Merchant men, what death and cruel torment shall we expect if they
conquer us? certainly they have hitherto failed grossly, being set out thence as
we were, both for number, time, and place.

Lastly, to make an Apology for not working the Mine, (although I know his
Majesty expects) whom I am to satisfy so much, as my self, having lost my
son, and my estate in the Enterprise, yet it is true, that the Spaniards took
more care to defend the passage leading unto it, than they did the Town, which
by the Kings instructions they might easily do, the Countries being Aspera and
Nemosa.

But it is true, that when Capt. Kemish found the River low, and that he could
not approach the Banks in most places near the Mine by a Mile, and where he
found a descent, a volley of Muskets come from the woods upon the Boat, and
slew two Rowers, and hurt fix others, and shot a valiant Gentleman of Captain
Thornix, of which wound he languisheth to this day. He, to wit, Kemish,
following his own advice, thought that it was in vain to discover the Mine; for
he gave me this for an excuse at his return, that the Companies of English in
the Town of S. Thome were not able to defend it, against the daily and nightly
assaults of the Spaniards, that the passages to the Mines, were thick and
unpassable woods, and that the Mine being discovered, they had no men to work
it, did not discover it at all: for it is true, the Spaniards having two gold
Mines near the Town, the one possessed by Pedro Rodrigo de Paran, the second by
Harmian Frotinio, the third of silver, by Captain Francisco, for the want of
Negroes to work them: for as the Indians cannot be constrained by a Law of
Charles the Fifth, so the Spaniards will not, nor can endure the labor of those
Mines, whatsoever the Bragadochio, the Spanish Ambassador says. I shall prove
under the Proprietors hand, by the Custom-Book, and the Kings Quinto, of which
I recovered an Ingot or two: I shall also make it appear to any Prince or State
that will undertake it, how easily those Mines, and five or six more of them
may be possessed, and the most of them in those parts, which never have as yet
been attempted by any, nor by any passage to them, nor ever discovered by the
English, French, or Dutch. But at Kemish his return from Orinoque, when I
rejected his counsel and his course, and told him that he had undone me; and
wounded my credit with the King past recovery, he slew himself: for I told him,
that seeing my son was slain, I cared not if I had lost an hundred more in
opening of the Mine, so my credit had been saved: for I protest before God, had
not Capt. Whitney (to whom I gave more countenance than to all the Captains of
my Fleet) run from me at the Grenades, and carried another ship with him of
Captain Woldestons. I would have left my body at S. Thomes by my sons, or have
brought with me out of that or other Mines, so much Gold oar, as should have
satisfied the King. I propounded no vain thing; what shall become of me I know
not, I am unpardoned in England, and my poor estate consumed, and whether any
Prince will give me bread or no I know not. I desire your Honor to hold me in
your good opinino, to remember my service to my Lord of Ar^undel and Pembrook,
to take some pity on my poor Wife, to whom I dare not write for renewing her
sorrow for her son; and beseech you to give a copy of this to my Lord (...):
for to a broken mind, a sick body, and weak eyes, it is a torment to write
many Letters. I have found many things of importance for discovering the state
and weakness of the Indies, which if I live, I shall here after impart unto
your Honor, to whom I shall remain a faithful servant.

Walter Raleigh

Sir Walter Raleigh's Letter sent to his Wife, Copied out of his own hand
writing.
I Was loath to write, because I know not how to comfort you, and God knows, I
never knew what sorrow meant till now. All that I can say to you is, that you
must obey the will and providence of God, and remember, that the Queens
Majesty bare the loss of Prince Henry with a magnanimous heart, and the Lady
Harrington of her son. Comfort your heart (dearest Bess) I shall sorrow for us
both, I shall for now the less, because I have not long to sorrow, because not
long to live. I refer you to Mr. Secretary Winwoods Letter, who will give you
a copy of it, if you send for it, therein you shall know what has passed; I
have written that Letter, for my brains are broken, and it is a torment for me
to write, and especially of misery. I have desired Mr. Secretary to give my
Lord Carew a copy of his Letter. I have cleansed my ship of sick men, and sent
them home; I hope God will send us somewhat before we return. You shall hear
from me if I live, from the New found land, where I mean to make clean my ships
and revictual; for I have Tobacco enough to pay for it. The Lord bless and
comfort you, that you may bear patiently the death of your valiant son

This 22. of March, from the Isle of Christophers, yours Walter Raleigh.
Postscript.
I Protest before the Majesty of God, That as Sir Francis Drake, and Sir John
Hawkins died heart broken when they failed of their enterprise, I could
willingly do the like, did I not contend against sorrow for your sake, in hope
to provide somewhat for you and to comfort and relieve you. If I live to
return, resolve your self that it is the care for you that has strengthened my
heart. It is true that Kemish might have gone directly to the Mine, and meant
it, but after my sons death, he made them believe he knew not the way, and
excused himself upon want of water in the River, and counter feiting many
impediments left it unfound. When he came back, I told him he had undone me,
and that my credit was lost for ever; he answered, That when any son was lost,
and that he left me so weak, that he resolved not to find me alive, he had no
reason to enrich a company of Rascals, who after my sons death made no account
of him. He further told me that the English sent up into Guiana, could hardly
defend the Spanish town of S. Thome which they had taken, and therefore for
them to pass through thick woods it was impossible, and more impossible to
have victual brought them into the Mountains And it is true, that the
Governor Diego Polo^eqe, and other four Captains being slain, whereof Wat flew
one, Plessington, Wa^s servant, and John of Moroc^urs, one of his men, slew
other two. I say five of them slain in the entrance of the Town, the rest went
off in a whole body, and took more care to defend the passages to their Mines
(of which they had three within a League of the Town, besides a Mine that was
about five miles off) than they did of the Town it self. Yet Kemish at the
first was resolved to go to the Mine; but when he came to the banck-side to
Land, and had two of his men slain outright from the bank, and six other hurt,
and Captain Thornix shot in the head, of which wound, and the accident thereof,
he has pined away those twelve weeks.

Now when Kemish came back and gave me the former Reasons which moved him not
to open the Mine, the one the death of my son, a second the weakness of the
English, and their impossibilities to work and to be victualled; a third that
it were a folly to discover it for the Spaniards; and lastly my weakness and
being unpardoned; and that I rejected all these his Arguments, and told him,
that I must leave him to himself to resolve it to the King and State, he shut
up himself into his Cabin, and shot himself with a pocket Pistol which broke
one of, his ribs, and finding that he had not prevailed, he thrust a long Knife
under his short ribs up to the handle and died. Thus much I have written to Mr
Secretary, to whose Letters I refer you to know the truth. I did after the
sealing break open the Letter again, to let you know in brief the state of that
business, which I pray you impart to my Lord of Northumberland, and Silvanus
Sco^y.

For the rest, there was never poor man so exposed to slaughter as I was; for
being commanded upon mine Alleagiance to set down not only the Cou^-trey but
the very River by which I was to enter it, to name my Ships number, men, and my
Artillery. This now was sent by the Spanish Ambassador to his Master the King
of Spain, the King wrote his Letters to all parts of the Indies, especially to
the Governor Palamago of Guiana, Elderado, and Trinidado, of which the first
Letter bore date 19 of March 16^7, at Ma^rill, when I had not yet left the
Thames, which Letter I have sent ot Mr Secretary. I have also other Letters of
the Kings which I reserve, and one of the Councels. The King also sent a
Commission to leave three hundred soldiers out of his Garrisons of ^nie Regno
de Granado e Portricho, with ten pieces of brasle Ordinance to entertain us; he
also prepared an Army by sea to set upon us. If were too long to tell you how
we were preserved, if I live I shall make it known; my brains are broken, and I
cannot write much, I live yet, and I told you why. Witney for whom I sold all
my Plate at Plymouth, and to whom I gave more credit and countenance than to
all the Captains of my Fleet, ran from me at the Grenades, and Wolleston with
him, so as I have now but five Ships, and out of those I have sent some into my
Fly boat, a sabble of idle Rascals, which I know will not spare to wound me,
but I care not. I am sure there is never a base slave in all the Fleet has
taken the pain and care that I have done, that have slept so little, and
traveled so much, my friends will not believe them, and for the rest I care
not; God in heaven bless you and strengthen your heart.


Yours Walter Raleigh.

Sir Walter Raleigh's Letter to Mr Secretary Winwood.
SIR,
SInce the death of Kemish, it is contessed by the Sergeant Major, and others
of his inward friends, that he told them that he could have brought them unto
the Mine within two hours March from the Riverside; but because my son was
slain my self unpardoned, and not like to live, he had no reason to open the
Mine either for the Spaniard or for the King; they answered, that the King
(though I were not pardoned) had granted my heart under the Great Sea. He
replied, that the grant to me was to no man, non Ens in the Law, and therefore
of no force; this discourse they had, which I knew not of till after his death:
but when I was resolved to write unto your Honor, he prayed me to join with
him in excusing his not going to the Mine, I answered him I would not do it;
but if my self could satisfy the King and State, that he had reason not to
open it, I should be glad of it: but for my part, I must avow that he knew it,
and that he might with loss have done it; other excuses I would not frame: he
told me that he would wait on me presently, and give me better satisfaction:
but I was no sooner come from him into my Cabin, but I heard a Pistol go over
my head, and sending to know who shot it, word was brought me that Kemish shot
it out of his Cabin window to cleanse it; his boy going into his Cabin, found
him lying upon his bed with much blood by him, and looking in his face saw him
dead; the Pistol being but little, did but crack his rib, but turning him over
found a long Knife in his body, all but the handle. Sir I have sent into
England with my cousin Harbert (a very valiant honest Gentleman) diverse unworthy
persons, good for nothing neither by sea nor land, and though it was at their
own suit, yet I know they will wrong me in all that they can. I beseech your
Honor, that the scorn of men may not be believed of me, who have taken more
pains, and suffered more than the meanest Rascal in the Ship; these being
gone, I shall be able to keep the Sea until the end of August, with some four
reasonable good ships. Sir, wheresoever God shall permit me to arrive in any
part of Europe, I will not fail to let your Honor know what we have done, till
then, and ever I rest

Your Honors servant W. Raleigh.

Sir WALTER RALEIGH'S Letter to King JAMES, at his return from GVIANA.
May it please your most excellent Majesty,
IF in my Journey outward bound, I had my men murdered at the Islands, and yet
spared to take revenge, if I did discharge some Spanish Barks taken without
spoil, if I so bear all parts of the Spanish Indies, wherein I might have taken
twenty of their Downs on the sea coasts, and did only follow the enterprise I
undertook for Guiana, where without any directions from me, a Spanish Village
was burnt, which was new set up within three miles of the Mine By your
Majesty's favor. I find no reason why the Spanish Ambassador should complain
of me. If it were lawful for the Spaniards to murder twenty six English men,
tying them back to back, and then cutting their throats, when they had traded
with them whole month, and came to them on the land without so much as one
sword, and that it may not be lawful to your Majesty's subjects, being charged
first by them, to repel force by force, we may justly say, O miserable English!

If P^^^^^ and ^^e^^^m took Campe^^^ and other places in the Honduras, seated
in the heart of the Spanish Indies burnt towns, and killed the Spaniards, and
had nothing said unto them at this return, and my self forbore to look into the
I^^^^as; because I would not offend, I may as justly say, O miserable Sir
Walter Raleigh!

If I have spent my poor estate, lost my son, suffered by sickness and
otherwise a world of miseries; if I have resisted with manifest hazard of my
life, the Robberies and Spoils, with which my Companions would have made me
rich, if when I was poor, I would have made my self rich, if when I have gotten
my liberty, which all men and nature it self do much prize, I voluntarily lost
it, if when I was sure of my life, I rendered it again, if I might elsewhere
where have sold my ship and goods, and put five or six thousand pounds in my
purse, and yet brought her into England, I beseech your Majesty to believe,
that all this I have done, because it should not be said to your Majesty, that
your Majesty had given liberty and trust to a man whose end was but the
recoverie of his liberty, and who had betrayed your Majesty's trust.

My Mutiniers told me, that if I returned from England I should be undone, but
I believed in your Majesty's goodness more than in all their being arguments.
Sure, I am the first that being free and able to enrich my self; yet has
embraced poverty and peril. And as sure I am, that my example shall make me
the last: but your Majesty's wisdom and goodness I have made my judges, who
have ever been, and shall ever be,

Your Majesty's most humble Vassal Walter Raleigh.

Sir Walter Raleighs's Letter to his Wife, after his Condemnaetion.
YOu shall receive (my dear Wife) my Last words in these my Last lines; my love
I send you, that you may keep when I am dead, and my counsel, that you may
remember it when I am no more. I would not with my will present you sorrows
(dear Bess) let them go to the grave with me, and be buried in the dust. And
seeing that it is not the will of God that I shall see you any more, bear my
destruction patiently, and with an heart like your self.

First I send you all the thanks which my heart can conceive, or my words
express, for your many travels and cares for me, which though they have not
taken effect as you wished, yet my debt to you is not the less; but pay it I
never shall in this world.

Secondly, I beseech you, for the love you bare me living, that you do not hide
your self many days, but by your travels seek to help my miserable Fortunes,
and the Right of your poor Child, your mourning cannot avail me that am but
dust.

Thirdly, you shall understand, that my Lands were conveyed ( bona fide) to my
Child, the writings were drawn at Midsummer was twelve months, as diverse can
witness, and I trust my blood will quench their malice who desired my
slaughter, that they will not seek also to kill you and yours with extreme
poverty. To what friend to direct you I know not, for all mine have left me in
the true time of trial. Most sorry am I, that being thus surprised by death,
I can leave you no better Estate, God has prevented all my determinations,
that great God which works all in all, and if you can live free from want,
care for no more, for the rest is but a vanity: Love God and begin betimes, in
him you shall find true, everlasting, and endless comfort, when you have
traveled and wearied your self with all sorts of worldly cogitations you shall
sit down by sorrow in the end Teach your son also to serve and fear God whilst
he is young, that the fear of God may grow up in him; then will God be an
Husband to you, and a Father to him, an Husband and a Father, that can never be
taken from you.

Baylie owes me a thousand pounds, and Arvan six hundred; in J^rnesey also
have much owing me. (Dear wife) I beseech you, for my Souls sake, pay all poor
men. When I am dead, no doubt you shall be much sought unto for the world
thinks I was very rich; have a care to the fair pretenses of men, for no
greater misery can befall you in this life, than to become a prey unto the
world, and after to be despised. I speak (God knows) not to dissuade you from
Marriage, for it will be best for you, both in respect of God and the world. As
for me, I am no more yours, nor you mine, death has cut us asunder, and God
has divided me from the world, and you from me. Remember your poor Child for
his Fathers sake, who loved you in his happiest estate. I sued for my life, but
(God knows) it was for you and yours that I desired it: for, know it, (my dear
Wife) your Child is the Child of a true man, who in his own respect despises
Death and his misshapen and ugly forms. I cannot write much, (God knows) how
hardly I steal this time when all sleep, and it is also time for me to separate
my thoughts from the world. Beg my dead body, which living was denied you, and
either lay it in S^^^b^rn or in Exceter Church by my father and mother. I can
say no more, Time and Death calls me away. The everlasting God, powerful,
infinite, and inscrutable God Almighty, who is goodness it self, the true
Light and Life, keep you and yours, and have mercy upon me, and forgive my
Persecutors and false accusers, and send us to meet in his glorious kingdom. My
dear Wife farewell, Bless my Boy, Pray for me, and let my true God hold you
both in his Arms.

Yours that was, but now not mine own Walter Raleigh.

Sir Walter Raleigh's Letter to Prince Henry, touching the model of a Ship.
Most excellent Prince,
IF the Ship your Highness intends to build, be bigger than the Victory, then
her beams, which are laid overthwart from side to side will not serve again,
and many other of her timbers and other stuff, will not serve, whereas if she
be a size less, the timber of the old Ship will serve well to the building of a
new.

If she be bigger she will be of less use, go very deep to water, and of
mighty charge, our Channels decaying every year, less nimble, less mannyable,
and seldom to be used Grande Navio grande satica says the Spaniard.

A Ship of six hundred Tuns, will carry as good Ordinance as a Ship of twelve
hundred Tuns, and where the greater has double her Ordinance, the less will
turn her broad side twice, before the great Ship can wind once, and so no
advantage in that overplus of Guns. The lesser will go over clear where the
greater shall stick and perish; the lesser will come and go, leave or take, and
is yare, whereas the greater is slow, unmanyable, and ever full of encumber.

In a well conditioned Ship, these things are chiefly required.

1. That she be strong built. 2. Swift in sail. 3. Stout-sided. 4. That her
Ports be so laid, as that she may carry out her Guns all weathers. 5. That she
hull and try well. 6. That she stay well, when boarding, or turning on a wind
is required.
To make her strong, consists in the care and truth of the workman; to make
her swift, is to give her a large Run, or way forward, and so afterward, done
by act and just proportion, and that in laying out of her bows before, and
quarters behind; the Ship-wright be sure, that she neither sink nor hang into
the water, but lie clear and above it, wherein Ship-wrights do often fail, and
then is the speed in sailing utterly spoiled.

That she be stout-sided, the same is provided by a long bearing floar, and by
sharing off from above waters to the low ^^edge of the Ports, which done, then
will she carry out her Ordinance all we^thers.

To make her to hull and to try well, which i^ called a good sea-Ship, there
are two things principally to be regarded, the one that she have a good draught
of water, the other that she be not overcharged: And this is seldom done in the
Kings Ships, and therefore we are forced to lie, or try in them with our main
Course and mizen, which with a deep keel and standing streak, she would perform.

The extreme length of a Ship makes her unapt to stay, especially if she be
floatie and want sharpness of way forward. And it is most true, that such
overlong Ships, are fitter for the narrow Seas in summer, than for the Ocean,
or long voyages: and therefore an hundred foot by the Keel, and thirty five
foot broad is a good proportion for a great Ship.

It is to be noted, that all Ships sharp before, not having a long floar, will
fall rough into the sea from a billow, and take in water over head and ears;
and the same quality have all narrow-quartered ships to sink after the tail.
The high Charging of ships, is that that brings many ill qualities, it makes
them extreme Lee-ward, makes them sink deep into the seas, makes them labor
sore in foul weather, and oft-times overset. Safety is more to be respected
than shows, or niceness for ease; in sea journeys both cannot well stand
together, and therefore the most necessary is to be chosen.

Two Decks and an half is enough, and no building at all above that, but a low
Masters Cabin. Our Masters and Mariners will say, that the ships will bear
more well enough; and true it is, if none but ordinary Mariners served in them.
But men of better sort, unused to such a life, cannot so well endure the
rolling and tumbling from side to side, where the seas are never so little
grown, which comes by high Charging. Besides those high Cabin works aloft, are
very dangerous in sight, to tear men with their splinters.

Above all other things, have care that the great Guns be four foot clear above
water when all lading is in, or else these best pieces are idle sea: for if the
Ports lie lower, and be open it is dangerous; and by that default was a goodly
Ship, and many gallant Gentlemen lost, in the days of Henry the Eigth, before
the Isle of Wight, in a Ship called by the name of Mary-Rose.

Sir Walter Raleighs PILGRIMAGE.
GIve me my Scallop shell of Quiet.
My Staff of Faith to walk upon;
My Scrip of Joy immortal Diet;
My Bottle of Salvation.
My Gown of Glory (Hopes true gage)
And thus I Will take my Pilgrimage.
Blood must be my Bodies only Balmer,
No other Balm will there be given
Whilst my Soul, like a quiet Palmer,
Travelleth toward the Land of Heaven
Over the silver Mountains
Where springs the Nectar Fountains,
There I will kiss the Bowl of Bliss,
And drink mine everlasting fill
Upon every Milken hill.
My Soul will be a dry before,
But after, it will thirst no more.
I Will take them first to quench my Thirst,
And taste of Nectars suckets,
At those clear Wells
Where sweetness dwells,
Drawn up by Saints in Crystal Buckets.
Then by that happy blestfull day,
More peaceful Pilgrims I shall see,
That have cast off their rags of clay,
And walk apparelled fresh like me,
And when our Bo^les and all we
Are filled with immortality,
Then the blessed Parts we will travel,
Strow'd with Rubies thick as gravel,
Sealings of Diamonds, Sapphire flowers,
High walls of Coral, and Pearly Bowers.
From thence to Heavens bribeless Hall,
Where no corrupted voices brawl,
No Conscience molten into Gold,
No forged Accuser bought or sold,
No cause deferred, no vain-spent Iourny,
For there, CHRIST is the Kings Attorney,
Who pleads for all without degrees,
And he has Angels, but no Fees:
And when the twelve Grand-million Jury
Of our Sins, with direful fury,
Against our Souls black Verdicts give,
Christ pleads his Death, and then we Live.
Be thou my Speaker [taintless Pleader,
Unblotted Lawyer, true Proceeder.]
Thou would Salvation even for Alms,
Not with a bribed Lawyers Palms.
And this is mine eternal Plea
To him that made Heaven, Earth and Sea,
That since my Flesh must die so soon,
And want a Head to dine next noon,
Just at the stroke, when my Veins start and spread,
Set on my Soul an everlasting Head.
Then am I ready, like a Palmer fit
To tread those blessed Paths which before I writ.
Of Death and Judgment, Heaven and Hell,
Who often does think, must needs Die well.
Sir Walter Raleigh's VERSES; Found in his Bible in the Gate House at
Westminster.
EVen such is Time, which takes in trust
Our Youth, our Joy, and all we have,
And pays us naught but Age and Dust,
When in the dark and silent Grave:
When we have wandered all our ways,
Shuts up the story o^ our days:
And from which Grave, and Earth, and Dust,
The Lord shall raise me up I trust.
Sir W. RALEIGH, On the Snuff of a Candle The night before he died.
Cowards fear to Die, but Courage stout,
Rather than Live in Snuff, will be put out.
Sir WALTER RALEIGH'S SPEECH Immediately before he was beheaded.
UPon Simon and Judes day, the Lieutenant of the Tower had a Warrant to bring
his Prisoner to the King's Bench. W (...), where the Attorney General demanded
Execution, according to the Judgment pronounced against him at W(...), the
Lord Chief Justice caused the Indictment. Verdict and Judgment to be read, and
after asked him, what he could say, Why he should not die according to the Law;
his answer was, That this fifteen years he had lived by the mere mercy of the
King, and did now wonder how his Mercy was turned into Justice, he not knowing
any thing wherein he had provoked his Majesty's displeasure, and did hope, that
he was clear from that Judgment by the Kings Commission in making him General
of the Voyage to Guiana, for (as he conceived) the words, To his trusty and
well beloved subject, etc. Did in themselves imply a Pardon. But Master
Attorney told him, these words were not sufficient for that purpose. Whereupon
he desired the opinion of the Court, to which the Lord Chief Justice replied,
it was no Pardon in Law.

Then began Sir Walter Raleigh to make a long description of the events and
ends of his Voyage, but he was interrupted by the Chief Justice, who told him,
that it was not for any offense committed there, but for his first fact that he
was now called in question, and thereupon told him, That seeing he must prepare
to die he would not add affliction to affliction, nor aggravate his fault,
knowing him to be a man full of misery; but with the good Samaritane administer
oil and wine for the comfort of his distressed Soul. You have been a General,
and a great Commander, imitate therefore that noble Captain, who thrusting
himself into the midst of a Battle, cried aloud, Mors me Expect^t, and ego
Mortem Expectabo, as you should not contemn so to do, nor should you fear
death, the one shows too much boldness, the other no less cowardice, so
with some other few instructions the Court arose, and Sir Walter was committed
into the hands of the Sheriff of Middlesex, who presently conveyed him to the
Gate house in Westminster.

Upon Thursday morning this Courageous, although Committed Knight, was brought
before the Parliament House, where there was a Scaffold erected for his
Beheading: yet it was doubted overnight that he should be hanged, but it fell
out otherwise. He had no sooner mounted the scaffold, but with a cheerful
Countenance and andaunted Look, he saluted the Company. His Attire was a
wrought Nightcap, a Ruff band, a hair-coloured Satin Doublet, with a black
wrought Waste-coat under it, a pair of black cut Taffery Breeches, a pair of
ash-colored Silk Stockings and a wrought black Velvet Night gown; putting off
his Hat, he directed his Speech to the Lords present, as follows. My
honorable Lords, and the rest of my good friends that come to see me die,
Know, that I much rejoice that it has pleased God to bring me from darkness
to night, and in freeing me from the Tower, wherein I might have died in
disgrace, by letting me love to come to this place, where though I lose my
life, yet I shall clear some false accusations, unjustly laid to my charge, and
leave behind me a testimony of a true heart, both to my King and Country.

Two things S^ W. Raleigh accused of.
Two things there are which have exceedingly possessed and provoked his Majesty's
indignation against me, viz. A Confederacy, or Combination with France, and
disloyal and disobedient words of my Prince. For the first, his Majesty had
some cause, h^^^gh grounds upon a weak foundation, to suspect mine inclination
to the French action, for not long before my departure from England, the French
Agent took occasion, passing by my house, to visit me, had some conference,
during the time of his abode, only concerning my voyage, and nothing else, I
take God to witness.

Another suspicion is had of me, because I did labor to make an escape from
Plymouth to France, I cannot deny, but that willingly, when I heard a rumor,
That there was no hope of my Life upon my return to London, I would have
escaped so the safeguard of my Life, and not for any ill intent or conspiracy
against the State.

The like reason of suspicion arose, in that I persuaded Sir Lewis Steakly, my
Guardian, to flee with me from London to France, but my answer to this is, as
to the other, That only for my safeguard, and thought else, was my intent, as
I shall answer before the Almighty.

It is alleged, That I seigned my self sick and in art made my body full of
blisters when I was at Salisbury. True it is, I did to; the reason was, because
I hoped thereb^ to defer my coming before the King and Council, and so by
delaying, might have gain time to have got my Pardon. I have an Example out of
Scripture for my warrant, that in case of necessity, and for the safeguard of
my life, David seigned himself foolish and mad, yet it was not imputed to him
for sin.

Concerning the second Imputation laid to my charge, that I should speak
scandalous and reproachful words of my Prince, there is no witness against me
but only one, and he a Chimicall French man, whom I entertained, rather for
his Jests than his Judgment: this man to incroach himself into the favor of
the Lords, and gaping after some great reward, has falsely accused me of
Seditions speeches against his Majesty; against whom, if I did either speak,
or think a thought hurtful or prejudicial, the Lord blot me out of the book
of Life.

It is not a time to flatter or fear Princes, for I am a subject to none but
Death? therefore have a charitable conceit of me. That I know to swear is an
offense, to swear falsely at any time is a great sin, but to swear false before
the presence of Almighty God, before whom I am forthwith to appear, were an
offense unpardonable; therefore think me not now rashly, or untruly to confirm,
or protest any thing.

As for other objections, in that I was brought perforce into England, that I
carried sixteen thousand pounds in money out of England with me, more than I I
made known; that I should receive Letters from the French King, and such like,
with many Protestations he utterly denied.



FINIS.
The PREROGATIVE Of PARLIAMENTS In ENGLAND. Proved In a Dialogue between a
Counselor of State, and a Justice of Peace.

Written by the worthy Knight. Sir WALTER RALEIGH.

Dedicated to that part of the Parliament now assembled. Preserved to be now
happily (in these distracted Times) Published.

LONDON, Printed for William Sheares Junior, in Westminster Hall. 1657.

To the KING.
Most gracious Sovereign:
THose that are suppressed and helpelesse are commonly silent, wishing that the
common ill in all sort might be with their particular misfortunes: which
disposition, as it is uncharitable in all men, so would it be in me more
dogge-like then man-like, to bite the stone that struck me: (to wit) the
borrowed authority of my Sovereign misinformed, seeing their arms and hunds
that flang it, are most of them already rotten. For I must confess it ever,
that they are debts, and not discontentments, that your Majesty has laid upon
me; the debts and obligation of a friendlesse adversity, far more payable in
all Kinds, then those of the prosperous: All which, nor the least of them,
though I cannot discharge, I may yet endeavor it.

And notwithstanding my restraint has retrenched all ways, as well the ways
of labor and will, as of all other employments, yet has it left with me my
cogitations, then which I have nothing else to offer on the Altar of my Love.

Of those (most gracious Sovereign) I have used some part in the following
dispute, between a Counselor of Estate, and a Justice of Peace, the one
dissuading, the other persuading the calling of a Parliament. In all which,
since the Norman Conquest (at the least so many, as Histories have gathered) I
have in some things in the following Dialogue presented your Majesty with the
contentions and successes.

Some things there are, and those of the greatest, which because they ought
first to be resolved on, I thought fit to range them in the front of the rest,
to the end your Majesty may be pleased to examine your own great and Princely
hear of their acceptance, or refusal.

The first is, that supposition, that your Majesty's Subjects give nothing but
with adjuction of their own interest, interlacing in one, and the same act your
Majesty's relief, and their own liberties; not that your Majesty's piety was
ever suspected, but because the best Princes are ever the least jealous, your
Majesty judging others by your self, who have abused your Majesty's trust. The
feared continuance of the like abuse may persuade the provision But this
caution, how ever it seems at first sight, your Majesty shall perceive by
many examples following but frivolous. The bonds of Subjects to their Kings
should always be wrought out of Iron, the bonds of Kings unto Subjects but
with Cobwebs.

This it is (most renowned Sovereign) that this traffic of assurances has
been often urged, of which, if the Conditions had been easy, our Kings have as
easily kept them; if hard and prejudicial, either to their honors or estates,
the Creditours have been paid their debts whith their own presumption.

For all binding of a King by Law upon the advantage of his necessity, makes
the breach it self lawful in a King, His Charters and all other instruments
being no other then the surviuing witnesses of unconstrained will: Princeps non
subjicitur nifi sua voluntate libera, mero motu and certa Scientia: Necessary
words in all the grants of a King witnessing that the same grants were given
freely and knowingly.

The second resolution will rest in your Majesty, leaving the new impositions,
all Monopolies, and other grievances of the people to the consideration of the
House, Provided, that your Majesty's revenue be not abated, which if your
Majesty shall refuse, it is thought that the disputes will last long, and the
issues will be doubtful: And on the contrary if your Majesty vouchsafe it, it
may perchance be styled a yielding, which seems by the sound to brave the
Regalty.

But (mose excellent Prince) what other is it to the ears of the Wise, but as
the sound of a trumpet, having blasted forth a false Alarm, becomes but common
air? Shall the head yield to the feet? certainly it ought, when they are
grieved, for wisdom will rather regard the commodity, then object the
disgrace, seeing if the feet lie in fetters, the head cannot be freed, and
where the feet feel but their own pains, the head does not only suffer by
participiation, but withal by consideration of the evil.

Certainly the point of honor well weighed has nothing in it to even the
balance, for by your Majesty's favor, your Majesty does not yield either to
any person, or to any power, but to a dispute only, in which the Proposition
and Minor prove nothing without a conclusion, which no other person or power
can make, but a Majesty: yea this in Henry the third his time was called a
wisdom incomparable. For, the King raised again, recovery his authority: For,
being in that extremity as he was driven with the Queen and his Children, Cum
Abbatibus and Prioribus satis humilibus hospitia quaerere and prandia: For the
rest, may it please your Majesty to consider that there can nothing befall your
Majesty in matters of affairs more unfortunately, then the Commons of
Parliament with ill success: A dishonor so persuasive and adventurous as it
will not only find arguments; but it will take the leading of all enemies that
shall offer themselves against your Majesty's estate.

Le Tabourin de la paurete ne faict poinct de breuct: of which dangerous
disease in Princes, the remedy does chiefly consist in the love of the people,
which how it may be had and held, no man knows better then your Majesty; how
to loose it, all men know, and know that it is lost by nothing more then by the
defense of others in wrong doing. The only motives of mischances that ever
come to Kings of this Land since the Conquest.

It is only love (most renowned Sovereign) must prepare the way for your
Majesty's following desires. It is love which obeyes, which suffers, which
gives, which sticks at nothing; which Love, as well of your Majesty's people,
as the love of God to your Majesty, that it may always hold shall be the
continual prayers of your Majesty's most humble vassal,

Walter Ralegh.

A DIALOGUE Between a COUNSELOR of STATE, And a JUSTICE of PEACE.
COUNSELOR. NOW Sir, what think you of M. S. John's trial in Star Chamber? I
know that the bruit ran that he was hardly dealt withal, because he was
imprisoned in the Tower, seeing his disswasion from granting a Benevolence to
the King was warranted by the Law.


JUSTICE. Surely Sir it was made manifest at the hearing, that M. S. John was
rather in love with his own letter; he confessed he had seen your Lordships
letter, before he wrote his to the Major of Marleborough, and in your
Lordships letter, there was not a word whereto the Statutes by Mr. Sr. John
alleged, had reference; for those Statutes did condemn the gathering of money
from the subject, under title of a free gift; whereas a fifth, a sixth, a tenth,
etc. was set down and required. But my good Lord, though diverse Shires have
given to his Majesty, some more, some less, what is this to the Kings debt?


COUNS. We know it well enough, but we have many other projects.


JUST. It is true my good Lord: but your Lordship will find, that when by these
you have drawn many petty sums from the subjects, and those sometimes spent
as fast as they are gathered, his Majesty being nothing enabled thereby, when
you shall be forced to demand your great aid, the the Country will excuse it
self in regard of their former payments.


COUNS. What mean you by the great aid?


JUST. I mean the aid of Parliament.


COUNS. By Parliament, I would fain know the man that durst persuade the King
unto it, for if it should succeed ill, in what case were he?


JUST. You say well for your self my Lord, and perchance you that are lovers of
your selves (under pardon) do follow the advice of the late Duke of Alva, who
was ever opposite to all resolutions in business of importance; for if the
things enterprised succeeded well, the advice never came in question; if ill,
(whereto great undertakings are commonly subject) he then made his advantage by
remembering his Country Council: But my good Lord, these reserved Politicians
are not the best servants, for he that is bound to adventure his life for his
Master, is also bound to adventure his advice, Keep not back Council (says
Ecclesiasticus) When it may do good.


COUNS. But Sir, I speak it not in other respect then I think it dangerous for
the King to assemble the three estates, for thereby have our former Kings
always lost somewhat of their prerogatives. And because that you shall not
think that I speak it at random, I will begin with elder times, wherein the
first contention began betwixt the Kings of this land and their subjects in
Parliament.


JUST. Your Lordship shall do me a singular favor.


COUNS. You know that the Kings of England had no formal Parliament till about
the 18. year of Hen. the first, for in his 17 year for the marriage of his
Daughter, the King raised a tax upon every hide of land by the advice of his
privy Council alone. But you may remember how the subjects soon after the
establishment of this Parliament, began to stand upon terms with the King, and
drew from him by strong hand and the sword the great Charter.


JUST. Your Lordship says well, they drew from the King the great Charter by
the sword, and hereof the Parliament cannot be accused, but the Lords.


COUNS. You say well, but it was after the establishment of the Parliament, and
by color of it, that they had so great daring, for before that time they could
not endure to hear of Sr. Edwards laws, but resisted the confirmation in all
they could, although by those laws the Subjects of this Island were no less
free than any of all Europe.


JUST. My good Lord, the reason is manifest; for while the Normans and other of
the French that followed Conqueror made spoil of the English, they would not
endure that any thing but the will of the Conqueror should stand for Law: but
after a difcent or two when themselves were become English, and found
themselves beaten with their own rods, they then began to favor the difference
between subjection and slavery, and insist upon the Law, Meum and tuum, and to
be able to say unto themselves, hoc sac and vives: yea that the conquering
English in Ireland did the like, your Lordship knows it better than I.


COUNS. I think you guess aright: And to the end the subject may know that
being a faithful servant to his Prince he might enjoy his own life, and paying
to his Prince what belongs to a Sovereign, the remainder was his own to
dispose. Henry the first to content his Vassals gave them the great Charter,
and the Charter of Forests.


JUST. What reason then had K. John to deny the confirmation.


COUNS. He did not, but he on the contrary confirmed both the Charters with
additions, and required the Pope whom he had them made his superior to
strengthen him with a golden Bull.


JUST. But your honor knows, that it was not long after, that he repented
himself.


COUNS. It is rrue, and he had reason so to do for the Barons refused to follow
him into France, as they ought to have done, and to say true, this great
Charter upon which you insist so much, was not originally granted Regally and
freely; for Henry the first did usurp the Kingdom, and therefore the better
to assure himself against Robert his eldest Brother, he flattered the Nobility
and people with those Charters. Yea King John that confirmed them, had the like
respect for Arthur Duke of Britain, was the undoubted heir of the Crown, upon
whom John usurped. And so to conclude, these Charters had their original from
Kings de facto but not de jure.


JUST. But King John confirmed the Charter after the death of his Nephew
Arthur, when he was then Rex de jure also.


COUNS. It is true, for he durst do no other, standing accursed, whereby few or
none obeyed him, for his Nobility refused to follow him into Scotland, and he
had so grieved the people by pulling down all the Park pales before harvest,
to the end his Dear might spoil the corn; And by seizing the temporalities of
so many Bishoprics into his hands, and chiefly for practicing the death of the
Duke of Britain his Nephew, as also having lost Normandy to the French, so as
the hearts of all men were turned from him.


JUST. Nay by your favor my Lord, King John restored K. Edwards Laws after his
absolution, and wrote his letters in the 15. of his reign to all Sheriffs
countermanding all former oppressions, yea this he did notwithstanding the
Lords refused to follow him into France.


COUNS. Pardon me, he did not restore King Edwards Laws then, nor yet
confirmed the Charters, but he promised upon his absolution to do both: but
after his return out of France, in his 16. year he denied it, because without
such a promise he had not obtained restitution, his promise being constrained,
and not voluntary.


JUST. But what think you? was he not bound in honor to perform it.


COUNS. Certainly no, for it was determined the case of King Francis the first
of France, that all promises by him made, whilst he was in the hands of
Charles the fifth his enemy, were void, by reason the Judge of honor, which
tells us he durst do no other.


JUST. But King John was not in prison.


COUNS. Yet for all that, restraint is imprisonment, yea, fear it self is
imprisonment, and the King was subject to both: I know there is nothing more
Kingly in a King than the performance of his word; but yet of a word freely and
voluntarily given. Neither was the Charter of Henry the first so published,
that all men might plead it for their advantage but a Charter was left ( in
deposito) in the hands of the Archbishop of Canterbury for the time, and so to
his successors. Stephen Langthon, who was ever a Traitor to the King, produced
this Charter, and showed it to the Barons, thereby encouraging them to make war
against the King. Neither was it the old Charter simply the Barons sought to
have confirmed, but they presented unto the King other articles and orders,
tending to the alteration of the whole commonwealth, which when the King
refused to sign, the Barons presently put themselves into the field, and in
rebellious and outrageous fashion sent the King word, except he confirmed them,
they would not desist from making war against him, till he had satisfied them
therein. And in conclusion, the King being betrayed of all his Nobility, in
effect was forced to grant the Charter of Magna Charta, and Charta de Forestis,
at such time as he was environed with an Army in the Meadows of Staynes, which
harters being procured by force, Pope Innocent afterward disavowed, and
threatened to curse the Barons if they submitted not themselves as they ought to
their Sovereign Lord, which when the Lords refused to obey, the King
entertained an army of strangers for his own defense, wherewith having mastered
and beaten the Barons, they called in Jews of France (a most unnatural
resolution) to be their King Neither was Magna Charta a Law in the 19. of Henry
the 2d. but simply a Charter which he confirmed in the 21. of his reign, and
made it a Law in the 25. according to Littletons opinion. Thus much for the
beginning of the Great Cbarter, which had first an obscure birth from
usurpation, and was secondly fostered and showed to the world by rebellion.


JUST. I cannot deny but that all your Lordship has said is true; but seeing
the Charters were afterward so many times confirmed by Parliament and made
Laws, and that there is nothing in them unequal or prejudicial to the King,
does not your Honor think it reason they should be observed?


COUNS. Yes, and observed they are in all that the state of a King can permit,
for no man is destroyed but by the Laws of the land, no man disseized of his
inheritance but by the Laws of the land, imprisoned they are by the
prerogative where the King has cause to suspect their loyalty: for were it
otherwise, the King should never come to the knowledge of any conspiracy or
Treason against his Person or state, and being imprisoned, yet does not any man
suffer death but by the Law of the land.


JUST. But may it please your Lordship, were not Cornewallis, Sharp, and
Hoskins imprisoned, being no suspicion of Treason there?


COUNS. They were; but it cost them nothing.


JUST. And what got the King by it? for in the conclusion (besides the murmr
of the people) Cornewallis, Sharp, and Hoskins having greatly overshot
themselves, and repented them, a fine of 5 or 600 l. was laid on his Majesty
for their offenses, for so much their diet cost his Majesty.


COUNS. I know who gave the advice, sure I am that it was none of mine: But
thus I say, if you consult your memory, you shall find that those Kings which
did in their own times comfirme the Magna Charta, did not only imprison, but
they caused of their Nobility and others to be slain without hearing or trial,


JUST. My good Lord, if you will give me leave to speak freely, I say, that
they are not well advised that persuade the King not to admit the Magna Charta
with the former reservations. For as the King can never lose a farthing by it
as I shall prove anon: So except England were as Naples is, and kept by
Garrisons of another Nation, it is impossible for a King of England to greaten
and enrich himself by any way so assuredly, as by the love of his people: For
by one rebellion the King has more loss then by a hundred years observance of
Magna Charta, For therein have our Kings been forced to compound with Roagues
and Rebels, and to pardon them, yea the state of the King, the Mouarchie, the
Nobility have been endangered by them.


COUNS. Well Sir, let that pass, why should not our Kings raise money as the
Kings of France do by their letters and Edicts only? for since the time of
Jews the 11. of whom it is said, that he freed the French Kings of their
wardship, the French Kings have seldom assembled the states for any
contribution.


JUST. I will tell you why: the strength of England does consist of the people
and Yeomanry, the Pefants of France have no courage nor arms: In France every
Village and Borough has a castle, which the French call Chasteau Villain,
every good City has a good Cittadell, the King has the Regiments of his
guards and his men at arms always in pay; yea the Nobility of France in whom
the strength of France consists, do always assist the King in those leavies,
because themselves being free, they made the same leavies upon there Tennants.
But my Lord, if you mark it, France was never free in effect from civil wars,
and lately it was endangered either to be conquered by the Spaniard, or to be
cantonized by the rebellious French themselves, since that freedom of
Wardship. But my good Lord, to leave this digression, that wherein I would
willingly satisfy your Lordship, is, that the Kings of England have never
received loss by Parliament, or prejudice.


COUNS. No Sir, you shall find that the subjects in Parliament have decreed
great things to the disadvantage and dishonor of our Kings in former times.


JUST. My good Lord, to avoid confusion, I will make a short repitition of them
all, and then your Lordship may object where you see cause; And I doubt not but
to give your Lordship satisfaction. In the sixth year of Henry the 3d there was
no dispute, the house gave the King two shillings of every plough land within
England, and in the end of the same year he had escuage paid him (to wit) for
every Knights fee two marks in silver. In the fifth year of that King, the
Lords demanded the confirmation of the Great Charter which the Kings Council
for that time present excused, alleging that those privileges, were exhorted
by force during the Kings Minority, and yet the King was pleased to send forth
his writ to the Sheriffs of every Country, requiring them to certify what
those liberties were, and how used, and in exchange of the Lords demand,
because they pressed him so violently, the King required all the castles and
places which the Lords held of his, and had held in the time of his Father,
with those Manors and Lordships which they had heretofore wrested from the
Crown, which at that time (the King being provided of forces) they durst not
deny, in the 14 year he had the 15. penny of all goods given him, upon condition
to confirm the Great Charter: For by reason of the wars in France, and the
loss of Rochett, he was them enforced to consent to the Lords in all they
demanded, in the tenth of his reign he fined the City of London at 50000.
marks, because they had received Lewis of France, in the 11. year in the
Parliament at Oxford, he revoked the great Charter, being granted when he was
under age, and governed by the Earl of Pembroke and the Bishop of Winchester,
in this 11. year the Earls of Cornwall and Chester, Marshall, Edward Earl of
Pembroke, Gilbert Earl of Gloucester, Warren, Hereford, Ferrars, and Warwick,
and others rebelled against the King, and constrained him to yield unto them in
what they demanded for their particular interest, which rebellion being
appeased, he sailed into France, and in his 15. year he had a 15th of the
temporality, and a disme and a half of the spirituality, and withal escuage of
every Knights fee.


COUNS. But what say you to the Parliament of Westminster in the 16th. of the
King, where notwithstanding the wars of France and his great charge in
repulsing the Welsh rebels, he was flatly denied the Subsidy demanded.


JUST. I confess, my Lord, that the house excused themselves by reason of
their poverty, and the Lords taking of Arms; in the next year it was manifest
that the house was practiced aganst the King: And was it not so, my good Lord,
think you in our two last Parliaments, for in the first even those whom his
Majesty trusted most, betrayed him in the union, and in the second there were
other of the great ones ran counter. But your Lordship spoke of dangers of
Parliaments, in this, my Lord, there was a denial, but there was no danger at
all: but to return where I left, what got the Lords by practizing the house at
that time? I say that those that brake this staff upon the King, were
overturned with the counterbuffe, for he resumed all those lands which he had
given in his minority, he called all his exacting officers to account, he found
them all faulty, he examined the corruption of other Magistrates, and from all
these he drew sufficient money to satisfy his present necessity; whereby he
not only spared his people, but highly contented them with an act of so great
Justice: Yea Hubert Earl of Kent, the chief Justice whom he had most trusted,
and most advanced, was found as false to the King as any one of the rest. And
for conclusion in the end of that year at the assembly of the States at
Lambeth, the King had the fortieth part of every man's goods given him freely
toward his debts, for the people, who the same year had refused to give the
King any thing, when they saw he had squeased those spunges of the
Commonwealth, they willingly yielded to give him satisfaction.


COUNS. But I pray you what became of this Hubert, whom the King had favored
above all men, betraying his Majesty as he did.


JUST. There were many that persuaded the King to put him to death, but he
could not be drawn to consent, but the King seized upon his estate which was
great; yet in the end he left him a sufficient portion, and gave him his life
because he had done great service in former times: For this Majesty, though he
took advantage of his vice, yet he forgot not to have consideration of his
virtue. And upon this occasion it was that the King, betrayed by those whom he
most trusted, entertained strangers, and gave them their offices and the charge
of his Castles and strong places in England.


COUNS. But the drawing in of those strangers was the cause that Marshall Earl
of Pembroke moved war against the King.


JUST. It is true, my good Lord, but he was soon after slain in Ireland, and
his whole masculine race, ten years extinguished, though there were five Sons
of them, and Marshal. being dead, who was the mover and ringleader of that
war, the King pardoned the rest of the Lords that had assisted Marshall.


COUNS. What reason had the King so to do?


JUST. Because he was persuaded, that they loved his person, and only hated
those corrupt Counselors, that then bare the greatest sway under him, as also
because they were the best men of war he had, whom if he destroyed, having war
with the French, he had wanted Commanders to have served him.


COUNS. But what reason had the Lords to take arms?


JUST. Because the King entertained the Poictovins, were not they the Kings
vassals also? Should the Spaniards rebel, because the Spanish King trusts to
the Neapolitans, Fortagues, Millanoies, and other Nations his vassals, seeing
those that are governed by the Vice-royes and deputies, are in policy to be
well entertained and to be employed, who would otherwise devise how to free
themselves; whereas, being trusted and employed by their Prince, they entertain
themselves with the hopes that other the Kings vassals do, if the King had
called in the Spaniards, or other Nations, not his Subjects, the Nobility of
England had reason of grief.


COUNS. But what people did ever serve the King of England more faithfully then
the Gascoynes did, even to the last of the conquest of that Duchy?


JUST. Your Lordship says well, and I am of that opinion, that if it had
pleased the Queen of Eng. to have drawn some of the chief of the Irish
Nobility into Eng. and by exchange to have made them good freeholders in Eng.
she had saved above 2. millions of pounds, which were consumed in times of
those Rebellions. For what held the great Gascoigne firm to the Crown of
England (of whom the Duke of Espernon married the Inheritrix) but his Earldome
of Kendall in England, whereof the Duke of Espernon (in right of his Wife)
bears the Title to this day? And to the same end I take it, has James our
Sovereign Lord given Lands to diverse of the Nobility of Scotland. And if I
were worthy to advise your Lordship, I should think that your Lordship should
do the King great service, to put him in mind to prohibit all the Scottish
Nation to alienate and sell away their inheritance here; for they selling, they
not only give cause to the English to complain, that the Treasure of England is
transported into Scotland, but his Majesty is thereby also frustrated of
making both Nations one, and of assuring the service and obedience of the Scots
in future.


COUNS. You say well for though those of Scotland that are advanced and
enriched by the Kings Majesty's will, no doubt serve him faithfully, yet how
their heirs and successors, having no inheritance to lose in England, may be
seduced, is uncertain. But let us go on with our Parliament. And what say you
to the denial, in the 26th. year of his reign, even when the King was invited
to come into France by the Earl of March, who had married his Mother, and who
promised to assist the King in the conquest of many places lost?


JUST. It is true my good Lord, that a subsidy was then denied, and the
reasons are delivered in English Histories, and indeed the King not long before
had spent much Treasure in aiding the Duke of Britain to no purpose; for he
drew over the King but to draw on good conditions for himself, as the Earl of
March his father in law now did: As the English Barons did invite Jews of
France not long before, as in elder times all the Kings and States had done,
and in late years the Leaguers of France entertained the Spaniards, and the
French Protestants and Netherlands, Queen Elizabeth, not with any purpose to
greaten those that aid them, but to purchase to themselves an advantageous
peace. But what say the Histories to this denial? They say, with a world of
payments there mentioned, that the King had drawn the Nobility dry. And
besides, that whereas not long before great sums of money were given, and the
same appointed to be kept in four Castles, and not to be expended but by the
advice of the Peers; it was believed, that the same Treasure was yet unspent.


COUNS. Good Sir you have said enough; judge you whether it were not a
dishonor to the King to be so tied, as not to expend his Treasure but by other
men's advice, as it were by their license.


JUST. Surely, my Lord, the King was well advised to take the money upon any
condition, and they were fools that propounded the restraint; for it does not
appear, that the King took any great heed to those overseers: Kings are bound
by their piety, and by no other obligation. In Queen Mary's time, when it was
thought that she was with Child, it was propounded in Parliament, that the rule
of the Realm should be given to King Philip, during the minority of the hoped
Prince or Princess; and the King offered his assurance in great sums of
money, to relinquish the Government at such time as the Prince or Princess
should be of age: At which motion, when all else were silent in the House, Lord
Da^res (who was none of the wisest) asked who shall sue the Kings Bonds? which
ended the dispute, (for what other Bond is between a King and his vassals, then
the Bond of the Kings Faith?) But, my good Lord, the King, notwithstanding the
denial at that time, was with gifts from particular persons, and otherwise,
supplied for proceeding of his journey for that time into France; he took with
him 30 Caskes filled with Silver and Coin, which was a great Treasure in those
days. And lastly, notwithstanding the first denial, in the Kings absence he
had Escuage granted him (to wit) 20s. of every Knights Fee.


COUNS. What say you then to the 28th year of that King, in which when the King
demanded relief, the States would not consent, except the the same former
order had bin taken for the appointing of 4 overseers for the treasure: as also
that the Lord chief Justice and the L. Chancellor should be chosen by the
States, with some Barons of the Exchequer and other officers.


JUST. My good Lord, admit the King had yielded their demands, then whatsoever
had been ordained by those Magistrates to the dislike of the Commonwealth, the
people had been without remedy, whereas while the King made them, they had
their appeal and other remedies. But those demands vanished, and in the end the
King had escuage given him, without any of their conditions. It is an excellent
virtue in a King to have patience, and to give way to the fury of men's
passions. The Whale when he is stricken by the fisherman, grows into that
fury, that he cannot be resisted: but will overthrow all the Ships and Barks
that come into his way; but when he has tumbled a while, he is drawn to the
shore with a twined thread.


COUNS. What say you then to the Parliament in the 29th. of that King?


JUST. I say, that the Commons being unable to pay, the King relieves himself
upon the richer sort: and so it likewise happened in the 33. of that King, in
which he was relieved chiefly by the City of London. But, my good Lord, in the
Parliament in London in the 38th year, he had given him the tenth of all the
revenues of the Church for 3 years, and three marks of every Knights Fee
throughout the Kingdom, upon his promise and oath upon the observing of Magna
Charta, but in the end of the same year, the King being then in France, he was
denied the aides which he required. What is this to the danger of a Parliament?
especially at this time they had reason to refuse, they had given so great a
sum in the beginning of the same year. And again; because it was known that
the King had but pretended war with the King of Castile, with whom he had
secretly contracted an alliance, and concluded a Marriage betwixt his Son
Edward and the Lady Elenor. These false fires do but fright Children, and it
commonly falls out, that when the cause given is known to be false, the
necessity pretended is thought to be fained. Royal dealing has evermore
Royal success: and as the King was denied in the eight and thirtieth year, so
was he denied in the nine and thirtieth year, because the Nobility and the
people saw it plainly, that the K. was abused by the Pope, who as well in
despite to Manfred bastard Son to the Emperor Frederick the second: as to
cozen the King and to waste him, would needs bestow on the King the Kingdom
of Sicily; to recover which the King sent all the Treasure he could borrow or
scrape to the Pope, and withal gave him letters of credence, for to take up
what he could in Italy, the King binding himself for the payment. Now, my good
Lord, the wisdom of Princes is seen in nothing more then in their enterprises.
So how unpleasing it was to the State of England to consume the Treasure of the
Land, and in the conquest of Sicily so far off, and otherwise, for that the
English had lost Normandy under their noses, and so many goodly parts of
France, of their own proper inheritances: the reason of the denial is as well
to be considered as the denial.


COUNS. Was not the King also denied a Subsidy in the forty first of his
reign?


JUST. No, my Lord: for although the King required money as before, for the
impossible conquest of Sicily, yet the House offered to give 52000 marks, which
whether he refused or accepted, is uncertain: and whilst the King dreamed of
Sicily, the Welsh invaded and spoiled the borders of England; for in the
Parliament of London, when the King urged the House for the prosecuting the
conquest of Sicily, the Lords utterly disliking the attempt, urged the
prosecuting of the Welshmen: which Parliament being proroged did again assemble
at Oxford, and was called the mad Parliament, which was no other then an
assembly of rebels, for the royal assent of the King which gives life to all
Laws, formed by the three estates, was not a royal assent, when both the King
and the Prince were constrained to yield to the Lords. A contrained consent is
the consent of a Captive and not of a King and therefore there was nothing done
their either legally or royally. For if it be not properly a Parliament where
the subject is not free, certainly it can be none where the King is bound, for
all Kingly rule was taken from the King, and twelve Peers appointed, and as
some Writers have it 24. Peers, to govern the Realm, and therefore the
assembly made by Jack Straw and other rebels may as well be called a Parliament
as that of Oxford. Principis nomen habere, non est esse princeps, for thereby
was the K. driven not only to compound all quarrels with the French, but to
have means to be revenged on the rebel Lords: but he quitted his right to
Normandy, Anjou and Main.


COUNS. But Sir, what needed this extremity, seeing the Lords required but the
confirmation of the former Charter, which was not prejudicial to the King to
grant?


JUST. Yes my good Lord, but they insulted upon the King, and would not suffer
him to enter into his own Castles, they put down the Purveyor of the meat for
the maintenance of his house: as if the King had been a bankrupt, and gave
order that without ready money he should not take up a Chicken. And though
there is nothing against the royalty of a King in these Charters (the Kings of
England being Kings of freemen and not of slaves) yet it is so contrary to the
nature of a King to be forced even to those things which may be to his
advantage, as the King had some reason to seek the dispensation of his oath
from the Pope, and to draw in strangers for his own defense: yea jure salvo
coronae nostrae is intended inclusively in all oaths and promises exacted from
a Sovereign.


COUNS. But you cannot be ignorant how dangerous a thing it is to call in other
Nations both for the spoil they make, as also, because they have often held the
possession of the best places with which they have been trusted.


JUST. It is true my good Lord, that there is nothing so dangerous for a King
as to be constrained and held as prisoner to his vassals, for by that, Edward
the second, and Richard the second lost their Kingdoms and their lives. And
for calling in of strangers, was not King Edward the sixth driven to call in
strangers against the Rebels in Norfolk, Cornwall, Oxfordshire and elsewhere?
Have not the Kings of Scotland been oftentimes constrained to entertain
strangers against the Kings of England: And the King of England at this time
had he not bin diverse times assisted by the Kings of Scotland and had bin
endangered to have been expelled for ever.


COUNS. But yet you know those Kings were deposed by Parliament.


JUST. Yea my good Lord being Prisoners, being out of possession, and being in
their hands that were Princes of the blood and pretenders. It is an old
Country Proverb, (that Might overcomes Right) a weak title that wears a
strong sword, commonly prevails against a strong title that wears but a weak
one, otherwise Philip the second had never been Duke of Portugal, nor Duke of
Millayne, nor King of Naples and Sicily. But good Lord, Errores non sunt
trahendi in exemplum. I speak of regal, peaceable, and lawful Parliaments.
The King at this time was but a King is name, for Gloucester, Leicester and
Chichester made choice of other Nine, to whom the rule of the Realm was
committed, and the Prince was forced to purchase his liberty from the Earl of
Leicester, by giving for his ransom the Countey Pallatine of Chester. But my
Lord let us judge of those occasions by their events what became of this proud
Earl? was he not soon after slain in Evesham? was he not left naked in the
field, and left a shamfull spectacle, his head being cut off from his
shoulders, his privy parts from his body, and laid on each side of his nose?
And did not God extinguish his race, after which in a lawful Parliament at
Westminster (confirmed in a following Parliament of Westminster) were not all
the Lords that followed Leycester disinheried? And when that fool Gloucester
after the death of Leycester (whom he had formerly forsaken) made himself the
head of a second Rebellion, and called in strangers, for which not long before
he had cried out against the King, was not he in the end, after that he had
seen the slaughter of so many of the Barons, the spoil of their Castles, and
Lordships constrained to submit himself, as all the survivers did, of which
they that sped best, paid their fines and ransomes, the King reserving his
younger Son, the Earledomes of Leycester and Derby.


COUNS. Well Sir, we have disputed this King to the grave, though it be true,
that he outlived all his enemies, and brought them to confusion, yet those
examples did not terrify their successors, but the Earl Marshall, and
Hereford, threatened King Edward the first, with a new War.


JUST. They did so, but after the death of Hereford, the Earl Marshall
repented himself, and to gain the Kings favor, he made him heir of all his
Lands. But what is this to the Parliament? for there was never King of this
land had more given him for the time of his reign, then Edward the Son of Henry
the third had.


COUNS. How does that appear?


JUST. In this sort my good Lord, in this Kings third year he had given him the
fifteenth part of all goods. In his sixth year a twentyeth. In his twelfth year
a twentyeth, in his fourteenth year he had escuage (to wit) forty shillings of
every Knights Fee, in this eighteenth year he had the eleventh part of all
moveable goods within the Kingdom, in his nineteenth year the tenth part of
all Church livings in England, Scotland and Ireland; for six years, by
agreement from the Pope, in his three and twentieth year he raised a tax upon
Wool and fels, and on a day caused all the religious houses to be searched, and
all the treasure in them to be seized and brought to his coffers, excusing
himself by laying the fault upon his Treasurer, he had also in the end of the
same year, of all goods of all Burgesses, and of the Commons the 10th part, in
the 25th year of the Parliament of St. Edmundsbury, he had an 18th part of the
goods of the Burgesses, and of the people in general, the tenth part. He had
also the same year by putting the Clergy out of his protection a fifth part of
their goods, and in the same year he set a great tax upon Woolls, to wit, from
half a mark to 40s. upon every sack, whereupon the Earl Marshall, and the
Earl of Hereford refusing to attend the King into Flanders, pretended the
greevances of the people. Put in the end the King having pardoned them, and
confirmed the great Charter, he had the ninth penny of all goods from the Lords
and Commons of the Clergy, in the South he had the tenth penny, and in the
North the fifth penny. In the two and thirtyeth year he had a subsedy freely
granted. In the three and thirtyeth year he confirmed the great Charter of his
own Royal disposition, and the states to show their thankfulness, gave the
King for one year, the fifth part of all the revenues of the land, and of the
Citizens the sixth part of their goods. And in the same year the King used the
inquisition called Trai le Baston. By which all Justices and other Magistrates
were grievously fined that had used extortion or bribery, or had otherwise
misdemeaned themselves to the great contentation of the people. This Commission
likewise did enquire of entruders, barators, and all other the like vermin,
whereby the King gathered a great mass of treasure with a great deal of love.
Now for the whole reign of this King, who governed England 35 years, there was
not any Parliament to his prejudice.


COUNS. But there was taking of arms by Marshall and Hereford.


JUST. That Is true, but why was that? because the King, notwithstanding all
that was given him by Parliament, did lay the greatest taxes that ever King did
without their consent. But what lost the King by those Lords? one of them gave
the King all his lands, the other dyed in disgrace.


COUNS. But what say you to the Parliament in Edward the Seconds time his
successor: did not the house of Parliament banish Pierce Gaveston whom the King
favored?


JUST. But what was this Gaveston but an Esquier of Gascoine, formerly banished
the Realm by King Edward the first, for corrupting the Prince Edward, now
reigning. And the whole Kingdom fearing and detesting his venomous
disposition, they besought his Majesty to cast him off, which the King
performed by an act of his own, and not by act of Parliament, yea Gavestones
own father in Law, the Earl of Gloucester, was one of the chiefest of the Lords
that procured it. And yet finding the Kings affection to follow him so strongly,
they all consented to have him recalled. After which when his credit so
increased, that he despised and set at naught all the ancient Nobility, and not
only persuaded the King to all manner of outrages and riots, but withal
transported what he lifted of the Kings Treasure, and Jewels: the Lords urged
his banishment the second time, but neither was the first nor second banishment
forced by Act of Parliament, but by the forceable Lords his Enemies. Lastly he
being recalled by the King, the Earl of Lancaster caused his head to be
stricken off, when those of his party had taken him prisoner. By which
presumptuous Act, the Earl and the rest of his company committed Treason and
murder: Treason by raising an Army without warrant, murder by taking away the
life of the Kings Subject. After which Gaveston being dead, the Spencers got
possession of the Kings favor, though the younger of them was placed about the
King, by the Lords themselves.


COUNS. What say you then to the Parliament held at London about the sixth year
of that King.


JUST. I say that King was not bound to perform the acts of this Parliament,
because the Lords being too strong for the King, enforced his consent, for
these be the words of our own History. They wrested to much beyond the bounds
of reason.


COUNS. What say you to the Parliaments of the White wands in the 13th of the
King.


JUST. I say the Lords that were so moved, came with an Army, and by strong
hand surprised the King, they constrained, (says the story) the rest of the
Lords and compelled many of the Bishops to consent unto them, yea it says
further, that the King durst not but grant to all that they required, (to wit)
for the banishment of the Spencers. Yea they were so insolent that they refused
to lodge the Queen coming through Kent in the Castle of Leedes, and sent her
to provide her lodging where she could get it so late in the night, for which
notwithstanding some that kept her out were soon after taken and hanged, and
therefore your Lordship cannot call this a Parliament for the reasons before
alleged. But my Lord what became of these Lawgivers to the King, even when
they were greatest, a Knight of the North called Andrew Herkeley, assembled the
Forces of the Country, overthrew them and their Army, slew the Earl of
Hereford, and other Barons, took their general Thomas Earl of Lancaster, the
Kings cozen germane at that time possessed of five Earledomes, the Lords
Clifford, Talbort, Moubray, Maudiut, Willington, Warren, Lord Darcy, Withers,
Knevill, Leybourne, Bekes, Lovell, Fitz williams, Watervild, and diverse other
Barons, Knights and Esquiers, and soon after the Lord Percy, and the Lord
Warren took the Lords Baldsemere, and the Lord Audley, the Lord Teis, Gifford,
Tucoet, and many others that fled from the battle, the most of which past
under the hands of the hangman, for constraining the King under color and name
of a Parliament. But this your good Lordship may judge, to whom, those
tumultuous assemblies (which our Histories, falsely call Parliaments have been
dangerous, the King in the end ever prevailed, and the Lords lost their lives,
and estates. After which the Spencers in their banishment at York, in the 15th
of the King, were restored to the honors and estates, and therein the King had
a subsedy given him the sixth penny of goods throughout England, Ireland, and
Wales.


COUNS. Yet you see the Spencers were soon after dissolved.


JUST. It is true my Lord, but that is nothing to our subject of Parliament,
they may thank their own insolency, for they branded and despised the Queen,
whom they ought to have honored as the Kings wife; they were also exceeding
greedy, and built themselves upon other men's ruins, they were ambitious and
exceeding malicious, whereupon that came, that when Chamberlain Spencer was
hanged in Hereford, a part of the 24th Psalm was written over his head: Quid
gloriaris in malitia potens?


COUNS. Well Sir, you have all this while excused your self upon the strength
and rebellions of the Lords, but what say you now to King Edward the third, in
whose time (and during the time of this victorious King, no man durst take
Arms or rebel) the three estates did him the greatest affront that ever King
received or endured, therefore I conclude where I began, that these Parliaments
are dangerous for a King,


JUST. To answer your Lordship in order, may it please you first to call to
mind, what was given this great King by his subjects before the dispute betwixt
him and the house happened, which was in his latter days, from his first year
to his fifth year, there was nothing given the king by his Subjects, in his
eight year at the Parliament at London a tenth and a fifteenth was granted, in
his tenth year he ceased upon the Italians goods here in England to his own
use, with all the goods of the Monks Cluniackes and others, of the order of
the Cistertians. In the eleaventh year, he had given him by Parliament a
notable relief, the one half of the Woolls throughout England, and of the
Clergy all their Woolls, after which, in the end of the year he had granted in
his Parliament at Westminster, forty shillings upon every sack of Wool, and
for every 30 wool fels forty shillings, for every last of leatherne, as much,
and for all other merchandises after the same rate. The King promising that
this years gathering ended, he would thenceforth content himself with the old
custom, he had over and above this great aid the eight part of all goods of
all Citizens and Burgesses; and of other as of foreign Merchants, and such as
lived not of the gain of breeding of sheep and cattle the fifteenth of their
goods. Nay my Lord: this was not all, though more then ever was granted to any
King, for the same Parliament bestowed on the King the ninth sheaf of all the
corn within the Land, the ninth fleece, and the ninth lamb for two years next
following; now what think your Lordship of this Parliament.


COUNS. I say they were honest men.


JUST. And I say, the people are as loving to their King now, as ever they
were, if they be honestly and wisely dealt withal, and so his Majesty has
found them in his last two Parliaments, if his Majesty had not been betrayed
by those whom he most trusted.


COUNS. But I pray you Sir, who shall a King trust, if he may not rust those
whom he has so greatly advanced?


JUST. I will tell your Lordship whom the King may trust.


COUNS. Who are they?


JUST. His own reason, and his own excellent Judgment which have not deceived
him in any thing, wherein his Majesty has been pleased to exercise them, Take
Council of thine heart (says the book of Wisdom) for there is none more
faithful unto thee then it.


COUNS. It is true, but his Majesty found that those wanted no judgment whom
he trusted, and how could his Majesty divine of their honesties?


JUST. Will you pardon me if I speak freely, for if I speak out of love, which
(as Solomon says) covers all trespasses, The truth is, that his Majesty
would never believe any man that spoke against them, and they knew it well
enough, which gave them boldness to do what they did.


COUNS. What was that?


JUST. Even, my good Lord, to ruin the Kings estate so far as the state of so
great a King may be ruined by men ambitious and greedy without proportion. It
had been a brave increase of revenue, my Lord, to have raised 50000l. land of
the Kings to 20000l. revenue, and to raise the revenue of wards to 20000l. more
40000l. added to the rest of his Majesty's estate, had so enabled his Majesty,
as he could never have wanted. And my good Lord, it had been an honest service
to the King, to have added 7000l. lands of the Lord Cobhams, Woods and goods
being worth 30000l. more.


COUNS. I know not the reason why it was not done.


JUST. Neither does your Lordship, perchance know the reason why the 10000l.
offered by Swinnerton for a fine of the French wines, was by the then Lord
Treasurer conferred on Devonshire and his Mistress.


COUNS. What moved the Treasurer to reject and cross that raising of the Kings
lands?


JUST. The reason, my good Lord is manifest, for had the land been raised, then
had the King known when he had given or exchanged land, what he had given or
exchanged.


COUNS. What hurt had been to the Treasurer whose Office is truly to inform
the King of the value of all that he gives?


JUST. So he did when it did not concern himself nor his particular, for he
could never admit any one piece of a good Manor to pass in my Lord Aubignes
book of 1000l. and, till he himself had bought, and then all the remaining
flowers of the Crown were called out. Now had the Treasurer suffered the Kings
lands to have been raised, how could his Lordship have made choice of the old
^ents, as well in that book of my Lord Aubigne, as in exchange of Theobalds, or
which he took Hatfield in it, which the greatest subject, or favorite Queen
Elizabeth had never durst have named unto her by way of gift or exchange. Nay
my Lord, so many other goodly Manors have passed from his Majesty, as the
very heart of the Kingdom mourns to remember it, and the eyes of the
Kingdom shed tears continually at the beholding it: yea the soul of the
Kingdom is heavy unto death with the consideration thereof, that so
magnanimous a Prince, should suffer himself to be so abused.


COUNS. But Sir you know that Cobhams lands were entayled upon his Cofens.


JUST. Yea my Lord, but during the lives and races of George Prook his
children, it had been the Kings, that is to say, for ever in effect, but to
wrest the King, and to draw the inheritance upon himself, he persuaded his
Majesty to relinquish his interest for a pretty sum of money; and that there
might be no counterworking, he sent Prook 6000 l. to make friends whereof Lord
Hume had 2000l. back again, Buckhurst and Barwick had the other 4000 l. and the
Treasurer and his heirs the mass of land forever.


COUNS. What then I pray you came to the King by this great consiscation.


JUST. My Lord, the Kings Majesty by all those goodly possessions, Woods and
goods loses 500l by the year which he gives in pension to Cobham, to
maintain him in prison.


COUNS. Certainly, even in conscience they should have reserved so much of the
land in the Crown, as to have given Cobham meat and apparel, and not made
themselves so great gainers, and the King 500l. ( per annum) looser by the
bargain, but it is past: Consilium non est eorum quae fieri nequeunt.


JUST. Take the rest of the Sentence, my Lord: Sed consilium versatur in iis
quae sunt in nostra potestate. It is yet, my good Lord, in potestate Regis, to
right himself. But this is not all my Lord; And I fear me, knowing your
Lordships love to the King, it would put you in a fever to hear all, I will
therefore go on with my Parliaments.


COUNS. I pray do so, and amongst the rest, I pray you what say you to the
Parliament holden at Iondon in the fifteenth year of King Edward the third?


JUST I say there was nothing concluded therein to the prejudice of the king.
It is true, that a little before the sitting of the house, the King displaced
his Chancellor and his Treasurer, and most of all his Judges and Officers of
the Exchequer, and committed many of them to prison, because they did not
supply him with money, being beyond the Seas, for the rest, the States
assembled, besought the King that the Laws of the two Charters might be
observed, and that the great Officers of the Crown might be chosen by
Parliament.


COUNS But what success had these petitions.


JUST. The Charters were observed, as before, and so they will be ever, and the
other petition was rejected, the King being pleased, notwithstanding, that the
great Officers, should take an oath in Parliament to do Justice. Now for the
Parliament of Westminster, in the 17th year of the King, the King had three
marks and a half for every sack of Wool, transported; and in his 18th he had
a 10th of the Clergy, and a 15th of the Laity for one year. His Majesty
forbear after this to charge his Subjects with any more payments, until the
29th of his reign, when there was given the King by Parliament 50 for every
sack of Wool transported for six years, by which grant, the King received a
thousand marks a day, a greater matter then a thousand pounds in these days,
and a 1000l. a day amounts to 365000l. a year, which was one of the greatest
presents that ever was given to a King of this land. For besides the
cheapenesse of all things in that age, the Kings soldiers had but 3d. a day
wages, a man at arms 6d. a Knight but 2s. In the Parliament at Westminster, in
the 33th year he had 26s. 8d. for every sack of Wool transported, and in the
42th year 3 dismes and 3 fifteens. In his 45th year he had ^0000l of the Laity,
and because the Spiritualty disputed it, and did not pay so much, the King
changed his Chancellor, Treasurer, and Privy Seal being Bishops, and placed
Lay men in their room.


COUNS. It seems that in those days the Kings were no longer in love with
their great Chancellors, then when they deserved well of them.


JUST. No my Lord, they were not, and that was the reason they were well
served, and it was the custom then, and in many ages after, to change the
Treasurer and the Chancellor every 3 years, and withal to hear all men's
complaints against them.


COUNS. But by this often change, the saying is verified, that there is no
inheritance in the favor of Kings. He that keeps the fig tree (says
Solomon) shall eat the fruit thereof; for reason it is that the servant live
by the Master.


JUST. My Lord, you say well in both, but had the subject an inheritance in the
Princes favor, where the Prince has no inheritance in the Subjects fidelity,
then were Kings in more unhappy estate then common persons, for the rest,
Solomon means not, that he that keeps the fig tree should surfeit, though
he meant he should eat, he meant not he should break the branches in gathering
the figs, or eat the ripe; and leave the rotten for the owner of the tree; for
what says he in the following chapter, he says that he that makes have to be
^ich, cannot be innocent. And before that, he says, that the end of an
inheritance hastily gotten, cannot be blessed. Your Lordship has heard of few
or none great with Kings, that have not used their power to oppress, that have
not grown insolent and hateful to the people; yea, insolent toward those
Princes that advanced them.


COUNS. Yet you see that Princes can change their fancies.


JUST. Yea my Lord, when favorites change their faith, when they forget that
how familiar soever Kings make themselves with their Vassals, yet they are
Kings: He that provokes a King to anger (says Solomon) sins against his
own soul. And he further says, that pride goes before destruction, and a high
mind before afall. I say therefore, that in discharging those Lucifers, how
dear soever they have been, Kings make the world know that they have more of
Judgment then of passion, yea they thereby offer a satisfactory sacrifice to
all their people, too great benefits of subjects to their king, where the mind
is blown up with their own deservings, and to great benefits of Kings conferred
upon their Subjects, where the mind is not qualified with a great deal of
modesty are equally dangerous. Of this later and insolenter, had King Richard
the second delivered up to Justice but three or four, he had still held the
love of the people, and thereby his life and estate.


COUNS. Well, I pray you go on with your Parliaments.


JUST. The life of this great King Edward draws to an end, so do the
Parliaments of this time, wherein 50 years reign, he never received any
affront, for in his 49th year he had a disme and a fifteen granted him freely.


COUNS. But Sir it is an old saying, that all is well that ends well, Judge you
whether that in his 50th. year in Parliament at Westminster he received not an
affront, when the house urged the King to remove and discharge from his
presence the Duke of Lancaster, the Lord Latimer his Chamberlain, Sir Richard
Sturry, and others whom the King favored and trusted. Nay, they pressed the
King to thrust a certain Lady out of Court, which at that time bare the
greatest sway therein.


JUST. I will with patience answer your Lordship to the full, and first your
Lordship may remember by that which I even now said, that never King had so
many gifts as this King had from his subjects, and it has never grieved the
subjects of England to give to their King, but when they knew there was a
devouring Lady, that had her share in all things that passed, and the Duke of
Lancaster was as scraping as she, that the Chancellor did eat up the people
as fast as either of them both. It grieved the subjects to feed these
Cormorants. But my Lord there are two things by which the Kings of England have
been pressed, (to wit) by their subjects, and by their own necessities. The Lords
in former times were far stronger, more warlike, better followed, living in
their Countries, then now they are. Your Lordship may remember in your reading,
that there were many Earls could bring into the field a thousand Barbed
horses, many a Baron 5. or 600. Barbed horses, whereas now very few of them can
furnish twenty fit to serve the King. But to say the truth my Lord, the
Justices of peace in England, have opposed the injusticers of war in England,
the Kings writ runs over all, and the great Seal of England, with that of the
next Constables will serve the turn to affront the greatest Lords in England,
that shall move against the King. The force therefore by which our Kings in
former times were troubled is vanished away. But the necessities remain. The
people therefore in these later ages, are no less to be pleased then the
Peers, for as the later are become less, so by reason of the trayning through
England, the Commons have all the weapons in their hand.


COUNS. And was it not so ever?


JUST. No my good Lord; for the Noblemen had in their Armories, to furnish some
them a thousand, some two thousand, some three thousand men, whereas now there
are not many that can arm fifty.


COUNS. Can you blame them? But I will only answer for my self, between you
and me be it spoken, I hold it not safe to mantain so great an Armory or
Stable, it might cause me, or any other Nobleman to be suspected, as the
preparing of some Innovation.


JUST. Why so my Lord, rather to be commended as preparing against all danger
of Innovation.


COUNS. It should be so, but call your observation to account, and you shall
find it as I say, for (indeed) such a jealousy has been held ever since the
time of the Civil wars, over the Military greatness of our Nobles, as made
them have little will to bend their studies that ways: wherefore let every man
provide according as he is rated in the Muster Book, you understand me.


JUST. Very well my Lord, as what might be replied in the perceiving so much; I
have ever (to deal plainly and freely with your Lordship) more feared at home
popular violence, then all the foreign that can be made, for it can never be
in the power of any foreign Prince, without a Papisticall party, rather to
disorder or endanger his Majesty's Estate.


COUNS. By this it seems, it is no less dangerous for a King to leave the
power in the people, then in the Nobility.


JUST. My good Lord, the wisdom of our own age, is the foolishness of
another, the time present ought not to be preferred to the policy that was, but
the policy that was, to the time present; so that the power of the Nobility
being now withered, and the power of the people in the flower, the care to
content them would not be neglected, the way to win them often practiced, or at
least to defend them from oppression. The motive of all dangers that ever this
Monarchy has undergone, should be carefully heeded, for this Maxim has no
posterne, Potestas humana radicatur in voluntatibus hominum. And now my Lord,
for King Edward, it is true, though he were not subject to force, yet was he
subject to necessity, which because it was violent, he gave way unto it,
Potestas (says Pithagoras) juxta necessitatem habitat. And it is true, that at
the request of the house he discharged and put from him those before named,
which done, he had the greatest gift (but one) that ever he received in all his
days (to wit) from every person, man and woman, above the age of fourteen
years 4d. of old money, which made many Millions of Groats, worth 61. of our
money. This he had in general, besides he had of every benificed Priest, 12d.
And of the Nobility and Gentry. I know not how much, for it is not set down.
Now my good Lord, what lost the King by satisfying the desires of the
Parliament house, for as soon as he had the money in purse, he recalled the
Lords, and restored them, and who durst call the King to account, when the
Assembly were dissolved. Where the word of a King is, there is power (says
Ecclesiasticus) who shall say unto him, what do thou! says the same Author,
for every purpose there is a time and judgment, the King gave way to the time,
and his judgment persuaded him to yield to necessity, Consularius nemo melior
est quam tempus.


COUNS. But yet you see the king was forced to yield to their demands.


JUST. Does your Lordship remember the saying of Monsier de Lange, that he that
has the profit of the war, has also the honor of the war, whether it be by
battle or retreat, the King you see had the profit of the Parliament, and
therefore the honor also, what other end had the King then to supply his
wants. A wise man has evermore respect unto his ends: and the King also knew
that it was the love that the people bare him, that they urged the removing of
those Lords, there was no man among them that sought himself in that desire,
but they all sought the king, as by the success it appeared. My good Lord,
has it not been ordinary in England and in France to yield to the demands of
rebels, did not King Richard the second grant pardon to the outrageous rogues
and murderers that followed Jack Straw, and Wat T^ler, after they had
murdered his Chancellor, his Treasurer, Chief Justice, and others, brake open
his Exchequer, and committed all manner of outrages and villainies, and why did
he do it, but to avoid a greater danger: I say the Kings have then yielded to
those that hated them and their estates, (to wit) to pernicious rebels. And yet
without dishonor, shall it be called dishonor for the King to yield to honest
desires of his subjects. No my Lord, those that tell the King those tales, fear
their own dishonor, and not the Kings; for the honor of the King is supreme,
and being guarded by Justice and piety, it cannot receive neither wound nor
stain.


COUNS. But Sir, what cause have any about our King to fear a Parliament?


JUST. The same cause that the Earl of Suffolk had in Richard the seconds
time, and the Treasurer Fartham, with others, for these great Officers being
generally hated for abusing both the King and the Subject, at the request of
the States were discharged, and others put in their rooms.


COUN. And was not this a dishonor to the King?


JUST. Certainly no, for King Richard knew that his Grandfather had done the
like, and though the King was in his heart utterly against it, yet had he the
profit of this exchange; for Suffolk was fined at 20000 marks, and 1000l.
lands.


COUNS. Well Sir, we will speak of those that fear the Parliament some other
time, but I pray you go on with that, that happened in the troublesome reign
of Richard the second who succeeded, the Grandfather being dead.


JUST. That King my good Lord, was one of the most unfortunate Princes that
ever England had, he was cruel, extreme prodigal, and wholly carried away
with his two Minions, Suffolk, and the Duke of Ireland, by whose ill advice and
others, he was in danger to have lost his estate; which in the end (being led
by men of the like temper) he miserably lost. But for his subsedies he had
given him in his first year being under age two tenths, and two fifteenes: In
which Parliament, Alice Pierce, who was removed in King Edwards time, with
Lancaster, Latimer, and Sturry, were confiscate and banished in his second year
at the Parliament at Gloucester, the King had a mark upon every sack of Wool,
and 6d. the pound upon wards. In his third year at the Parliament at
Winchester, the Commons were spared, and a subsedy given by the better sort,
the Dukes gave 20 marks, and Earls 6 marks, Bishops and Abbots with myters
six marks, every mark 35. 4d. and every Knight, Justice, Esquire, Shrieve,
Person, Vicar, and Chaplain, paid proportionably according to their estates.


COUNS. This me thinks was no great matter.


JUST. It is true my Lord, but a little money went far in those days: I my self
once moved it in Parliament in the time of Queen Elizabeth, who desired much to
spare the Common people, and I did it by her Commandment; but when we cast up
the subsedy Books, we found the sum but small, when the 30l. men were left
out. In the beginning of his fourth year, a tenth with a fifteen were granted
upon condition, that for one whole year no subsedies should be demanded; but
this promise was as suddenly forgotten as made, for in the end of that year,
the great subsedy of Poll money was granted in the Parliament at Northampton.


COUNS. Yea but there followed the terrible Rebellion of Baker, Straw, and
others, Leister, Wrais, and others.


JUST. That was not the fault of the Parliament my Lord, it is manifest that
the subsedy given was not the cause; for it is plain that the bondmen of
England began it, because the were girevously pressed by their Lords in their
tenure of Villenage, as also for the hatred they bate to the Lawyers and
Atturneyes: for the story of those times say, that they destroyed the houses
and Manors of men of Law, and such Lawyers as they caught, slew them, and
beheaded the Lord chief Justice, which commotion being once begun, the head
money was by other Rebels pretended: A fire is often kindled with a little
straw, which oftentimes takes hold of greater timber, and consumes the whole
building: And that this Rebellion was begun by the discontented slaves (whereof
there have been many in Elder times the like) is manifest by the Charter of
Manumission, which the King granted in hec verba, Rich. Dei gratid etc. Sciatis
quod de gratia nostra spirituali manumissimus, etc. to which seeing the King
was constrained by force of arms, he revoked the letters Pattents, and made
them void, the same revocation being strengthened by the Parliament ensuing,
in which the King had given him a subsedy upon Woolls, called a Maletot: In the
same fourth year was the Lord Treasurer discharged of his Office, and Hales
Lord of St. John's chosen in his place, in his fifth year was the Treasurer again
changed, and the Staff given to Segrave, and the Lord Chancellor was also
changed, and the staff given to the Lord Scroope: Which Lord Scroope was again
in the beginning of his sixth year turned off, and the King after that he had
for a while kept the Seal in his own hand, gave it to the Bishop of London,
from whom it was soon after taken and bestowed on the Earl of Suffolk, who
they say had abused the King, and converted the Kings Treasure to his own use.
To this the King condiscended, and though (says Walsingham) he deserved to
loose his life and goods, yet he had the favor to go at liberty upon good
sureties, and because the King was but young, and that the relief granted was
committed to the trust of the Earl of Arundell for the furnishing of the Kings
Navy against the French.


COUNS. Yet you see it was a dishonor to the King to have his beloved
Chancellor removed.


JUST. Truly no, for the King had both his fine 1000l. lands and asubsedy to
boot. And though for the present it pleased the King to fancy a man all the
world hated (the Kings passion overcomming his judgment) yet it cannot be
called a dishonor, for the King is to believe the general counsel of the
Kingdom, and to preser it before his affection, especially when Suffolk was
proved to be false even to the King; for were it otherwise love and affection
might be called a frenzy and a madness, for it is the nature of humane
passions, that the love bred by fidelity, does change it self into hatred, when
the fidelity is first changed into falsehood.


COUNS. But you see there were thirteen Lords chosen in the Parliament, to have
the oversight of the government under the King.


JUST. No my Lord, it was to have the oversight of those Officers, which (says
the story) had imbezeled, lewdly wasted, and prodigally spent the Kings
Treasure, for to the Commission to those Lords, or to any six of them, joined
with the Kings Counsel, was one of the most royal and most profitable that
ever he did, if he had bin constant to himself. But my good Lord, man is the
cause of his own misery, for I will repeat the substance of the commission
granted by the King, and confirmed by Parliament, which, whether it had bin
profitable for the King to have prosecured, your Lordship may judge. The
preamble has these words: Whereas our Sovereigne Lord the King perceives by
the grievous complaints of the Lords and Commons of this Realm, that the
rents, profits, and revenues of this Realm, by the singular and insufficient
Council and evil government, as well of some his late great Officers and
others, etc. are so much withdrawn, wasted, given, granted, alienated,
destroyed, and evil dispended, that he is so much impoverished and void of
treasure and goods, and the substance of the Crown so much diminished and
destroyed, that his estate may not honorably be sustained as appertains. The
King of his free will at the request of the Lords and Commons, has ordained
William Archbishop of Canterbury and others with his Chancellor, Treasurer,
keeper of his privy seal, to survey and examine as well the estate and
governance of his house, etc. as of all the rents, and profits, and revenues
that to him appertains, and to be due, or ought to appertain and be due, etc.
And all manner of gifts, grants, alienations and confirmations made by him of
lands, tenements, rents, etc. bargained and sold to the prejudice of him and
his Crown, etc. And of his jewels and goods which were his Grandfathers at the
time of his death, etc. and where they be become.

This is in effect the substance of the commission, which your Lordship may
read at large in the book of Statutes, this commission being enacted in the
tenth year of the Kings reign. Now if such a commission were in these days
granted to the faithful men that have no interest in the sales, gifts nor
purchases, nor in the keeping of the jewels at the Queens death, nor in the
obtaining, grants of the Kings best lands, I cannot say what may be recovered,
and justly recovered; and what say your Lordship, was not this a noble act for
the King, if it had been followed to effect?


COUNS. I cannot tell whether it were or no, for it gave power to the
Commissiouers to examine all the grants.


JUST. Why my Lord, does the King grant any thing, that shames at the
examination? are not the Kings grants on record?


COUNS. But by your leave, it is some dishonor to a King, to have his
judgment called in question.


JUST. That is true my Lord, but in this, or whenever the like shall be
granted in the future, the Kings judgment is not examined, but their knavery
that abused the King. Nay by your favor, the contrary is true, that when a
King will suffer himself to be eaten up by a company of petty fellows, by
himself raised, therein both the judgment and courage is disputed, And if your
Lordship will disdain it at your own servants hands, much more ought the great
heart of a King to disdain it. And surely my Lord, it is a greater treason
(though it undercreep the law) to tear from the Crown the ornaments thereof:
And it is an infalliable maxim, that he that loves not his Majesty's estate,
loves not his person.


COUNS. How came it then, that the act was not executed?


JUST. Because these, against whom it was granted, persuaded the King to the
contrary: as the Duke of Ireland, Suffolk, the chief Justice Tresilian, and
others, yea, that which was lawfully done by the King, and the great Council
of the kingdom, was (by the mastery which Ireland, Suffolk, and Tresilian had
over the Kings affections) broken and disavowed. Those that devised to relieve
the King, not by any private invention, but by general Council, were by a
private and partial assembly adjudged traitors, and the most honest Judges of
the land, enforced to subscribe to that judgment. In so much that Judge
Belknap plainly told the Duke of Ireland, and the Earl of Suffolk, when he was
constrained to set his hand, plainly told these Lords, that he wanted but a
rope, that he might therewith receive a reward for his subscription. And in
this Council of Nottingham was hatched the ruin of those which governed the
King, of the Judges by them constrained, of the Lords that loved the King, and
sought a reformation, and of the King himself; for though the King found by all
the Shrieves of the shires, that the people would not fight against the Lords,
whom they thought to be most faithful unto the King, when the Citizens of
London made the same answer, being at that time able to arm 50000. men, and
told the Major that they would never fight against the Kings friends, and
defenders of the Realm, when the Lord Ralph Passet, who was near the King,
told the King boldly that he would not adventure to have his head broken for
the Duke of Irelands pleasure, when the Lord of London told the Earl of
Suffolk in the Kings presence, that he was not worthy to live, etc. yet would
the King in the defense of the destroyers of his estate, lay ambushes to entrap
the Lords, when they came upon his faith, yea when all was pacified, and that
the King by his Proclamation had cleared the Lords, and promised to produce
Ireland, Suffolk, and the Archbishop of York, Tresiltan, and Bramber, to
answer at the next Parliament, these men confessed, that they durst not appear;
and when Suffolk fled to Callice, and the Duke of Ireland to Chester, the King
caused an army to be leavied in Lancashire, for the safe conduct of the Duke of
Ireland to his presence, when as the Duke being encountered by the Lords, ran
like a coward from his company, and fled into Holland. After this was holden a
Parliament, which was called that wrought wonders. In the Eleventh year of this
King, wherein the fornamed Lords, the Duke of Ireland and the rest, were
condemned and confiscate, the Chief Justice hanged with many others, the rest
of the Judges condemned, and banished, and a 10. and a 15. given to the King,


COUNS. But good Sir: the King was first besieged in the Tower of London, and
the Lords came to the Parliament, and no man durst contradict them.


JUST. Certainly in raising an army, they committed treason, and though it
appear, that they all loved the King, (for they did him no harm, having him in
their power) yet our law does construe all leavying of war without the Kings
commission, and all force raised to be intended for the death and destruction
of the King, not attending the sequel. And it is so judged upon good reason,
for every unlawful and ill action is supposed to be accompanied with an ill
intent. And besides, those Lords used too great cruelty, in procuring the
sentence of death against diverse of the Kings servants, who were bound to
follow and obey their Master and Sovereign Lord, in that he commanded.


COUNS. It is true, and they were also greatly to blame to cause then so many
seconds to be put to death, seeing the principalls, Ireland, Suffolk, and York,
had escaped them, And what reason had they to seek to enform the State by
strong hand, was not the Kings estate as dear to himself, as to them? He that
makes a King know his error mannerly and private, and gives him the best
advice, he is discharged before God and his own conscience. The Lords might
have ^^tired themselves, when they saw they could not prevail, and have left
the King to his own ways, who had more to lose then they had.


JUST. My Lord, the taking of Arms cannot be excused in respect of the law, but
this might be said for the Lords that the King being under years, and being
wholly governed by their enemies, and the enemies of the kingdom, and because
by those evil men's persuasions, it was advised, how the Lords should have been
murdered at a feast in London, they were excusable during the kings minority
to stand upon their guard against their particular enemies. But we will pass
it over and go on with our parliaments that followed, whereof that of Cambridge
in the Kings 12th year was the next, therein the King had given him a 10th and
a 15th, after which being 20. years of age rechanged (says H. Kinghton) his
Treasurer, his Chancellor, the Justices of either bench, the Clerk of the
privy seal and others, and took the government into his own hands. He also took
the Admirals place from the Earl of Arundell, and in his room he placed the
Earl of Huntingdon in the year following, which was the 13th year of the K. in
the Parliament at Westminster there was given to the King upon every sack of
wool 14s. and 6d. in the gound upon other Merchandise,


COUNS. But by your leave, the King was restrained this parliament, that he
might not dispose of, but a third part of the money gathered.


JUST. No my Lord, by your favor. But true it is that part of this money was by
the Kings consent assigned toward the wars, but yet left in the Lord
Treasurers hands, and my Lord it would be a great ease, and a great saving to
his Majesty our Lord and Master, if it pleased him to make his assignations
upon some part of his revenewes, by which he might have 1000l. upon every
10000l. and save himself a great deal of clamor. For seeing of necessity the
Navy must be maintained, and that those poor men as well Carpenters as
ship-keepers must be paid, it were better for his Majesty to give an
assignation to the Treasurer of his Navy for the receiving of so much as is
called ordinary, then to discontent those poor men, who being made desperate
beggars, may perchance be corrupted by them that lie in wait to destroy the
Kings estate. And if his Majesty did the like in all other payements,
especially where the necessity of such as are to receive, cannot possible give
days, his Majesty might then in a little roll behold his receipts and
expenses, he might quiet his heart when all necessaries were provided for, and
then dispose the rest at his pleasure. And my good Lord, how excellently and
easily might this have been done, if the 400000l. had been raised as aforesaid
upon the Kings lands, and wards I say that his Majesty's House, his Navy, his
guards, his pensioners, his munition, his Ambassadors and all else of ordinary
charge might have been defrayed, and a great sum left for his Majesty's
casual expenses and rewards, I will not say they were not in love with the
Kings estate, but I say they were unfortunately borne for the King that crossed
it.


COUNS. Well Sir, I would it had been otherwise, But for the assignments, there
are among us that will not willingly endure it. Charity begins with it self,
shall we hinder our selves of 50000l. per annum to save the King 20? No Sir,
what will become of our New years gifts, our presents and gratuities? We can
now say to those rhat have warrants for money, that there is not a penny in the
Exchequer, but the King gives it away unto the Scots faster then it comes in.


JUST. My Lord you say well, at least you say the truth, that such are some of
our answers, and hence comes that general murmr to all men that have money
to receive, I say that there is not a penny given to that nation; be it for
service or otherwise but is spread over all the kingdom: yea they gather
notes, and take copies of all the privy seals and warrants that his Majesty
has given for the money for the Scots, that they may show them in Parliament.
But of his Majesty's gifts to the English, there is no bruit though they may be
ten times as much as the Scots. And yet my good Lord, howsoever they be thus
answered that to them sue for money out of the Echequer, it is due to them for
10. or 12. or 20. in the hundred, abated according to their qualities that
show, they are always furnished. For conclusion, if it would please God to put
into the Kings heart to make their assignations, it would save him many a
pound, and gain him many a prayer, and a great deal of love, for it grieveth
every honest man's heart to see the abundance which even the petty officers in
the Exchequer, and others gather both from the king and subject, and to see a
world of poor men run after the King for their ordinary wages.


COUNS. Well, well, did you never hear this old tale, that when there was a
great contentation about the weather the Seamen complaining of contrary winds,
when those of the high Countries desired rain, and those of the valleys
sunshining days, Jupiter sent them word by Mercury, then, when they had all
done, the weather should be as it had been, And it shall ever fall out so with
them that complain, the course of payments shall be as they have been, what
care we what petty fellows say? or what care we for your papers? have not we
the Kings ears, who dares contest with us? though we cannot be revenged on
such as you are for telling the truth, yet upon some other pretense, we will
clap you up, and you shall sue to us ere you get out. Nay we will make you
confess that you were deceived in your projects, and eat your own words: learn
this of me Sir, that as a little good fortune is better then a great deal of
virtue: so the least authority has advantage over the greatest wit, was he not
the wisest man that said the battle was not the strongest, nor yet bread for
the wise, nor riches to men of understanding, nor favor to men of knowledge:
but what time and chance came to them all.


JUST. It is well for your Lordship that it is so. But Qu: Elizabeth would set
the reason of a mean man, before the authority of the greatest Councellor she
had, and by her patience therein she raised upon the usual and ordinary
customs of London without any new imposition above 50000l a year, for though
the Treasurer Burleigh, and the Earl of Leicester and Secretary Walshingham,
all three pensioners to Customer Smith, did set themselves against a poor
waiter of the Custom House called Carwarden, and commanded the grooms of the
privy Chamber not to give him access, yet the Queen sent for him, and gave him
countenance against them all. It would not serve the turn, my Lord, with her;
when your Lordships would tell her, that the disgracing her great officers by
hearing the complaints of busy heads, was a dishonor to her self, but she had
always this answer, That if any men complain unjustly against a Magistrate, it
were reason he should be severely punished, if justly, she was Queen of the
small, as well as of the great, and would hear their complaints. For my good
Lord, a Prince that suffers himself to be besieged, forsakes one of the
greatest regalities belonging to a Monarchy, to wit, the last appeal, or as
the Trench call it, le dernier resort.


COUNS. Well Sir, this from the matter, I pray you go on.


JUST. Then my Lord, in the Kings 15. year he had a tenth and a fifteen
granted in Parliament of London. And that same year there was a great
Council called at Stamford to which diverse men were sent for, of diverse
counties besides the Nobility, of which the King took advice whether he
should continue the war, or make a final end with the French.


COUNS. What needed the King to take the advice of any but of his own Council
in matter of peace or war.


JUST. Yea my Lord, for it is said in the Proverbs, where are many counselors,
there is health. And if the King had made the war by a general consent, the
Kingdom in general were bound to maintain the war, and they could not
then say when the King required aid, that he undertook a needless war.


COUNS. You say well, but I pray you go on.


JUST. After the subsedy in the 15. year, the King desired to borrow 10000l.
of the Londoners, which they refused to lend.


COUNS. And was not the King greatly troubled there with.


JUST. Yea but the King troubled the Londoners soon aftar, for the king took
the advantage of a riot made upon the Bishop of Salisbury his men, sent for the
Major, and other the ablest citizens, committed the Major to prison in the
Castle of Windsor, and others to other castles, and made a Lord Warden of this
city, till in the end what with 10000l. ready money, and other rich
presents, instead of lending 10000l. it cost them 2000l. Betvveen the fifteenth
year and twentieth year, he had two aides given him in the Parliaments of
Winchester and Westminster: and this later was given to furnish the Kings
journey into Ireland, to establish that estate which was greatly shaken since
the death of the Kings Grandfather, who received thence yearly 30000l. and
during the Kings stay in Ireland he had a 10th and a 5th granted.


COUNS. And good reason, for the King had in his army 4000. horse and 30000.
foot.


JUST. That by your favor, was the Kings savity: for great armies do rather
devour themselves then destroy enemies. Such an army, (whereof the fourth part
would have conquered all Ireland) was in respect of Ireland such an army as
Xerxes led into Greece in this twentieth year, wherein he had a tenth of the
Clergy, was the great conspiracy of the Kings uncle, the Duke of Gloucester,
and of Moubrey, Arundell, Nottingham, and Warvvick, the Archbishop of
Canterbury and the Abbbot of Westminster, and others who in the one and
twentieth year of the King were all redeemed by Parliament, and what thinks
your Lordship, was not this assemble of the 3. states for the kings estate,
wherein he so prevailed, that he not only overthrevv those popular Lords, but
besides (the English Chronicle says, the king so wrought and brought things
about, that he obtained the power of both houses to be granted to certain
persons, to 15. Noblemen and Gentlemen, or to seven of them.


COUNS. Sir, whether the King wrought well or il I cannot judge, but our
Chronicles say, that many things were done in this Parliament, to the
displeasure of no small number of people, to wit, for that diverse rightful
heirs were disinherited of their lands and livings, with which wrongful
doings the people were much offended, so that the King with those that were
about him, and chief in Counsel, came into great infamy and slander.


JUST. My good Lord, if your Lordship will pardon me, I am of opinion that
those Parliaments wherein the Kings of this land have satisfied the people, as
they have been ever prosperous, so where the King has restrained the house,
the contrary has happened, for the Kings atchievments in this Parliament, were
the ready preparations to his ruin.


COV. You mean by the general coffeehouse that followed, and because the
King did not proceed legally with Gloucester and others. Why Sir, this was not
the first time that the Kings of England have done things without the Counsel
of the land: yea, contrary to the law.


JUST. It is true my Lord in some particulars, as even at this time the Duke of
Gloucester was made away at Call^ce by strong hand, without any lawful trial:
for he was a man so beloved of the people and so allied, having the Dukes of
Lancaster, and York his brethren, the Duke of Aumarle, and the Duke of Hereford
his Nephews, the great Earls of Arundell and Warwick, with diverse other of
his part in the conspiracy, as the King durst not try him according to the
law: for at the trial of Arundell and Warwick, the King was forced to
entertain a petty army about him. And though the Duke was greatly lamented,
yet it cannot be denied but that he was then a traitor to the King And was it
not so my Lord with the Duke of Guise: your Lordship does remember the spurgald
proverb, that necessity has no law: and my good Lord, it is the practice of
doing wrong, and of general wrongs done, that brings danger, and not where
Kings are pressed in this or that particular, for there is great difference
between natural cruelty and accidental. And therefore it was Machiavels
advice, that all that a King did in that kind, he shall do at once, and by his
mercies afterward make the world know that his cruelty was not affected. And
my Lord take this for a general rule, that the immortal policy of a state
cannot admit any law or privilege whatsoever, but in some particular or other,
the same is necessarily broken, yea in an Aristocratia or popular estate, which
vaunts so much of equality and common right, more outrage has been committed
then in any Christian Monarchy.


COUNS. But whence came this hatred between the Duke and the King his Nephew.


JUST. My Lord, the Dukes constraining the King, when he was young, stuck in
the Kings heart, and now the Dukes proud speech to the King when he had rendered
Breast formerly engaged to the Duke Britain, kindled again these coals that
were not altogether extinguished, for he used these words: Your grace ought to
put your body in great pain to win a strong hold or town by feats of arms,
ere you take upon you to sell or deliver any town gotten by the manhood and
strong hand and policy of your noble progenitors. Whereat, says the story, the
King changed his countenance, etc. and to say truth, it was a proud and
maisterly speech of the Duke; besides that inclusively he taxed him of sloth
and cowardice, as if he had never put himself to the adventure of winning such
a place, undutifull words of a subject do often take deeper root then the
memory of ill deeds do: The Duke of Biron found it when the King had him at
advantage. Yea the late Earl of Essex told Queen Elizabeth that her conditions
was as crooked as her carcass: but it cost him his head, which his
insurrection had not cost him, but for that speech, who will say unto a King
(says Job) thou art wicked. Certainly it is the same thing to say unto a Lady,
thou art crooked (and perchance more) as to say unto a King that he is wicked,
and to say that he is a coward, or to use any other words of disgrace, it is
one and the same error.


COUNS. But what say you for Arundell, a brave and valiant man, who had the
Kings pardon of his contempt during his minority.


JUST. My good Lord, the Parliament which you say disputes the Kings
prerogative, did quite contrary, and destroyed the Kings charter and pardon
formerly given to Arundell. And my good Lord, do you remember, that at the
Parliament that wrought wonders, when these Lords compounded that Parliament,
as the King did this, they were so merciless toward all, that they thought
their enemies, as the Earl of Arundell most insolently suffered the Qu: to
kneel unto him three hours for the saving of one of her servants, and that
scorn of his manebat alto mente repostum. And to say the truth, it is more
barbarous and unpardonable then any act that ever he did to permit the wife of
his Sovereign to kneel to him being the Kings vassell. For if he had saved the
Lords servant freely at her first request, as it is like enough that the Qu:
would also have saved him, Miseris succurrens paria obtenibis aliquando: For
your Lordship sees that the Earl of Warwick who was as far in the treason
as any of the rest, was pardoned. It was also at this Parliament that the Duke
of Hereford accused Moubray Duke of Norfolk, and that the Duke of Hereford
Son to the Duke of Lancaster, was banished to the Kings confusion, as your
Lordship well knows.


COUNS. I know it well and God knows that the King had then a silly and weak
Council about him, that persuaded him to banish a Prince of the blood, a most
valiant man, and the best beloved of the people, in general of any man living,
especially considering that the King gave every day more then other offense to
his subjects. For besides that he fined the inhabitants that assisted the Lords
in his Minority (of the 17. shires) which offense he had long before pardoned,
his blank Charters, and letting the Realm to farm to meon persons, by whom he
was wholly advised, increased the peoples hatred toward the present government.


JUST. You say well my L. Princes of an ill destiny do always follow the worst
counsel, or at least embrace the best after opportunity is lost, Qui consilia
non ex suo cord sed alienis viribus colligunt, non animo sed auribus
cogillant. And this was not the least grief of the subject in general, that
those men had the greatest part of the spoil of the commonwealth, which neither
by virtue, valor or counsel could add any thing unto it: Nihil est
sordidius, nihil crudelius (says Anto: Pius) quamsi Remp. i^ arrode, qui nihil
in eam suo labor conferent.


COUNS. Indeed the letting to farm the Realm was very grievous to the subject.


JUST. Will your Lordship pardon me if I tell you that the letting to farm of
his Majesty's Customs (the greatest revenue of the Realm) is not very pleasing.


COUNS. And why I pray you, does not the King thereby raise his profits every
third year, and one farmer outbids another to the Kings advantage


JUST. It is true my Lord, but it grieves the subject to pay custom to the
subject, for what mighty men are those Farmers become, and if those Farmers get
many thousands every year, as the world knows they do, why should they not now
(being men of infinite wealth) declare unto the King upon oath, what they have
gained, and henceforth become the Kings collectours of his Custom, did not
Queen Elizabeth who was reputed both a wise and juft Princess, after she had
brought Customer Smith from 14000l. a year to 42000l. a year, made him lay
down a recompense for that which he had gotten? and if these Farmers do give no
recompense, let them yet present the King with the truth of their receivings
and profits. But my Lord for conclusion, after Bullingbrook arriving in England
with a small troop: Notwithstanding the King at his Landing out of Ireland, had
a sufficient and willing army: yet he wanting courage to defend his right gave
leave to all his Soldiers to depart, and put himself into his hands that cast
him into his grave.


COUNS. Yet you see he was deposed by Parliament.


JUST. As Well may your Lordship say he was knocked in the head by Parliament,
for your Lordship knows that if King Richard had ever escaped out of their
fingers that deposed him, the next Parliament would have made all the deposers
traitors and Rebels, and that justly. In which Parliament, or rather unlawful
assembly, there appeared but one honest man, to wit, the B. of Carlisle, who
scorned his life, and estate, in respect of right and his allegiance, and
defended the right of his Sovereign Lord against the Kings elect and his
partakers.


COUNS. Well I pray go on with the Parliaments held in the time of his
successor Henry the fourth.


JUST. This King had in his third year a subsedv, and in his fifth a tenth of
the Clergy without a Parllament; In his sixth year he had so great a subsedie,
as the House required there might be no record thereof left to posterity, for
the House gave him 20s. of every Knights Fee, and of every 20l. land, 20d. and
12d. the pouud of goods.


COUNS. Yea in the end of this year, the Parliament pressed the King to annex
unto the Crown all temporal possessions belonging to Churchmen within the
land, which at that time, was the third foot of all England. But the Bishops
made friends, and in the end saved their estates.


JUST. By this you see, my Lord, that Cromwell was not the first that thought
on such a business. And if King Henry the 8. had reserved the Abbeyes, and
other Church lands, which he had given at the time, the revenue of the Crown of
England, had exceeded the revenue of the Crown of Spain, with both the Indies,
whereas used as it was, (a little enriched the Crown) served but to make a
number of pettifoggers, and other gentlemen.


COUNS. But what had the King in steed of this great revenue


JUST. He had a 15th of the Commons, and tenth, and a half of the Clergy, and
withal, all pensions granted by King Edward, and King Richard were made void.
It was also moved that all Crown lands formerly given (at least given by King
Edw: and King Richard) should be taken back.


COUNS. What think you of that, Sir? would it not have been a dishonor to the
King? and would not his Successors have done the like to those that the King
had advanced?


JUST. I cannot answer your Lordship, but by distinguishing, for where the
Kings had given land for services, and had not been over reached in his gifts,
there it had been a dishonor to the King, to have made void the graunts of his
predecessors, or his graunts, but all those graunts of the Kings, wherein they
were deceived, the very custom and policy of England makes them void at this
day.


COUNS. How mean you that, for his Majesty has given a great deal of Land
among us since he came into England, and would it stand with the K. honor to
take it from us again.


JUST. Yea my Lord, very well with the Kings honor, if your Lordship, or any
Lord else, have under the name of 100l. land a year, gotten 500l. land, and so
after that rate.


COUNS. I will never believe that his Majesty will ever do any such thing.


JUST. And I believe as your Lordship does, but we spoke e're while of those
that dissuaded the King from calling it a Parliament: And your Lordship asked
me the reason, why any man should dissuade it, or fear it, to which, this place
gives me an opportunity to make your Lordship answer, for though his Majesty
will of himself never question those grants yet when the Commons shall make
humble petition to the King in Parliament, that it will please his Majesty to
assist them in his relief, with that which ought to be his own, which, if it
will please his Majesty to yield unto the house will most willingly furnish and
supply the rest, with what grace can his Majesty deny that honest suit of
theirs, the like having been done in many Kings times before? This proceeding
may good Lord, my perchance prove all your phrases of the Kings honor, false
English.


COUNS. But this cannot concern many, and for my self, I am sure it concerns me
little.


JUST. It is true my Lord, and there are not many that dissuade his Majesty
from a Parliament.


CO. But they are great ones, a few of which will serve the turn well enough.


JUST. But my Lord, be they never so great (as great as Giants) yet if they
dissuade the King from his ready and assured way of his subsistence, they must
devise how the K. may be elsewhere supplied, for they otherwise ^^nne into a
dangerous fortune.


COUNS. Hold you contented Sir, the King needs no great disswasion.


JUST. My Lord, learn of me, that ^here is none of you all, than can ^erce the
King. It is an essential property of a man truly wise, not to o^en all the
boxes of his bosom, even ^o those that are near'st and dear'st unto him, for
when a man is discovered to the very bottom, he is after the less esteemed. I
dare undertake, that when your Lordship has served the King twice twelve years
more, you will find, that his Majesty has reserved somewhat beyond all your
capacities, his Majesty has great reason to put off the Parliament, at his
last refuge, and in the mean time, to make trial of all your loves to serve
him, for his Majesty has had good experience, how well you can serve your
selves: But when the King finds, that the building of your own fortunes and
factions, has been the diligent studies, and the service of his Majesty, but
the exercises of your leasures: He may then perchance cast himself upon the
general love of his people, of which (I trust) he shall never be deceived, and
leave as many of your Lordships as have pilfered from the Crown, to their
examination.


COUNS. Well Sir, I take no great pleasure in this dispute, go on pray.


JUST. In that Kings 5th year, he had also a subsedy, which is got by holding
the house together from Easter to Christmas, and would not suffer them to
depart. He had also a subsedy in his ninth year. In his eleventh year the
commons did again press the King to take all the temporalities of the Church
men into his hands, which they proved sufficient to maintain 150. Earls, 1500.
Knights, and 6400. Esquiers, with a hundred hospitals, but they not prevailing,
gave the king a subsedy.

As for the notorious Prince, Henry the fifth, I find, that he had given him in
his second year 300000. marks, and after that two other subsedies, one in his
fifth year, another in his ninth, without any disputes.

In the time of his successor Henry the sixth, there were not many subsedies. In
this third year, he had a subsedy of a Tunnage and poundage. And here (says
John Stow) began those payements, which we call customs, because the payement
was continued, whereas before that time it was granted but for a year two or
three, according to the Kings occasions. He had also an aid and gathering of
money in his fourth year, and the like in his tenth year, and in his thirteenth
year a 15th He had also a fifteenth for the conveying of the Queen out of
France into England. In the twenty eight year of that King was the act of
Resumption of all honors, towns, castles, Signeuries, villages, Manors, lands,
tenements, rents, reversions, fees, etc. But because the wages of the Kings
servants, were by the strictness of the act also restrained, this act of
Resumption was expounded in the Parliament at Reading the 31th year of the
Kings reign.


COUNS. I perceive that those (...) of Resumption were ordinary in former
times; for King Stephen resumed the lands, which in former times he had given
to make friends during the Civil wars. And Henry the second resumed all
(without exception) which King Stephen had not resumed; for although King
Stephen took back a great deal, yet he suffered his trustiest servants to enjoy
his gift.


JUST. Yes my Lord, and in after times also; for this was not the last, nor
shall be the last, I hope. And judge you my Lord, whether the Parliaments do
not only serve the King, whatsoever is said to the contrary; for as all King
Henry the 6. gifts and graunts were made void by the Duke of York when he was
in possession of the Kingdom by Parliament. So in the time of K. H. when K.
Edw. was beaten out again, the Parliament of Westminster made all his acts
void, made him and all his followers traitors, and gave the King many of their
heads and lands. The Parliaments of England do always serve the King in
possession. It served Rich. the second to condemn the popular Lords. It served
Bollingbrooke to depose Rich. When Edw. the 4. had the Scepter, it made them
all beggars that had followed H. the 6. And it did the like for H. when Edw.
was driven out. The Parliaments are as the friendship of this world is, which
always follows prosperity. For King Edw. the 4. after that he was possessed
of the Crown, he had in his 13. year a subsedy freely given him: and in the
year following he took a benevolence through England, which arbitrary taking
from the people, served that ambitious traitor the Duke of Bucks. After the
Kings death was a plausible argument to persuade the multitude, that they
should not permit (says Sir Thomas Moore) his line to reign any longer upon
them.


COUNS. Well Sir, what say you to the Parliament of Richard the third his time?


JUST. I find but one, and therein he made diverse good Laws. For King Henry
the seventh in the beginning of his third year he had by Parliament an aid
granted unto him, toward the relief of the Duke of Britain, then assailed by
the French King. And although the King did not enter into the war, but by the
advice of the three estates, who did willingly contribute: Yet those Northern
men which loved Richard the third, raised rebellion under color of the money
imposed, and murdered the Earl of Northumberland whom the King employed in
that Collection. By which your Lordship sees, that it has not been for taxes
and impositions alone, that the ill disposed have taken Arms; but even for
those payments which have been appointed by Parliament.


COUNS. And what became of these Rebels?


JUST. They were fairly hanged, and the money levied notwithstanding in the
Kings first year he gathered a marvailous great mass of money, by a
benevolence, taking pattern by this kind of levy from Edw. 4th. But the King
caused it first to be moved in Parliament where it was allowed, because the
poorer sort were therein spared. Yet it is true that the King used some art,
for in his Letters he declared that he would measure every man's affections by
his gifts. In the thirteenth year he had also a subsedy, whereupon the Cornish
men took Arms, as the Northern men of the Bishopric had done in the third
year of the King,


COUNS. It is without example, that ever the people have rebelled for any thing
granted by Parliament, save in this Kings days.


JUST. Your Lordship must consider, that he was not over much beloved, for he
took many advantages upon the people and the Nobility both.


COUNS. And I pray you what say they now of the new impositions lately laid by
the Kings Majesty? do they say that they are justly or unjustly laid?


JUST. To Impose upon all things brought into the Kingdom is very ancient:
which imposing when it has been continued a certain time, is then called
Customs, because the subjects are accustomed to pay it, and yet the great tax
upon wine is still called Impost, because it was imposed after the ordinary
rate of payement, had lasted many years. But we do now a days understand those
things to be impositions, which are raised by the command of Princes, without
the advice of the Commonwealth, though (as I take it) much of that which is
now called custom, was at the first imposed by Prerogative royal: Now whether
it be time or consent that makes them just, I cannot define, were they just
because new, and not justified yet by time, or unjust because they want a
general consent: yet is this rule of Aristotle verified in respect of his
Majesty: Minus timent homines in justum pati a principe quem cultorem Dei
putant. Yea my Lord, they are also the more willingly borne, because all the
world knows they are no new Invention of the Kings. And if those that advised
his Majesty to impose them, had raised his lands (as it was offered them) to
20000l. more then it was, and his wards to as much as aforesaid, they had done
him far more acceptable service. But they had their own ends in refusing the
one, and accepting the other. If the land had been raised, they could not have
selected the best of it for themselves: If the impositions had not been laid,
some of them could not have their silks, other pieces in farm, which indeed
grieved the subject ten times more then that which his Majesty enjoys. But
certainly they made a great advantage that were the advisers, for if any tumult
had followed his Majesty, ready way had been to have delivered them over to the
people.


COUNS. But think you that the King would have delivered them if any troubles
had followed?


JUST. I know not my Lord, it was Machiavels counsel to Caesar Borgia to do
it, and King H the 8. delivered up Empson and Dudley: yea the same King, when
the great Cardinal Woolsey, who governed the King and all his estate, had (by
requiring the sixth part of every man's goods for the King) raised a rebellion,
the King I say disavowed him absolutely, that had not the Dukes of Norfolk and
Suffolk appeased the people, the Cardinal had sung no more Mass: for these
are the words of our Story: The King then came to Westminster to the Cardinals
Palace, and assembled there a great Council, in which he protested, that his
mind was never to ask any thing of his commons which might sound to the breach
of his Laws. Wherefore he then willed them to know by whose means they were so
strictly given forth. Now my Lord, how the Cardinal would have shifted
himself, by saying, I had the opinion of the Judges, had not the rebellion been
appeased, I greatly doubt.


COUNS. But good Sir, you blanch my question, and answer me by examples. I ask
you whether or no in any such tumult, the people pretending against any one or
two great Officers, the King should deliver them, or defend them?


JUST. My good Lord, the people have not stayed for the Kings delivery, neither
in England, nor in France: Your Lordship knows how the Chancellor, Treasurer,
and Chief Justice, with many others at several times have been used by the
Rebels: And the Marshals, Constables, and Treasurers in France, have been cut
in pieces in Charles the sixth his time. Now to your Lordships question, I say
that where any man shall give a King perilous advice, as may either cause a
Rebellion, or draw the peoples love from the King, I say, that a King shall be
advised to banish him: But if the King do absolutely command his servant to do
any thing displeasing to the Commonwealth, and to his own peril, there is the
King bond in honor to defend him. But my good Lord for conclusion, there is no
man in England that will lay any invention either grievous or against law upon
the Kings Majesty: and therefore your Lordships must share it amongst you.


COUNS. For my part, I had no hand in it, (I think) Ingram was be that
propounded it to the Treasurer.


JUST. Alas, my good Lord, every poor waiter in the Custom House, or every
promooter might have done it, there is no invention in these things, To lay
impositions, and sell the Kings lands, are poor and common devices. It is true
that Ingram and his fellows are odious men, and therefore his Majesty pleased
the people greatly to put him from the Coffership. It is better for a Prince to
use such a kind of men, then to countenance them, hangmen are necessary in a
common wealth: yet in the Netherlands, none but a hangmans son will marry a
hangmans daughter. Now my Lord, the last gathering which Henry the seventh
made, was in his twentieth year, wherein he had another benevolence both of the
Clergy and Laity, a part of which taken of the poorer sort, he ordained by his
testament that it should be restored. And for King Henry the eight, although he
was left in a most plentiful estate, yet he wonderfully pressed his people with
great payments, for in the beginning of his time it was infinite that he spent
in Masking and Tilting, Banqueting, and other vanities, before he was entered
into the most consuming expense of the most fond and fruitless war that ever
King undertook. In his fourth year he had one of the greatest subsedies that
ever was granted; for besides two fifteens and two dismes, he used David's Law
of Capitation or head money, and had of every Duke ten marks, of every Earl
five pounds, of every Lord four pounds, of every Knight four marks and every
man rated at 8l. in goods, 4. marks, and so after the rate: yea every man that
was valued but at 401 paid 12d, and every man and woman above 15. years 4d. He
had also in his sixth year diverse subsedies granted him. In his fourteenth
their was a tenth demanded of every man's goods, but it was moderated. In the
Parliament following, the Clergy gave the King the half of their spiritual
livings for one year, and of the Laity there was demanded 800000l, which could
not be leavied in England, but it was a mavelous great gift that the king had
given him at that time. In the Kings seventeenth year was the Rebellion before
spoken of, wherein the King disavowed the Cardinal: In his seventeenth year
he had the tenth and fifteenth given by Parliament, which were before that time
paid to the Pope. And before that also, the moneys that the King borrowed in
his fifteenth year were forgiven him by Parliament in his seventeenth year.
In his 35. year a subsedy was granted of 4d. the pound of every man worth in
goods from 20s. to 5l, from 5l. to 10l. and upwards of every pound 2s. And all
strangers, denisens and others doubled this sum strangers not being
inhabitants above 16. years 4d. a head. All that had Lands, Fees, and
Annuities, from 20. to 5. and so double as they did for goods: And the Clergy
gave 6d. the pound. In the thirty seventh year, a Benevolence was taken not
voluntary, but rated by Commissioners, which because one of the Aldermen
refused to pay, he was sent for a soldier into Scotland. He had also another
great subsedy of six shillings the pound of the Clergy, and two shillings eight
pence of the goods of the Laity, and four shillings the pound upon Lands.

In the second year of Edward the sixth, the Parliament gave the King an aid of
twelve pence the pound of goods of his Natural subjects, and two shillings the
pound of strangers, and this to continue for three years, and by the statute
of the second and third of Edward the sixth, it may appear, the same Parliament
did also give a second aid, as follows, (to wit) of every Ewe kept in
several pastures, 3d: of every weather kept as aforesaid 2d: of every sheep
kept in the Common, 1d, ob. The House gave the King also 8d. the pound of every
woollen cloth made for the sale throughout England for three years. In the
third and fourt, of the King, by reason of the troublesome gathering of the
poly money upon sheep, and the tax upon cloth, this act of subsedy was
repealed, and other relief given the King, and in the seventh year he had a
subsedy and two fifteens.

In the first year of Queen Mary, tunnage and poundage were granted. In the
second year a subsedy was given to King Philip, and to the Queen, she had also
a third subsedy in Annis 4. and 5.

Eliz. Reg, Now my Lord, for the Parliaments of the late Queens time, in which
there was nothing new, neither head money, nor sheep money, nor escuage, nor
any of these kinds of payments was required, but only the ordinary subsedies,
and those as easily granted as demanded, I shall not need to trouble your
Lordship with any of them, neither can I inform your Lordship of all the
passages and acts which have passed, for they are not extant, nor printed.


COUNS. No, it were but time lost to speak of the latter, and by those that are
already remembered, we may judge of the rest, for those of the greatest
importance are public. But I pray you deal freely with me, what you think
would be done for his Majesty, If he should call a Parliament at this time, or
what would be required at his Majesty's hands?


JUST. The first thing that would be required, would be the same that was
required by the Commons in the thirteenth year of Hen. the eight (to wit) that
if any man of the commons house should speak more largely, then of duty he
ought to do, all such offenses to be pardoned, and that to be of record.


COUNS. So might every Companion speak of the King what they list.


JUST. No my Lord, the reverence which a Vassal owes to his Sovereign, is
always intended for every speech, howsoever it must import the good of the
King, and his estate, and so long it may be easily pardoned, otherwise not; for
in Queen Elizabeth's time, who gave freedom of speech in all Parliaments, when
Wentworth made those motions, that were but supposed dangerous to the Queens
estate, he was imprisoned in the Tower, notwithstanding the privilege of the
house, and there died.


COUNS. What say you to the Scicilian vespers remembered in the last Parliament?


JUST. I say, he repented him heartily that used that speech, and indeed
besides that, it was seditious, this example held not: The French in Scicily
usurped that Kingdom, they neither kept law nor faith, they took away the
inheritance of the Inhabitants, they took from them their wives, and ravished
their daughters, committing all other insolences that could be imagined. The
Kings Majesty is the Natural Lord of England, his Vassals of Scotland obey the
English Laws, if they break them, they are punished without respect. Yea his
Majesty put one of his Barons to a shameful death, for being consenting only
to the death of a Common Fencer: And which of these ever did or durst commit
any outrage in England, but to say the truth, the opinion of packing the last,
was the cause of the contention and disorder that happened.


COUNS. Why sir? do you not think it best to compound a Parliament of the Kings
servants and others, that shall in all obey the Kings desires?


JUST. Certainly no, for it has never succeeded well, neither on the kings
part, nor on the subjects, as by the Parliament before-remembred your Lordship
may gather, for from such a composition do arise all jealousies, and all
contentions. It was practiced in elder times, to the great trouble of the
kingdom, and to the loss and ruin of many. It was of latter time used by
King Henry the eight, but every way to his disadvantage. When the King leaves
himself to his people, they assure themselves that they are trusted and beloved
of their king, and there was never any assembly so barborus, as not to answer
the love and trust of their King. Henry the sixth when his estate was in effect
utterly overthrown, and utterly impoverished at the humble request of his
Treasurer made the same known to the House: Or other wise, using the Treasurers
own words. He humbly desired the King to take his Staff, that he might save
his wardship.


COUNS. But you know, they will presently be in hand with those impositions,
which the King has laid by his own Royal Prerogative.


JUST. Perchance not my Lord; but rather with those impositions that have been
by some of your Lordships laid upon the King, which did not some of your
Lordships fear more then you do the impositions laid upon the Subjects, you
would never dissuade his Majesty from a Parliament: For no man doubted, but
that his Majesty was advised to lay those impositions by his Council, and for
particular things on which they were laid, the advice came from petty fellows
(though now great ones) belonging to the Custom House. Now my Lord, what
prejudice has his Majesty (his Revenue being kept up) if the impositions that
were laid by the general Council of the Kingdom, which takes off all
grudging and complaint.


COUNS. Yea Sir, but that which is done by the King, with the advice of his
private or privy Council, is done by the Kings absolute power.


JUST. And by whose power it is done in parliament, but by the Kings absolute
power? Mistake it not my Lord: The three Estates do but advise, as the privy
Council does, which advice if the King embrace, it becomes the Kings own Act
in the one, and the Kings Law in the other, for without the Kings acceptance,
both the public and private advices be but as empty Egg shells: and what does
his Majesty lose if some of those things, which concerns the poorer sort to be
made free again, and the Revenue kept up upon that which is superfluous? Is it
a loss to the King to be beloved of the Commons? If it be revenue which the
King seeks, is it not better to take it of those that laugh, then of those that
cry? Yea if all be conten to pay upon moderation and change of the Species: Is
it not more honorable and more safe for the King, that the Subject pay by
persuasion, then to have them constrained? If they be contented to whip
themselves for the King, were it not better to give them the Rod into their
hands, then to commit them to the Executioner? Certainly it is far more happy
for a Sovereign Prince, that a Subject open his purse willingly, then that the
same be opened by violence. Besides, that when impositions are laid by
Parliament, they are gathered by the authority of the Law, which (as aforesaid)
rejects all complaints, and stops every mutinous mouth: It shall ever be
my prayer that the King embrace the Council of Honor and safety, and let other
Princes embrace that of force.


COUNS. But good Sir, it is his Prerogative which the King stands upon, and it
is the Prerogative of the Kings, that the Parliaments do all diminish.


JUST. If your Lordship would pardon me, I would say then, that your Lordships
objection against Parliaments is ridiculous. In former Parliaments three things
have been supposed dishonor of the King. The first, that the Subjects have
conditioned with the King, when the King has needed them, to have the great
Charter confirmed: The second, that the Estates have made Treasurers for the
necessary and profitable disbursing of those sums by them given, to the end,
that the Kings, to whom they were given, should expend them for their own
defense, and for the defense of the Commonwealth: The third, that these have
pressed the King to discharge some great Officers of the Crown, and to elect
others. As touching the first my Lord, I would fain learn what disadvantage the
Kings of this Land have had by confirming the great Charter, the breach of
which have served only men of your Lordships rank, to assist their own
passions, and to punish and imprison at their own discretion the Kings poor
Subjects. Concerning their private hatred, with the color of the Kings
service, for the Kings Majesty take no man's inheritance, (as I have said
before) nor any man's life, but the Law of the Land, according to the Charter.
Neither does his Majesty imprison any man (matter of practice, which concerns,
the preservation of his estate excepted) but by the law of the land. And yet he
uses his prerogative as all the Kings of England have ever used to: for the
supreme reason cause to practice many things without the advice of the law. As
insurrections and rebellions, it uses the marshall, and not the common law,
without any breach of the Charter, the intent of the Charter considered truly.
Neither has any Subject made complaint, or been grieved, in that the Kings of
this land, for their own safeties, and preservation of their estates, have used
their Prerogatives, the great Ensign, on which there is written soli Deo. And
my good Lord, was not Buckingham in England, and Byron in France condemned,
their Peers uncalled? And withal, was not Byron utterly (contrary to the
custom and privileges of the French) denied an advocate to assist his
defense? For where laws forecast cannot provide remedies for future dangers,
Princes are forced to assist themselves by their Prerogatives. But that which
has been ever grievous, and the cause of many troubles, very dangerous is,
that your Lordships abusing the reasons of state, do punish and imprison the K.
Subjects at your pleasure. It is you my Lords, that when Subjects have
sometimes need of the Kings prerogative, do then use the strength of the Law,
and when they require the law, you afflict them with the prerogative, and tread
the great Charter (which has been confirmed by 16 Acts of Parliament) under
your feet, as a torn parchment or waste paper?.


COUNS. Good Sir, which of us do in this sort break the great Charter?
perchance you mean, that we have advised the King to lay the new impositious.


JUST. No my Lord: there is nothing in the great Charter against impositions:
and besides that, necessity does persuade them. And if necessity do in somewhat
excuse a private man a fortiori, it may then excuse a Prince. Again the Kings
Majesty has profit and increase of revenue by the impositions. But there are
of your Lordships (contrary to the direct Letter of the Charter) that imprison
the Kings Subjects and deny them the benefit of the Law, to the Kings
disprofit. And what do you otherwise thereby (if the impositions be in any sort
grievous) but Renovare dolores? And with all digg out of the dust the long
buried memory of the Subjects former intentions with their Kings.


COUNS. What mean you by that?


JUST. I will tell your Lordship when I dare, in the mean time it is enough for
me, to put your Lordship in mind, that all the Estates in the World, in the
offense of the people, have either had profit or necessity to persuade them to
adventure it, of which, if neither be urgent, and yet the Subject exceedingly
grieved, your Lordship may conjecture, that the House will be humble suitors
for a redress. And if it be a Maxim in policy to please the people in all
things indifferent, and never suffer them to be beaten, but for the Kings
benefit (for there are no blows forgotten with the smart but those) then I say
to make them Vassals to Vassals, is but to batter down those mastering
buildings, erected by K Henry the 7. and fortified by his Son, by which the
people the Gentry of England were brought to depend upon the King alone. Yea my
good Lord, our late dear Sovereign Q. Eliz. kept them up, and to their
advantage, as well repaired as ever Prince did Defend me, and spend me, faith
the Irish Churl.


COUNS. Then you think that this violent breach of the Charter will be the
cause of seeking the conformation of it in the next Parliament, which otherwise
could never have bin moved.


JUST. I know not my good Lord perchance not, for if the House press the King
to grant unto them all that is theirs by the Law, they cannot (in Justice)
refuse the King all that is his by the Law. And where will be the issue of such
a contention? I dare not divine, but sure I am that it will tend to the
prejudice both of the King and Subject.


COUNS. If they dispute not their own liberties, why should they then the Kings
liberties, which we call his Prerogative.


JUST. Among so many and so diverse Spirits, no man can foretell what may be
propounded, but howsoever, if the matter be not slightly handled on the Kings
behalf, these disputes will soon dissolve for the King has so little need of
his Prerogative, and so great advantage by the Laws, as the fear of imparing
the one, to wit, the Prerogative, is so impossible, and the burden of the
other, to wit, the Law, so weighty, as but by a branch of the Kings
Prerogative, namely, of his remission and pardon, the Subject is no way able to
undergo it. This my Lord is no matter of flourish that I have said, but it is
the truth, and unanswerable.


COUNS. But to execute the Laws very severely, would be very grievous.


JUST. Why my Lord, are the Laws grievous which our selves have required of our
Kings? And are the Prerogatives also which our Kings have reserved to
themselves also grievous? How can such a people then be well pleased? And if
your Lordship confess that the Laws give too much, why does your Lordship urge
the Prerogative that gives more? Nay I will be bold to say it, that except the
Laws were better observed, the Prerogative of a Religious Prince has manifold
less perils then the Letter of the Law has. Now my Lord, for the second and
third, to wit, for the appointing of Treasures, and removing of Counselors,
our Kings have evermore laughed them to scorn that have pressed either of these,
and after the Parliament dissolved, took the money of the Treasurers of the
Parliament and recalled and restored the Officers discharged, or else they have
been contented, that some such persons should be removed at the request of the
whole Kingdom, which they themselves out of their Noble natures, would not seem
willing to remove.


COUNS. Well Sir, Would you notwithstanding all these arguments advise his
Majesty to call a Parliament?


JUST. It belongs to your Lordships who enjoy the Kings favor, and are chosen
for your able wisdom to advise the K. It were a strange boldness in a poor
and private person, to advise Kings, attended with so understanding a Council.
But be like your Lorpships have conceived some other way, how money may be
gotten otherwise. If any trouble should happen, your Lordship knows, that then
there were nothing so dangerous for a K as to be without money: A Parliament
cannot assemble in haste, but present dangers require hasty remedies. It will
be no time then to discontent the subjects by using any unordinary ways.


COUNS. Well Sir, all this notwithstanding we dare not advise the King to call
a Parliament, for if it should succeed ill, we that advise, should fall into
the Kings disgrace. And if the King be driven into any extremity, we can say to
the King that because we found it extremely unpleasing to his Majesty to hear
of a Parliament, we thought it no good manners to make such a Motion.


JUST. My Lord, to the first let me tell you, that there was never any just
Prince that has taken any advantage of the success of Councels, which have
been founded on reason, To fear that, were to fear the loss of the bell, more
then the loss of the steeple, and were also the way to beat all men from the
studies of the Kings service. But for the second, where you say you can excuse
your selves upon the Kings own protesting against a Parliament, the King upon
better consideration may encounter that fineness of yours.


COUNS. How I pray you?


JUST. Even by declaring himself to be indifferent, by calling your Lordships
together, and by delivering unto you that he hears how his loving subjects in
general are willing to supply him, if it please him to call a Parliament, for
that was the common answer to all the Sheriffs in England, when the late
benevolence was commanded. In which respect, and because you come short in all
your projects, and because it is a thing most dangerous for a King to be
without treasure, he requires such of you, as either mislike, or rather fear a
Parliment, to set down your reasous in writing, which you either mislike, or
feared it. And such as with and desire it, to set down answers to your
objections: And so shall the King prevent the calling or not calling on his
Majesty, as some of your great Councellers have done in many other things
shrinking up their shoulders, and saying, the K. will have it so.


COUNS. Well Sir, it grows late, and I will bid you farewell, only you shall
take well with you this advice of mine, that in all that you have said against
our greatest, those men in the end shall be your Judges in their own cause, you
that trouble your self with reformation; are like to be well rewarded hereof
you may assure your self, that we will never allow of any invention how
profitable soever, unless it proceed, or seem to proceed from our selves.


JUST. If then my Lord, we may presume to say that Princes may be unhappy in
any thing, certainly they are unhappy in nothing more then in suffering
themselves to be so enclosed. Again, if we may believe Pliny, who tells us, that
it is an ill sign of prosperity in any kingdom or state, where such as deserve
well, find no other recompense then the contentment of their own conseiences, a
far worse sign is it where the justly accused shall take revenge of the just
accuser. But my good Lord, there is this hope remaining, that seeing he has
been abused by them he trusted most, he will not for the future dishonor of
his judgment (so well informed by his own experience) as to expose such of his
vassals as have had no other motives to serve him, then simply the love of his
person and his estate) to their revenge, who have only been moved by the love
of their own fortunes, and their glory.


COUNS. But good Sir, the King has not been deceived by all.


JUST. No my Lord, neither have all been trusted, neither does the world accuse
all, but believe, that there be among your Lordships very just and worthy men,
as well of the Nobility as others, but those though most honored in the
Commonwealth, yet have not been most employed: Your Lordship knows it well
enough, that three or 4 of your Lordships have thought your hands strong enough
to beat up alone the weightiest affairs in the Commonwealth, and strong enough,
all the Land have found them to beat down whom they pleased.


COUNS. I understand you, but how shall it appear that they have only sought
themselves.


JUST. There needs no perspective glass to discern it, for neither in the
treaties of Peace and War, in matters of Revenue, and matters of Trade, any
thing has happened either of love or of judgment. No my Lord, there is not any
one action of theirs eminent, great or small, the greatness of themselves
only excepted.


CO. It is all one, your Papers can neither answer nor reply, we can. Besides
you tell the King no news in delivering these Complaints, for he knows as much
as can be told him.


JUST. For the first my Lord, whereas he has once the reasons of things
delivered him, your Lordships shall need to be well advised, in their answers
there is no sophistry will serve the turn, where the Judge, and the
understanding are both supreme. For the second, to say that his Majesty knows,
and cares not, that my Lord were but to despair all his faithful Subjects.
But by your favor my Lord, we see it is contrary, we find now that there is no
such singular power as there has been, Justice is described with a Balance in
her Hand, holding it even, and it hangs as even now as ever it did in any Kings
days, for singular authority begets but general oppression.


COUNS. Howsoever it be, that's nothing to you, that gave no interest in the
Kings favor, nor perchance in his opinion, and concerning such a one, the
misliking, or but misconceiving of any one hard word, phrase, or sentence, will
give argument to the King either to condemn or reject the whole discourse. And
howsoever his Majesty may neglect your informations, you may be sure that
others (at whom you point will not neglect their revenges, you will therefore
confess it (when it is too late) that you are exceeding sorry that you have not
followed my advise. Remember Cardinal Woolsey, who lost all men for the Kings
service, and when their malice (whom he grieved) had outlived the Kings
affection, you know what became of him as well as I.


JUST. Yea, my Lord, I know it well, that malice has a longer life, than
either love or thankfulness has, for as we always take more care to put off
pain, than to enjoy pleasure, because the one has no intermission, and with
the other we are often satisfied, so it is in the smart of injury and the
memory of good turns: Wrongs are written in marble: Benefits are (sometimes)
acknowledged, rarely requited. But my Lord, we shall do the K. great wrong, to
judge him by common rules, or ordinary examples, for seeing his Majesty has
greatly enriched and advanced those that have but pretended his service, no man
needs to doubt of his goodness toward those that shall perform any thing
worthy reward. Nay, the not taking knowledge of those of his own vassals that
have done him wrong, is more to be lamented, than the relinquishing of those
that do him right, is to be supected. I am therefore, my good Lo: held to my
resolution by these 2, besides the former. The 1, that God would never have
blessed him with so many years, and in so many actions, yea in all his actions,
had he paid his honest servants with evil for good. The 2d. where your
Lordship tells me, that I will be sorry for not following your advice, I pray
your Lordship to believe, that I am no way subject to the common sorrowing of
worldly men, this Maxim of Plato being true, Dolores omnes ex amore animi erga
corpus nascuntur. But for my body, my mind values it at nothing.


COUNS. What is it then you hope for or seek?


JUST. Neither riches, nor honor, or thanks, but I only to seek to satisfy
his Majesty (which I would have been glad to have done in matters of more
importance that I have lived and will die an honest man.


FINIS.
The Authors Epitaph, made by himself.
EVen such is Time, which takes in wast
Our Youth, and Ioy's, and all we have,
And pays us but with age and dust,
Which be the dark and silent grave,
When we have wandered all our ways,
Struts up the story of our days:
And from which Earth and Grave, and Dust,
The Lord shall raise me up I trust.

