THE GOOD SAMARITAN; OR AN EXPOSITION ON THAT PARABLE LUKE X. VER. XXX --
XXXVIII. A certain man went down from Jerusalem to Jericho, and fell amongst
Thieves, etc.

By Nehemiah Rogers, Preacher of the Gospel.

Ea quae didicisti ita doce ut cum dicas nove, non dicas nova. Vincent Lyrin.
advers. haeres. LONDON: Printed for Geo: Sanbridge, at the Bible on
Ludgate Hill, MDCLVIII.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL ROBERT AYLET Dr. OF THE CIVIL LAWS, COMMISSARY TO THE
RIGHT HONORABLE AND REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, WILLIAM LORD BISHOP OF LONDON, AND
ONE OF THE MASTERS IN ORDINARY OF HIS MAJESTY'S HIGH COURT IN CHANCERIE. A
bountiful Favourer and fast friend to the CLERGY.

N. R. WITH HVMBLE APPRECATION OF ALL TRUE Happiness presents this ensuing
Exposition, in thankful acknowledgement of his many Favors, and as a
testimony of his ready observance in whatsoever is commanded within the Power
and Profession of him his obliged Servant.

The Text. LVK. 10.30-38. VERSE 30. And Jesus answering said, A certain man
went down from Jerusalem to Jericho, and fell among thieves, which stripped
him of his raiment, and wounded him and departed, leaving him half dead. VERSE
31. And by chance there came down a certain Priest that way, and when he saw
him, he passed by on the other side. VERSE 32. And likewise a Levite, when he
was at the place, came and looked on him, and passed by on the other side.
VERSE 33. But a certain Samaritane, as he journied, came where he was: and
when he saw him, he had compassion on him, VERSE 34. And went to him and bound
up his wounds, pouring in Oil and Wine, and set him on his own beast, and
brought him to an Inn, and took care of him. VERSE 35. And on the morrow when
he departed, he took out two pence, and gave them to the Host, and said unto
him, Take care of him, and whatsoever thou spendest more, when I come again I
will repay thee. VERSE 36. Which now of these three think thou, was
Neighbor unto him that fell among the thieves? VERSE 37. And he said, He
that showed mercy on him. Then said Jesus unto him, Go, and do thou likewise.
A TABLE OF THE PRINCIPAL OBSERVATIONS PROSECVTED IN THIS Ensuing Exposition of
the PARABLE of The good SAMARITANE.
VERSE XXX.
1 PARABLES have God for their Author as well as other Scripture. 2 Teaching by
word of mouth is the most effectual kind of teaching. 9 3 Christ has an
answer ready to our demands. 10 4 God turns man's sin to his Churches
advantage. 13 5 It is a good way to answer the proud and captious by Parables.
13 6 Scripture sets down things necessary. 14 7 Adam and his posterity is the
wounded man. 15 8 Jerusalem a type of Heaven. 18 9 Jericho; a figure of this
world. 20 10 In our travells we are liable to many perils. 21 11 The way from
Jerusalem to Jericho is full of dangers. 22 12 A Thief is a Thief in the
language of Scripture. 27 13 There is a combination amongst Thieves. 27 14
Thieves have been long abroad. 28 15 Who so spoils another of his goods is a
Thief. 29 16 The things of this world are transitory. 31 17 Unrighteous
persons are also cruel and bloody. 33 18 Devils are the grand Thieves. 34 19
Their number are many. 38 20 Sin is a fall. 39 21 By falling into the hands
of Satan we were spoiled. 39 22 Gods Image was a garment wherewith man was
clothed. 40 23 Through man's fall he lost his raiment. 41 24 Every natural man
is a wounded man. 42 25 Whom Satan wounds, he leaves wounded. 43 26 Man by his
fall is not wholly dead but wounded. 44
VERSE 31.
1 There are chances that fall out. 48 2 The Priest and Levits way is the same
with other men's. 3 The event is not like to all, in the same way. 51 4
Spiritual persons especially, should be pitiful. 53 5 Where we expect most,
we (often) find least. 58 6 To turn away the face from the afflicted is a
fault. 60 7 Occasions are to be avoided if we would have dangers prevented. 62
8 Hypocrites more regard ceremonies then substance. 64
VERSE 32.
1 In evil practices, some (of note) will follow. 65 3 Evil doers are very
like in their manners 68 4 By the Law man became not wounded. 69 5 There is no
salvation to be had by the Law. 70 6 Sin is seen and discovered by it. 71 7
The discovery of sin is rather an accident, then the proper work of the Law.
73 8 The whole Mosaicall Law has a pass. 73
VERSE 33.
1 The most are unmercifull. 2 By base means God beats down man's pride. 82 3
From the hands of wicked and men superstitious, may better dealing be sometimes
found, then from the hands of forward professors. 82 4 In works of mercy, the
necessity of the person is especially to be respected. 86 5 Christ is the good
Samaritane by whom alone we have Salvation. 94 6 God serves himself and
providence by us, then especially when we are in our callings. 99 7 Opportunity
offered of doing good is to be apprehended. 100 8 Christ descended from heaven
to us in the flesh and for our good, 102 9 The eye affects the heart, 106 10 We
should be tenderly affected toward the afflicted, 110 11 Works of mercy flow
from the inward affection and compassion of the heart, 112 12 Christ took on
him as our Nature so our passions and affections, 114 13 He was full of
compassion whilst he was on Earth, 117 14 Christ's love and compassion was the
mooving cause of our Salvation, 118
VERSE 34.
1 A compassionate heart will not be idle, 2 It will carry us to them who
cannot come to us, 123 3 Christ came as a Visitour, not to see the world but to
save it 124 4 There is a necessary and good use of physic and surgery, 127 5
Christ is the souls physician, 129 6 With wine and oil our spiritual cure is
wrought, 133 7 God has given us the creatures both for necessity and delight,
139 8 Our Brethrens necessity is to be preferred to our Utility, 140 9 Ins are
of good use, 144 10 Whom Christ means to save he brings into the Church, 148 11
Care must be had of what we undertake, 151 12 The poor and impotent ought
carefully to be attended by such as have undertaken the charge, 152 13 Christ
was full of care for our souls welfare, 154
VERSE 35.
1 Victualing houses are not for residence, 2 The world was no place for
Christ's abode longer than whilst he had finished his work, 160 3 Money at an Inn
bears mastery and makes welcome, 161 4 Ministers are the Churches Hosts, 162 5
The gifts God has be trusted his Ministers withal, are for the comfort and
relief of distressed souls, 166 6 Who so receives wages must discharge the
work, 167 7 Good Hosts should be careful of their Guests, 179 8 Ministers
should be careful of their cure, 180 9 All that is required of a Minister is
care, 183 10 To pass our words for him that is in misery is a work of charity,
186 11 Whatsoever Gods Ministers lay out Christ will discharge, 190 12 The
Ministers reward is not to be expected here but in heaven,
VERSE 36.
1 God applies himself to man's disposition, 196 2 Catechizing is a profitable
way of teaching, 197 3 Who is a Neighbor is questionable, 199 4 The appeal to
Conscience for sentence, after it is rightly informed is a safe way. 203
VERSE 37.
1 Truth has sometimes an adversaries testimony. 2 Who so helps in misery is
to be preferred in neigh our-hood 215 3 What is good in any (yea though an
enemy) is to be allowed of, and approved. 216 4 Action (not verbal profession)
prooves a Christian. 218 5 Good duties are to be performed by our selves. 220 6
Examples are instructions. 222 7 The best patterns are for our imitation. 223
8 Good examples are to be followid whoever sets them 225 9 Works of merry are
to be so done as the Samaritane did them. ibid.
THE GOOD SAMARITANE
LUKE 10. VERSE. 30-38. And Jesus answering said, a certain man went down from
Jerusalem to Jericho and fell amongst thieves. etc.
A Picture drawn to the life is highly praised; but when we see one, made by
the hand of a cunning workman, to nod with the head, moove the lips, roll the
eyes, etc. we so much the more extol it. All the Parables in Scripture are set
forth to the life (as it were) but this (with some others) in such a manner,
Lyra in leo.
as that it seems (and so is held by some) to be rather a History then a
Parable; though generally held to be a Real Parable.

Our Saviors Scope in propounding of it was, First to show unto the boasting
Lawyer, who was his Neighbor. Harm. Evang.
For however our Savior (says Calvin) could have simply answered to the
latter question made;

Who is my Neighbor ( verse 29) yet he chooses rather by this Parable to draw
an answer from the Lawyers own mouth, the more sweetly to induce him, and
others to acknowledge all mankind to be so linked together by one common
Nature, that every man in necessity is to be counted for a Neighbor, and the
hand of relief to be reached out unto him.

Secondly, to instruct the Church, concerning that Righteousness which must
save u^; and that by by the works of the Law no man living shall be justifi d.

Thus he make* answer to the Lawyers former Question, verse 25. purposely
meeting with the Priests and Levites, who were highly conceited of their own
goodness, contemning the Samaritanes as most vile (and counting Christ
himself for one) when yet the Citizen of Hierasalem was relieved by the hands
of a Samaritane, and neither by Priest nor Levit.

Propounding, ver. 30-36. 2. Applying, ver. 36, 37.

In the former we have, 1. The Introduction. 2. The Narration.

The Introduction, verse 30. [ And Jesus answering said.]

Where you have first the Author [Iesus] 2* The manner of delivering it; which
was, first by word of mouth [He said] 2. By way of answer [Answering he said.]

In the Narration two things: 1. The Subject or Person spoken of [A certain
man] 2. The Predicate, or what is spoken of him [He went down from Jerusalem
to Jericho and fell amongst thieves.]

And here we have more specially considerable, 1. His Misery. 2. His Recovery.


His Misery, ver. 30. and in it, First the means whereby he came so miserable;
Secondly, Particulars, wherein that his misery stood.

The Means were either more Remote, or more Proximary and near. The Remote
was his traveling from Jerusalem to Jericho (where you have the terms from
whence and whether) The more near was his falling into the company of thieves,
etc.

The Particulars of this his misery, stood in the evil both of Loss and
Sense. 1. The evil of loss, [He was stripped of his raiment.] 2. The evil of
sense; he was wounded so as that he was left [halfe dead.]

His Remedy or Recovery, ver. 31 -- This is laid down 1. Negatively. 2.
Affirmatively.


Negatively, how or by whom it was not. verse 31, 32.

There; first, the Persons noted, first by Profession. 2. By Disposition.

By Profession the one a Priest, the other a Levit.

Their Disposition; is first generally notified [They passed by] 2.
Particularly exemplified from the manner of it, which was very unhumane [They
saw him in the way] yet passed by on the other side.

Affirmatively, where. 1. The Person succoring, a Samaritane. 2. His merciful
Disposition, and that is enlarged, first from the Cause; Secondly, Effects. The
Cause was either more remote, viz. his traveling that way and coming where he
was; or more near, he saw him and had compassion on him.

The Effect or Fruit. ver. 34.35. There see what he did, 1 To him immediately
by himself while present with him. 2 For him, mediately by others when absent
Whilst he was present with him: So in general, 1. He went to him, 2. And took
care of him, which care is exemplified first, in the dressing of his wounds,
and that by pouring in Wine Oil
2. In the binding them up.

Secondly providing for future succor. 1. By setting him on a beast, 2.
Bringing him to an Inn.

Next, what he did, when he was to leave him; by the hands of others, verse. 35.
And there first the charges he was at with him. 2. The Charge he gave
concerning him. The Charges is generally expressed. [two pence] And then
Particularly exemplified, 1. From the tune when, [on the morrow] 2. From the
Person to whom [to the Host.

In the Charge also two things. 1. The Precept [take care of him] 2. The
Promise. Whatsoever thou spendest more, etc.

The Conclusion or Application follows, ver. 36, 37.

And there 1 A Question, 2. The Answer.

In the first, we have the matter of it [which of these three] 2. His opinion
required concerning it [thinkest thou.]

In the Answer we have first the Respondent or the Answerer [He] 2. The Answer
it self; which is first put in by the Lawyer. 2. Ratified by the Law giver.
And therein, 1. A Dismission [Goe] 2. A Commission or Injunction [Doe likewise]
And thus of the Parts.

There are many Histories in the Word, which either are Allegorical in
signification, or may be Allegorically compared and resembled. Of what kind
this is, is somewhat Questionable; hear the Opinon of Maldonate. Hic totius
Parabola sensus est literalis: utrum praterea sit sensus aliquis mysticus, non
affirmaverius, negaverimve: Sed quia omnes veteres Patres id tradiderunt magno
consensu, est valde probabile, non solum allegoriam, in qua non omnes utique
convenissent, sed mysterium etiam esse, quo^ DEVS omnium mentibus
instillaverit. Hos potissimum auctores videre Lector poterit; Orig. Hom. in
Loc. 34. Greg. Naz. ora, 4. de Theol. Ambro^. hoc loco. Aug. de verbo Dom. Ser.
17. and lib. 2. de q. q. Evang. Greg. lib. 20. Moral, 21. Bedam and Theo in
Comment.

We will then look both into the History, and the Mystery. Hystoria
fundamentum ponit, Allegoria tectum supponit, (says Hugo de sanct. vict. in
Introduct. Sacra Script. cap. 5.) The one lays the Foundation, the other
puts on the Roof: And into the last especially (as being the most noble
sense,) and which especially concerns us; and s^ (reserving the truth of the
Story) By this certain man Adam with his posterity may be understood, So Saint
Augustine. Aug: de quest: Evang: Lib: 2. quest: 59.
Homo iste ipse Adam intelligitur in genere humano. [Homo quidam] been est
generis appellatio, nonenim ait descondit [Quidam] Sed [Homo quidam] nam sermo
fit de tota humanitate (Graecus Anonym. in loc.

By Hierusalem] from whence he traveled, Heaven and Happiness is to be
understood, Aug: Lib: 3. Hypognost.
Descendit a Hierosolimis h. e. agratia Dei, (says S. Augustine) and magno
illo dignitatis gradu, quo conditi fuerant: Vel Jerusalem quae interpretatur
visio pacis, Paradisum dicimus, ante enim quam peccaret homo, in visione pacis
erat, hoc est in Paradiso, ubi quicquid videbat pax erat and laetitia.

By Iericho] to which he went is meant this world] hear (again S. Augustine)
Heirico] Interpretatur luna, and significat mortalitatem nostram, propter hoc
quod nascitur, crescit, senescit and occidit. Aug. de Evang. quest. lib. 2. q,
59. or thus, Aretius in Loc
In Jericho, hoc est, ad urbem Satanae.

By the Theeves] into whose hands he fell [Divels] (so Saint Ambrose) Incidit
in latrones] Qui sunt isti latrones nisi Angeli noctis and tenebrarum (and S.
Augustine thus) Incidit ergo in latrones, Ambros: in Loc de bomine descendente
a Jerusalem in Ierich^.
i. e. in Diabolum and Angelos ejus, qui per inobe dientiam prims hominis
humanum genus dispoliaverunt.

They stripped him of his rayment] i. e. deprived him of Gods Image (so S.
Ambrose) Qui ipsam imaginem Dei vera justitia and sanctitate alijsque donis
gratiae spoliarunt, Au^: cont: Pelag Lib: 3: Hypognosticon: c: 7
and quoad bona naturae vulneratum and semimoriuun, a vita nimirum Dei
abalienatum, and in peccatis mortuum, and vita duntaxat naturali praeditum
reliquerunt. Ambros. in Loc.


He was left half dead] not wholly dead, still he had Freewill in things
Natural: Ability to reason, discourse, foresee dangers to come, and to provide
for the things of this life, in all which respects a portion of life remains
in man after his fall, but in matters which concern a better life, Aug. cont.
Pelat
none at all. Recte dictus est semivivus (says St. Augustine) habebat enim
vitalem motum, id est liberum arbitrium vulneratum, quod ei solum ad aeternam
vitam quam peraiderat redire non sufficiebat: Et ideo jacebat, quia vires ei
proprae ad surgendum non sufficiebant, ut adse sanandum Medicum, id est, Deum
requireret. Or [Halfe dead] the soul still remaining immortal (so
Theophylact.)

By [ Priest and Levit] the Law may be shadowed out with the Sacrifices, etc.
which cannot deliver. 1 Cor. 3.7. (So Augustine) In Sacerdote and Levita duo
tempora intelliguntur, L^gis (cilicet and Prophetarum; In Sacerdote Lex, per
quam Sacerdotium and Sacrificia instituta sunt. In Levita vaticinium
Prophetarum, Aug tom. 7. cont Pelag.
quorum temporibus humanum genus sanari non potuit, quia per legem conditio
peccati non abolevit.

He the [Samaritane] Christ, who was touched with our infirmities. Samaritanus
iste, ipse est Salvator Christus (venit secus enim) i. e. venit in
similitudinem carnis peccati (says the same Father.)

He [journied and came where he was] i. e. came on ^arth, and dwelt amongst
men. [Bound up his wounds] dressed them like the good Physician of our souls,
[powring in oil and wine] preaching [ Repencance and Faith, Law and Gospell]
which do both search and supple: binding all up with the Sacraments, whereby
Christ's merits are applied. Obligat vulnera infundens vinum and ^leum] Vinum
denotat legem, ^leu^s est gratia Evanglij; Sacramenta sunt quasi alligamenta.
Greg, Aug. de q. q. Evang: l 2 q. 19:
epist. 25. l. 1. ad Joan. Epise. Constant. and Latin lib. 2. mor. c. 8. Dieter
post.

The Beast] he set him on might set forth our [Nature] which he assumed bearing
our sins in his body on the tree. Iumentum] ejus est caro, qua ad nos venire
dignatus est: imponi jumento, est in ipsam incarnationem Christicredore (so S.
Aug. and Theop. in loc.

The Inn] is the Church into which Christ brings us; the partition wall being
by him broken down, thus Aretius. Aretius in Loc:
In diversorium ducit] Ecclesia hic peregrinatur per hospitia, suum habens
(...) in coelis, been iumento impositum duxit in stabulum, quia nemo nisi per
baptismum corpori Christi adunatus Ecclesiam intrabit, says Beda. Beda c. 42.
in Loc.


The morrow] when he departed is the time of his Resurrection and Ascension,
Quis est ille alter dies, nisi forte ille resurrectionis dominica; etc. Amb: in
Loc.
(Amb. in loc.) vel quasi tempore alio, post resurrectionem utique and
ascensionem suam, Aug: cont. Pelag.

About the two pence] there are variety of opinions, St. Ambrose thereby
understands the two Testaments both Old and New, Ambros: in hunc Loc.
quae imaginem in se habent aeterni regis expressam quorum pretio vulnera
nostra curantur. St. Augustine thus, Aug: de Quest. Evang: Lib. 2. Quest: 19.
Duo denarij sunt duo praecepta Charitatis quam per Spiritum sanctum acceperunt
Apostoli ad Evangelizandum caeteris; vel promissio vitae praesentis and
futurae. I trouble you with no other.

The Host] in whose hand this Two pence is put are the Ministers of the Word
and Sacraments. Thus St. Augustine] Et dedit stabulario, Paulo Apostolo, Cont:
Pelag Hypogu: Lib: 3.
quiest vas electionis cui solicitudo est omnium Ecclesiarum: And else where he
further explaines himself thus, Sed and pro tempore doctores qui vetus and
novum Test. exposuere, supererogaverunt, De Quest: Evang: Lib: 2: q: 19.
pro quibus retributionem accipient.

The Charge given them (with the two pence) is to [take care] i. e. to feed the
flock committed to their trust. And that under hope of a large retribution at
his coming back [ whatsoever thou spendest more, etc.] Sed quando reverteris
Domine nisi judicij Die? (says St. Ambrose.) Redibit Dominus in die judicij
and beneficia in proximum collata cumulatissime remunerabit (says St. Bernard.)

Thus much for Explication, come we now to matter of Observation from each part
in order: And first of the propounding part; wherein briefly of the Preface or
Introduction.

And Jesus answering said]
Parable is Jesus Christ, the wisdom of the Father. Parables have God for
their Author as well as any other part of holy Scripture, 2 Timothy 3.16. Mat.
13.10, 53 and 21.45. Mar. 4.34.

Their fulness, fitness, purity, preservation, together with the Churches
acceptance and confirmation puts it out of doubt.

Comparisons and Similitudes, the better to imprint in our hearts and memories
what so nearely concerns us. This God would have his Church take notice of for
a special favor. Hos. 12.10.

divine Parables to their hearers. If all Scripture be profitable to teach,
improve, etc. 2 Timothy 3.16. then these Scriptures; (without question) Pass we
from the Author to his Manner of delivery.

[Answering said] (...), suspiciens autem Jesus dixit (so the Vulgar read) As
if Christ should make Answer with his eyes lift up to heaven: male quidem
legerunt suspiciens (says Barradus) legendum enim suscipiens: (And so do our
best Interpreters) Some of our later (Excipiens) Erasmus, Respondens: So we
render it; and that aptly for (...) signifies sometimes to answer, or to begin
a speech (...) Plutarch de des^orat.

He said] Oratoris est dicere, vulgi loqui. There is no little difference
betwixt speaking and saying: Speaking comes by Nature; Saying by Art: Children
speak, the Learned say: Christ so spoke, as if he said. He spoke, and
answered. First observe.

Teaching by word of mouth is the most effectual kind of teaching.

Thus Exo. 20 1. God spoke, saying, therefore Act. 7.38. they are called verba
viventia, lively oracles: or as some copies have it, (...), sermonem vivum.

For further confirmation of this Position, read 1 Kin. 19 11. Romans 10.14.17.
Act. 10.44. 1 Cor. 1.21. Pro. 28.9. Gal. 3.2.

What think you then of that position of Papists: De Imagie: 10.
Images are Laymens books? And that of Bellarmine melius interdum docet pictura
quam Scriptura.

And what of the conceit of Anabaptists, Familists, and such like; who are of
opinion, that the public ministry is needless, they are to depend on
Apparitions and Revelations, etc.

As for us, attend we to the Word read and preached; Christ enters in by the
Door, not Window, he leaves that to the hireling. Be ye open ye everlasting
doors that the King of glory may enter in.

Answering said.
An answer is made either to the necessity of the matter, or to the desire of
the hearer.

As it is made to the former; so Christ is said sometimes to answer when no
question went before, so Mat. 11.25. thus it is an Hebraisme.

Usually it is a reply to some question before propounded, And so here: You
read before there was a question made by a certain Lawyer; proud, though
learned: Learned he showed himself to be in forbearing all circumlocutions;
and in abridging the ten Commandments into two (taking the first, out of Deuteronomy.
6. and the second out of Lev. 6.) whereby it appears he was well read in Moses
law. Proud he was, in that he went about to justify himself, ver. 29. He
hearing himself praised for his wisdom was ambitious also of the praise of
Righteousness; for which end he propounds this case to Christ, Who is my
Neighbor? thinking no Samaritane was to be taken for a Neighbor, but the Jew
alone, whom he durst boldly say he loved as himself. Our Savior upon this
occasion answers as follows. Observe we hence.

Christ has an answer ready to our demands. If we make the Question, he will
find an Answer. Mat. 11.4, 25. and 12.38, 39, 48. and 13.11, 27. Mark. 10.3, 5,
20, 24. Ioh. 3.3, 5, 10. Amongst many other proofs that one Mat. 22.46. would
not be forgotten. He was so ready and prompt a respondent, as that his
adversaries durst ask him no more Questions.

Isa. 9 6. Counselor, and being our Counselor he will answer our Quaeres.

Secondly, he is Full; sometimes counsel must demur; Christ needs not, he can
soon tell us what is good in Law.

Thirdly, he has promised that if we seek we shall find, Mat. 7.8. And
therefore,

Resolution, as flesh and blood can be in Questioning.

Obje. But Christ is in Heaven*

Resp. Yet his answer is near thee. Romans 10.8. even in his Word, and in thy
Heart.

Sometimes in his Word God answers us, as he did of old by Vrim and by Thummim;
guiding his Ministers tongue for that very purpose. Mich. 2.7.

And as we have his answer from his Word, so not seldom from his Spirit,
especially in Prayer. Isay. 30.19. Ier. 33.3. So that an answer may be had if
sincerely sought.

Obje. But some have sought, and yet have not bin answered; So Saul who asked
counsel of God, and yet in depth of sorrow complained, Deus recessit a me,
etc. The Lord has forsaken me, and answers me no more, neither by Prophets
nor by dreams. 1 Samuel 18.15.
And Mich. 3.7. Nulla exauditio Dei* There is no answer from the Lord?

Resp. Saul sought to serve his own turn against the Philistines, and not to
please the Lord; neither God nor his Glory were regarded: By such indeed God
will not be inquired of, Eze. 20.3, 31. or if he be, he will not answer them;
or if he do, it shall be in wrath and not in mercy, Eze. 14.4, 7.

Quest. What then must be done if we would be answered?

Resp. Be ye such as answer Gods demands. Zac. 7.17. see that answer of a good
conscience be made by you spoken of. 1 Pet. 3.21.

Secondly, take heed ye bring not Idols in your hearts: let there not be any
beloved sin lodged or harbored within; for then the Lord will not answer you;
or if he do, even according to the multitude of your Idols will he answer you,
Eze. 14.3. You see it true in Balams case Numb. 22.

Thirdly, see that you bring with you an humble spirit, willing to deny your
self, and receive what answer soever God shall please to give; to enquire of
God, and yet to follow your own counsel is a sin of a provoking nature.
Ier. 6.16. and 23.35, 36. thus do and doubt not of an answer.

Cor. 1.20. who turns all his Religion into unprofitable Vtrums. God has an
answer for these, as well as other. To be short, there are four principal
Questions, which shall not go unresolved.

The first is, An sit Deus? this the Atheist makes, but God will give him to
understand, there is a God. The second is, Quid sit Deus? this the Papist shall
be resolved of, and made to know that stocks and stones are no gods. Psalm.
58.11. Jer. 2.11. -- 5 7. Exo. 34.7.
The third is, Quotuplex Deus? this shall be fully resolved against desperate
and presumptuous sinners, the presumer shall feel that God is just as well as
merciful, and the desperate behold that God is merciful as well as just. Pro:
16.4.
The fourth is, Propter quid Homo? All wicked ones shall find that God made man
for his own Glory, and the wicked for the day of Judgment.

Apostles precept, To be ready always to give an answer to every man that
asks; 1 Pet: 3.15.
be they Believers, or Unbelievers. True it is there is more than ordinary
skill required to answer well: Persons, Time, Place, Occasions must be
observed. One kind of answer suits not with every sort of men: After one manner
we answer Great-men; after an other manner Learned-men; after an other Ordinary
men; after an other way the Captious, etc. But yet this skill we must endeavor
to attain unto, Colos. 4.6. God is he that can enable us, Pro. 16.1. And has
Promised to enable us, Math. 10.19. Seek we to him (as Habbakuk 2.1.) bringing
with us in our Prayers, Faith in Gods Promises, as did David, Psalm. 119.41,
42. So shall we not need to fear to give an answer before Kings or Princes
being called thereunto.

Obj. But we read Mat. 27.12, 13, 14. Nihil respondit, Christ answered nothing
to the accusations of the Priests and Elders, nor to the demand of Pilate, John
19.9.

Resp. Christ was at no time without an answer, when God might have glory by
it, as appears, Math. 26.63. But at this time he forbore, for diverse reasons.
1. To fulfill Prophesies, as that, Esaias. 53.7. 2. To show his readiness, and
willingness to suffer death for us. 3. To leave us an example of Humility and
Patience, in case of slander, 4. For that at this time an answer needed not,
Pilate was incapable of the doctrine of the Trinity: Nor was it a time now, to
reveal his Deity. The rest were unreasonable and malicious. who though they
knew him to be innocent, yet would they accuse him, and (by his words) seek to
ensnare him: In the like case it is lawful (nay behoovefull) we should be
silent: Amos 5.13.
Intelligens illo tempore silebit (says the Prophet) quum tempus mali erit:
That time is an evil time and enjoynes silence.

A second thing to be observed is,

God turns the sins of men to the advantage of his Church.

It was a captious question which the Lawyer made and that occasioned this
Parable. Thus David's fall occasioned the penning of many a sweet Psalm, which
else we might have bin without. So the running away of Onesimus from his Master,
the writing of that Epistle to Philemon.

Light to arise out of Darkness, and brings honey unto us out of a dead
carkase. St. Austin said of Adams fall, it was Foelix culpa (in regard of the
happy consequences thereof to the Elect) so we may say (in the same respect) of
many of the sins and falls of others, we had never enjoyed so many sweet
instructions, and consolations, but for their foul offenses.

Lastly in that our Savior thus answers this captious caveller by a Parable,
we may conclude.

It is a good way by Parables. to answer the proud and captious.

Christ could simply and directly have answered his question, but this way he
rather chooses, Call: in Loc.
the better to convince and silence him. Wherefore, as our Savior says in an
other case, He that can receive it, let him receive it. And so much briefly for
the Introduction. Come we now to the Narration.

A certain man went down, etc.
First look we into the Story: (Consider we the words according to the letter)
and then after into the Mystery. The Text says; Homo quidam. A certain man
there was, but who this man was, is left uncertain.

Scripture sets down things necessary for Salvation, not for satisfying
curiosity. It is well observed that in the books of the Kings and Chronicles,
this is often repeated. The rest of the Acts, etc. They are written in the
books of the Chronicles of the Kings of Judah, etc. So Ester 10.2. The rest is
written in the books of the Kings of Persia. As if the Spirit of God should
say: I have sufficiently told you here, so far as may corcerne the Church,
and make for your edification in Godliness; it is not my manner to satisfy
your curious desires, and lustful appetites, if you would know more go you to
your own Registers. See 2 Timothy 3.16.

Scripture by jesting or overcurious handling, to please men's humors: This is
(as it were) to put the Prophets and Apostles into a Fooles-coat. They are not
penned for any other end then to further man's salvation and happiness And in
reading of them let our aim be to profit, and not to pass the time away, Dr.
Hall
True it is there is no History so pleasant as the Sacred: The magnificence and
antiquity of the matter, the sweetness of compyling, the strange variety of
memorable occurrences does sweetly steal away both time and Reader. But let us
still remember, the delight in reading is nothing unless it be reduced to Use:
God penned his Word not to tickle the ear, but to save the soul.

In the Mystery; Aug: Tom: 4. Quest Evang: l: 2. cap: 2.
This certain man was Adam, and every one that comes from the loins of Adam;
even man's whole nature. Homo enim iste ipse Adam intelligitur in genere humane
(says St. Austine.)

In this Expositors do agree concluding (according to the truth.) That Adam
and, his posterity is the robbed and spoiled man. See Genesis 3. Ps. 49.12.

Paul, Romans 7.24. (...) O wretched (spoiled) man that I am.

Man by Creation was indeed an admirable creature, the Masterpiece of all Gods
works, consisting of a material body, but as immortal as his soul which was
divine and immateriall: his Inside was full of spiritual, his Outside was full
of natural perfection, both carrying the Image of his God, and he in both
being the glory of Gods Worke-manship in this inferior world: Placed in a
Paradise, prepared and furnished with all delights and rarities for his
entertainment. Such a place as no man's eyes might ever be so happy as to
behold, but his own: Appointed Lord and Sovereign over all the creatures upon
the Earth, which received their denomination from him, and did their homage
most readily unto him. In a word, he was a creature every way so absolutely
happy, that unless we had again his first perfections, it is impossible to
make complete relation of his happy and glorious condition.

Thus God made man upright, Eccles. 7.29.
but he has sought out many inventions of his own. Although he was created
thus Excellent, yet mutable. He was made good, but changeably good: In power of
standing, and possibility of falling: Power of standing he had from God his
Creator; possibility of falling from himself being a creature; so as that this
his estate might be altered and changed by force of temptation.

That the creature (righteous by Creation) may so eternally remain; Two helps,
or favors from God, are necessarily required. 1. A power to persevere in
goodness (for without this Power the creature of it self cease to be good.)
2. An act or deed; and that is the will to persevere or perseverance it self.
Both these helps the good Angels have, and therefore kept their standing. Adam
received the first of God, but not the Second: For besides the goodness of his
will, he received of God, a power constantly to persevere in goodness, if he
would; Yet the act of perseverance was left to the choice and liberty of his
own will; which power he abused, and so falling into the hands of Thieves, the
Devil and his Angels, was soon robbed and spoiled (as we shall see in the
Prosecution)

Adam sufficient grace having not the will to will that good he could and
might.

perfection of his nature; (if he would not have bin wanting to himself;) but
he received not sufficient grace for the immutability of his nature; nor was
that of necessity to be given to a creature: Basil:
For then God had created a God (who only has his Name and Nature I AM: it
being only proper to him to be unchangeable good.)

A Goldsmiths makes a Jewel of great value (says one) he compounds it of
gold, pearls and precious stones, when he has brought it to perfection he does
not put this property to it, that if it fall it shall not be bruised nor
broken: Thus God created man in all perfection, and gave him power and ability
to continue in the same, if he would; yet he did not put unto his nature this
condition, that it should be unchangeable, when it should be assailed by the
force of outward temptation (as it was, whence he fell, and as a robbed and
spoiled man now remains.) Judge not then of Gods goodness to him by what now he
is.

Thief or robber further than he was assisted by Gods good grace; which should
cause us (now much more) to renounce our selves and cleave to God; wholly
depending upon his gracious assistance in all our actions and attempts. Let not
our false heart deceive us which thinks to go beyond the Devil in swallowing
of his bait and yet avoid his hook; Worlds of souls perish by this fraud,
fondly beguiling themselves, whilst they make themselves believe by their wit,
and strength, they can beguile the Tempter.

Thus much for the Person spoken of. Next consider we what it is that is said
of him.

He went down from Jerusalem to Jericho and fell amongst thieves, etc.

First, we must speak of the terms before we come to other particulars.

[Hierusalem.]
Jerusalem of old was called Salem, Genesis 14.18. Afterward it was possessed of
the Iebusites, and named Iebus. Pet. Martyr. Pererius.
Judge 19.10. And so from Iebus and Salem (as some suppose) by the change of a
few letters (for the better sound) came Ierushalem. Others think the former
part of the word comes from (...), holy; Hierom Mat: 27.53.
because Jerusalem is called the holy City.

But then there should be a mixture of two several languages to make up the
word: And therefore their opinion is most probable who derive it of ijreh, he
will be seen, Midras in Ps. 76
Genesis 22. And Shalem, Peace: Thus put together it is Ierushalem, the vision of
Peace (for there peace and concord dwelt.) Visio Pacis.


It consisted of two Cities; One was called (...), the upper City, the other
(...), the lower town: to this the Apostle alludes, Galat. 4.25. the one
signifies the Church Militant, Psalm 128.5. The other the Church Triumphant,
Revel. 21. In the Allegory then.

Jerusalem is a tipe of Heaven.

Jerusalem was high standing upon hills, and therefore called the navell of the
Earth or the middle of the Land. Judge. 9.37. Ezekiel. 38.12. And these that come
from thence are said to descend or come down when they went to other parts (as
this Samaritane is said to do:) Beautiful for situation (says the Psalmist)
Psalm. 48. And thus is Heaven: It is a lofty and high Mountain, Isay. 57.15. So
high that we may wonder the eye is not wearied before it reaches it: The
fairest Prospect, in which all others end; one inch of which has more beauty
in it then the whole Globe of the Earth. And yet that we see is but as the
outward curtain of that glorious Tabernacle, wherein God himself, and blessed
Angels reside; which is conceived to be as far above that we see, as that is
this Earth.

2. Jerusalem, as it was high so holy. Math. 4.5. Zach. 8.3. Dan 9.16. God
having chosen it in a special manner to put his name there. 2 Cor. 7.12. Thus
Heaven, Isay. 57.15. that is the Throne of God, there he sits, that is his
eternal habitation, into which no unholy thing can enter.

3. Jerusalem, was a safe place, being compassed about with a threefold Wall;
environed with many mountains, having a ditch that compassed about the City
dug out of stone, wherein an hundred and fifty thousand men did still
continue and abide. And yet Heaven is a place of more security; there can no
moth nor rust come to corrupt it; nor Thief break through to steal, Matthew
6.20. Isaias 32.18.

4. Jerusalem, (according to the notation of the word) was the vision of
Peace, there God made known himself, by Vrim and Thummim; there and only
there was the Temple, the Priesthood, and Sacrifice. Peace was within those
Walls and Prosperity within those Palaces: There it was, where silver was of no
price, but accounted of as stones, and where Cedars were as Sycamore trees in
the Vale for abundance: Thus is Heaven, there we shall see God face to face,
and have a perfect vision of him, Quoad capacitatem Creaturae, though not quoad
plenitudinem ejus. Yea this Vision shall be the Vision of Peace; thence peace
shall come Isay. 32.18. A Tabernacle that shall not be taken down, not one of
the stakes thereof shall ever be removed, neither shall any of the cords thereof
be broken. Isay. 33.20.

5. H^erusalem, was a City compact by reason of the bond of love and order
amongst the Citizens. Psalm. 122.3. So in Heaven; there shall we be all of one
heart, and one mind: we shall rejoice in others glory as if it were our own,
and walk all by one rule, and that for ever.

6. Lastly, Jerusalem, was the glory of the Earth: and so is Heaven; take the
Sun out of the Firmament, what would the Earth be but as a confused Chaos to
u^?

Caleb and Joshua said to the people concerning the Land of Canaan, Come let us
go up to possess it, for it is a good Land and rich Country: So say I of
Heaven: what good thing on earth, or above it that Heaven has not?

Fulgentius seeing Theodorick King of Italy going in pomp to Rome (spoke thus)
how beautiful is the heavenly Jerusalem, when earthly Rome so glittereth! So
think thou, and speak thou of Heaven, when thou look upon any earthly
thing that does delight thee; Remember still Heaven excels.

David resolves he will never forget Jerusalem, but prefer it to his
chiefest joy. Psalm. 137.6. So should we vow, concerning the new Jerusalem;
with the Tribes, thither should we go up in our serious meditations, and having
once pitched upon that place of excellency come down no more: Or if in case
this flesh we bear about with us force our descent (as does our Text) yet how
unquiet should we be, till we are let loose to immortality.

[Iericho.
Iareach, Aug. Tom. 4. Quest. L. 2. Evang c. 19. Revel. 12.1.
the Moon, and the world is like the Moon.

First, for her Mutability: The Moon never looks upon us with the same face;
still in her increasings or decreasings; now she is in her Full, anon in her
Waine. Secondly, And when she is at the Fullest she is not without her Spots;
something we meet with in the world that does imbitter her sweetest delights
unto us. Thirdly, Besides, all the Light the Moon has is but Borrowed from
the Sun; no comfort in any thing here to be had, further then it is bestowed
upon us in Christ.

Secondly, Jericho for Situation was low; and low Country ground is wet ground;
it was moist and watery: so is this World; low indeed in comparison of Heaven,
and has a wet bottom; every eye is full of tears, still cause of lamentation
and mourning whilst here we are.

Thirdly, the waters of Jericho were bitter, and the ground barren. 2 King.
2.19. So this World, no content can we find in it, it is but as a dry and
barren land, even a land of famine, as you read, Luke 15.

Fourthly, Jericho was unkind to Gods spies. Josh. 2. So is this World to Gods
servants his Embassodors. 2 Cor. 6.4, 5 and 11.23.

Fifthly, Yet in Jericho there was one Rahab to entertain them, and to hide
them: So in this World God has some to give Gods Servants entertainment.

Sixthly, Ieriche was execrable and to be destroyed: So is this World, Josh
6.17.
it is reserved for fire against the last day.

Seventhly, in Ier cho some were spared, even as many as got under the red
Flag, which was the sign. Josh. 2. Thus, Jos. 6.23, 25. Cap 2.18.
so many as get under Christ's colors, and are sprinkled with his bloo^ shall
not perish.

Eighthly, Josh 6.18, 26
a heavy curse lay upon him that should take of the accursed thing, or go to
raise up the Walls, or bui^d the City. So is it with those who do affect this
World, who endeavor to maintain it and the works of it, Ioh. 2.15, 16. Iam. 4

error of our Judgment is a cause of the error in our Affections;
questionless if we did rightly understand what the world is, we would not set
our affections upon it, so eagerly, even as the Be sets on her sting, with all
our might.

You may remember in the Law; those Fish which had fins, and did float aloft,
were counted clean, and might be eaten; but Eeles might not be eaten of, they
were esteemed as unclean. The Fins (as some of the Ancient have thought)
signified Faith and Hope. The Eele having no Fins, signified the Worldling, who
is always grubling in the Earth: How ever (these things be applyable, yet)
this we rest assured of, Worldlings are in Gods esteem Idolaters, Col. 3. With
Achan they take of the accursed thing, and hide it in their hearts, as he did
in his Tent; yet they will acknowledge it no more then Achan did his wedge, but
God will discover such in the end, as he did that Achan. And thus much of the
terms.

Now his travail from Jerusalem to Jericho was a more Remote cause of this his
Misery, whence observe.

In our travels we are liable to many perils, Judge 19 25. 2 Cor. 11.26. Yea to
death it self, 1 King. 20.30 Genesis 25.19.

Genesis 28.20, 21, 22.24.12. St. James does wittily taunt those who say to day or
to morrow we will go, etc. James 4.13. The Success of our travels depend upon
Gods blessing, therefore the godly speak with a limitation, St Dominus
voluerit, If God will, or if God bless me, etc. And his blessing may be
expected while we are in our ways; having a warrantable calling, and right
affection in such undertakinge; seeking unto him also by Prayer and Invocation
that it may be prosperous. Psa. 91.11.
A journey thus undertaken in Faith and sanctified by Prayer cannot but have
good success. To the neglect hereof we may justly impute those many damages
that we suffer from Thieves and robbers and other cross accidents which we
meet withal in our travels.



Secondly, we note,

That the way from Jerusalem to Jericho is full of dangers.

This is true in the History: For betwixt Jerusalem and Jericho there was a
Desert, where passengers were spoiled by thieves and robbers, and much blood
there shed, in which respect it was called Adomim, from the store of blood
there shed by them. Quod interpretatur sanguineum Hier. in epist Paul.
There also was Zedechias the King taken by the Captains of the King of Babell
when he fled from Jerusalem.

This is true likewise in the Mystery; we are never in more danger to be made a
prey on then when we descend to Jericho, Si non descendisset, fortasse in
latrones non incidisset, says St. Aug.
and travel to the World-ward. See Job. 18.8 1 Timothy 6.10. In this way it was
that Esau. Achan, Gehezi Ahab, Ananias and Saphira, Demas (with many other)
have bin spoiled: Some bound hand and foot, so as that they could do nothing:
Some gagged, so that they could neither cry nor call: Thousands mortally
Wounded, so as that never after they could be recovered.

go this way; Read 1 Ioh, 2.15. A necessary exhortation for us, to whom it is
as natural to love the world, as for smoke to ascend; and hence it is that
God does so often admonish us to take good heed, when we walk that way, l^st we
be ensnared, Deuteronomy. 7.25.

Should a Sayler see a Ship before him cast away upon some Rock he would steer
his course with the greater care: How many have we known, whose love has bin
cooled, Zeal quenched, etc. through the love of this world? How many young
servants have prooved (through the pursuit of this) irreligious Masters? Young
Saints in show, but Devils in truth? In their former time they have like
Thamar (King David's Daughter) bin apparrelled in Virgins roabes, 2 Samuel 13.18.
( A garment of diverse colors, such as Kings daughters use to wear) But in
after time, their garments have bin torn; ( Charity rent, Faith broake,
Patience tatterd) so that as Absolon spoke to her, his Sister; ver. 20.
Has Amnon thy brother been with thee, we may say to these, has not the World
bin with you, etc. Alas for us who follow after this world and fear not, when
as indeed it is but as the wood and desert, and the pleasures thereof the bushes
wherein the these and spoyler lies lurking to make us a prey.

Quest. Must we have no doings with the world then? May it not be used at all
nor followed?

Resp. Surely then we must get out of the world (as the Apostle speaks) Why
has God placed us here, but to be employed in it? Our callings necessarily
require that we sometimes take a journey toward Jericho, as to the
Market-Towne; where and whence it is, that provision for our bodies must be
made. But (notwithstanding) we must travel as he does who is to pass some
dangerous road, having a great charge about him.

First, have our eye in every corner or crosse-way: He who travels a dangerous
road is very circumspect, and wisely suspicious of every one he meets withal:
So should we in following the world; still looking upon these things, as snares
and nets, laid to entrap us: So speaks St. Ambrose, There is a snare in gold;
Birdlime in silver; entangling ne^s and grins in lands and Lordships: yea this
lower Hemispheare or visible part of the world (as says an other) is but the
Devils Chesboard, wherein hardly can our souls moove, either backward or
forward, but he sets out one creature or another to attach us, nor have we any
other means to avoid his subtilty and snare then by looking up unto the hills
from whence comes our help, Psalm. 121.1.
as 2 King. 6.15.

The Bird when she is afraid, mounteth up to Heaven and so escapes the net;
thus should we do; For in vain is the net spread for all that have wings.
Prove. 1.17. They have power to escape by flight. Thus David, Psalm. 25.15. Mine
eyes are ever toward the Lord, for he shall pluck my feet out of the net.
Learn a new way to escape taking.

The snare (you know) is laid on Earth, and the wisest course would be (as a
man would think) to have the eye thereabout where we suspect the snare is: But
(says David) I will look up; while we look up the feet are gathered up the
better. A wise man's eyes (says Solomon) are in his head, but a fools eyes are
in every corner of the world: Let us be as that wise man and have our eyes in
Christ our Head, and not as the Fool, but with the Sayler, who though he be
upon the Sea, yet looks more to the Heavens then to the Sea: So do we.

Secondly, he that travels in a dangerous way is careful to provide himself
of weapons, for fear of Robbers; a good Staff, or a good Sword, or both: So
here in this our travel. Faith may not be wanting. David said of Goliahs
sword, none like to that, so say we of this, it is a weapon offensive, by it we
overcome the world, 1 John 5.4. and Devil, 1 Pet. 5.9. James 4.1. It is as a
Pistol against a Theife, if our enemies see us furnished with that they will
not hastily venture on us.

It is also Defensive, in which respect it is compared to a Target or Shield. 1
These. 5.8. Ephesians 6.16. It defends us from the fiery darts of the evil one.

It is a good Staff likewise to rest upon. With it (in his hand) St. Peter
could walk upon the Sea; we stand and are stablished by it (as speaks the
Apostle to the Colossians.) Therefore (if we be wise) provide we our selves of
such weapons, 2 Cor. 10.4.

Thirdly; he that is to travel in such a way will be inquiring after good
Company: For Vae soli, Woe to him that is alons; Eccles. 4 9.10.
good society takes away all tediousness from a journey: Get we into the
company of the Saints, delight we in them that excel in virtue, Ps. 16.9.
they will help thee and assist thee by their Prayers, and examples: Their
strength shall be employed for thy good, and thou better enabled to walk
Heavenward: Two are better than one. (yet better one then a bad companion.)

Fourthly, he that travels some dangerous way will not be running into every
by-lane; they will keep the beaten road: the Kings High way is held to be the
safest way: So we, while we keep our selves within the compass of our calling
( General or Particular) have promise of Protection, Psalm. 91.11. Otherwise we
are as a Bird that wanderech from her nest, Prove. 27.8. While it sits brooding
of her eggs, God took order that none should hurt it, but being off, if any
killed it, it was no offense: So is it with us; Balaam shall meet an Angel with
a naked Sword, when he wanders out of his path, Numb. 22. the Prophet with a
Lion, 1 King. 13. Shime^ shall loose his life, when he passes the bounds that
are set him by the King.

If the Dear, leap over the pale and will be straggling into the fields not
keeping within the compass of the Park, every dog shall set upon it, to hunt
it in again. So the world, Devil, Conscience, All, shall be let loose against
us, and a thousand inconveniences shall befall us, to make our paths
uncomfortable, to drive us to Repentance, and bring us back again. As God
therefore has distributed to every man, 1 Cor. 7.17.
as the Lord has called every one, so let him walk.

Fifthly, he that walks in a perilous way will travel between Sun and
Sun. Thus should we have the light of the Word for that we do: Before that
Sun rises stir not out; nor be you seen upon the way after the setting of
it. Gods word must be the light unto our feet, and a lantern unto our paths;
Like the Cloud that went before Israel; so must it be to us; all our actions
are to be ordered and directed by it.

The arrow (you know) is put into the nick by the hand, and so sent to the
mark: Gods Word is that hand that must set us about our works, So we walking
according unto rule Peace will be upon us. Gal. 6.


Lastly, he that is to travel in such a way as is full of danger, will carry
his Purse or Treasure close and hide it in some secret place about him: It is
not wisdom to be boasting of our Treasure, as Hezekiah did, this is but to lay
a bait for a villain, as he did for gold thirsty Babell. It is enough in your
journey to make show of a little, not all: There is Provision for the way; the
full sacks of Corn need not be opened, Genesis 42 25.

You shall hear some young women boast much of their conception, Isay. 39.
when in the end it prooves but, a tympany to their shame: Better, if with old
Elizabeth, they would hide themselves five months, Luke 1 24.
and be sure they have (indeed) conceived before they be seen abroad. So in
things spiritual.

These are the Directions I commend to you, to observe when your occasions
require your travel toward Jericho, least you become a prey to those, who lie
(like Arabians) in the way to spoil you. It is not running to Mountains, nor
to Caces; flying from all society and company, (as some have done) that will
help us: For the world is every where, and theives are every where in the
world. Poverty is a theife to steal away wealth: Sickness is a theife to
steal away health: Death is a thief to steal away life: The World it self
is a theife to steal away the Word. But thank we God for that which so
overcomes us, as that it overcomes the love of the World in us: Our Faith.

[Theeves]
A Thief is a Thief; It give names suitable to Natures, it calls not black
white, nor white black, light darkness, nor darkness light. Isa. 5.20.

etc. have not learnt of Scripture to speak rightly; who in these days dares
call a spade a spade? Yet you see Scripture dares and does.

Luther told one that persuaded him to recant) God has named thee, and branded
thee for a Theife.

Theives] There is (then you see) a combination amongst them; there are many of
them, not one alone, Pro. 1.10, 11 hand joins in hand, and heart in heart.
Pro. 11.21.

Solomon) that makes fools to agree, Pro. 14 9.

will be little enough to make head against the league of cruel ones.

It was a good speech of Judah unto Simeon his brother, Come up with me unto my
lot, that we may fight against the Canaanites, Iud. 1.3.
and I will also go up with thee into thy lot, So Simeon went up. Thus should
good Christians join hands and hearts and purses against the common adversary.

But alas! For our divisions which cause great thoughts of heart; whilst
Drunkards hang upon a string; Swearers shake hands; Theives are sworn
brethren; we that profess better things shrink one from another, which is our
sin and shame.

Theeves] you may easily collect then hence,

That Thieves were abroad many a day agone as well as now. Judge. 18.17, 24.
Job. 1. Ier. 3.2. Hab. 1.6. Mat. 27.38. and that Thieves are yet abroad needs
no proof. I might send you to Highways, Faires, Markets, Shops, etc. If you
doubt hereof: For further confirmation forget not the precept, Exo. 20 15.
which being moral shows, that as there has bin, so still there will be, use
thereof.

Dracoes, exceeding Moses Iudicialls in punishing Theft with Death; Exodus 22.1.
In former times there was required but restitution four for one or five for
one at most.

crescentibus delictis exasperantur poenae, whence it was that even amongst the
Jews in after times the Judge awarded restitution in a greater proportion than
four fold: Pro. 6.30. Lyra.
Now under the Gospel, theft is a greater sin, than under the Law (like Runnet
the older it is, the stronger it is) and the necessity of so sharp a remedy is
greater amongst us (generally) than it was amongst them: So that a Thief at
Gallows looking through a halter is none of the worst sights in a Country.

But who are these Theives, or what did they? See in the Text, They strippe the
poor traveller of his raiment, they sor^ly wound him, and leave him half dead.

First we may infer,

Who spoil others of their goods and take what they have no right unto, are
Thieves. Exodus 20.15. Prove. 12.27. and 21.6, 7. Mich. 2.2. Luke 3.14. Ephesians.
4.28.

So is Theft defined, to be the unlawful usurpation of another man's goods
against his will; and therefore unlawful, because the owner was unwilling: And
it is committed either in Ablato or in Deposito.

If another take from me, what belongs to me, this is Theft, whither it be
done without my knowledge, by fraud and close cousenage, or with my privity
(but against my consent) as by violence and oppression: Or with any consent in
part, as in the exaction of covenanted interest from distressed debtors.

If another withheld from me what is committed to his trust for my use and
benefit, this is no better, Exodus 22.12. Levit. 6.2.

Thieves, 1 These. 4.6. There are Nimrods, mighty hunters of the Earth, who when
they oppress, have their help at the gate in the place of Judicature, and
dare stare the Law in the face, who come like Elies sons with their flesh-hooke
in their hands, and say, 1 Samuel 2.
give it me, if thou will not I will have it. The Thief steals (says
Solomon) to satisfy his hunger, Pro. 6.30.
but these can plead in themselves no necessity, for they are great men, Isay.
1.23. Hos. 4.18 nor is there any superfluity in those they rob, for they rob
the poor.

Believe it all Theives are not High-way-Cutters; there are more Thieves than
those who scowre the plains: There is a kind of Theife who has a house, and
that of his own in which he dwells: In domum furis, the flying roll shall
enter, Zach. 5.4. and commonly it is one of the fairest and stateliest, being
built with blood: Those that lie in itinerant ambushments shall in comparison
of these be counted as no Thieves. These be poor shallow thieves, soon taken
and clapped up in chains of iron, when the other walk (like Aldermen) in chains
of Gold. These great Thieves are a terror unto little ones.

A poor Sea-Captaine being brought before Alexander for Piracie, thus
confessed his fault: Indeed I am a Pirat, because I robbed some poor Fishermen
in a Cock-boate, but if I had scowred the Seas as thou have done, and spoiled
all the world with a Navy, I had been no Pirat, I had been an Emperor. Thus
some Malefactors dye for some petty theeveries, but if they had robbed the
Church by Simony, or Sacrilege, or the Commonwealth by ingrossings or
inhauncings: The City by diminishing quantities, corrupting qualities, taking
advantages, sharking Sophistications: The Country by racking rents, enclosing
Commons, they might have bin Senators, Instices, Gentlemen, and escaped the
Gallows. As pertly and stately as many bear their heads, if they were stripped
of that pomp, wherewith injustice has clothed them, they would be enforced to
beg their bread in the World, and scarce find any to be bound for their truth
and honesty.

To conclude, the universal practices of injustice makes me become a suitor to
you all of what rank soever, that you would not disdain the commendation of
being no thieves: For may I not say in the Prophets sense, All men are liars,
so All men are theivest the Oppressor has a theevish hand: The Covetous has a
theevish eye: The Slanderer has a theevish tongue: The Drunkard has a
theevish throat: The Harlot has a theevish lip: The Flatterer has a theevish
knee: Every Sinner has a theevish heart. Do not hold it impossible for you to
discover and attach a thief in your own bosoms: Examine thy corrupt lusts
within thee narrowly; thou will find thou had had a theofe at bed and board,
arraign it, condemn it, punish it with an impartial execution.

Next we may gather from this poor man's loss,

That the things of this life are transitory, and subject to innumerable
casualties: See Mat. 6.19. Moth may eat them; Rust may consume them; thieves
may rob us of them: To day we may be (with Job) the richest in all the East,
and to morrow the poorest, being left as naked as he was borne: 1 Timothy 6.17.
In regard of which the Apostle calls them, Divitias incertas, uncertain
riches, and the Wiseman, the riches of vanity; Pro. 13.11.
because they are continually ready to vanish and come to nothing.

Their houses shall continue for ever, Psalm. 49.11.
and their dwelling places to all generations; but how soon does the wheel
turn down Prince and up Peasant, down Rich man, up Poor man; down wise man,
up foold? Ad^^ibezeke, Nebuchadnezer, Haman, Belshazzar, Acham, Naboath, Job,
Herod, with many more might be called in as witnesses. What can we cast our
eyes on, that is not taken with a Palsy (as it were) so shaking as that the
joints cannot hold together; one man's inheritance shakes into another man's
purchase, from them that have riches to them that are covetous; still there is
a continual shaking, much wealth is escheated for want of heirs; much is
confiscated for some offenses; much is rioted and made away by unthrists; and
much is taken from us by the violence of wicked ones. At the best estate all is
vanity, and at the worst vexation. Could we enjoy our wealth so long as we
enjoy our life, yet that were uncertain: For what is our life, but a drsame, a
shadow, a vapor, a thing of nothing? With life all goes: Body and goods are
both in a bottom, and cast away together, Psalm. 49.17. But of the two life is
of the longer continuance (oftentimes;) that is as the Tree, Riches as the
leaves or fruit; the leaves will fall, the fruit is plucked off, when the Tree
stands still: Every thief takes not our lives that takes our purses; nor are
there so many ways in our paenall laws to forfeit our lives as our goods.

Dyonisius the second was Lord of four hundred ships, had an army of an
hundred thousand footmen, and nine thousand horsemen, he had besides the
richest Magazine of any Prince in the world; yet he lived to see himself
dis-throned; his Sons cruelly butchered; his daughters, first ravished, and
then massacred, and all his Allies destroyed.

Gelener, that potent King of the Vandals, was so low brought, that he
entreated his friend to send him a harp, a sponge, and a loaf of broad; the
one to make him merry; the other to dry up his tears, and the last to satisfy
his hunger.

Bellizarius a great Captain of the Goths, soon after his victory sitts
begging by the way, of the passenger, for one half penny. To come nearer home,
not fewer then nine Kings in our own Island have begun their Glory in a
Throne, and ended it in a Cell.

But lay up treasure in Heaven, where no thief can come, Mat. 6.20. It is a
vain thing, to rest upon that which is so vain; being subject to rust, subject
to fire, subject to man, subject to time.

That was never perfectly good which might be lost, of this nature you see
riches are. Alas silly things that they should have one dram of our
confidence: Let God be our confidence, so, though we loose divitias Dei, yet we
shall never loose, Deum divitiarum.

These things being then (as you see they are) uncertain and apt to run away
as a wheel, let us be like a wheel too: The wheel (says S. Hilary) though
it roale upon the Earth, yet it has its greatest part from the Earth: So
should we have our conversations in Heaven, though we are here below. And when
it does fall out that we suffer any loss in these earthly things, never lay it
much to heart, but know that then the world has showed it self to be like it
self, and that God as a wise captain has rid thee of some luggage, that thou
may pursue thine enemies the better, and mind Heaven the more, give God the
thanks, Job 1.21.

This was not all that this poor Travellour suffered from the hands of
Thieves; For besides this, They stripped him] They also sorely wounded him even
near to death, So that hence we learn

Who are unrighteous are also bloody, 1 King. 21. Mich. 3.2 Zeph. 3.3. Hos.
4.4. Ps. 10.10. and 14.4.

Hence is it (as say the Learned in our Laws) that Thieves are called Fellons,
of our ancient word Fell or Fierce, because they commit their theevery with a
cruel and mischievous mind. Sure I am that the Thief breaks the sixth
Commandment in breaking of the eight; for when he takes away his Neighbors
goods, he takes away his Life, and therefore their goods are called their life,
Luke 8.43. She spent upon the Physicians all her goods, in the Greek it is
called, (...), omnem vitam, her whole life, called so, because they were the
means to maintain her life.

Fall of man, who by it is become a Beast, nay Devil unto his like. Bears
agree with Bears, Tigers with Tigers, they will not make a prey of their own
kind, but seem to condole the misery of their own nature. But man seeks the
ruin. Home homini Demon.
and destruction of man, like himself; yea takes pleasure and delight in the
project, when it is effected: 1 Cor. 15.32.
Such Men-beasts there are at Ephesus, yea every where tobe found, who if they
spare the life, shed no blood* etc. though they prey on the goods and carry
away all that is portable, than facilis jactura, it is but an easy loss,
Judge. 18.24. As a Captain sometimes told a Traveller, who complained that his
Soldiers had robbed him and left him nothing but his clothes, had they (said
he) bin my Soldiers they would not have left thee clothes upon thy back, nor
life in thy body, for they seldom robbed but they killed: so is it with these.

deflowre Virgins, ravish Matrones, commit Adulteries, and so bind three
transgressions together, breaking at once three of Gods divine precepts; The
damnation of such sleeps not.

It may admonish us to be wary of all unrighteous persons let them pretend
love, make show of friendship; yet being Thieves they seek to draw you into
some by-path, that they may the better have their wills of you: It shall be
your wisdom not to trust them. True Religion is the band that ties us fast, as
to God, so one unto another; where that is not, hard measure may be expected.

These Observations the History affords, Mystery.
the Mystery is as fruitful, which teaches us.

Devils are the Thieves, See Mat. 13.19. Mark. 4 15 Luke 8.12.



Thieves) and Proteus-like, they turn themselves into all forms and shapes to
hurt, 2 Cor. 11.14.
they love not to be known by their own names; nor seen in their own colors:
Sometimes indeed they rob without a vizard; with an open and high hand he
commits his robbery and that both by Sea and Land, Rev. 12.12. Thus they come
like Nimrod, that cruel hunter or oppressor, Genesis 10.8. and by their strong
temptations, horrible apparitions, put on to hellish impieties, and causes us
to run into desperate courses.

But most commonly they cast a cloak (as it were) upon their Theft, and come
disguised: Sometimes like a Divine, the Thief comes with a Psalter in his
hand, coloring his Theft under pretense of Religion, Mat. 4.6. So those who
brought Cattle and Doves to the Temple to be sold, and there changed their
moneys, pretending it was a furtherance to Gods service, (the people having
Sacrifices ready at hand;) but this was theft, Math. 21.13. Sometimes they come
like Lawyers and take away men's goods per (...) by forged cavillations, as did
Zacheus the Publican. Luke 19.9. who justified his action by Statute, and if
any did speak against him, he was ready to accurse them to be wrongers of the
Law.

Sometimes they come like a Merchant in his ruff and stake down, haec dabo,
ready money, Mat. 4.9. Mat. 26.15. But these are Canaanites, and the balance of
deceit is in their hands, Hos. 12.7. They have a weight and a weight. Now God
is all mercy, than he is all justice; they sell by one measure to a wicked man,
and by another to the godly.

Sometimes they come like one of the family of love, and rob with a demure
countenance, as did Judas, what needs this waste, why was it not sold for so
much and bin given to the Poor, But this he said not for that he cared for the
poor, but because he was a thief and had the bag and bore what was put
therein, Math. 12 5, 6.

Sometimes they seem to be like Iuglers and with false dice, cousen men of
their moneys, which the Apostle alludes unto, Ephesians. 4.14. Be not carried away
with every wind of Doctrine (...), with such sleights as men use at Dice: with
extenuations, mitigations, qualifications, distinctions, they cast a false dice
at every throw.

Sometimes they rob like a broken Tradesman in withholding that, which he has
been betrusted with: they have taken up for a day or two, or for an hour, the
Hand, Eye, Ear, or Heart, and promised payment without fail, but what they
get they keep till Chancery do relieve us after a long suite (as in David's
case:) It is not possible to discover all the devices of these Thieves.

Thieves, Job 1.7. and they have many secret haunts: Sometimes they lie lurking
in the Church, and sometimes in the Market: Sometimes at the bed and sometimes
at the board: what Saul spoke of David we may say of these, They are subtle, 1 Samuel 23.23. Sometimes they creep into the Ear and lie there lurking to rob us
of our Religion: Sometimes they get into the Eye seeking to spoil us of our
Chastity; They sometimes break into the heart of the proud, covetous,
malicious, and wait their time for a booty: Sometimes they lie lurking in the
mouths and under the lips of our friends to do us a mischief. They are sly,
cunning Thieves; no Bars nor Barricadoes can keep them out. It is not the
Monks cell, nor the Auchorites wall, that will do it; Paradise it self could
not, and if that place were not exempt; what place (think we) can be?

In the way wherein I walked they have privily laid a snare for me, said David,
Psalm. 142.3. Snares of Temptation, Ambushes of Destruction are prepared by
these crafty enemies of ours, to surprise and take us in every calling; in
every action; in every material; In cibo, in potu, in vultu, in vesto, as
says St. Austin.

-- Cui nomina mill,
mill concendi arts --
traveller lighting into the company of a suspected person does not soon shake
him off? Better is a blank than an ill filling. Or what wise man would invite a
Thief to come unto his house, and being come would make him the best cheer,
show him the best room, lay him in the best bed* etc. when he is told for
certain that he means to spoil him? And yet this ontertainment has Satan
from us, when no Thief so mischievous as he: What Thief but leaves something
behind him? Some gleaning grapes shall remain (as the Prophet shows, Ier.
49.9.) They steal but till they have enough, but this Thief carries all away
that good is: Not a member of the body, not a power of the soul, not a good
instruction in the head, not a good motion in the heart, but he steals away,
Mat. 13.4.

Other thieves may be melted with tears and overcome with persuasions and
entreaties; but Satan will not, he derides us when we mourn, laughes at us
when we have lost all Mat. 27 4.

Other thieves do not ever kill when they spoil; though they take the goods,
yet they often spare the life: But this Thief hunts after the life, yea the
precious soul of man, that is it he seeks to devour, 1 Pet. 5.8.

Other thieves do many times restore what they have taken: But what this Thief
steals is irrecoverable, never does he restore any part of his booty, unless
it be rescued by an high hand. Indeed if we follow with Hue and Cry, go to God,
desire his assistance, confess their losses, raise the country, desire all to
send their help in Prayer, there is than no doubt but we shall recover what is
lost, else not.

Next observe there was (not one alone, but) many of them; they were the hands
of Thieves this man fell into. So than conclude we,

The number of Devils are many. Ephesians. 6.12. Luk 8.2, 30 Revel. 12.7.

Pet. 5.8.



2. There is one who is the head and principal amongst them; but
notwithstanding they are many in number, though how many cannot be determined;
but we may piously think that there are more Devils in the Air than there are
men (at one time) upon the Earth; for who is free from them at any time? Some
Devil or other is at hand to solicit man to sin; besides some one man may
have a Legion of Devils, that is, six thousand, six hundred sixty six in him at
one time, as we read in the Gospel.

Thieves; let us not be careless. Elisha^s servant when his eyes were opened,
saw tropes of spiritual Soldiers, which before he discerned not. If the eyes
of our souls were once enlightened by supernatural knowledge, and the clear
beams of Faith, we should as plainly discern the invisible powers of
wickedness, as now our bodily eyes see Earth or Heaven; but carnal eyes
cannot discern spiritual objects, which is the reason why many being in the
midst of these Thieves, see no worse than themselves, and think no danger near.

Psalm. 23. For as he that hates Israel neither slumbers nor sleeps, no more
does he that keeps Israel.

Plutarch tells us how that Philip King of Maced^n having slept soundly, and
awaking, spying Antipater by him, used these words; No marvel I slept so
soundly seeing Antipater was by and watched: how much more cause have we to say
this, after every nights preservation and rest, and give God the glory.

And fell among Thieves.
that Sin is a fall: So we have taken up the true term and call Adams sin his
fall, and that aptly: For it fowls us like a fall, it bruiseth us like a fall,
it brings us down like a fall: But this I pass, and observe further

By falling into the hands of Satan we became spoiled, 2 Cor. 4.4. He was a
murderer from the beginning, Ioh. 8.44. He seduced E^e, 2 Cor. 11.3. He
provoked David to number the people, 1 Chronicles. 21.1. was alying spirit in the
mouth of Ahabs Prophets to seduce him, 1 King. 22.21. Stirred up Judas to
betray his Master, Luke 22.3. Ananias and Saphira to lie to the Holy Ghost.
Act. 5.3. Elimas to hinder Sergius Paulus his conversion, Acts. 13. Not any
robbery but he is the Thief.

Iam. 1.14.

Devil gives the first moove and rise to sin; we perfect it: He is the Father,
our hearts the mother; he begets, we conceive; he strikes fire, we bring
tinder: Did we not join with him, nothing could be done, he having no
enforcing might, though a persuading slight, in working on the will. Still he
has a hand, and no small one in the robbing and spoiling of us.

Watch therefore and pray that ye enter not into temptation, Math. 26.41. God
has an overruling hand, He can put a hook into this Senacheribs nose, and a
bridle unto his lips: His power is a limited power: 2 King. 19.28
God knows how to deliver us out of his temptations; as also how to preserve
and keep us from his wiles. Should the Lord leave us into the hands of these
spoylers, 1 Pet. 2.9.
our case were miserable. Psalm. 124.
Blessed be the Lord who has not given us over as a prey unto their teeth, the
snare is broken and we are escaped.

The Particulars wherein this man's misery did consist, were two: First, the
evil of loss, next the evil of sense. For the first, He was stripped of his
raiment by these Thieves.

The Image of God consisting of Righteousness and true holiness is the
Garment. So it is compared, Job. 29.14. Ps. 45. Ezekiel. 16.10 Isay. 61.10. Math.
22. Col. 3.12. Rev 69 and 12.1.

For, first, it covered us as does a Garment, from top to toe, no part was left
naked.

Secondly, it adorned us as does a garment: Mordecai did not shine more in his
kingly roabes before the people, than we before men and Angels in it.

Garment to be affected. It is fit for all Seasons; not too hot for Summer, nor
too cold for Winter (as Dyonisius sometimes said scoffingly the rich garments
of his gods were.)

It is fit for all persons, old, young, men, women, and children, 1 Ioh. 2.11,
12, 13.

It is a profitable Garment, the longer you wear it the fresher and fairer it
waxes, and every day more and more in fashion.

Lastly, it is a comely Garment, no garment adorns like this: Other garments
(which we take up in Pride) are nothing else but what the worm has before in
scorn egested. And to value ones self by these, is as if the Daw should value
it self by its Coxcombe, or a fool by his gaudie Coat. But this Garment does
honor us, and procure us esteem, both in the eyes of God and men, 1. Pet. 3.4.

O than get this Garment; and as men are seen and known by their apparel, so
be you by this, and as they seek to get credit by their Garments. So do you
by it.

Pagans over gilded their blocks and stocks, that they might be worshipped;
and many garnish their bodies for the same end; But all such proud dresses, are
like Democritus his brazen shield set up against the Sun, only to dazzle the
eyes of the beholder; in the mean time no care is taken for the obtaining of
this Roabe: so many dresses some have for the head; so many suits for the back;
but not one grace for the heart: how miserable is the condition of such?

As for those who have this garment on their souls; let them honor it as the
Philosopher did his borrowed courtly roabes, which in the presence of the
Emperor on a solemn day he often kissed, telling them who asked him the
reason, Honoro honorantem, I honor that which honored me. Nam quod virtus
non potuit, vestitus obtinuit, my virtue could not procure me admittance into
the Princeragged and beggarly of our selves to be let into the glorious Court
of Heaven, but being clothed with this garment we shall be let in with ease.
But we come to the next point, viz.

Through man's fall he lost his raiment. The Image of God (consisting of
Righteousness and true holiness) he was stripped of, Eccles. 7.29. Romans 3.23,
24.

Quest. Is all gone then, is there no ragge remaining on his back?

Resp. Not so much as will hide his nakedness, or keep off weather: Something
remains and is escaped (like that one servant of Job) to bring the news of
his fall: A dead child has some little resemblance of the living Father, such
is that left in us.

we are naked, as Israel is said to be, Exodus 32.25. Not as Paul speaks of
himself, 2 Cor. 11.27. Corporally; but spiritually; Deuteronomy. 28.21, 22
lying open to all GODS plagues, Corporal, Spiritual, Eternal.

Secondly, we are deformed, and most uncomely, See Ezekiel. 16.6. Revel. 3.17. our
deformity is not from without; but from within especially, that which comes
from thence defiles a man.

You read what a disgrace Hanun put upon David's servants, 2 Samuel 10.4.
shaving of one half of their beards, and cutting off their garments in the
middle, even to their buttocks. A far greater shame has Satan put upon us; O
that it might work on us as it did on them; and that we would use this world
as they did the boarders of that Jericho; stay here, but for necessity till our
beards be grown, and we have again recovered our former honor.

Quest. But is this all? Resp. If no more, yet (as Ester said unto the King
concerning Haman) the enemy cannot countervaile our damage: Ester 7.4.
But this is not all: for the Text shows the Evil of sense was added to the
Evil of loss, He was sorely wounded, So then

Every natural man is a wounded man.

Cast your eye upon what part you please, you can see nothing but wounds and
bruises, Isay 1.5, 6.

His mind that is blind, Ier. 10.14. and 51.17. Ephesians. 5.8. Vain, Pro.
14.12. Ephesians. 4.17. 1 Cor. 1.21. Foolish, Tit. 3.3. Esaias 29 13. Job 11.12.

His Will rebellious and averse, Revel. 8.7. and 7.14. and 6 19. Mat. 23.37.
Ier. 18.12. and 44.16, 17.

His Memory mavelous weak and feeble, Luke 24.6, 7, 8. Heb. 13.2. 2 Pet. 3.5.

His Conscience that is benumbed, Ephesians. 4.19. Heb. 9.14. Genesis 10 15.
Turmoiled, John 8.9. 1 John 3.20. Acts 2.37. and 24.26. Impure, Tit. 1.15. Heb.
10.22. Superstitious and erroneous, Mark 10.19.20. Luke 18.12. Mat. 15.2, 3.
John 16.2.

His Affections are unruly and disordered, they stand quite cross, and
contrary unto God, Gal. 15.24. Romans 10.2. 1 King. 22.8. and 21.4. James 4.12.

His outward members are all instruments of sin, Romans 6.13, 19. and 3.13. Psalm.
52.4. 2 Pet. 2.24.

Totum est pro vulnere corpus. Lucan.
In Noah's flood no part of the earth was uncovered; so here, no part, nor power
of soul, nor body, is unwounded, Genesis 6.5. And as wounds send forth nothing
but filth and corruption, so man by nature, the filth and foame of
uncleanenesse.

Woe is me (says Saint Austin) wretch that I am, so often wounded; for that
thou art the Salve, and I am yet without thee: woe is me wretch, so often
dead; for that thou art the life, and I am without thee, etc. But a deceived
heart has beguiled us; the corruption of our wounds breaks forth in diverse
places, Mat. 15 19. Atheism in one, Adultery in an other, etc. yet who lays
this to heart? nay who boasts not (before God and man) of his own soundesse?

Hospital this world is, wherein we live. All of us are wounded and diseased;
the sent and savor that proceeds from our corrupted soars is most loathsome:
This might imbitter the love of this world unto us.

Ob. But every wound is mortal? Resp. True, and yet not past Christ's cure.
Quest. What must be done? Resp. As the Israelites being stung with fiery
Serpents, looked up unto the brazen Serpent and were healed: so should we, John
3.14. Come to Christ, discover thy wounds, be willing to make them naked, cry
out with David, My wounds stink and are corrupt. And fear not but in due time
thou shall have health and help.

And departed.]
Satan having wounded and spoiled man so leaves him, he departs from him and
lets him lie, (that is our Observation.)

casts down, but withal he raises up, Hos 6.1. The devil he casts
down, and leaves us in the sudds, Mat. 27.4.



But how leave they him? The Text shows [halfe dead.] Rhem. in loc.
The Papists hence infer Free Will, and heavenly life left in man, since his
fall, whereby he has ability to dispose himself toward his own conversion.
We may grant them thus much,

Man is not by his fall so wounded as that he is wholly dead, there is still
some portion of life remaining in him since his fall. What it is, and wherein
it consists, is now to be considered.

First, consider man Philosophically, in genere Entis, in regard of his
natural abilities and endowments, (as Theophilact and Saint Austin do in this
place) so there is life remaining. He has still an Immortal soul, endued
with Understanding, Will, Conscience, Memory, Affections; Capeable of divine
objects; he still has apprehensions and operations suitable to his nature,
being able to Compare, Connect, Discourse, Deduct, etc. the Image of God in him
is not wholly lost.

Consider man in a Civil sense, Politically, as he is a member of the
Commonwealth; so he is still endued with many excellent virtues; he can go,
ride, buy, sell, plant, build, etc. Acts 5.4. Was it not in thy power? etc.

Consider man in a Spiritual sense, Theologically, or as he is to be taken in
Divinity, so he is not half dead (as here) but wholly dead, Colos. 2.13. Ephesians.
25. Nor are we dead in some one sin, but dead in many sins; the soul having
bled to death (as it were at every joint) being deprived of all actual
goodness, and wholly unable to recover himself out of this misery.

Thus Ferus on Mat. 7.16, 17. without Gods assistance man's understanding cannot
know good, nor his will choose good: By which good (he says) he means not
moral nor humane good, but the chief and the eternal good, which cannot be
known and chosen without the Revelation of divine light; which speech (with
other such like) Dominicus Sotho (in lib. Annot. in Ferum) condemns, as
favoring too much Lutheranisme.

less life or more in it, then indeed there is. The Papist and their followers
too much advance it, and many of us too much debase it, while we conceit our
selves so wounded as that there is no life at all remaining. True it is, we
have no power to do any gracious acts, as of our selves; yet we have power to
apply our selves unto the Ministry; to hear what is delivered; to apply our
understanding to that we hear; to consult, to compare that which is delivered
with the Scriptures; which things a stock, or stone cannot do. Velle credere
est gratiae, sed posse credere est naturae. Aug.
So that it is an erroneous and a false conceit to judge of man as of a block
in the work of his conversion: For though man concur not to the working of
his own Salvation as a cause, or agent; yet he may and must concur as a
Subject. God only works that which is good in man, yet man of himself has a
general power to will and work: So that God works not without man, but in
man, and by man as his Instrument, Opus pium quatenus opus a libero Arbitrio
est, tantum quatenus pium a sola gratia est, Bellar. lib. 6. de gratio. Aug.
Cont. Pelag. Act. 3.
which receives the whole activity in good things from the first moover. The
natural power of willing and thinking is ours, the goodness and holiness is
Gods.

Freewill in good actions is as the Materia, Grace working as the Forma; now as
the matter without the Form is rude and shapelesse: So Freewill is altogether
rude and deformed, if it be not framed and fashioned by grace coming
thereunto. The one is as the Beast, the other as the Rider. Now as the Beast is
guided by the hand of the Rider, that it may go in the way to the Riders
pleasure: So Freewill is governed by grace to walk aright in the ways of God.

Be we than rightly informed of these things, and so far as God has given
ability and Freewill, co-work we with God. David calls God his helper, now
(says Saint Austin) Adjuvari non dicitur qui nihil sponte conatur: He is not
said to be helped who never concurred with his endeavor. And Beza on these
words of the Apostle, We are laborers together with GOD, 1 Cor. 3.9. Inferrs
that we do gratiae primae (...), and he that denies it, denies that efficacy
of the first grace.

But it is with us as it was with Naaman, who coming to the Prophet to be
cured of his Leprosy, and being willed by him to wash seven times in Jordan,
he stomachs the matter and breaks out into a Passion; I had thought (said he)
he would have come to me and have called on the name of his God, and laid his
hands on me and so I should have been healed: Three things he expected: 1. That
the Prophet should come to him: 2. Call on his God. 3. Lay his hands on him and
cure him: But all this while nothing is thought on to be done by himself. So
is it with us in the cure of our leprous souls, God must do all, he must
deliver us, if he will have us without our pains.

But frustra oramus pro quibus non laboramus (says St. Austin) In vain we
pray for that blessing, which our endeavors never seek; God sends his Angel
to stir the waters, but no Angel to dragg us into the Poole; we must use
those powers God has bestowed on us, and step in our selves if we would be
healed. Non trunci aut stipites sumus (says Beza on 2 Pet. 1.5.) we are not
blocks and stones but reasonable creatures, and God works on us accordingly.
Put case two men should go together; both have Freewill, and power which way to
take, to the Tavern, or to the Temple, one will to the Church, the other to
the Alehouse, which of these two think you shall soonest be converted? So
here, use the means, follow that, and however thou can not do any thing
meritorious, to deserve at Gods hand, yet thou invitest him to show thee mercy,
as the child does that stands at the Table waiting at his Fathers elbow with a
Trencher in his hand: Thou art in the way of preferment. Nor can I think God
will ever leave himself without witness in such a case.

hear, read, pray, do justice, deal righteously with man; for such a power
still remains, since the fall: But to do these things as thou ought, Vide
Calv. in Gen 9.6. Siquis obijciat im^ginem, etc*
is impossible, till thou gettest a new nature: till then thou art but like a
walking ghost, which seems to do the actions of a living man; it walks, it
talks, etc. yet it does these things not as a living man: Not from any inward
principle, not from the motion of life within, nor is it constant in the work,
it only makes an apparition, and so vanishes.



Those that are naturally dead understand nothing, but in man naturally there
is a life of Understanding remaining (though marvellously corrupted) by which
he may know that he is dead: Those naturals dead cannot stir nor walk to the
means of life, as these may; those cannot hear, and receive what we say, as
these can: So that you see we must call on them, you, to attend still unto the
means.

True it is by falling into the hands of Thieves we are robbed and spoiled and
left naked in a wilderness (as it were) yet there is hope to be restored again
to a happy estate, seeing all life is not wholly gone. Now there is hope while
there is life. Let us lift up our eyes than, God may send some good man by to
power in wine and oil, and bind up our wounds: As follows in the other part
of the Parable which now I come unto.

And by chance there came down a certain Priest that way, Text Ver. 31, 32,
33.
and when he saw him, he passed by on the other side, and likewise a Levite,
etc.

How the wounded man came cured is here showed, 1. Negatively, not by the
Priest nor Levite, verse. 31, 32. 2. Affirmatively, How and by whom it was,
verse. 33. The good Samaritane he did it.


Those who helped not, are noted, 1. By their Profession or Calling, Priest,
Levite. 2. By their Disposition, which is generally notified and expressed
[They passed by] And then particularly exemplified from the manner of it [They
saw him in the way] and yet passed by on the other side.

[And by chance.]
This word (And by chance) being lighted on we must speak something of before
we speak of the Persons.

The Greek word, (...), signifies properly it fell out, or it came to pass:
viz. by the providence of God so disposing or overruling the matter (though
casually to the Priest) and gives thus much to understand.

There are chances that do fall out, i.e. Diverse things in the passage of our
lives which fall out to us casually or accidentally. Now nihil aliud in rebus
casum vocamus nisi cujus ratio and causa secreta est (Aug. cont. Acad lib. 1)
that we call casual or accidental, that comes betwixt the cause, and the
effect, unknown to us, and hinders it, such there are to be met withal. See
Eccles. 8.14. and 9.11. Deuteronomy. 19.5. Exo. 21.13. 1 King 22 34.

Many instances might be produced, the whole book of Ester is a clear proof:
What a chain of mere casualties, (if we look only upon second causes) did
concur in the whole Story? as in the offense of Vashti; in the promotion of
Ester; in the Treason by the two Chamberlaines; in the Discovery by Mordecai;
in the wakefullnes of the King; in the opening of the Chronicles; in the
attendance of Haman; in the acceptance of Esters request. I will give you a
Reason.

Chance) that belongs to the universal cause and we ascribe it to the Lord;
whence it comes, that God usually in the dispersing of contingent things turns
them rather by accidental causes, by casual things, then by those causes that
have influence into their effects; for therein his own hand is most seen, and
the greatest glory gotten. Pro. 16.14.

chance falls out, may we not demur with the Philistines in what happens,
whither it is God or Fortune that smites us?

Chance or Fortune is taken two ways; either for a cause it self opposed to
the Divine Providence (as Epicures, Resp. Te facimus fortuna Deam coeloque
locamus.
Philosophers, and many of the Vulgar take it;) And so it is a very Fiction,
mere Fancy and vain conceit; the name of Fortune having bin brought in by
error and blindness (says Lactantius Iustit. 3.29.) And thus did the
Philistines conceive of it. Or else it is taken for the hiddennesse or secrecy
of a cause; when the cause of a thing is secret and hidden from us; the
appointment disposing, and Providence of God is not seen of us (as here we are
to understand it.) So that we need not question whither there is a cause or no;
(For nothing falls out (no not a sparrow on the ground) but it is by Gods
Providence and arises from the universal cause of all) There is nothing done
nor suffered to be done, but God either does it or permits it, seem it to us
never so casual, Pro. 16.33. See Genesis 24.15, 20, 21, 26. I pass this point
with a word of Use.

Boast not thy self of to morrow (says Solomon, Pro. 27.1.) for thou know
not what a day may bring forth. Can thou conclude peremptorily what is in the
womb before deliverance? No more can thou tell what the day travels with.
Little did Job think in the morning when he arose, that such tidings should be
brought unto his ears before the evening; that that day traveled with such a
birth, as the loss of his goods, Children, etc. and he be left as poor and
naked, as he was when he first came into the world. Ahab, Saul, Haman, thought
as little they should so speed, having made such strong preparations as they
had made, to effect their purposes. Be the Cause never so fair, yet the Effect
expected may prove abortive, and that fall out thou never lookedst for; daily
experience we have of this, and that Proverb verifieth it, Man purposes but
God disposes at his pleasure.

This Doctrine well learned will cause us, 1. To be abundant in Prayer, as you
see Abraham's Servant was, Genesis 14.12. It will free the heart from distracting
cares, wherewith it is so often disquieted about the success and event of
things, 1 Peter 4.19. And lastly it will work Patience in all Afflictions that
befall us, Job. 1.20.22.

Come we now to the Persons, first who helped not; They are first set forth by
their Calling or Profession, one was a Priest, the other was a Levite: Both of
them were Spiritual Persons, and were Ministers about the Temple.

The office of the Priest was to offer Sacrifice; burn Incense; 1 Chro. 6 49.
and 2 Chr. 29.22 Numb. 10. Levit. 13.2. Mal. 2.7.
sound the Trumpets; slay the Beasts; lay them on the Altar; dress the Lamps;
judge of Leprosy; instruct the people.

The office of the Levite was to set up and take down the Tabernacle; to bear
it, and the vessels of it, etc. Numb. 4.3. Both were Ministers, both Jews,
both of Jerusalem: These pass by the same way where the wounded man lay,
Observe first

The way of the Priest and Levite is the same with that of other wounded men,
Romans 3.23, 24. Isay. 53.6.

Reason. They came from Adam as well as others and were in his loins as well
as the poorest and basest.

Zach 3 1. Luke 22.31. 1 King. 22.31. and therefore expect to find them
assaulted, yea often foiled, they are men of like passions with your selves,
Acts 14.15.

Did Papists believe this, would they deny marriage to Ministers, as if there
were some new way laid out to Heaven for them; and they in no danger of the sin
of incontinency, and so no need of that remedy?

Secondly we may hence observe,

That in the same way the event is not alike to all, Luke 17.34, 35, 36. Luke
23.39.40. The whole book of Salomons Proverbes is a proof of this, (besides
many instances that might be brought if need were) as in Moses smiting the
Rock twice, he is blamed for it: The King of Isreal's smiting it thrice and is
commended for it, but blamed for doing it not.

Moses numbers the people and is praised; David numbers them and is punished,
etc. Abraham laughs and is commended, Sarah laughs and is reproved, etc.

Samuel to sacrifice; Phineas to execute judgment, which done by them when
called thereunto is pleasing; but for others uncalled to undertake such things,
God approoves not thereof, nor will accompany with a blessing.

Moses, Samuel, Iehosaphat, Elijah destroyed Idols and Idolaters, so did Iehu
also; but not with a like success: For Iehu had a base end, and what he did,
he did with a corrupt mind, poisoned with Ambition, 2 King. 10.31. He aimed
therein at his own Praise, therefore the Lord threatened to punish him, Hosea
2.4. though he blessed others.

Eccles. 7.14. God has made this contrary to that, he takes different courses
with men, that men should not find the print of his footsteps, so as to say
God will certainly do thus or thus, for all his ways and actions are past
finding out.

Paul did, so David and others of the Saints, but does it necessarily follow
all shall have the like good hap? Some have bin taken in the act of their
evil, as Belshazar, Herod, Ananias, Saphira, etc. All are not; some men's sins
go before to Judgment, some men's follow after, 1 Timothy 5.24. Expect not ever
the like event. Thus both in the ways of Judgment, and in the ways of Mercy
the event may alter; Pharaohs Bakers head may be lifted up and so the Butlers,
but one to his ruin, the other to advancement: So in all other ordinary
actions and passages of thy life observe it, and apply it as occasion shall be
offered, and learn to judge of things aright, not always by the way and
means, (though they promise fair) but acknowledge God in all thy ways and
undertakings, Pro. 3.6.

We spare any larger prosecution of these points: Come we more particularly to
the Persons spoken of.

A certain Priest, etc.]
Our Savior does instance in a Priest and Levite (rather then in any other
person) the better to convince this Lawyer, who conceited that the Jews were
no way wanting in works of mercy; Our Savior by this Parable shows, that the
best, and those most noted for works of Charity (even these spiritual persons
the Priests and Levites) were herein much wanting, and so no wonder if others
were from whom was less expected. Our Observation is,

Spiritual persons in a special manner should be pitiful. See Tit. 1.7, 8.
1 Timothy 3.2. You may read 2 Kings 4.1. The distressed widow comes to a Prophet
to bemoane her condition; every one would not be sensible of her A^fliction; if
they did pity her, yet little hopes there was that they would relieve her; A
Prophet she hopes will do both: Into Elishaes ear she unloades her griefs.
The like course takes David and flies unto Abiathar the High Priest when he was
an hungry and in distress, 1 Samuel 22.

Gods Chaplains in ordinary: they serve that Master who is merciful; him they
should imitate, and learn to be merciful as he is merciful, Luk 6.36. What
Scholar but will imitate his Masters exercise?

2. They have received more mercy, and drunk deeper in that cup then others
have, 2 Cor. 4.1, 2. Who ever (then) are, it is expected they should not be
wanting in this duty.

3. In every good duty Ministers should be Examples unto others, in Word, in
Conversation, in Charity, etc. 1 Timothy 4.12. The Minister is to the people as
the shadow to the body, if the body stoop to the Earth the shadow will not be
upright toward Heaven; thus we see there is good reason for the point
delivered.

covetous hearted, etc. Charity becomes all men, but above all men, the men of
God: If we want bowels in us where shall men find them: If Mercy be a lamp in
others, it must be a bright Star in our Breasts. A Jewel more precious then
all the Stones in Aarons breastplate.

For 1. We are men of God, 1 Timothy 6.11.
and therefore should sly all covetous and earthly practices. Fishes love the
Salt-waters, yet birds of the air fly upwards toward Heaven, and whilst the
Ant (a creature housed in the Earth) makes abundant provision for her self;
the Fowls of Heaven neither sow, nor reap, nor carry into Barnes. O! How
unnatural is it that they, next Heaven by Vocation, should yet in respect of
Conversation be furthest off! Nothing further from Heaven, nor more unlike God
then Uncharitableness.

2. We preach Charity and Mercy, that is the Sum and maine Scope of all our
Sermons: It being the abridgment of the Law, and the Tenor of the Gospel.
Faith is the Center, Love the Circle. All our Doctrines and Conclusions are but
lines drawn from the Center to the Circumference. To come without Charity is
to come into the Pulpit without our Compass; and shall we commend that cheer to
others we refuse to eat our selves? Or lay out a way for them to walk in which
we refuse to tread our selves? Bilhah and Zilpah brought forth children to
Jacob and they were free, yet their mothers still remained bond-women: Shall we
infranchise our Auditory in the liberties of Charity, and suffer out own hearts
to be bound with the shackles of uncharitableness? Nay, as we preach Charity,
profess Charity, and pray for Charity: So we must open our doors to Charity
and give it entertainment.

3. We in a special manner are commanded to entertain it: Simon love thou
me, then feed my sheep, feed my Lambs, etc. David knows not whither to go for
bread, but to the Priest in the Sanctuary of the Lord. Where should the Beasts
of the Forest drink? And the wild Asses quench their thirst, if not at these
Fountains?

non habemus unde, we want wherwithall?

Habet semper unde det qui plenum pectus habet Charitatis (says S. Austin)
Some way or other we may be comfortable to distressed ones. S. Paul shows, 1 Timothy 5.10. wherein poor widows might be hospitable. If with S. Peter and S.
John we want money and meat, yet we may and must by our Prayers and counsel
succor those that are in need.

Secondly; may we rot be wanting in this duty? Then much less, cruel: God
complains, Hos. 6.9. that as troops of robbers wait for a man: So the company
of Priests murder in the way by consent. 1. There were many robbers and so not
so easily avoided. 2. They joined in troops and so hardly to be conquered. 3.
They fell not only to robbery (which had bin far enough,) but to mutther. 4.
They were not Thieves, who did all this, such as professed not God; but
Apostated Priests, such as robbed under an holy garment or Prophets mantle. It
may be some such one may be found, one Judas amongst the twelve Apostles. 5.
They do it by consent, yea Agendo agunt, They commit it, it is their practice.

Now if the Priest and Levite are, as you see here in our Text, condemned for
not succouring the wounded man, what shall become of those who give wounds, and
that murtherous ones; so do Heretics, Schismatiques, and false Teachers? The
Damnation of these men slumbers not.

Augustines time, that the poor should beg of none but the Priest, and if he
had not wherwithall to relieve them, they might exclaim against him for not
more effectually mooving the people; for from them must the Priest receive that
he may give. Indeed all the Charity of the world is put upon us; other men rid
their hands of it and conceive it only a ministerial duty, as if we only were
bound to do all things: But what receive we? Let us demand but recompense for
our labors, we are counted covetous; if we give not, we are deemed
unmercifull; whilst in the mean time you are guilty of iniquity, and abridge
the Priest and Levite of his means, by Customs, Impropriations, forged
Cavillations, etc. Such is the injury of the world; yea such is the Pride of
many Parishes, that the Minister must be always the poorest man in it: For by
this means the poor Minister may not dare to reproove his rich Benefactours,
least he loose his contribution.

Would you have the Pot of Charity sees and yet allow no sire to put under? Or
would you have fire in the Sanctuary and yet allow no Fuel? Can the Lamps
burn without Oil? That the Altar should have maintenance, for her servants,
none but those, who wish there were neither Altar, nor Minister; no Gospel,
nor Preacher; rather then their heirs should want a Personage, or their
Horse-heeles litter, will, or can deny. Read Gal. 6.6. 1 Timothy 5.17, 18. 1 Cor.
9.7. and see how the Apostle labors about this point; who having laid down
for a Position, that none goes to warrefare at his own charge, nor plants a
Vineyard, but eats of the fruit. etc. He then meets with this objection, you
speak in your own cause and are partial. No says St. Paul, the Law says
what I do; for there it is written, thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the Ox,
etc. And why was that? Surely to encourage Ministers; for, for our sakes no
doubt this was written, that he who ploweth should plow in hope, etc. God
having made a Statute of provision for his Clergy, that we might not be left to
the wills and allowances of those men, whose sins we must reproove, nor feed
upon arbitrary Contributions, or Benevolences: Having answered this objection
he prooves the point, and brings an argument drawn from equity: If we have
sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great thing if we do reap your
carnal things? Do you not receive far more from us than we from you whilst
we bring Salvation unto you and receive some small portion of food and raiment
from you? besides, they that minister about holy things, live of holy things as
you well know. Nor was this a Statute and Law in Jacob concerning the Levite
only, but in Israel also and concerns the Minister of the Gospel; for even
so has the Lord ordained; what can be said more fully for Ministers
maintenance? And yet how many think it arbitrary at their choice whither they
will give the Minister any thing or not? You shall have some give more for a
License to keep a dog, to eat flesh in Lent, etc. than to the Minister for
feeding his soul all the year.

Clergy is rich?

Patrimony, Dowry, or Gift of Friends, 2. As have lighted on the unruined
things of the Land, which stood out of the Popes way, and in the sickness of
Superstition escaped of Impropriation, or that which Sacrilege has not let
blood by Custom, Composition, Depopulation, etc. 3. Or those, Antiqui Heroes
nati melioribus annis, that came to their livings when that good Queen
Elizabeth came first to her Crown, at which time Benefices were not at so high
a purchase, as afterward they were; they went a begging then, as Ministers do
now. 4. Or lastly, Such as destill a dry Rose cake for water; by Parsimony and
miserableness get something out of Gentlemen's leavings, and thresh over the
straw again for a few grains of wheat: But notwithstanding scarce one of a
thousand is called by any other title than a poor Priest or Minister.

Object. 2. What the Law gives, you have?

Resp. Gods Law is the best Law; give us what that gives, we ask no more. 2.
Press not man's Law too far: Sure I am you expect more from us than humane
Law can extort from us; should we preach no more Sermons in a year then Law
exacteth at our hands, you would complain of injurious dealing; Why should you
require above statute work, when you give but statute wages? Besides know, 3.
The Law leaves something to the liberty of thy conscience to be answered in a
higher Court.

Object. 3. What would content you? you never have enough.

Resp. Let God determine that: See 1 Cor. 9.14. we desire no more then we may
live upon.

1. As men, so we must have for necessity and delight. 2. As Believers, so we
must have sufficient to lay up for those whom we are bound by the Law of nature
to provide for, 1 Timothy 3.2. 3. As men of God, so we are to have wherewith to
maintain the duties of our Callings, and Confirm by Practice what by doctrine
we teach, 1. Tim. 3.2.
Where we look for most, there oftentimes we find least. This Priest and
Levite which passed by were not only spiritual Persons, but Country men, and
fellow Citizens; of the same Religion, under the same Political Government,
yet these help not.

This dealing God finds from his own Vineyard, he looked that it should bring
forth grapes, for which be had done so much, but it brought forth wild grapes,
Isay 5.4, 7. Judah dealt treacherously with God, and went a whoring from him
when other Nations forsook not their gods. Mary shall spend more tears upon
Christ's feet, then Simon from whom Christ deservedly might challenge more. A
Samaritane (who was a stranger of all the Lepers cleansed) he only is found to
return with thanks; Luke 17.18.
Christ shall have his tyth out of a strange field, when his own flock and
Parish pay him none.

This man finds in every Relation, as might be showed betwixt Father and
Child, 1 Samuel 20.30. 2 Samuel 15. Husband and Wife, Ioh 2.9, 10. Genesis 19.26.
Judge. 9.5.
Betwixt Brother and Brother, Genesis 4 8. Psalm. 105.17. Gal. 4 29. Numb. 12.^.
Betwixt Kinsman and Kinsman, Mark. 3.21. Betwixt Countrieman and Countrieman, 1
Cor. 11.24. Betwixt Friend and Friend, 2 Chronicles. 24.21. Job 19.13. Psalm. 38.5.
and 41.9. and 55.^6. Betwixt People and Ministers, Cant. 5.7. John 4 44.
Betwixt Minister and Minister, Mark 6.^.
John 3.25. Gal. 2. Betwixt Professor and Prof^ssor, 2 Cor. ^1.26.

In all these Relations we stand fast bound one unto another, and should expect
more from these then from others, yet there (you see) least is found; Salomons
Proverb is daily verified, Prove. 19 7. All the Brethren of the poor do hate
him, when a man is in distress his nearest kindred will despise him; much more
his friends; such as are Companions only, go far from him and estrange
themselves, and Prove. 27 10. A neighbor near is better then a Brother far
of, and is sooner found to help one, then a Brother. And that of a wiser then
Solomon (our blessed Savior himself) who tells us, that a man's foes shall be
those of his own house, Mark 6.4.

etc. but we find little fruit; think not this strange. The Inhabitants under
the Torrid Zone (as they write) are more troubled with damps then those under
the Frigid. The bright Sun of Knowledge shining amongst a people has ever
been answered (through inward coldness of heart and spirit) with the damps
and suffocations of piety and justice.

Thou have a friend, a child, etc. whom thou have done much for, who yet has
dealt treacherously with thee; be not too much cast down; God (happily) feeth
thou did place thy hope in man, or too much did affect the creature; so
that God was almost forgotten to be thy stay.

Whilst Naomies sons and husband were alive, Ruth 1.
we find no motion of her re^yting home to Judah; but when these were remooved
and they failed her, then she thinks presently of returning unto her Country;
we cannot so heartily think of our home, and God above whilst we are furnished
with earthly contentments: But when God strips us of them and causes them to
sail, then strait way we pitch on him and mind home ward, Psalm. 27.10.

And when he saw him, he passed by on the other side]
We have seen these Passengers described by their Profession, now see their
Disposition. 1. Generally notified, in that they passed by on the other side.
And 2. More particularly aggrivated, in that seeing him in the way, yet they
passed by, etc.

They saw him then, and this was an aggrivation of their fault, in that they
turned their faces from him whom they saw in misery.

It is a fault (which many are guilty of) to turn away the face from the
afflicted in the day of their distress, Obad. 1.5 Amos 6.6, 8. Isa. 53.3, Pro.
21.13.

1. It is a breach of Gods Commandment, 1 These. 5.14. Comfort the feeble
minded, support the weak, etc. 2. It is most unnatural, as the Apostle
shows, 1 Cor. 12 and argues want of Gods blessed Spirit. 3. It shows there
is no fear of the Almighty in us, Job 6.14.
Pro. 21.13.

These come short of the Charity of this Priest and Levite, yea these men fall
below the very Beasts (as Sheep and Swine) they will come and look upon the
wounds and distresses of their fellows, while these do what they may to put
away the cries and groans of those that be miserable.

A second sort are such as look on and see, yet are nothing moved nor
affected with the distresses of their Brethren, Ester 3.15. They with Haman are
in jollity, whilst Shushan is in Perplexity: So Amos 6.6. These sort of people
jumpe with this Priest and Levit in their Charity and no whit exceed.

A third sort to be reproved are they, who add affliction to affliction; it is
wicked, miserum relinquere, but worse it is, miserum facere. If these
Passengers be taxed for not helping this robbed Travellor, what think you
shall their punishment be that spoiled him? What do you other who charge the
afflicted of Hypocrisy, and by your insolences and other cruelties make more
bitter their afflictions, giving them Gall for meat, and vinegar to quench
their thirst? Let such consider what is spoken, Ps. 69.24, 26, 27. and Psalm.
109.16. It is dangerous to make their backs blew which are already black with
smiting. This for Reproof. Be we next persuaded.

Austin seeing a poor miserable man took occasion thereby to admonish
himself and his Company, Aut sumus, aut fuimus, vel possumus esse quod hic est.

St. James 1.27. makes it a badge of that Religion which is undefiled, to visit
the Fatherless and Widow: It would wonderfully affect the heart (as hereafter
we shall see) and stir up compassion in us; in which respect the Wiseman
says, It is better to go to the house of mourning then to the house of
feasting, Eccle. 7.2 And Pilate to move compassion presented Christ unto the
Jews scourged, saying, Ecce homo, behold the man.



more loathsome in the eyes of God, and his blessed Angels.

2. Christ looked upon a worser object when he looked upon thee, yet he turned
not away his face; why do thou from any of his members?

3. Do what thou may, knowing God accepts the will for the deed, if it be
sincere.

Object. But say the disease be infectious, am I bound to visit?

Resp. No, unless thou be strictly tied by some special bond: We are not to
thrust our selves needlessly into any danger.

2. Yet such would be spoken unto, as Daniell was through the Den: we may visit
yet keep of the infection.

He passed by on the other side]
It may be it was not in popular view where the man lay; the Pharisees must do
what they did with a witness (for fear that God should deny the debt) all
they did (as our Savior says) was to be seen of men; Mat. 6 23.
there being no body to look on, was the reason (say some) they passed by on
the other side and left him unsuccoured. But secondly, and especially they thus
passed, Ne cadaveris contactu pollueretur (Beza in Loc.) least they should be
defiled. The Law forbad the Priest to touch any dead corpse; had he been dead
(which yet he was not) they had observed the Law and done well to have took
the wind, but now they showed themselves right Pharisees, more to respect a
Ceremony then the weightier matters of the Law. Out of their school learn this
lesson,

If we would avoid danger and infection, then to shun the means and occasions
thereto conducing, Pro. 4.15. and 5.8. Job 31.1. Genesis 39.10. Ps. 119.37.

Priest and Levite, who pretending to avoid the infection of sin, yet avoid not
the Persons in whom that corruption reigns: who so would avoid the Plague
will balke the house wherein the Infection dwells: Miserable folly! We hate
the Plague which may kill our bodies, we love the Plague which will kill our
souls. If a man lie sick in the streets we take the wind of him, we shun him
and walk aloof: But with Adulterers, Swearers, etc. we complement and close,
yet only of these we have a charge de non tangendo, not to accompany them.
Ephesians. 5.
This argnes an unsound heart, for the occasion will discover us, Heb. 11.15.

Saepe occasio peccati voluntatem facit peccandi ( Isidor, Sol. lib. 2.) there
be sparkles in a Flint, which being let alone are quiet and appear not, but
strike it with a Steel then you shall discover those which are able to kindle
a great flame: The sparks of sin are raked up in the imbers of our
affections, let them not be stirred with occasions, they are quiet, but when
opportunity blows them there is danger.

Bees in Winter (you know) keep their Hives and will not expose themselves to
the bleake air, sharp winds, bitter frosts: Such should be our wisdom, if we
would shun danger: And as those that desire to hinder the generation of bad
creatures, keep the male and female asunder the one from the other: So should
we keep such enticements from our hearts what lies in us, see Isay. 33.15.



David speaks, Psa. 142.3. In the way wherein I walked have they privily laid
a snare for me: Man in his innocence was not free from this; Paradise was made
for man, yet there behold the Serpent: And thither he no sooner came then he
fell to work. But occasions are of two sorts. First. Such as are given to
Satan and our own corruption, as things either simply evil or else in
themselves indifferent, which yet we, (such is our weakness) cannot use
without sin.

2. Such as are not given by us to them, but only taken by them; as Prayer,
Alms, Hearing, receiving Sacraments, etc. these may not be refrained nor
omitted, because of the occasion of Pride and Vainglory, but Gods assistance
is to be craved: Those of the former sort must carefully be avoided: As for
example, if one find himself in such a company in danger to be entangled, apt
to learn their ways, join with them in their courses; it is wisdom to
forbear that company what may be: So in the use of the creatures: He that
finds himself apt to Drunken^esse, he may not look on the wine that is in the
cup, nor be so bold with it as another may. The like I might say of Recreations
and Passions. But I conclude the Use with that which Plutarch reports of Cotys
King of Thracia, who being by nature very choleric, and having many curious
glasses presented to him, brake them presently, fearing least he should deal
too cruelly with his servants, if in case that any of them should be broken by
them: His practice may teach us this care, wisely to prevent the occasion, if
we would the danger.

Priest and Levite passed on the other si^e to avoid legal uncleanness,
neglecting the work of mercy, which was to be preferred, we may observe the
nature of Pharisaicall Hypocrites, more to regard the Ceremony then the
Substance (as our Savior tells them) Matthew 23.23. They strain at a Gnat and
swallow a Cammell, Matthew 26. They make much a do about Mint and Cummin, some
smaller matter, when in the mean time the weightier matters of the Law are
neglected: Care indeed should be had about all; But the greatest and weightiest
matters most, and the less, least.

And likewise a Levite when he was at the place came and looked on him, and
passed by on the other side. Text. Verse. 32.
]
Both were spiritual persons (as before was showed) yet the Levite was
inferior to the Priest, ^hey were adjuncts to them, Numb. 18.2. The Levite
here comes after, yet treads in the same path the Priest had trodden before him
in. The Person here spoken of, together with his Behavior is considerable; The
Person was a Levite his Behavior and Carriage was like the Priests. As the
Priest had done so did he, first observe

In evil practices there will be some (and that of note) to follow.

Beelzebub fell not alone from Heaven; thousands of Angels fell with him in that
confederacy: Those three conspirators, Corah, Dathan, and Abiram shall have
250. Rulers, men of Renown, Number. 16. 2 Samuel 15.
and famous in the Congregation to join. Absolon shall not rise up in
rebellion against the King (his Father) without seconds. Jeroboam shall not be
an Idolaser alone; no sooner shall he set up his Calves, but Israel will be on
their knees. Balaams way shall be much beaten with the feet of followers, 2 Pet
2.15. Jude 11. He is a mean person that draws not some Clyents after him;
Even Theudas and Judas shall have their four hundereds to accompany them.

They are not singular. And who is? Did you ever know Adultery, Drunkenness,
etc. to be without Clyents? As Eliphaz said to Job 15.7, 8, 9, 10. So seems
the sinner to speak? Am I the first in wickedness that was borne? Do I
restrain sin to my self, what know I that others know not, or do I that
others have not done before? With us are both the aged and the gray headed much
elder then thy father. But let me tell these, the way is broad that leads to
Hell, and there be passengers enough to accompany such as are bound that way.
Singularity is a fault in many; yet it is a virtue (and so to be esteemed) when
vice grows into fashion, Mat. 5.46.

Corah kindle the fire two hundred and fifty Captains will bring sticks to
it, and all Israel will be ready to warm themselves at it being kindled.

Further in that the Levite (who was inferior to the Priest) followed after in
the same Path and Practice; Note

Inferiors usually follow the example of their Superiors, As the one does so
does the other, Pro. 29.12. Luke 23.11. Gal. 2 13.

The very Heathen had their Imaginary gods for guides, as Jupiter, or Mercury:
them they invocated, them they imitated: Augustus a learned Prince filled Rome
with Scholars; Tiberius with Dissemblers; Constantine with Christians; Julian
with Atheists; nor is there any such authority given to sin as by the example
of Superiors. There is a double beneficial Use to be made of this.

Let them that are in Authority and place look in a special manner to their
lives. It is the unhappy desire of wickedness to be the ringleader of sin:
Every accessory is faulty enough, but the first Author is abominable, a^ was
Jeroboam, of whose fact all agea ring with the accent of dishonor, Jeroboam
the s^nne of Nebat that made Israel to sin. Imitators of evil deserve
punishment, the abettours more, but there is no Hell deep enough for the
leaders of publik wickedness: eminent persons in sinning (with Sampson) pull
down these pillars of goodness that shall not only quash themselves, but be
the ruin of thousands. Their facts become examples, their examples Laws; and it
is usual with men to follow the Law of Fact, before the Law of Faith.

We read Ezra 9.2. When the people had taken them strange wives of the
Idolatrous Nation; it was told Ezra and with this addition that the heads of
the Princes and Rulers were the chief in this matter. And Numb. 25.4. We read
that God charged Moses to take the heads amongst the People and to hang them
up: In the practice of sin the chief and the most eminent are usually most
faulty; For the multitude (as we say of Bees) will follow their Master. If
Jeroboam will set up Calvish Deities, he shall be sure of brutish subjects.

From whence has grown all our strange disguises, Fantastical fashions,
painted faces, apish gestures, but from the example of leaders? These are the
party colored rods after which inferiors conceive: Till sin got courage from
their example, it went about like a fatherless child, every one did shut their
doors against it, but when once Superiors took it in, Inferiors fostered
it, and now it stands up in defiance: Though it be a bastard, it dares
challenge the true heir, and wrangle for the inheritance. You that are above
others give good examples, be not to others examples of transgressions lest God
make you examples of destruction in the end.

Superiores caet^ri^, but there is Superior supremis. Eccles. 5.8. He that is
higher then the highest regards it, and there be higher then they. There is
no respect of Persons with God, the poorest may say to the richest, as the
Malefactor to his fellow on the cross, Thou are in the same condemnation with
us: Say not then, I did it, but there were better then I did so: Such were in
the Company whom I durst not displease, etc. It is better to prefer Gods
honor, then man's humor; and at that day when Scepters and Sepulchers, shall
be all one, you will find that there is no Protection in any Lord against the
Lord of Hoasts.

Again observe we,

Evil doers are very like in their behavior and manners; As the Priest did so
[likewise] the Levite, The world is conformable unto it self. Romans 12.2. So 1
Kings 15.3, 26, 34. and 16.2, 26, 31. 2 Kings 8.18, 27. and 13.6, 11. 1 Kings
17.8. and 21.21. Jude 7. One unclean Person imitates an other, and verse 11,
one Conspirator follows the tract of another. So 2. Pet. 2 15. Sorcerers
imitate Sorcerers, and Act. 7.51. As the Father did so do the Children.

Ps. 1.1.

[likewise] we conform unto the world. The world like a Weather-cocke turns
with every wind, if we do [likewise] we then conform unto the world. The world
is impatient of reproves, and will not endure to be told of its faults; if we
do [likewise] we then conform unto the world: And in so doing can we expect to
be distinguished from the men of this world either here or hereafter?

So much for the Letter: of the Mystery yet further.

This Levite and Priest, who here passed by without helping the wounded man.
(though they looked on him) no^e forth unto us the whole Mosaicall Law with the
Sacrifices and Ceremonies of the same: Sacerdos and Levita praetereuntes legem
and sacrisicia vet. Test. denotant. Chrysostom.
All which look on man fallen, and discover his sin, but can neither help nor
cure: they leave man still wounded, pouring in neither oil to supple, nor wine
to cleanse.

The first Conclusion we lay down is this,

Man was not wounded by the Law: The Priest and Levite did not wound this man:
They were not the Thieves, though they did neither help nor heal him.

The Law than is not the proper cause of death to any; it does not properly, as
a working cause, wound the soul of man nor make him liable to damnation.

There was (you know) condemnation enough in the world between Adam and Moses,
before the Law was published anew, and however it be true that the Law shall
prove a Condemning and a Judging Law to all impenitent ones and unbelievers;
yet this was not the primary intention of it* no more than it was of the
Gospel to condemn men by it, which yet will be a savor of death unto death
to all that despise it, Deuteronomy. 30.15. Lev. 18.5 Eze. 20.11. Romans 10.7, 18.

Object. But, Ezekiel. 20.25. I gave them Laws that were not good, and Judgments
whereby they shall not live?

There be three sorts of Laws or Precepts. 1. Mala, as Mich. 6.16. the
Statutes of Omri. 2. Non bona, as the Ceremonial Law. 3. Bona. So the Moral
Law. Now those Laws there spoken of were the Laws of Ceremonies, which the
Lord calls not good; because they could bring nothing to perfection, being but
shadows of things to come, Heb. 10.1. But the moral Precepts are just and
holy, and the man that does them shall live by them, Gal. 3.12.

Object. 2. 2 Cor. 3.^. It is the ministration of death?

Resp. So it is accidently (as we shall show anon) not because there is any
imperfection in the Law, but from the weakness of the flesh, which is not able
to keep the Law; whence it propounding a curse to all that do not keep it,
and showing withal no means to avoid it, man is affected to it as to an
enemy, that seeks his destruction and ruin, so that this arises not from the
Law, but the infirmity of the flesh.



Secondly, in that neither Priest nor Levite did help this man, Observe we,

There is no Salvation by the Law, Though death properly be not by it, yet it
cannot cure nor save. See Gal. 3.21. Romans 8.3. Act. 13.25. Heb. 7.19. and 10.1.

Apostle gives, Romans 8.3.
the Law by sin is become weak and unprofitable to the purpose of Salvation
and Justification. It is not weak either in Precept or in Doctrine, but only in
justifying of man; and this not in it self, but by accident; because we are
naught and not conformable unto it; for if we could perfectly keep it, it were
as able to justify us now as ever.

There are three things required to the justifying of us before God; all which
are impossible for the Law to do.

1. To offer us forgiveness of those things we do against the Law; Now the Law
accuses, but absolveth not.

2. To work Faith in us to lay hold upon forgivenes being offered, which the
Law cannot engender.

3. To put strength and power into us, that we may be able to keep the
Commandments of the Law to the ends of our lives, All which are impossible to
the Law: It instructs what to do, but ministers no strength to do what it
bids, Praecipit non adjuvat; Lex offert, and affert Evangelium.
(that is the office of the Gospel) For these purposes the Law is weak,
uneffectual and feeble, but that comes not from the Law, but from our Flesh
and corrupt nature. A carver cannot cut the Image of his Prince on a rotten
logg, but that is no fault of the Carvers; The Law has skill to justify, but
cannot do that feat on our rotten nature.

Ceremonial or Moral, many please themselves in Ceremonies, other with their
good deeds: These will be found too weak to effect it.

Papists in a special manner might do well to see their error, who suppose
the Law (even since the fall) to be propounded as a means of Justification (at
the least) in the sight of God.

Object. But it is improbable that God would give a Law that none can keep,
Promise life under an impossible condition, and damn for that, which man has
not ability to observe.

Resp. 1. When God first gave the Law, it was possible to be kept by man; he
had strength by Creation given him proportionable to the duties in his Law
enjoined: Shall not the Landlord challenge his rent of his tenant? What does
God more.

2. That the Law is impossible to be kept is not Gods fault, but ours, as I
showed, Romans 8.3.

3. God by such exaction aims at this, to bring us to an acknowledgment of our
misery, that so in Christ he may have mercy on us, Romans 11.32.

A third Conclusion is,

Sin is seen and discovered by the Law. As this Priest and Levite came and
looked on the man and so discovered him: So does the Law, See Romans 3.20. and
5.20. and 7.7. And in this respect it is said to be a Glass, Iam. 1. Given to
the disobedient, 1 Timothy 1.5.

This it does. 1. In discovering the depth and foulness of sin, the guile
and deceit of the heart by nature, giving some evidence to the soul of the
horrid vengeance due thereto.

2. Romans 3.19. Gal. 3.10.
By applying wrath to the soul in particular, pronouncing him to be a cursed
Creature in respect of it, and exposed to all that wrath which sin has
deserved.

3. By awaking the Conscience, begetting in a man the spirit of bondage and
fear, so as that a man knows not what to do, Act. 2.37.
nor which way to turn. And this the work of the Moral Law in respect of sins
discovery.

As for the Ceremonial part of Moses Law that likewise was a help this way;
the Jewish washings, Sacrifices, Rites, etc. Did no other then discover our
misery and the penalty due unto transgression, and so send us unto Christ, that
by him our wounds might be healed.

Hagar cried in her affliction and was heard: So he who is under the Law, and
has his conscience awakened by it, will so cry as to be heard, Acts 2.37. and
16.

It is truly said, Our hearts are all of sin, but our ears are all of Mercy:
He that will please us with a Song must set it to the Tune of the Gospel: We
can hear nothing but Pax vobis, and see nothing but Ecce agnus: As if the Law
were of no further use, like an old Almanac out of date.

But the Law is to be preached and that in its own fearful shape, in Thunder,
Fire, Tempest, Darkness, Heb. 12.18. that so the conscience may be convinced,
and room made and welcome prepared in the soul for Christ, which will scarce
otherwise be. Hag. 2.7.
The Prophet tells us, God must shake the Nations before the desire of the
nations will come; so wedded we are to our sins, as that there will be no
acceptance of mercy on fair terms. But of the use of the Law, together with
the Abrogation thereof, more shall be said in the last point.

A fourth Doctrine or Conclusion hence is,

The discovery of sin is rather an accident then a natural and proper work
of the Law. It is by Chance (you see) that the Priest and Levite came this way.

Primarily and originally the Law was given. 1. To be a rule of life. 2. For a
means of Salvation by keeping thereof, Lev. 18.5. But now after the Fall there
were other secondary and inferior Effects thereof; whereof this was one
principal, See Gal. 3.19. As for the Law of Ceremonies they were added to help
the Jews infancy, and fitted to their capacity and nonage, and showed what was
sin ex accidente and indirectly.



Glass to behold our perfections (as the Papists do) but accidentally to
discover our blemishes. It is by accident that it does inrage and stir up
lust, Rom 7. It is by accident, that it does punish and curse sin; (for
punishment in no Law is the main intention of the Lawgiver) and that sin is
discovered it is by accident too; for had there bin no transgression there had
bin no need of this.

The last thing to be observed is,

That the whole Mosaicall Law has its pass, it goes its way and gives place
to another: So you see the Priest and Levit did before the Samaritan came, see
Luk 16.26. Romans 7.4. Heb. 7.16, 18. Ier. 3.16.

This was typified by Moses and Joshua, Moses led to the sight of Canaan, but
then gave place to Joshua, who gave entrance. And by Moses Sepulcher which
could no way be found, which might signify the passage of the Law upon Christ's
coming: So by Isaac and Ishmael; Genesis 21.10, 14
Ishmael served Abraham and Sarah till Isaac was born; but then he leaves the
Family, and was put away with his mother: So the service of the Law is needful
for the Church till Christ be come and formed in us, Gal. 4. 1, 5, 19.31.

The renting the Veil of the Temple from the top to the bottom (and sundry
other things which I spare to speak of) did teach us this truth. Mat. 27.51.


Quest. But is the Law wholly abrogated and abolished?

Resp. Remember the Law of Moses was threefold, Moral, Ceremonial, Judicial;
that part which was Judicial, was the doctrine of those external actions,
whereby the civil Commonwealth of the Jews was to be governed. These are two
ways to be considered.

1. As they concerned the Jews, as men in a common and general rite: The
foundation of these is moral and so perpetual in the nature and equity of
them. 2. As they concerned the Jews in a Personal, National, or singular
rite, as that Law of raising up seed unto the brother, Deuteronomy. 25.5. Such as
these are me^rly Judicial, and so abolished, Christians not being bound to
rule their Commonwealths after that form.
That part of the Law which was Ceremonial belonged to Ecclesiastical
business (as the former did to civil) and concerned Sacrifices, Sacraments,
and other rituall observations; This took its mortal wound by the death of
Christ, and with him died: For as it had Vigorem a Christo relationem ad
Christum; so it had consummationem in Christo: He gave ceremonies their
beginning, and he also has given them their ending.

True it is this Law was not presently thrown into the grave, but (according
to the seemly burial of humane bodies) they had their funerals and were
brought with solemnity to their Sepulchers. And he that revives them, shall not
be in Austines judgment, Pius funeris deductor, Aug Epist. 19 ad Hier.
but Impius Sepulturae violator; not a devout solemnizer of the Funeral, but a
profane raker in the grave, and the violator of quiet sepulture.

Quest. But did all Ceremonies then utterly dye.

Resp. We must here distinguish betwixt Ceremonies: Some Ceremonies in the old
Law were mixed (being natural and Ceremonial) as for the Elder to have a
double portion; here take away the Ceremonial part as it figured Christ: So
the Natural part of giving the Elder a double portion may be preserved.

Thus cities of Refuge were appointed to save the mankiller from the Revenger
of blood: There was a Ceremony annexed to this Law, that they should stay
until the death of the High Priest in the Cities of Refuge: Take away that
Ceremony and the equity of the Law may stand, and Cities of Refuge be kept,
that those who casually kill be not slain.

Again, some Ceremonies in the old Law were typical, figuring Christ: These
are dead, yea deadly in respect of Use: Of use (I say) but not in regard of
Reading, Hearing, or having instruction from them.

Others are Ceremonies of Order: These still remain; for Christ came not to
destroy Order: God must be served with the body, and therefore of necessity
there must be some outward observances. Provided, First, for number they be
few. Secondly, for signification plain. Thirdly, for observation simple, far
from ostentation, farther from superstition.

So that this makes neither for Jewish nor Popish Ceremonies: As for those
Ceremonies of the Old Testament, they are not fit for us, the Church being now
past her infancy and come to maturity of age. Saint Augustine tells of a Youth
who came to Vindecianus a Physician, Aug. Epist. 19. ad Ma^cel.
and was cured of his disease, after when he was grown to be a man, he fell
into the same disease again, and applied the same receipt which he had used
before in his Youth, and it almost killed him; He came to the Physician and
complained of his Physic: the Physician replied, it was no marvel, for that
might be wholesome to him when he was a youth, which now he was of age would be
deadly.

Thus the Ceremonies of the Law were profitable for the Jews being Children,
and taken at the Commandment of God; which now to us, who are become men in
Christ, would be mortal.

And for Popish Ceremonies they rather become the whore of Rome then the Spouse
of Christ. True it is the Spouse of Christ cannot be without her Borders, and
her Laces, yet she may not flaunt it like an Harlot, but be soberly attyred
like a chaste and grave Matron. The Church of Rome loades her self with a heap
of gaudy Ceremonies which they obtrude upon the people, as principal parts of
Gods service, yea worship them and bind men's consciences unto them on pain of
damnation, and so fall under Austins censure, digging into the graves of the
dead for putrified and rotten relics.

The Moral part of the Law is that which prescribes the rule of a godly and
upright life, being divided into two Tables, the former concerning God, the
other our Neighbor. Now this Law in Consideration of the Elect is abolished by
the coming of Christ, and that both Quoad damnandi vim, as Romans 8.1. and Quoad
dominandi vim, as Romans 6.14.

Notwithstanding this; It has the office of a Schoolmaster, Gal. 3.24. Now
the office of a Schoolmaster is double, Dirigere and Corrigere; Arctius.
So the Law directs and corrects: By fear of punishment it keeps under the
Old Man, (the remnants whereof are yet in the best) and it directs and instructs
the new man in the ways of God: The Law sends the Elect to Christ to be saved,
and Christ sends us back again to the Law to learn Obedience.

In consideration of Unbelievers and Impenitent ones this Law is no way
abolished; It seems to convince them, and condemn them without all hope of
mercy; as for the other two profitable Uses it is no whit availeable unto them
through their own default.

The Antinomians then, who take away all use of the Law may see their folly.
Christ met with none on the mount in his Glory, but Moses and Elias; the Law
giver and the Law-restorer: to show that he did not only come to fulfill the
Law, and institute the Gospel, but even to reconcile the Law and the Gospel:
We must obey what God commanded by Moses, and what we cannot perform is
supplied to us by our Belief in JESUS, Luke 16.16.

Law and the Prophets were till John: why should we now have to deal with it?

John as a Preparation and Prediction of Christ's coming: He being come that
Preparation and Prediction is ended; but still both Law and Prophets do remain,
both to confirm us in the Faith of Christ and direct us in the way to Christ.
Therefore Malachi the last of the Prophets in the very point of his passage
toward the prediction of Christ, and of John the Baptist, seals up the Old
Testament in his last Chapter with, Remember ye the Law of Moses my Servant. A
man may not forget his Schoolmasters, because he has learned his lesson: And
to this we have a harmony of the Confession of all Christian Churches, Helvet
Confess. Artic. 12. Gallica Confess. Artic. 23. Aug. Confess. Page 127. Scot. Art.
15. Belg. Con. Art. 25. Argentivensis Conf. cap. 12. August. Conf. Art. 6.

Pass, stay it not by the way: Seek not for life and Justification where it is
not to be had; The Law can look upon you and further exasperat (as this Priest
and Levite did) but it can do no more; thank it for this, and welcome Christ.
But if you look for Salvation by the Law, Christ shall profit you nothing.

The lower the Sun is, the higher is your shadow: and the higher it goes the
shorter the shadow is: Whilst the Sun is before you the shadow is behind you;
and you see it not, but turn your back upon it, and you see nothing but
shadows: So whilst you look on Christ you will set by the Law of Ceremonies,
but if you turn your backs upon him, Vmbra rerum will be your ruin.

Abrogation is a plausible doctrine in popular estates, Proclamations
concerning immunities from Tributes, is wonderfully well taken, such should
this Doctrine in Divinity be: It is one of the great gifts and endowments
bestowed by God on his Church, we should therefore joyfully entertain it, and
stand fast in that liberty, wherewith Christ has made us free, Gal. 5.1.

Only take we heed that we abuse not our liberty, and we abuse it when we use
it as a Cloak of maliciousness, 1 Pet. 2.16. when we plead it for a defense
of sin: but we are made free from sin that we may be the servants of
righteousness, Romans 6.18.

Secondly, when under pretense of Christian liberty we refuse to obey
authority in things of an indifferent nature, 1 Pet. 2.16. 1 Pet. 2.16.
The objection seems to be this in hand, We are freed (might some say) from
Ceremonies or Ordinances in things indifferent. The Apostle answers, that our
liberty should not be made a Cloak for our ill affectednesse toward
authority; for the Law of God must still direct, and that wills us to honor
our Magistrates* and in what more then in obeying in such things as are
indifferent; And so much for the first part of this Parable, proceed we.

But a certain Samaritan as he journeyed came where he was, etc. Text. Verse.
33.


The Priest and Levite pass by without showing any compassion. A third man
comes, and he a Samaritane, who shows him mercy.

By the way learn,

The most want mercy; For one that shows it, two show it not, 1 King. 19. Romans
11.3. Jeremy 3.16. Isay, 57.1. Hosea 4.1. Amos 8.6. Psalm 12.1. 2 Timothy 3.2.

so few righteous, Isay. 57.1. Iniquity abounds, therefore the love of many
waxes cold: And few there are that have tasted of Gods Mercy in Christ.

Secondly, those, who were, are not; God has housed them before the storm
comes, They are taken away from future evils. Isa. 57 1.

Shall not the Land then tremble for this, and every one mourn that dwells
therein, Amos 8.8. There was a Church called Philodelphia, brotherly love, but
where may it now be found? Run ye, Ier. 3.1.
go to and fro through the Streets of our Jerusalem, see now and know and
seek in the broad places thereof, if you can find a man, if there be any that
shows Mercy, that succoreth the needy, and I will pardon.

The Commonwealth takes up the same complaint, whilst those that should be
Eyes to the blind, Job 24.15.
pluck out their Brethrens eyes, and make them blind, whilst they grind their
faces who should cheer them; and robb them of their garments who should cloth
them. Mich. 3.2.
Where is Mercy?

Whilst there are (almost) as many Nimrods as Great ones, and Tyrants as
Landlords; whilst Rich men eat up the Poores Commons, and take away the bread
that belongs to children, giving it to Dogs, to Kites, that they may be stuffed
up, and gorged in their mews, whilst Christ Jesus in his distressed members
has his face withered, back naked, etc. Where is Mercy?

Whilst men turn bread into stones (A trick beyond the Devil) selling good
land to build fine houses, turning the smoke that ascended the Chimnies of
their Forefathers, relieving edifices, through their own nostrils: Whilst
there is so much Pride, so little Pity, great Feasts, little Charity, huge
Barns, small Alms, etc, where will you go to find out Mercy.

We read that it was the use of the Roman Consors once in a year to call the
Citizens before them, and take account how the Laws were observed in all their
Provinces, A messenger was commanded to call the Good-men before him; He went
unto the Temples and to the Tombs of such as for their virtue in their
lifetime were most renowned, and called every one of them by their names,
summoning them to appear before the Censors: for which being reprooved, he
thus answered, that sickness and age had worn out all the Good-men of the
City, so that he was driven to go unto their Sepulchers, none being left alive
amongst them worthy of that name. You can apply it.

The Prophet sometimes when righteousness was taken up into the Clouds, and
the Earth void of it cries unto the Heavens that they would drop down
Righteousness again: So let us, seeing the want of mercy amongst men, cry out,
O ye Heavens drop down mercy; And with David, Help Lord, Psalm. 12.1.
Lamenting much the decay of it, as God expects, Isay. 57.1. And by our
endeavors set her up once more, every one showing mercy to his brother as we
are exhorted, Zach, 7 9. 1 Pet. 3. Colos. 3.12. Luke 6.36. So when others miss
of mercy (as merciless people will, James 2.13.) We shall find it; for,
Blessed are the merciful, Mat. 5. This in General, come we to Particulars.

The Person succouring is here described, first by his country or Nation,
secondly by his humanity and merciful disposition. By Nation he was

[A Samaritane.]
Samaria was the City royal of the ten Tribes, built by Omri and remained the
chief seat of the Kingdom so long as their kingdom endured: 1 King. 16.24.
But when Salamansur the Assyrian (in the days of Hoshea) beseiged it, and
took it, he carried the Israelites thence into Assyria, and the King of
Assyria (who was as Ezra says Esur-haddon the son of Senacherib, Ezra 4.2.
whom he also called verse 10. the great and noble Ashapper) sent thither
Colonies to inhabit that Region from Babylon, and from Cuthah, and from Ava,
and from Hemath, and from Sepharvaim, 2 King. 17.24. Ezr. 4.9, 10. Tremel.
annot in 2 King. 17.
Cuthah and Ava were parts of the Deserts of Arabia: Hemath and Sepharvaim of
Syria and Mesopotamia.

These Heathens as the Text shows served not the Lord, and therefore the Lord
sent Lions amongst them which slew them, 2 Kings 17.25. Hereupon they sent to
the King of Assyria, who sent unto them one of the Priests of Israel, who were
brought thence to dwell amongst them, and teach them the manner of the God of
the Land, who did accordingly, and dwelt at Bethel, and taught them to worship
the true God, ver. 26.27, 28.

And hence it was that in many points of Religion, they agreed with Gods own
people, acknowledging the five Books of Moses; using Circumcision, and the
Sacrifices of the Law, ver. 32. and looked for the Messiah that was to come,
John 4.25. But yet they corrupted those points of Religion they had learned,
with gross superstition, and Idolatry, verse 29. In which respect though the
holy Ghost says of them, ver. 33. They feared God, because of some parts of
his worship, which they retained, yet in the next verse it is said that they
did not fear God; because they worshipped him not according to his Word.

This their Superstition was the chief cause why the Jews hated them and
contemned them: Nor could they object worse in their venomous slander than
this, thou art a Samaritane, John 8.42. For such they concluded had the Devil,
they worshipping the Devil under their Idols. Now in the History, one of these
Samaritanes it was; one of that Sect and Nation that shows Mercy and
compassion to this poor distressed man. Observe then first,

How God beats down the Pride of man by such means and persons as we most
contemn, and esteem most basely of. 1 Cor. 1.27, 28. See this in sundry
instances, 1 Samuel 17 9, 42, 44, 49, 51. Judge. 5.29. and 4.21. and 9.53, Acts
12.22. Exodus 8.

Rom 14 3. Lev. 1^.14. Luke 18.10.
by these God can humble and confound our Pride. The Cock in comparison is but
a weak creature, and yet his crowing does make the Lion tremble: What is a Be
to a Bear, or a Mouse to an Elephant? And yet if the Be do but fasten his
sting in the Nose of the Bear, or a Mouse creep up and know the Trunk of an
Elephant, how easily do these l^ttle creatures torment the greatest? What
creature so swel^ing, and of it self so incroaching as the Sea? And what more
weak, smooth and passable then the Sand? And yet the Sand (so easily remooved
and swept away) is decreed to hold in the raging Element, and to break its
proud and foming billows: What in appearance weaker then words spoken by a
weak, poor, and despised Minister? And what stronger in the world then raging
lust? And yet God by those tames and subdues these, that we may learn to fear
his power.

Secondly, Observe,

Better dealing may many times be found from those that are wicked and
superstitious, then from such who profess better. You have heard what
Profession the Priest and Levite did make, and who the Samaritan was, and how
short he came of them, you have also seen; and yet here he shows mercy when
they show none at all, see Luke 17.16.

(That we give no offense) give me leave to explain my self in these four
Conclusions.

First, Where the true fear of God is not, no good dealing can be expected or
looked for, but the contrary, Gen, 12 12.20, 21. Hos. 4.1, 2. Ier. 5.7. and
7.9, 10. Romans 1.25, 26, 29. and 3.18. Mich. 7.5. We see this also in the
example of the Sodomites, Genesis 19.9. And in the Inhabitants of Gibeah, toward
the Levite and his wife, Iud. 19.22. So that where men are without the fear of
God and knowledge of his name, they are abominable in all their doings, and to
every good work reprobate.

Secondly, no better dealing is to be found, then where the true fear of God
is. Those who are truly religious, who know God and fear him, will deal well;
none better, Genesis 42.18. Exodus 1.17. Psalm. 111.10. Such are best Husbands, Genesis
21.12. Best Wives. 1 Pet. 3.6. Best Masters, Genesis 18.19. Act. 10.7. Best
Servants, Genesis 14.14. and 24.2. Philemon 11. Best Children, Genesis 22 9.

Thirdly, It sometimes so happens that better dealing may be found amongst
Idolaters and those who are superstitious, then amongst such as are very
forward Professors of Gods name and fear. Thus Ieremias found more favor
amongst the Chaldeans then his own people: The men of Anathoth, they sought
his life, Ier. 11.21. And put him in Prison, Ier. 37.15. when the other knock
off his Chains, set him at liberty, give him victuals, and a reward as you
read. Ier. 39.12. and 40.4, 5. So David found more favor from Achish King of
the Philistines, then from Saul: That Philistin King welcomes him, supplies his
wants, likes his conversation and presence so well, as that he professes
himself pleased with him, as with an Angel of God, 1 Samuel 27.3. and 28.2.
and. 29.9. Saul hunts after him, seeks to take his life from him, and expels
him, notwithstanding the tears, vows and promises he made to David: The
promise of a Pagan may be sometimes taken before the Fidelity of a professed
Christian: Fidelity may be without the Church and falsehood within it. And thus
S. Paul found more kindness amongst Barbarians, then his own Country men:
Hear what he says of the entertainment he had amongst the Jews, Five times
received I forty stripes save one, thrice was I beaten with rods, once was I
stoned. In perils often, in perils by robbers, in perils by mine own
Countrymen, in perils amongst false Brethren, etc. 1 Cor. 11.24, 25, 26.
Hear now what entertainment amongst Barbarians when he escaped Shipwreck:
The Barbarous people showed us no little kindness, they kindled a fire, and
received every one, because of the rain and cold, Act. 28.2. Joseph you know
was advanced in Egypt, Genesis 41.40. when his brethren would have killed him in
Israel. Eliah could not be fed in Israel, 1 King. 17.15. yet is cherished by
a poor widow of Sarepta in Sy^on, a heathenish Country; in diverse other
instances this conclusion might be made good.

Fourthly and lastly, Tit. 1.12.
Though this thus sometimes falls out, yet it is not the fault of true
Profession, nor Religion; But of the Professor who abuses his Profession,
which comes to pass, 1. Through Gods permission (and that in infinite wisdom)
to provoke his people to greater care and circumspection of their ways, Romans
2.23. 2. Through the Devils instigation, Ireneus advers Haer. l. 1, c. 24.
that the Gospel may be blemished, and the Profession scandalized, and others
kept off from it. 3. Through man's own corruption, who naturally loves to
dissemble, and nothing more.


And thus much for Explanation and Confirmation; A word now for Application.

Professors, because it is thus: Some Kings have proved tyrants, will you say
that al are so? Some Angels are now turned Devils, will you condemn the rest?
A Nobleman condemned for treason (of whom Camden speaks) spoke thus of
himself, It is not the Baron, but the Barronry that is the traitor: So on the
other side, think you, it is not the Profession, but the Professor that is
faulty. And as William the first, Apologizing for himself unto the Pope for
that he had censured one who was both a Bishop and an Earl, that it was not
the Bishop he did meddle with, but the Earl only: Do ye the like, fault the
party, let Profession be spared.

Professors were more careful of their actions and dealings: As Saint Paul
spoke in another case, so I in this; There is verily a fault amongst you, and
that most horrid, while you use your Profession for a cloak to cover your
oppression; as the Pharisees under color of long Prayers devoured widows
houses, Mat. 23.10. To amend this consider.

First, what a precious thing the Gospel and profession is, Heb. 2.1.
Christ being the High Priest of it: Woe then to such, whose dead Flies cause
that box of precious Ointment to stink even in the Nostrils of the wicked,
Ezekiel. 36.15, 20.

Secondly, do but think how near you come to God in your Profession, you dip
with him in the same dish, will you betray him? Rom, 2.22.

Thirdly, what a wound you have given to diverse of Gods children, while they
suffer for your faults: Joseph's Coat is still held up, See is not this thy
Sons? Are not these your Professors? Hence is that Prayer of David, Psalm
69.6. Let none be ashamed because of me.

Fourthly, and how many have bin kept from profession by your ill living? This
was the practice of the Devil in ancient times, as witnesses Eusebius ( Eccl.
Hist. lib. 4.7. and 5.1.) And how uncomfortable must this be unto thee in the
day of Gods visitation: Imagine if thou can.

See then that your religious life commend your Religion, Having your
conversation honest in the sight of all men, that you may silence evil doers,
Romans 12.17. 1 Pet. 2.12. We are set upon a Stage, the eyes of every one (of
Angels and Devils) are upon us, to observe us, and a little black upon a white
ground is soon espied.

As Nehemiah in another case, say thou in this; Nehe. 6.11, 12 13.
Shall such a one as I fly? Shall I cousen, deceive, lie, etc. What come short
of a Turk, Jew, Henthen? Shall Perjury, Usury, Deceit be odious to them,
savoury to me? etc. It shall not be, I will not do thus; now therefore O Lord
strengthen my hands.

Thirdly, in that this Samaritane showed mercy to this poor distressed man
(who was a Jew) notwithstanding the inveterate hatred that was betwixt them, we
are taught,

Not so much to respect the Person as the necessity of the Person in the works
of mercy; Be he friend or foe, known or unknown; Gal. 6.10. Mat. 5.42.
if he fall into misery and calamity, mercy is to be extended to him, Pro.
25.21, 22. Romans 13.8. and 12.20. Exo. 23.4. You have a memorable example of
this in Elisha 2 King. 6.22 And in God himself, whose example is without
exception, Mat. 5.44 Romans 5.10.

This Truth is not without the suffrage of Antiquity. Atticus the Bishop of
Constantinople when he sent money to Calliopius the Nicene Priest to be
distributed amongst the poor, Niceph lib. 14 cap 24.
willed him in the distribution thereof not to regard so much as Religion in
them, but only to have an eye to this, that the needy might be sustained.

Saint Chrysostom, Ad Olympiad. Chrysostom. de Lazaro con. 2. Tom. 2.
prescribing a form of giving Alms, says (amongst other things) that
Bountifullnesse is to be measured by the need of those that crave. And in his
second Homily of the beggar Lazarus, he has these words: If it be the worst
Person that lives, and wants necessary sustenance, let us supply his need, it
is enough he is in misery.

Saint Hierom in his Epistles tells us, Hier. in Epist.
that whether the distressed be a Priest, a Cozen or Acquaintance, Nihil in
illo aliud consideres quam paupertatem: No notice should be taken of any thing
in him saving of his poverty.

Saint Ambrose says, Amb. lib. de Nab 5.2.
that mercy uses not to judge of deserts, but to help necessity, not to
examine the righteousness of a man, but to relieve his need, and he witnesses
of the Emperor Theodosius, that he never denied mercy unto any that craved it.

Austine defines it to be, Misericordia est alienae miseriae in nostro cord
compassio, Aug de civ. Dei lib. 9. cap, 11.
A fellow feeling in our hearts of another misery, So that it looks not into
the cause, but into the present state and condition: Now man is nothing else but
misery and calamity, as says Heredotus, and miseria res digna misericordia,
misery is a thing worthy of mercy.





1. Say that the world is bad, and but few are worthy, Chrysostom to the
Point: Chrysostom. de Lazaro con. 2. Tom. 2 col. 1350.
What excuses (says he) and delays would many make, if God had commanded us
to search out the life and conversation of the poor and then to show mercy on
them? But now God has eased us of all this care; why then do we pluck upon our
selves unnecessary cares? It is one thing to be a Judge, an other thing to be a
merciful man: When we give an Alms, though it be to the unworthy, yet it is an
Alms: If we be curious about the unworthy, perchance also the worthy may
escape us. Now it is far better to do good to the unworthy for the sake of
the worthy, Nazianz.
than not to do good to the worthy for the sake of the unworthy.

2. Say that he who asks thy relief be wicked and unthankful, and thou
know him to be so; yet man's nature, is to be pitied in an evil man: So
Aristotle sometimes answered for himself in the like case. Laert l. 8. cap. 1.
^u^anitati dan^an si non ipsi homini, Arist.
And he that gives an Alms unto a sinner (not because he is a sinner, but)
because he is a man relieveth not a sinful, but a righteous poor man; because
he respects not his fault, but his Nature. Again set before thee the example of
God himself, who cease not to show mercy to those who blaspheme his name.
etc. Mat. 5.45. The force of this Argument compelled a Pagan to say: That it is
the part of liberality to give to every one that asks, therein and to imitate
God. If thou do imitate God, says he, give also to the unthankful. Seneca l.
de benefi^tjs l. 7. c. 32
And again is he unthankful? He has therein not injured me, but himself: I
have done my duty, when I gave, nor will I for this give more slowly, but with
greater diligence; for what I have cast away upon this man, I shall find
amongst others: Yea I will give unto the same man again; and like a good
Husbandman, I will overcome the barrenness of the soil with my care and
painful tillage, neither is it any great matter to give and loose, but to
loose and give.

3. But he is mine enemy,

Paul himself, Romans 12.20. Thou shall in feeding him, Magnificentissime
bonitatis est ut tuum quoque inimicum dil^gas, Aug. E^ch. c. 73.
if he be hungry, and by other such like works of mercy, Heap coals of fire
upon his hea^; not to consume him, but to purge away his rancor, and of an
enemy to make him become thy friend.

You may read, 2 King. 6. How full of bloody purposes, the Syrians came to
Dothan: Elisha calls upon the King of Israel (whose fingers itched to be dipped
in their blood, having all their throats at his mercy) to set bread and water
before them that they might eat and drink, and so send them away full of good
cheer and jollity: This was done and they hereby were overcome: So that the
bands of Syria came no more (by way of Ambush or incursion) into the bounds of
Israel, as you read, verse 23. See a victory got and no blow given to them.

Philip King of Macedon being councelled to punish one Archadius, (who
continually rayled on him; Plut.
) would not; but when he met him spoke kindly to him, and would still be
sending to him gifts: And then willed his friends to enquire what he said of
him amongst the Greeks: This they did, and told the King that he was now
become a great praiser of him, the King replied, I am then a better Physician
then any of you all.

It is likewise reported of him that the like course he took with Nicanor, and
it had the like effect: Plut in Apol. reg.
For ever after Nicanor in what company so ere he came would extol and praise
the King, which being related to him by his friends, he said unto them, Videtis
in nostra est potestate been vel male audire. It lies in our power (you see)
whether we will be well or ill spoken of.

The like I might tell you of Alphonsus King of Aragon, who sent to one that
rayled on him a Purse of gold, and being asked the reason, he said, Dogs when
they bark must have their mouths stopped with a morsel, and indeed (we see)
the curstest dogs will by casting them a piece of bread, be quieted; as Esau
was by Jacobs present which he sent. This is then a most noble revenge and the
only way to overcome an enemy. Shall I bring an Example nearer home? A
malefactor (in birth and Person a comely Gentleman) was sentenced by a Judge,
in Person somewhat deformed; the condemned falls a tayling at the Judge,
calling him a stigmaticall and bloody man. The patient Judge for that time
reprived him till the next Session, which being come and he produced; The Judge
asked him if his choler were spent, he redoubles his invectives; The Judge
reprives him again, as loath to let him die in such a desperate condition:
After he sends for him to his Chamber, asks him if yet he were better
pacified, still he continues his raylings: The Judge said, God forgive thee for
I do, and withal flung him his pardon: Whereat the Offender was so astonished,
as that he would none of it, unles the Judge would pardon his malice and
receive him into his service; the Judge did so, and found him so faithful,
that dying he left him the greatest part of his estate.



Papists say those Scriptures, Mat. 5.45. Romans 12.14, 20. and such like are not
delivered by way of Precept; but of Council: If a man would be perfect so as
to supererogate he must perform it, otherwise he may do well enough: But if we
consider the reasons given to enforce these duties, Mat. 5 45. We shall find
them Precepts, and every one who desires Heaven stands thereto obliged.

Indeed it is durus sermo, and contrary to an unsanctified nature, which caused
one Thomas Linacle preaching on those words of Christ, Mat. 5.44. to cry out, O
my friends, either this is very absurd, or we are no Christians: The Pharisees
gloss pleases well, Love your Friends, and hate your enemies, Mat. 5.43. Or
if more, then to show compassion to them that do submit, if they be our
Enemies, (which yet may be found in generous beasts, as in the Lion, etc.) Or
if yet further, not to do them harm, though they hurt us: But to bless those
that curse; do good for ill, etc. this flesh and blood (which ever is an Enemy
to Grace) can no way brook.

Quest. How comes it than to pass that David did so often curse his Enemies,
did he do well therein?

Resp. Our Enemies are to be considered, First, as our Private Enemies, or as
Gods.

Secondly we must distinguish betwixt our own private cause, and Gods.

Thirdly, betwixt the Persons of evil men, and the Actions of evil men. Now
David when he cursed them, did not consider them as they were his own Enemies,
but as they were Gods; nor was it in his own cause that he cursed them, but in
Gods and his Churches, according unto the rule of Paul, 1 Cor. 16.22.

Or if he did look upon them as his Enemies, than he used those imprecations,
not against their Persons, but Impieties: So 2 Samuel 15.31. Act. 4 29.

Secondly, David's imprecations were rather Prophesies of what should befall,
than Curses of his own, as desiring or wishing that such things should come to
pass. And thus much for the usual objections made against the Persons, yet
there remains a Case or two to be resolved arising from the doctrine delivered.

Case. If this be so that not the Person, but the necessity of the Person is to
be regarded, what matter is it to whom we give.

Resp. Turpissimum genus perdendi est inconsulta donatio, Unadvised giving is
the worstkind of loosing; our Charity must be Wise as well as warm, therefore
says the Psalmist, Psalm. 41.1. Blessed is he that wisely considers the
poor and needy. Now the poor and needy are distinguished into many kinds by
our Savior, Mat. 25.35. The Hungry, Thirsty, Stranger, Naked, Sick, Poor,
Prisoner.

There are weak ones, who have a failing or trembling hand, Levit. 25.35.
There are our own poor, such as are amongst us within our own Gates or
Parishes, Deuteronomy. 15.7. And there are poor of the Household of Faith, Gal. 6.

Again, there are impotent poor, and there are impudent poor: The former are
so through Necessity, either by birth; as those borne Creeples, or Blind, or
Fatherless, etc. or by casualty of losses, sickness, as the decayed
Householder, the maimed Soldier and the like: The latter are so through Choice,
they are poor, because they are idle and lazy, and so will be poor: So our
common Beggars and vagrant rogues (the blemish of our Government, and burden
of our Land) Now he does wisely consider the poor, who puts a difference
between poor and poor, Hierom in Ep. ad Paul.
condition and condition: And (as Hierom says) has regard of the substance of
Christ, that he does not foolishly wast it, nor inconsiderately give it, least
liberality be lost by liberality, as the Wiseman said: The Religious are to be
preferred before the Irreligious; and those who have bin painful and
laborious before the sloathfull and negligent, and such as have walked
inordinatly, concerning whom Saint Paul (long since) made an Order, that who so
would not work should not eat, 2 These. 3.10. that is (as I conceive) of the
common stock and charge of the Church; that if nothing else yet hunger and
necessity might compel them to labor, remembering always that Nature be not
deserted in extreme necessity: Plutarch. in Lacon.
but (out of that case) they nourish Idleness who succor the Idler: As that
Lacaedemonian said to one who begged of him: If I give thee ought, thou will
the longer coutinue thy idle life: For he was the cause of this thy
reproachful living, who first gave unto thee and made thee idle.

Case 2. Is it not lawful than to give an Alms at our doors to common beggars?

Qui largiuntur indignis ca qua dignis conferri debebant, tria committunt
absurda, 1 Nam and ipsi jactura^ saciunt, 2 Et in bonos contumeliosi su^t, 3 Et
malos roborant materia vitiorum suppeditato.
Resp. It is not to be approved of, if without difference we give to all that
come, as to loose and idle persons, (who are able to work and labor) For
(besides this that it heartens them in their lazy course, as also causes the
honest poor to be neglected, who otherwise should be more liberally mantained,
if such idle droanes did not eat up their Portion.) It crosses Gods Ordinance,
who would not have a common beggar in Israel, Deuteronomy. 15.4. And gives offense to
the Christian Magistrate (whom we are bound to obey in all things lawful and
indifferent) whilst those good and wholesome Laws made for reforming of this
abuse are disobeyed and transgressed.

Case 3. What order are we to observe in giving Alms, or exercising works of
mercy? Who are to be preferred and have privilege above other?

Resp. Principally, respect is to be had to the state and condition of the
parties without any difference of Persons; according to the Doctrine that has
bin delivered, those who are in extreme necessity (and thereby like to perish)
are first to be relieved (though they be our Enemies) and that before our
dearest friends, though likewise in great want. but if our estate be such that
we are not able to relieve all that crave our help, (being in the same degree
of Poverty and Necessity) than the nearer any is unto our selves, the more must
he be preferred.

Thus our wives next our s^lves, and before all other whatsoever, Ephesians. 5.28.

Then our Parents, who are to be preferred before our children, we being bound
in nearer bonds of Nature to them from whom we had our substance and being than
to those who have from us substance and being; and owing more debt and duty
unto them in respect of our being, birth and bringing up, than unto our
children. And albeit ordinarily and in order of Charity we are to provide for
our children rather than for our Parents, 2 Cor. 12.14. yet in great necessity
we are more bound to our Parents.

After them our Children with the rest of our Family, 1 Timothy 5.8. These are to
be relieved before all other, even before those who are virtuous and religious,
being not so near unto us in the bonds of Nature.

After these our spiritual Kindred must take place and be preferred in works
of Mercy before those who are a kin unto us only in the flesh, Psalm. 16.3. Romans
12.13. Than they before any common friend, or Neighbor, and these before
Strangers, and Strangers before Enemies.

Thus if our liberality cannot extend to all sorts, we must stretch it as far
as we can according to this order; (there being an equality of estate, and the
want and necessity being alike) (taking things in an even and equal
comparison:) And so when we are linked to any in many of those bonds, we are to
prefer them before any of those to whom were are but bound in some one
particular. As a gracious Child before a graceless; a Religious Kinsman and
Neighbor before one irreligious. As a Center out of which issues many Lines,
the farther they are extended from the Center they are the farther dis-united
amongst themselves; and the nearer they draw to the Center, the nearer they are
united: So the nearer they draw to God, the nearer they should be to us, and
more beloved of us, Phil. 16. How much more unto thee, says Saint Paul to
Philemon, both in the flesh and in the LORD. And so much for this Point.
Mystically,

Christ is the good Samaritane, by whom alone we have Salvation and
deliverance: To this the Scripture bears witness, Samaritanus isse ipse est
Salvator Christus Samaritanus custos interpretatur and ideo ipse Dominus
significa tur hoc nomine, Aug. quaest. Evang l. 2. ca. 19 and Hypog, l. 3.
Mat. 1.21. Acts 2.36. and 4.12. 2 Cor. 11.4. Phil. 2.10, 11. Acts 16.31. Luke
1.47, 68, 69. 1 Timothy 1.15. 1 John 4.1. Luke 4.18. Romans 7.25. We want not humane
Authority to back this. The Samaritane is Christ (says Theophilact.) So Saint
Austin by the Samaritane understands Christ (For it signifies a Keeper) and he
was thus upbraided, thou art a Samaritane. Thus Ambrose, Melancthon, Aretius
with diverse others.

Reason John 6.27. 1 Cor. 1.30. Him has God the Father sealed; God has
ordained and called him hereunto, and given him alone Commission and warrant to
deal about the business of man's redemption and salvation.

2. As he only had a Calling to go about this work, So he only had Power and
Ability. Those necessary conditions required to our help and succor were
performable by no other creature: Who could rescue out of the hands of the
strong man, but he? Who could satisfy, but he? Romans 3.26. Heb. 2.14. Who could
restore to life, but he who was God-Man? no other could, therefore he or none.

Isa. 53.1.
from them Salvation (as yet) is hidden, Ephesians. 2.12. Salvation is by Christ,
no Christ, no Salvation to be had. Are not they much mistaken who think all
shall be saved. There were, and are Nations amongst whom the name of Christ was
rever heard, Romans 15.20. Even at Athens the name was new, and for the novelty
of that strange God they desired to hear Paul further, Acts 17.18, 20.

True it is, God has set up his Son for a Standard to draw all people to it,
yet what the better, if we have no Eyes, nor will to look up? The Sun is set
in the Heavens for a public light, yet it benefiteth none but those who have
Eyes, and open them to admit, and make use of that light. A Court of Justice or
Equity is a publik Sanctuary, yet it actual^y relieveth none, but such as fly
unto it: Christ is a publik and universal Salvation, set up for all comers,
and appliable to all particulars, John 3.16. Heb. 2.9 But all this is not
beneficial to life, but only to those that receive him, and that many receive
him not is evident, Isa. 53.1.

Samaritane who is willing, and able to recover thee and work thy cure. Surely
this only is the board that must help to escape the wrack, no comfort in any
other thing after the Priest and Levite have looked on us and passed by, but in
this news of the Samaritans coming.

When Noah was in the Arc, if he looked downward he saw nothing but sinking,
drowning, etc. if he looked upward nothing but Bears and Tigers; yet in the
midst of all this he had the Arc to comfort himself withal: Thus thou
look upward, downward; without thee, within thee and every thing affrights
thee, till thou look on Christ and there thy heart reviveth.

Saint Paul, Romans 7.24. sinking (as it were) under an unsupportable load, A
body of sin and death, which he carried about with him, cries out in an
Agony, Infaelix ego, wretched man that I am: His sins seemed to be so many, his
transgressions so foul, that he counted himself miserable and wretched in
respect of them: Finding himself sinking he gets hold upon this twig. there he
hangs: I thank God through Jesus Christ my Lord, q. d. yet I hope God has
sent his Son into the world to save sinners, of whom I believe my self to be
the chief. Through this cranny let light enter into thy soul.

Luke 2.10, 11.

There is matter of joy to the Patient, to hear from his Physician that his
disease is cureable: To the client to h^are from his Council that the day is
his: To one condemned to hear from his friend that a pardon is obtained.

It is a sweet thing to be saved from fire, from water, from the sword, from
Pestilence; but to be saved from our sins is a far greater matter. Therefore
the joy arising thence, should far exceed the joy that arises from any thing
of that nature, this joy should be like Harvest joy.

Such strong affections have the godly (sensible of their sins and misery)
borne to this doctrine of Salvation by Christ, as that the very name of JESUS
has bin sweeter to the smell of their souls than roses and violets to the
outward sense.

Nomen cum rosis violisque natum, Mart. Epig. l. 9.

Quod Hyblam sapit, Atticosque flores,
Quod nidos olet avis superbae,
Nome nnectaredulcius beato.
Nothing relished Saint Austin without it, and therefore in his Confessions
speaking of the great delight he took in Ciceroes Hortensius professes that
the heat of his delight was abated only upon this ground, he found not in that
Book the Name of Christ. Saint Bernard was the like affected; Si scribas non
placet, nisi legam ibi Iesum, etc. If thou writest unto me thy letter does not
please me unless I read there Jesus: If thou conferrest thy Discourse is not
sweet without the name of Jesus. A name it is highly advanced by God himself
above all names, Phil. 2. Therefore let the Sheaves of all Joseph's brethren,
rise up and do homage to that Sheafe: Let us advance it, and let every Knee bow
unto it, for there is Salvation in no other name under Heaven to be had, Act.
4.12.

Samaritane that must save us, let this direct us to whom to seek for Salvation
for our selves and ours. No sooner had John pointed at Jesus and said, Ecce
aguus Dei, Behold the Lamb of God, Ioh. 1.37.
but the two Disciples left all and followed him: Thus should we upon the
bearing of this Doctrine withdraw our hearts, as from all false fears, so
from all vain hopes; he alone must save us here and hereafter; And yet says
Christ, John 5.40. Ye will not come to me that ye may have life.

Did we hear of a strange Physician come into the Country (very skillful)
there would be flocking to him: So there was after Christ for curing diseases
of the body; some that could not come themselves were borne by others, as Mark
2.3. Others let down the roof in a basket, but who among us takes so much
pains for the Salvation of the souls of them or theirs. Our carnal part is
quick and sensible, but our spiritual part is dead and dull; let us be advised
by Saint Peter, 1 Pet. 1.13.

Israel out of their oppressors hands, but all those were but petty Saviors,
as the Lord Joshua or the Lord Gideon, etc. But this is Christ the Lord.

They saved from bodily Tyrants, and worldly enemies; but Christ from Hell, the
Devil and Damnation, Luke 1.74 Romans 8.1.

They were Saviors of the Body and goods alone, but Christ saves not those
only, but the soul also, Psalm 33.18.

They saved but for a times for when those Saviors died strait ways Isreal's
enemies oppressed them again, but Christ saves us for ever and for ever, even
eternally Heb. 5.9.

They saved but only those that lived in those days, they could not save those
that were before them, or should come after them. But Christ saves from Adams
fall to the end of the world: And as the same Sun enlightens the Stars above,
and the Earth beneath, so the same Christ was the salvation both of his
forefathers and of their Seed, Heb. 13.8.

Now then if God expected such thanks (and that deservedly) from the
Israelites, for sending them such Saviors for their outward good and peace;
what think you does he expect, and what should we return for giving us his
Son to be the Savior of our souls for ever? Behold thou have bin thus
careful for us (said Elisha to the Shunamite) what is to be done for thee? So
thou Lord have done all this for our Salvation, what shall we return^ for all?

Heb. 12.15. Be ye such as he may be a Savior to you.



the whole need not the Physician, but the sick, Luke 4.18, 19. Read there
what a Text he chose and what he said of it. O be thou his Text: Entreat him
for his Name sake to look upon thee, and beseech him to make good his Name,
and not so far to remember thy sins, as to forget himself.

2. See thou becomest a member of his body: The mercy-Seat was upon the Arc;
get to be a true member of the Church, he shall save his people from their sins
and none else.



Jew and the Samaritan so, was there not a distance betwixt these? If man can
find a heart to show mercy to his enemy in distress, much more God, whose
ways are not as our ways, nor thoughts as our thoughts.

2. In this he will the more extol his love and magnify it, Ioh. 4.10. So Romans
5.10. Only see that we suffer our hearts to be wrought upon, and be not
faithless but believing.

As he journied came where he was]
Little did this Samaritane think to meet with such an Object for his
Compassion, but while he is on his way, and in his journey, he meets with one
unexpectedly.

Observe hence,

God serves himself and providence of us and by us then especially when we are
in our ways and following the works of our callings, Exodus 3.1. Judge 6.11,
12. 1 Samuel, 9.3 19 Luke 1.8. and 2.8. Mat. 4.18. Act. 9.3. Act. 8 26, 27. Luke
24.27.

Psalm 109.31. He stands at the right hand of the poor to save him: The
Right Hand you know is usually the working-hand, now at the working hand he
stands to give a blessing, not at our left hand, to bless us in our idleness,
so Psalm. 16.8. Isay. 31.13.

You read Deuteronomy. 22.6. the whilst the Bird keeps hernest, and sits upon her
eggs, or young ones, God undertook the Protection of her; None might touch her
or hurt her; but when she left her Nest and forsook her eggs, she was in
danger. Thus it is with him that keeps himself in his way, the Angels are
commanded to preserve him, Psalm. 91.11. But going out and wandering from our
place, we are like the bird that wandereth from her Nest, Prove. 27.8. liable to
Gods Judgment and the temptation of the Devil: Whereupon Saint Hierom gave
this advice to his friend Rusticus the Monk, that he would still be doing
something, that so the Devil when he came might find him busy. Flies easily
stick to the cold pot, but they eschew the pot that is hot and boiling; so is
it with the temptations of Satan, they light not so often on a stirring and and
active mind, as on the idle and sloathfull person.



That opportunities of doing good to others, which unexpectedly we meet withal
in our ways are to be apprehended, and made use of, Eccl. 8.5. Pro. 3.27. Gal.
6.10. See 1 Samuel 30 5. 2 King. 8.5.



to redeem our time. There is none of us but have more opportunities offered
daily, Col. 4.
both of doing and receiving good then we expected, or looked for, but who is
so wise as to apprehend them? When we let slip an opportunity for our outward
state, we can cry shame on our selves: What a fool was I, but many a fair
opportunity God puts us upon to do good to our own souls which we slightly
let pass. To amend this, consider

1. God gladly takes every opportunity for the doing of us good: If Job be
naked he lays hold on the opportunity and clothes him: If the Shunamites
child be dead to quicken him: If Lazarus buried, he glad of the occasion,
raises him, etc.

2. Satan watches upon every opportunity to do us mischief. If David be a
little idle, he takes the opportunity and tempts him to Adultery. Zach. 3.1.
If Joshua the High Priest stain his Priests garments and so come to minister
before the Lord, Satan will take the opportunity to resist him, and tell tales
of him: His sowing season is when men sleep, which opportunity he loses not.

3. The godly have bin good husbands of their time, and apprehended every good
occasion offered. Paul will preach while a door is open, and there is
likelihood of doing good. Cornelius and his friends will gather themselves
together, Act. 10.
when Peter opens his mouth and preaches the word unto them. Abigale watches
the fittest opportunity both to reproove Nabal and pacify David. And Nathan
can observe his time, 1 Samuel 25.
when to come in, 1 Kin. 1.14, 22
and second Bathsheba in her suit for Solomon her son, etc.

4. The wicked also know their times (though not in those things which belong
unto their peace) The servants of Benhadad can lie upon the catch and take
every word that falls from the mouth of Ahab that will serve their ends, 1 King.
20.33
Thy brother Benhadad, etc.

Opportunitate nihil faelicius, amitti nihil facilius.
Watch we then all opportunities, to apprehend them, wherein we may do good to
others as well as to our selves. Sometimes it may so fall out a word of our
mouths may stand them in great stead, as you see in that Example, 2 King. 8.5.
such a time must be observed and apprehended. Sometimes it may happen, that to
lend or to forbear to require our own from them may do them as great a
pleasure as to give so much at an other time, here we should observe the
opportunity, so shall the work be more beautiful and precious, as you read,
Eccles. 3.11.

Mystically: The journey of this Samaritane sets forth unto us our blessed
Savior, his Descention from Heaven to us in the flesh. Quis est qui descendit
de Coelo, nisi qui ascendis in Coelum, filius hominis qu^ est in Coelo? Says
Saint Ambrose, as we have it, John 3.13.

Descendit non per peccatumsed per incarnatio nis mysterium, Amb.
Now he came where we were; First, when he was conceived in the womb; for in
the womb of our mother we lay wounded, Ps. 51.5.

2. He came where we were, when he came into the World, John 1.10, 11. And
there he found us in the manger. Psalm. 49 12.20. Man in honor understanding
not, is like to the Beasts that perish: What was Man else but Beast having lost
his excellency? Whereupon says St. Bernard, Iumenta puto dicerent (si loqui fas
esset) Ecce Adam factus est quasi unus ex nobis.

3. He came where we were, when he went into the Grave; we were but dead men;
Death had taken us up captive and carried us into his Den. Christ to redeem
us breaks into his hold; overcomes the strong man, binds him and sets the
prisoner free, 1 Cor. 15.54, 55, 56, 57.



Quando venit plenitudo temporis (says the Scripture) Gal. 4.4. When the
fulness of time was come; not in the beginning of the world; not so soon as
man was fallen and wounded, but long after; it being deferred by the wisdom of
God purposely that man might feel his disease, and see the need he had of
help and remedy.

Nor was it fit that such a Prince as he should come without his banners and
triumphs before him.

But in the perfect age of the world he came to show that with him he brought
perfection; Perfect joy, perfect peace, perfect Salvation, etc.

Savior thus to humble and abase himself, who being the highest should yet
descend down unto the lowest, and come Ex alto from the height of Heaven, yea
Ex altissimo from the bosom of his Father, to visit man a poor wounded
creature.

When Elijah lay in his Cave desolate and alone, the Lord called to him and
said, what do thou here Eliah? May it not be said in this case to the Son
of God, What do thou here? Why came thou to this forlorn and abject place?

We cannot think that our blessed Savior had any business of his own, and
that he did take up the work of man's Redemption and Salvation, by the way as
he went, as this Samaritane in the Parable did the wounded man, but this was
the maine errand and end he undertook this journey for, Heb. 2.14. In which
respect at the first moment of his Incarnation he is said to be given us of the
Father, Isay. 9.6. Both natus nobis, and datius nobis, for us men Incarnatus
(says the Nicene Creed,) for us men Condemnatus, bred for us, dead for us, all
for us.

Should a Prince come to a Dungeon, and but call or look through the grate
upon the Prisoner, as Ebedmelech did on Jeremiah; And Nebuchadnezer on
Shadrach, Mesach and Abednego, the favor were great, and greatly to be
esteemed of (especially when the party is out of favor and in great disgrace
withal.) But to come into the Dungeon or Prison, and there eat, and drink, and
sleep and keep with the Offender, who would not wonder to to hear of such an
act and admire so rare an example of humility and favor? But this of Christ is
more, for should a King not only do (as before was said) for a Traitor that
has sought his life; but further for the good of such a one be content to be
made a toade or frog or the meanest creature, it were not to be compared with
this love of Christ; for betwixt the meanest of the creatures and a King, there
is not so great a disproportion, as betwixt the Creator and the creature. One
hand made them all, and they were all made of the same matter, Earth and Dust,
and when they are turned to Earth again there is no difference betwixt them:
But betwixt the Son of God and Nature of man there was no proportion at all.
This then exceeds. Why did thou wonder David at a far less mercy, O what
is man that thou so regardest him! 1 King. 8.27.
Psalm. 8. And thou Solomon admire that God should be pleased to dwell in a
Temple made with hands, (which was yet as glorious as the wit of man could
devise to make it) And thou Elizabeeh by way of astonishment demand, Whence
comes this that the mother of my Lord is come unto me? Luke 1.4^. Zach. 2.
Behold I my self will come and dwell in the midst of you (says the Lord.)
And he has performed his Promise, (...), says the Evangelist, he dwelt with
us, The eternal God is come from Heaven and has planted his Tabernacle in the
midst of us, and says, touch me, handle me, Luke 24.39. Like a good Physician
he presses into the Pesthouse of this contagious world, healing all our
infirmities, disdaining none.

Harp and Timbrell, tune our souls into a pleasant Key; rise up and meet our
God with a new Song in our mouths, as Luke 1.68. This will prove the heavy
condemnation of the world in the end, that he came to his own, but his own
received him not, Ioh. 1.11. First in not knowing him, 2. Not acknowledging
him, 3. Not loving him, 4. Not believing him, 5. Not obeying him. All these
ways we refuse him, much more when we persecute him, and slay him. as Math.
21.33. be not like the Bethlemites, who afforded him no better a lodging than
the Oxes and Asses had, a Stable. The best room is not good enough for his
entertainment.



Object. How can we go to him? Where he is we cannot come, Ioh. 13.33.

Resp. Corporally, as yet we cannot, but afterward we may, Ioh. 13.36.

Spiritually we ought: And that, first by Contemplation, Col. 3.1, 2. 2 Cor.
4.18.

2. By Desideration; longing still for his presence, desiring that we may once
be where he is, Phil. 1.23. 2 Cor. 5.8.

3. By Resolution or Determination, wi^h full purpose of heart cleaving close
unto him, Act. 11.23. Phil. 3.8. Revel. 12.11.

4. By Imitation, still following his example in things imitable, doing as he
has done, walking in those steps he has gone before us in, Mat. 11.29. John
13.15. Ephesians. 5.2. 1 Pet. 2.

Besides we come unto him in his Ordinances, Pro. 9. Luk 14.17. Mat. 22. Who
can say the Church is too far considering the long journey Christ took? We come
also unto him in receiving of his servants, and in visiting his distressed
members, Math. 10.40. and 25.40. Thus come.

the same mind in us that was in Christ Jesus; to humble our selves and finish
our works of Self-denial, that in due time we may be exalted: He was (as you
see) content to descend from Heaven, and to take on him the form of a servant
for our good, and shall we refuse to do or undergo any thing for him and his?
Ioh. 13.14. It is our sin and shame, to refuse to stoop to any condition of
Humility.

Whilst Rebecka was amongst her servants, she rode upon her Cammells, but when
she saw Isaac walking in the fields, she lighted down and covered her face
with her veil: Thus we though we are in our Ruff or in the height of our
pride in the company of others like our selves, yet to see Christ thus coming
on foot, (as it were) and humbling himself for us, let us leave our pride and
high-mindednesse and be content to do the meanest office for the good of
others. A humble Master and a proud servant is most unseemly, yea a shame
intolerable.

Remember the ointment wherewith Mary anointed Christ was in a broken box, so
grace acceptable is in a broken heart.

And when he saw him he had compassion on him]
Priest and Levite did, but so looks upon his wounds as to have his heart
affected with his miseries.

First then observe.

The eye affects the heart, Lam 3.51. Pro. 15.30. Psalm. 119 158. Act. 17.16.
Deuteronomy. 28.31, 32, 34. Esaias. 1.7. 2 Pet. 2.7.

Eye is. 1. Sensus perspicacissimus: of all senses the quickest of
apprehension; It can see the sky and stars though far remote; it goes out
for a prey and brings it home in an instant, receiving species from the object
and so bringing home, (according to that of Aristotle) rather then by casting
out beams, and darting out the visive faculties to the object (according to
the opinion of Plato.)

2. It is Sensus efficacissimus; no sense so firmly imprinteth forms in the
Imagination; what it sees once intentively, it sees many daves after.

3. It is Certissimus; things seen are most certainly known, and in that
respect they move the more. I saw it, is an evident testimony: In which respect
one Eyewitness we prefer (in diverse cases) before ten Eare-witnesses.

Eye be, being well used? But if ill, how great a hinderer? Certain it is the
sight has a mavelous influence into the speeches, thoughts and actions of
men, Genesis 3.6. Josh. 7.21. 2 Samuel 11.2. Most sins begin commonly at the Eyes,
Satan dealing as the Chapman with his wares, who lays them forth upon the
Stall that with the sight the buyer may be drawn in to buy, Mat. 4.8. The Eye
is the Maid by which he woes the Mistress. And so on the other side great
helps they are to the spirit, when placed upon warrantable objects, whence it
was (as is conceived) that Abraham when he would stir up his soul to sorrow
for the loss of Sarah, wept in the sight of the dead Corpse, Genesis 23.2, 3. that
behoulding it, he might be the rather moved.

Make we then a covenant with our Eyes, as Job did Cap. 31.1. and place them on
such objects as God has provided for them, that the soul be not intrapped but
benefitted.

First, Lift them up unto the hills, from whence thy salvation comes, Ps.
121.1. To see God in Christ, is the most pleasant and durable object, Exo.
33.21, 22.23 Christ is the rock; when once we are in him, God will cause his
glory to pass before us.

Secondly, the Creatures also we may look upon, provided that we see God in
them, Isay. 40.26. Psalm. 8.1 -- 9 happy we thus to see them* or with those,
Ioh. 2.23. So to see the works which God has done, as thereby to be the better
induced to believe them.

Thirdly, we are to cast our Eyes upon our Brethren in their wants and
miseries. Quod non videt oculus cor non dolet. Alexander the Great was reported
to have, Cor durum and avarum; but his covetousness he overcame by his
ambition of command and Empire, and his hardness by his Eye-pitty; for he
seeing in Greece a great number of poor people that were naked and distressed,
the tears trickled from his Eyes (says Diodorus) and forthwith he took order
that they should be furnished both with cloths and money.

You read, Mat. 9.36. that when Christ saw the multitudes he was moved with
compassion.

Fourthly, upon our selves: We should look homeward, and with the Bird when
she prunes her self, turn our Eyes into our own breasts: Look on what you
will, you may see somewhat that is a brand of your sin and shame; so shall your
hearts be the better affected, as was David's, Ps. 119.136.

Lastly, upon Gods Ordinances we should look; especially in the Sacrament of
the Lord's Supper: When we see the Bread broken, and the Wine powered forth, O
what a deep impression should that make? Zach. 12.10.

what they see not, Isay. 57.2. 2 Kings 22.20. Josiah had a tender heart, it
melted to hear of the threatenings; how would he have endured then to see the
miseries of his country and people? therefore God tells him. His eyes shall not
see that evil; he will first take him away by death: The like promise did God
make to the young child of Ieroboams, 1 King. 14 13. And it was the Prayer of
Luther, that he might not live to see the Judgments which he did verily
believe God would bring on Germany for their sins, and therein God heard him,
for soon after his death, the land was almost made desolate by the sword.

Secondly, in regard of what they do see; though not (as yet) with their
bodily Eyes, yet by Vision. But one day both they, and we shall see with these
Eyes face to face, Job 19.27. 1 John 3.1. O think how great then that joy and
happiness shall be, when the Eyes both of soul and body shall be full! If the
sight be such a working sense, what impressions then will they make upon the
soul. In these respects why should it be thought a thing unlawful to bless.
GOD for souls departed?

him, whom they have crucified (with the scarrs and wounds in his sides which
they have made) come in the clouds to judge them, to see those they have
derided and scorned to be taken up to him; to see all that they have delighted
in burning about them, and themselves, with those they have drawn into sin
(their own Friends, Children, Acquaintance, etc.) to be driven from Gods
presence into everlasting vengeance, how this will affect their hearts, let
them in time think.

Eye upon us, seeing sight works so effectually on the heart. We read 1 Samuel
6.5. what advice the Priests of the Philistines gave their Princes who were
stricken with Emerods, make Images, say they, of your Emerods, and Images of
your Mice, which mar the Land, and you shall give glory to the God of
Israel: Peradventure he will lighten his hand from you: Conceiting with
themselves (as some conceive) that God but looking upon the similitude of their
loathsome disease and grievance (presented before the Arc) his bowels would be
moved with compassion toward them: Sure I am that David thought it enough to
show God his trouble, Psalm. 142.2. And to say, Aspice afflictionem meam, look
upon my affliction and misery, Psalm. 25.18. This kind of cunning Martha and
Mary used, Behold he is sick whom thou love, John 11.3 And so Hezekiah, 2
King. 19.14, 16. God never casts his Eye upon any, but there he setleth his
affection, and he never setleth his affection without an intention of blessing.

As Christ cured men's bodies with a word, so their souls with a look: He looked
upon Saint Peter, and presently he repented: He looked on Zacheus and presently
he was justified: He looked on Saint Matthew and presently he was called. Lord
look on us miserable sinners that we are, and the bowels of thy compassion will
be moved, and our souls saved.

He had Compassion]
His very intrals were affected, for so the word imports even an affection
coming from the bowels or inward parts of the heart, much like to that of a
mother grieving for the misery of her chi^d, Isay. 49.15.

So it is said of that woman who contended before Solomon for the living child,
1 King. 3.26. She would not endure that the child sh uld be divided; for (says
the Text) her compassion was kindled, her bowels were moved and did burn and
yearne within her. And Genesis 43.30. we read that such was Joseph's affection
toward his brother Benjamine. Aust. de Civ. Dei. l. 9 c. 13.
Accordingly Saint Austin defines Mercy to be a fellow feeling in our hearts
of another misery: And Gregory says, it has the denomination and Etimology a
misero cord, from a miserable and woeful heart; because as often as we
behold a man in misery, the mind (through commiseration being touched with
grief at his misery) does, (...) from (...) mi sereor,
as it were, Cor miserum facere, vex and torment the heart with a sympathy and
a fellow-feeling of his misery.

And indeed there is a twofold branch of Mercy; the one is referred to the
mind and heart, properly called Misericordia, pity, or compassion: the other
to the word or work, called Miseratio, Bounty or Beneficence. They thus differ,
says Hugo: Misericordia est quasi fons in affectu, miseratio quasi rivulus in
effectu. The first is as the Fountain in the heart and affection; the other as
the River flowing forth to outward action, so we see in this good Samaritane:
From whose Example first we learn.

To be tenderly affected toward the afflicted, and so touched with the sight
of others miseries as if they were our own, Romans 12.15, 16. Col. 3.12. Heb.
13.3. 1 Cor. 11.25. Examples see, Neh. 1.4. Dan. 10.2, 3 Exo. 2.6. 2 Samuel 11.10.

Humanity requires it: Every creature will commiserate such of their kind as be
in misery; if a Swine be lug'd all the rest of the company will (in their kind)
condole: If a beast be slain and the blood spilt, another of that kind spying
it, will scrape Earth upon that blood, bury his fellow, and solemnize his
Funeral with a kind of lamentation over him: Homo sum humanu^ a me nibil
alieaum puto, Teren.
And does not humanity much more teach us to pity the ruins and miseries of
other men, Isa. 58.7.

2. Christianity much more enjoynes it: And that First, from the consideration
of our own frailty, Heb. 13 3. Secondly, from the consideration of our near
community, Romans 12.5. 1 Cor. 12.

persecuting them whom God has smitten, Psalm. 69.26* dealing hardly with those
who are afflicted (as Shimei did with David) drawing blood from the back, which
was yet blew with the strokes of the Almighties hand: So the Edomites in the
day of the destruction and captivity of Judah; (as we read in Obadiah) or like
Joseph's brethren, when they had cast him into the Pit, They sat down to eat
bread and to be merry, Genesis 37.25.

Dolendus magis es si non doles, Bern de consid. l. 1. and m^d. c. 12
who are worthy to be bewailed for not lamenting the states of those who are
to be lamented, as Saint Bernard speaks.

Austin speaks on, Psalm 130. Such want natural affection; and that Saint
Paul makes a note of one given up to a reprobate mind, Romans 1.28, 30.
1 John 3.17. Saint John concludes the point; as we therefore desire assurance
of Gods love, shut not up the bowels from our Brethren that are in need.

Objection. Say a man suffers for his evil deeds, are we in such a case to
be affected with his sufferings?

Respon. In the sufferings of sinners, if we look upon the glory of Gods
Justice and the fruit thereof in regard of the good to others, so we are to
rejoice thereat, Psalm, 58.10, 11. But if we look on it as it brings misery upon
the creature, so we must be affected with it and lament it, Luke 19.41. Romans
9.2. 2 Samuel 16.1. Thus the Judge in passing sentence on Malefactors, is
moved with indignation as they are offenders, but with Compassion as they are
miserable men.



That works of mercy flow from the inward affection and compassion of the
heart.

The Samaritane having his heart affected with the misery of the wounded Person
goes to him and succors him; otherwise he would have passed by as the Priest
and Levite did before, Job 30.25. Isa. 28.10, 11. 2 Cor. 9.7. Heb. 13.3. This
is that the Apostle means, Col. 3.14. Above all things put on love, which is
the bond of perfectness; because when love resideth in the heart, it will put
together every faculty to do the work perfectly it goes about. First it makes
the mind and understanding of a man consider seriously of the case of the poor
and needy, Psalm, 41.1. it causes him to devise how to relieve and succor him,
Psalm. 14.22. Esaias. 32.8. As you see it is in the mother toward the sick child.
Next it works upon the memory and causes a man to bethink himself to whom
to go what he has heard, read, found by experience, that will do good in such
a case. Then upon the will so as to be sorry for his pain, and to desire and
endeavor every way his good, etc. and so at last it comes to vent it self at
the Eyes, Tongue, hand and other parts.



mercy: For know assuredly the truth of an Alms consists not, either in the
party to whom we give, whither he be good or bad (so he be in Necessity and
Misery) nor in the quantity of what is given, whither it be much or little;
Nulla beneficentia nisi (...) conjuncta Deo placet, Call. 11. Epist, John 3.17
Luke 21.1. Luke 11.8. Mat. 6.
But it consists in our selves, with what mind we give, and from whence it
flows. If it comes from superfluity, we give because we have enough to spare,
etc. or for importunity of those that are in misery: Or enforced from us by
warrant and authority, or through the gripes of a galled and accusing
conscience upon our sick-beds: Or from Examples of others who have gone therein
before us; or from desire of applause and praise from men, or any such like
end, it is not acceptable nor pleasing unto God; Profitable indeed it may be
to those who do receive them, but small profit shall redound to such as do
bestow them.

mercy: Many pleas are brought by covetous ones for their excuse, sometimes
they are poor themselves: Other times their charge is great; than they come
thick, they have not for all, etc. but the true cause is, there wants a heart.

Look on men's backs, they are as fine as ever; there is no want; Look on their
Tables, they are as full as ever, Houses as trim, Children as neat, here is no
want: They have to spend upon their lusts in needless and contentious suits of
Law, enough to entertain the rich and wealthy of the world with superfluous
pomp and plenty: They have to cast away upon Dogs and Kites; vain delights
and pleasures: yet nothing wherewith to succor the poor and needy in their
misery; Where lies the want? Surely in the heart: Find but a heart, and you
might find means enough. The soul is not yet drawn, Isay. 58.10. till that
be, the purse will not open easily.

Col. 3.
Put on (not the words of mercy, but) the bowels of mercy, says St. Paul. To
encourage you consider.

1 You else have little hope that you are in the body, 1. Cor. 12.12.25. 2 This
is your Masters livery, Ioh. 13.35. by this we shall be known to be his. 3 The
Excellency of it, for it excels Almesdeeds; those being from without, this
from within us. 4 And lastly, Beneficentia ex benevolentia manare debet.
Affectus tuus nomen imponit operi tuo. Amb. off c, 30.
Without compassion all we give is nothing, 1 Cor. 13.2. Luke 22.1, 2, 3, 4. It
is not quantum, but ex quanto, that God regards, Mat. 10.42.
Mystically: In this Samaritane we see what affectionate compassion our blessed
Savior did bear to mankind, and whence those works of Mercy showed to us did
flow.

The Observations are these, first

As Christ took on him our nature, so he took our Passions and Affections,
Ioh. 11.15. and 2.17. Mat. 8.10. and 26.38. Luke 19.31. Ioh. 4 16. Hence he is
said to be not only Ben-Adam, the son of a man, but also he was Ben-Enesh, the
son of a frail man. Psalm. 8.5. And that for these Reasons.

1. For satisfaction sake: Math. 8.17. Isay. 53.4. 2. For the strengthening of
our Faith in the truth of his Incarnation: Had he not taken these, we might
have doubted whither he had bin man or no. 3. For Example sake; He was subject
to hunger, thirst, etc. to teach us to be contented with it, 1 Pet. 2.21. 4.
That he might be more compassionate toward us, Heb. 2.17. and 4.14.


Passions sinful and detestable, and some that be unblameable.

Sinful, as in the Irascible faculty, despair, etc. such he took not on him:
But the other which are natural and unblameable, he took, they not detracting
from the perfection of his Person, nor of his Grace, nor of the work of our
Redemption.

2. Those in Christ differed much from ours.

1. In the Object, his were carried only to objects good, but ours to evil.

2. In the Measure, ours often exceed and break their bounds; his did never:
Ours like Rachell are importunate; as was Ahab for Naboths vineyard; his not so.

3. In the first Rise of them. Christ undertook them by a voluntary necessity;
but our nature contracts them, inseperably.

4. His were ordered by right reason, they did go and come at the command
thereof.

5. There was no contrariety nor contradiction in Christ's passions, as is in
ours, which like wild horses pluck contrary ways, as you see in one and the
same man, who is proud yet an adulterer, etc.

6. There was no instability nor inconstancy in his, as is in ours; with Ammon
now we love Thamar, but by and by hate her.

7. They in Christ never disturbed Reason; ours do; in him they were as water
in a clean glass, stir the glass and there arises up no mud, but in us
they are as water in a muddy and durty glass, which if you stir presently it
grows dim, and the mud arises.

Passion and Affection. Christ was without sin, yet not without them: Yea so
far is it from being a sin to have them, as that is a sin to be without them,
2 Timothy 3 3.

Gal. 5.4. Colos. 3.5. the mortifying of our affections is pressed.

Carnality, or inordinatenesse of Affections is struck at, not the Affections
themselves. Now they are inordinate, either when they are placed on a wrong
object, (as not loving, desiring, fearing, grieving for what we should) or else
when they come short or exceed their due measure, missing their just
proportion: Herein lies all the Error that is in our affections: Which Error is
that the Scripture condemns and true grace in some good measure rectifies,
becoming as an auriga to them to keep them in and order them that they draw
not the Chariot of the soul out of the way.

Heb. 13.13. Men are content to take the honor of Christ, but they are loath
to take his ^^ame; he took our worst, as well as best; even the infirmities and
weaknesses of our natures; and shall we think much to take his worst, which yet
is to be preferred to our best? It is a sweet speech of holy Bernard: So much
the more base thou art borne and become for me, by so much the more thou art
dear unto my heart and to my soul in this regard.

find the holiest men most passionate, 2 Samuel 18.33 Iam 5.17. our comfort is,
Christ has sanctified as well our affections as natures.

Secondly observe we,

Christ was full of Compassion while he was upon the Earth and exceedingly
affected with man's misery. See Math. 9.36. and 14.14. and 15.32. and 20.34.
Luke 19.41.

It is observable in the works and cures Christ did, still the Scripture adds
this, He was touched with compassion. And hence it is that his mercies are said
to be tender mercies, Luke 1.78. Or Bowels of mercy, even such as is in a
tender Mother toward her distressed Child, Heb. 2.17, 18.

Heb. 4.15.16. Does poverty lie upon thee? Hunger bite thee? Sorrows and
Afflictions grieve thee? Death fear thee? O remember Christ knows what all
these things mean, and suffers with thee in all thy sufferings; Pear not
then, but go thou unto him, and rest affured of deliverance in due time.

Redemption. In the work of our Creation we saw Gods outside (as it were,)
Psalm. 90.2. Or his fore parts, Romans 1.19. And in the giving of the Law his back
parts, Exodus 33.25. (for so in things passing he showed himself as passing) but
here in the work of man's Redemption we see in his very heart and bowels.

In that great deluge which covered all mankind, it is said that the fountain
of the great deeps was broken up, and the windows of Heaven were opened, Genesis
7.11. So in this spiritual deluge, the springs of Heaven have bin opened to
us, and bowels of mercy have appeared: Let not us shut our bowels against him,
but be affected as he is.

Thirdly observe,

The love and compassion that Christ bore toward us was the mooving cause of
our Salvation and happiness, Salvation is from mercy.
Gal. 2.20. Revel. 1.5. Isay. 43.25. 1 Pet. 1.3. Tit. 3.4. where the impulsive
cause is set down by three words, kindness, love, mercy.

Isay. 20.12. Lord thou have wrought all our works, and say of all spiritual
things as Jacob did of his wealth, Genesis 33.11. God has had mercy on me, and
therefore I have had all these bands. Renounce merits, human satisfactions.
Moses hand was leprous while it was in his own bosom, so is ours in our own
righteousness; but if with doubting Thomas we put it into his side we are
well: Live and die with that saying of that Martyr Lambard, None but Christ,
none but Christ, Abraham must out his own country if he will to Canaan.

etc. Why what was required of those that were stung with fiery Serpents, but
to look up? There is nothing in thee, yet there is something in Christ, out of
his own bowels he can fetch arguments enough to moove him to do thee good and
to save thy soul.

Fecit mihi magna potens, said the blessed Virgin Mary, He that is mighty has
done great things for me, and holy is his Name. Fecit mihi, nec in me, nec per
me: Neither in me, nor by me, but to me and for me. Acknowledging her self no
Agent, but a poor Patient in the blessed work of her Redemption.

I remember a speech of Mr. Bradford with which I shut up this point, Well
might I doubt of my Salvation feeling the weakness of Faith, Hope, and Love,
that is in me, if these were the grounds and causes of my Salvation; but whilst
we build on Gods mercy through Faith in Christ we build upon a Rock.

And went to him and bound up his wounds pouring in oil and wine, etc.

The Compassionate heart of this Samaritane, discovers it self in the outward
acts of mercy; eye, hand, foot, tongue, purse are set on work by it.

A compassionate heart is neither idle nor unfruitful, See Job 29.11, 12. and
30.25. and 31.16 Act. 3.2. and 9.36. and 16.15. Luke 19.16. Mat. 15.32.



Some men's Charity affoards no comfortable words, their language is not
healing, comforting, pitying, but (as Shemies to David) wounding, piercing and
insulting: These are (thus far) worse than Dives his Dogs, they licked the
Soars of poor Lazarus with their tongues.

There are others who speak pity, but do none, Jam. 2.16.
they are S. James his Almoners spoken of by him: They will bless you but
without a cross, or like Nepthali, they give goodly words, but that is all.

Were the poor and needy like Ephraim fed with wind, their alms were good, but
being not so, the poor may answer as Hushai to Absolon, the counsel is good
but not at this time.

And there are those who do something, but as good as nothing: Give them, O
Lord, what will thou give? Give them dry breasts and a miscarrying womb (says
the Prophet) though the breasts of these men be not altogether dry and without
the milk of Charity, Hos. 9.14.
yet their womb miscarries.

For first; when they give they give of that which they know not how to make
use of: The Rule is to cast our bread upon the waters, Eccles. 11.1. [Bread]
that which is necessary, not superfluous: Vtantur divites superfluis, dent
pauperibus necessaria; says Saint Austin de verb. Dom. Let the rich enjoy
their superfluities, and relieve the poor with necessaries; let them use those
things which are bought at high rates; and give the poor such as are good
cheap. Thus did our blessed Savior, when he fed the poor that followed him;
he turned not their water into wine (as at the Marriage in Cana) but multiplied
their Barley loaves and fishes.

And as it must be necessary, not superfluous or overdainty; so it may not be
the base or refuse: Though it be course, yet it must be wholesome. Christ has
from the hands of many not superflua sed reproba: it is mouldinesse gives the
Bread, the Fly which gives the meat, the Moth which gives the garment: were it
not for these the poor should never have what is given.

The Samaritane in our Text, you see powered in wine and oil into the wounds of
this distressed creature, and what could be more useful?

Next in giving they fail in circumstances, God loves a cheerful giver, 2
Cor. 9.5-7. Prove. 3.27. Eccles. 9.10. Tit. 3.1. These liquors that power out
themselves, and drop of their own accord, are esteemed better than those which
are squeezed and pressed out by violence. Gratia ab officio, quod mora tardat,
abest.
These give, but it is grudgingly; their gift sticks long in their hands before
they part with it: It is long before the Purse can be found; then before the
hand can get in, then before they can get change; and when they give they do it
in such a manner, as if the hand had stoale from the heart unawares, and that
the Eye were displeased with the discovery of the theft: But Qui moratur,
neganti proximus est, (says one) yea many times a quick denial is to be
preferred before a slow grant. Pro. 13.12.


2. God loves a righteous giver, Psalm. 112 2. Mich. 6.8. Quaerit Deus dona, non
spolia (says Saint Ambrose) God requires gifts, not spoils. Some stick not to
buy a burying place for strangers, but it is with the price of blood. They
build Hospitalls for children with their Fathers bones. Quale est illud munus
(says Saint Austin) quod alter cum gaudio accipit, alter cum lachrymis
amittit: It is a woeful Charity when one laughs, who receives; another weeps,
who loses: Zacheus his practice is commendable, and imitable; Half my goods
I give to the poor, and restore to him I have wronged fourfold, Luke 19.8.
Do ex meis, Reddo ex alienis. I restore other men's goods, I give of mine own,
Quod dedistis, dicitis, non quod abstulistis (says Saint Ambrose) you talk of
what you have given, not of what you have taken away: Such offerings are in Gods
esteem, but as the price of a Dog, and hire of an Harlot. Isay. 61.8.


3. God loves a good intention in giving: What we do this way should be done in
simplicity, Mat. 6.3. Luke 14.13, 14. Romans 12.8. A Pharisaicall giver (says
Saint Chrysostom) Dat sibi non Domino, and what reward can he look for? The
applause of men; Verily (says Christ) they have their Reward: Let them take
and pay themselves: But I must take leave to tell such, that they lay not up
their treasure in Heaven, but in the tongues and eyes of men, and such Chests
have neither lock nor key to keep what is put into them.

I spare to speak of other circumstances, by this that has bin said, it i^
evident enough, that the charity of the world is stripped and left as bare and
naked as the wounded man was, which our Text speaks of.

breathest, Christian; why the sign of it is thy Charity: Faith indeed is the
life of a Christian, Gal. 2. but this is the breath whereby he is known to live,
1 Cor. 13.3. James 2.18, 27.

You have your pleas; you want means; your ability is small, charge great,
etc. But say not so; if you have any bowels within you, something will be
done: You will pity, pray, comfort, and commend their case who are in misery
unto God and others; nor is there any so poor but may help this way. Yea
farther also something will be done in Deed: Say thou have no money to give,
none to lend, yet thou majest go to the Physician for him that is in need; Amb.
in Epist ad Cor.
yet thou majest go to the Physician for him that is in need; thou will travel
for him, watch with him, or do any service this way, which in some cases may be
more beneficial unto him than thy money. Charity is not measured by the purse
so much as by the mind. Luke 21.2. Mat. 10.42.
He that praised the widow for casting in her two mites into the treasury, has
also promised that if thou give but a cup of cold water in his name (having
nothing else to give) thou shall not loose thy reward. 1 Timothy 6.18.
None may slip his neck out of the collar, but see he makes conscience of this
duty: Especially those who are rich and have ability, and outward sufficiency
enough. Remembering what S. James tells us, Iam. 1. ult. This is pure Religion
and undefiled, because true Religion is ever accompanied with true mercy.

Question, But of what are we to give and how much?

Resp. Saint Chrysostom says, that whatsoever is above our necessary
maintenance is not ours, Chryshom. 34. adpop. Antioch.
but the poores, and to retain this from them cries into the Ears of the
Lord for vengeance, as does the wages of the labourer detained.

Now that may be accounted needful or necessary,

1. Which Nature requires, as meat, drink, clothing, without which the body
cannot but pine away and perish Lam. 4.45.

2. Which our Estate (wherein God has set us) requires: As Books for
Scholars, Instruments and Tools for Artificers: And so for public persons
and men of great place and birth, such sufficiency as is meet and fit for the
maintenance of the same: For what is Superfluous for a private Person, may yet
be but necessary for a public, 1 Timothy 3 2 and 4.16.

3. Which the Charge committed to us requires, and that for present Provision,
1 Timothy 5.8. As also for future, 2 Cor. Deus nusqua^^ su am un prefigit, unusqu.
sque est si^^ propriae beneficentiae arbiter.
12.14. Certain it is, that Scripture has not determined the quantity or
measure of what we give, but left that to the discretion of the prudent
Christian to order, 2 Cor. 8.7, 8. and 9.7. only in the general it is required
that we must give largely and liberally, respect always being had to our own
estates and abilities, and the necessity of our Brother; Keeping (as we are
counseled) our own wells full that our selves and ours may drink, letting the
over plus (or wast as it were) to run abroad in the Streets, Prove. 5.16. Act.
11.29. Notwithstanding in cases of urgent necessity and great extremity we are
to strain our selves above our Abilities; of this we have an example in the
Primitive Church Act. 2.45. and 4.34.35. Thus much in General: Now to the
Particulars.

[And went to him.
Observe here,

A Compassionate heart will carry us to them who are disabled from coming unto
us, and yet want our help. See Matthew 25.36, 43. James 1.27. 2 Timothy 1.17.

visiting the sick, and such as are in misery let our compassion be manifested
as well as in any other particular whatsoever; it being a Christian duty, and
one of the chief points our blessed Savior will examine us about at the last
day, Mat. 25.

You know the Scholar that must pass under a strict examination before he
take his degree in Schools, Amb.
or otherwise will study well the Question in which he is to be examined and
tried: Our Savior has before hand told us, what it is that we are to be
examined about at the Judgment day; It is our wisdom to be abundant therein,
that we may yield a comfortable answer thereunto.

As this concerns all, so some in special, Overseers of the poor, whose duty
it is to go from house to house, from family to family, and take special
notice of the earnings and expenses of the poor and needy. And to encourage
both them and others to this duty: It may not be forgot that,

First, we shall hereby the better know whom to relieve, and how to proportion
out our Charity, according to the kind of want and necessity of the poor: What
the Queen of Sheba spoke of Salomons wisdom, It was a true word which I heard
of thy sayings and of thy wisdom in my own land, 1 King. 10.6, 7
howbeit I beleeeved not this report till I came and saw it with mine eyes; but
lo the one half was not told me, for thou have more wisdom and prosperity
then I have heard by report, etc. So shall we be forced to say of the condition
of many poor and needy; we hear much yet the tenth part of their poverty and
misery is not known, except we go and see it.

Secondly, much good we shall do unto our selves hereby, we should not be so
often visited, nor have so many at our doors if we visited oftener.

Yea we should learn Temperance and Sobriety, and just occasion would hereby be
administered unto us of thankfulness, seeing God has dealt so bountifully with
us above many of our Brethren.

Lastly, it would not be forgotten how in visiting the poor, we visit Christ
himself in them, who has done the like for us, that were in a far baser and
meaner estate, as the next point shows.

In the Mystery is set forth unto us Christ's further love, in that he came not
only where we were, Mist. Expos.
but

He came unto us as a visitour, not to see the world, but (...) save the world,
Ezekiel. 16.6, 7. Luke 1.68, 78.

More particularly, you know a visitour comes before he be sent for, freely of
his own accord and mind. Thus did our Savior; we sought not after him, before
we sought him, he was found. True it is now and then we might hear some holy
man or other cry, Make haste O Lord and let thy tender mercy prevent us; Ps.
12.1.84.9 Genesis 49.18.
for we are in misery and brought very low: Help us O God of our Salvation,
for the glory of thy name, and deliver us and purge away our sins for the names
sake. Psalm. 79.8, 9. O that thou would bow the Heavens and come down, Isa.
64.1. But these very groans and cries came from his Spirit, of our selves none
could ask nor seek for help.

2. A Visitour comes with some relief and comfort to the dis^ressed; he will
speak comfort and do something that may added unto it. Thus did Christ, how
lovingly and gently did he speak unto us, easing the anguish and sorrow of our
languishing and distressed spirits, Math. 11.29. and 5.2. and 9.2, 22. Mark
6.50. John 16.33. Nor was he wanting in praying for us, Luke 22.32. Heb. 5.7.
Like a good Visitour his hand seconded his tongue; He felt the pulse and
touched the soar, taking poor infants in his arms, Putting his hands upon
them and blessing them, Mark. 10.4. he laid a plaster to the eyes of the
blind, Ioh. 9.6. touched the stammering tongue and put his finger in the deaf
man's ear, Mark 7.33.

All of us might truly say, My wounds stink and are corrupt, Ps. 30.5. yet
that hindered not. Yea like a gracious Visitor, he comes with his salves and
oils to heal our wounds, who were at point of death, and in no one point of a
gracious visitor was he wanting, as we shall after see.

be we never so rich and honorable, let us not disdain to visit the
distressed though poor and loathsome.

It was a noble speech of Placilla, Nicephor Call l. 2.6.42.
the most devout wife of Theodosius the Emperor, who being blamed for visiting
the sick, and ministering unto them with her own hands, answered; It well
became her to consecrate the ministry of her hands to him who had bestowed the
Empire on her husband, and done more for her. None can be so base and loathsome
as we by nature, nor any on Earth so rich and glorious as was our Savior (God
equal with his Father) Therefore seeing he thus abased himself for our sakes;
let us for his not disdain to perform the meanest office to the poorest
Christian.

Object. But they are visited with strange and noisome diseases?

Resp. The greater their misery, the greater need of thy hand of mercy.

Object. But I endanger my own life in visiting of others?

Resp. If thou be a public Person, thou art not bound to hazard thy life in
particular men's cases: Public persons are the common good and cannot make
their lives peculiar to one without injury to many: A good Father may not spend
his substance on one child, and leave the rest beggars.

If a private Person and tied by special bond unto the visited: As the husband
is unto the wife, the wife unto the husband, etc. such may, ye must in their
place and calling expose themselves to danger, for performing of that work
which by virtue of their place belongs to them; which (if in case the disease
be contagious and infectious, yet) may be supplied by others, substituted in
their place, who are able and willing to perform the duties whereto they are
deputed. It is not necessary, that Darius should enter into the Lions Den, and
salute Daniel there amongst those fierce companions; it is enough that he
speaks comfort to him through the grate, as before was showed.

And bound up his wounds, pouring in wine and oil.
The used in those Countries Oil to make the face to shine, and to anoint the
feet therewith in their journies; So Wine to refresh their spirits, when they
began to be faint and weary. This Samaritane makes a Physical use of both: he
cleanses the wounds of this distressed man with the one, and allaies the
pains, and mollifies the flesh with the other, then binds up the wounds when he
had thus done.

From the letter we observe,

There is a necessary and good use of Surgery and Physic for the bodies health
and recovery.

Physicians and Surgions are of ancient standing, See Genesis 50.2. 2 Kings 20.7.
And the practice warrantable, Ier. 8.21, 22. Math. 9.11. Colos. 4.14. 2 King.
20.7.

Why else has God put such virtue into herbs and plants, Eccles. 38.4,
and other creatures serving for the curing of diseases, which are hidden and
unknown to us till found out by the industry of man? God created the
Physician, Eccl. 38.1. and has put into him the knowledge of nature, therefore
honor him.

Jews detest all Physicians, and have this Proverb, Optimus inter medicos ad
Gehennam; but we have now to deal with Christians; there are those who will
not endure to hear of Physic, pleading many use it but are never the better
for it, nay much the worse, as the woman in the Gospel, who suffered many
things and spent all under the Physicians hands, but had no help, etc. Let
such remember, this may so happen through the insufficiency of the means, they
deal with such as are ignorant and unskillfull; or else they trust too much
unto the means, not seeking for a b^^ssing from the hands of God. In these and
such like cases let not the thing it self be blamed: For upon the l^ke ground
meat, drink, or any other Blessing, may be rejected.

Others there be who use it, but either waywardly or wantonly: The former sort
are those, who will not be cured (as God spoke of Babell) through the^t
disorder. The other sort are they who out of pride of niceness, will be
physicking of their bodies for warts or pimples; Law and Physic are for
necessity not sport. These offend against this Doctrine.



First, Use such means as God has ordained, and have a natural power or
virtue in them to help and cure. As for charms and spells, they have not any
power in them either by Creation or any Ordinance of God. Satan is an expert
Physician, and God for the trial of us often suffers the cure by such means,
2 These. 2.10. But it is better to die of the disease then to have the Devil
for Physician.

Secondy, trust not to the means, 2 Cor. 16.12. but seek to God for his
blessing thereupon.

Vulnera nostra obligat Christas cum remittit peccata nostra, and condonat
multiplicem in firmitatem.
Mystically] Christ played the Physician in our Redemption, then he bound up the
wounds of miserable man, when as by satisfying his Fathers wrath and Justice,
he obtained the remission and pardon of our sins. He powered in wine and oil,
when as by the preaching of the Law and Gospel, he brought man to
righteousness, so as that he was capable of this mercy and grace.

Two things especially then may hence be noted for our Instruction.

First, Though man by sin be desperately wounded, yet by Christ those wounds
of his are bound up and healed.

It is by wine and oil, the preaching and applying of the Law and Gospel, the
threatenings and terrors of the one, Oleum significat praedinationem Eva^gelij
consolantem, and erigen. em consci entias, etc. vinu^ significat legem quae
quasi mordet.
the comforts and promises of the other, whereby he ordinarily works this cure
on us.

For the former, Christ is the Physician of our souls, He it is by whom our
wounds are bound up and healed, our sins remitted, Mal 4 2. Esaias. 5.3. and
35.4, 5, 6. Ephesians. 1 7. Act. 3 26. and 5.31. 2 Chronicles. 30.20. God healed the
people, i.e. forgave them. So Psalm. 147 3. Isay. 6.10. what the Prophets there
speak of healing, the Evange lists, Math. 1^.15. Mark. 4.12. expound
forgiving. Now if you ask how this is done? I answer briefly.

1. Christ covers our sins and binds them up in Justification it being a thing
without us.

2. He heales our sins and soars, in Sanctification, working a
righteousness inherent in us; both these are from the blood of Christ, and by
both we are healed.

Magnus venit medicus, etc. a great Physician steps in to our succor, who
undertakes the cure: It was the Devil only that gave the wound, and God only
that gives the remedy: Hell slew us, and Heaven must help us: For this purpose
the Son of God was manifested that he might destroy the works of the Devil,
1 Ioh. 3.8. and amongst all the works of the Devil none more mighty and
malicious then this, the wounding of the souls of men by sin.

Diverse notable grounds of encouragement we have to come unto him for help.

First, He rejects none that seek unto him, Psalm. 30 2 while he was on Earth,
whoever came to him for help that he took exception against? See Math. 12.15.
Luke 4.40. Luke 22.51.

Secondly, There was no disease that he refused to undertake the cure of:
Leprosies, Luk 5.12. Dropsies, Luke 14.2. Agues, Mat. 8.15. Palsies. Mat. 9 2.
Issues of blood, Mat. 9.20. Blindness, Ioh. 9.1. Deafness, Mark. 7.32.
Dumbness, Mat. 15.30. Lamenesse, Math. 21.14. Lunacies, Math. 4.24 yea every
kind of disease he healed and cured, Mat. 4 23. whether old, as Ioh. 5.5.
Mark. 5.25. Luke 13.11, 12. or new, as Mat. 9.18.

Thirdly, No Time came amiss to him, Holy Day or working-day; yea after he had
spent himself in preaching, when Even was come, and the Sun down he heals,
Mark. 1.32. Luke 4.40.

Fourthly, Nor Place, the high-way-side, there he cured blind Bartimeus, Mark
10.46. In the house, Mark. 5.41. Luke 4.38. In Cities and villages, Math. 9 33,
34. Desert places, Mat. 14.13, 14. and oftentimes in the Synagogues and
Church Assemblies, Mat. 8.5, 13.
as Mat. 21.24. Mark. 3.3. Luke 13.10, 12.

Fifthly, He was wonderfully ready and willing to help: He did not stay till he
was sought unto, but of his own accord (full often) and unrequested, Luke 6.6,
8. and 7.11. and 13.12. and 14.2, 4. Ioh. 5.6. and 9.1, 6, 14. this is that
spoken of, Isa. 65.1.

Sixthly and lastly, He was very free, taking nothing for the cure, Hos. 14 4.
only willing them to show themselves unto the Priest, Luke 17.12. All these
were bodily cures. And Christ did show his power in curing these the better to
draw us to seek to him for the Salvation of the souls of us and ours: So Mat.
8.17. q. d. this was done to teach men that this was he spoken of by Isaiah the
Prophet, who should cure our souls and make satisfaction to God for all our
sins. All bodily diseases were punishments of sins: now removing these, he
would give them as pledges of the removing of sin too, as he did to him sick of
the Palsy, Mat. 9.6.

Christ: Sin (says S. Austin) aut sanabitur aut damnabitur, it must be healed
or damned; Gods Son would heal it by his blood, but they will none. They
(like Babylon, Ier. 5.1. and like Ephraim, Hos 7.1) break out into more
wilfulness: And with desperate Porus will not suffer their wounds to be
dressed: Refusing cure, comfort, advice, plucking of the plasters slinging
them into the Surgeons face; such must needs perish, 1 Samuel 2.25. Act. 3 23.
their wounds will rankle and fester, fester and rot, not being bound up nor
mollified with ointment.

Christ for help, it is as impossible they should miscarry as for Christ to
forget himself; he stands upon his name and praise, which if he should want, he
should suffer most and be the greatest looser.

Object But my wounds are old and desperate: Sins they are of long continuance
sore sicknesses and of long durance?

Resp. Be they what they will be they are not past Gods cure: He can as well
cure desperate diseases (even the remediless consumption, the dead Apoplexy,
the filthy leprosy of the soul,) as any other small malady, or little
faintness, In doubting what do we other then detract from his skill and
derogate from the virtue of his blood? Read Isay. 1.2. -- 18. See what a
desperate cure there was, yet ver. 18. he undertook it, so in Manasses,
Matthew, Zacheus, Mary Magdalen: All these examples are recorded in Scriptures
for our encouragement.

Objection, I doubt not of his Power, but of his Will; I know, if he would, he
could make me whole?

Respon. If so; why then do you think there is greater probability of pardon,
if your sins were less and fewer, then now they are so many, and of such a
nature? This discovers that your discouragements arise from hence, that you
think he cannot rather then that he will not.

2. And why doubt you of his will, seeing that he has called you to come,
Math. 11.28, thrust away none that ever came, and gets greater praise unto
himself in undertaking desperate cures, then small and petty diseases and
infirmities.

Objection, But why am I not then cured? Still my wounds stink and are
corrupt; as passionate as ever, earthly minded as ever, backward to holy duties
as ever?

Resp. You must know. 1. God cures by degrees, that proud flesh may not rise
up; nor does he cure here in this life so perfectly as hereafter; sick men must
have a little and often; Grace like hot water must be taken a little at once.

2 Some wounds are more cankered and festered then other some; thou have it may
be lain long in evil before thou answeredst Gods call, no marvel now if thou
be longer under hand.

3. Besides, you know some flesh is not so healing as other some is (as the
swelling and angry) so it is with the peevish and techy nature, nothing will
down nor please.

4. God begins his cure at the bottom, and heales upwards, so that it cannot
be so easily perceived. The Kingdom of Heaven comes not with observation; A
man sees his wounds are healed; but how or when, he sees not.

Object. But the cure goes backward; it is with me as with Ephraim Hos. 7.1 sin
and corruption daily discovers it self in me?

Resp. Though you think so, it does not follow therefore that it is so: is a
wound because it smarts more then before, further of from healing?

Besides, it is not impossible that it should be as you say, but then fault
your self; it is your careless diet, taking cold or the like, that puts the
cure back; the ague may be got into a soar which keeps it from healing.

Quest. How may I know when my wounds are cured, sins remitted, etc.

Resp. When thy conscience is at peace, Romans 5.1. I say not that this is ever
found by them, whose sins are pardoned; but sometimes or other and in some
comfortable manner upon the use of the means it may be found, which being
found it is an evidence the wound is bound up and healed.

Secondly, if we find more ability and strength for holy performances then
before; you read Math. 9.6, 7. no sooner had Christ cured the Palsy man and
forgiven him his sins, but as a pledge thereof he gave him strength to bear
his bed: Such strength he gives to all he cures, as that they are in some good
measure enabled to arise and walk in a pious and Christian course.

Thirdly, if thou art cured thou can endure to have thy wound rubbed, thy sins
reproved; nay thou will reprove thy self often, and rub thy own wounds,
condemning those courses thou have taken pleasure and delight in, 2 Cor. 7.11.

Quest. What must be door after I am cured?

Resp. Go away and sin no more, least a worse thing befall thee Ioh. 5.14.

2. Show thy self unto the Priest, and be thankful, Ier. 17.14. Praise is the
Fee God looks for; pay it with David, Ps. 103.1, 3. Ps. 116.8. And with Paul,
Romans 7 25. 1 Timothy 1.12, 14. and so go on thy way rejoicing with the Eunuch,
Act. 8. Thus much for the Cure: now for the means, whereby Christ effected this
which you see was with wine and oil.

Thence we observe,

That wine and oil applied to our wounds is the outward means which Christ
uses to effect this cure.

What we may understand by wine and oil I before showed: Curavit corpora verbo
potestatis, curavit animas doctrinae coelestis medicina, Chrysostom. Ep 1^
I know there are variety of interpretations and conceits, wherewith I will not
trouble you: give me leave to use that liberty which S. Austin says a
Christian has in those Texts, which by reason of Allegorical and figurative
expressions, Vinum infudit i. e. sanguinem passionis and oleu^ chrismatis, ut
indulgentia daretur per sanguinem sanctificatio co^ferretur per chrismatis
unctionem, etc. Chrysostom. in Sermon de hom. incidente, etc.
are hard to be understood; and fasten upon that which I conceive most
probable, delivering nothing contrary to the Analogy of faith, keeping within
the bounds of Charity, Piety, Loyalty and Sobriety.

And so these outward means applied I understand to be the word preached,
which is the power of God to Salvation, Romans 1.16 searching betwixt the joints
and the marrow, Heb. 4.12.

Hence it is called the ministration of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.8. and the
ministry of Reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5.18. And commanded to be preached, that
through the knowledge of it Salvation and remission of sins might be
obtained Luke 1.77. Act. 10 42, Quae secundum hominem est co^versio oleum est:
quae vero secundum Deum vinum est quod divinitatem significat, quam nemo
pitaisset sustinere: nisi oleum haberetur i. e. conversatio humana, etc.
Infudit ergo oleum and vinum quia nos humanitate and divinitate salvavit.
Theoph. Romans 3.20. and 7.7.
43. Of this word there are two parts: Moses and the Prophets, Law and Gospel.
The Law like Wine does mundifie and search the wound; it is very searching and
piercing even into the bowels of the belly, discovering sin (as before has bin
showed) together with the loathsomeness and fearfullnesse thereof, and upon this
discovery working in the soul shame and sorrow, Romans 6.21. so that the poor
soul roares and cries out for pain, what shall I do, Act. 2.37. and 16.30.
The Gospel, that like oil mollifies and supples: it mittigates the sharpnes
and bitterness of the Law, speaking unto the poor distressed creature as
Naamans little captive maid said unto her Mistress, 2 King. 5.3. would God my
Lord were with the Prophet that is in Samaria, for he would recover him of his
Leprosy. O that thou would come to Christ, the eternal Son of God; he
would bear the infinite wrath of his Father for thee and procure his favor,
he would release thee of those impossible conditions the Law binds thee unto,
and deliver from the rigor and curse thereof, etc. Thus the Gospel makes
known a remedy; it leaves not the soul in a forlorn hope, but gives
assurance of life and Salvation upon easier terms then the Law does, whereupon
the distressed conscience lifts up the head; flie^ to Christ, rests on him, and
is blessed for ever.

we read 1 Samuel 26. of David and Abishai how that both of them found their
Enemy: Abishai would presently have smote him stark dead, but David awaketh
him, tells him of the danger, and admonishes him to look better to himself;
Thus both Law and Gospel find out the sinner, both meet with his wounds; the
Law like Abishai would presently smite us with his Spear (the curse) to the
Earth, yea to Hell at once: But the Gospel like David says, Destroy him not;
with Evangelicall mitigations the Laws bitterness is abated, and it permitted
to take away only our Spear, and cruise of water; our rotten peace, and
carnal confidence for our further awakening and healing: For which purpose
both are of great use. The Law not saving us without the Gospel, nor the
Gospel without the Law.

Saint Ambrose sets this forth unto us by a similitude of the upper and lower
Millstone, Ambros. Set. 29.
comparing the Law to the nether Millstone, which is slow and stirs not; the
Gospel to the upper stone, which is more quick and stirring: Now as one
without the other is unprofitable, for the lower cannot grind without the
upper; but both together make good meal; so Justification as fine flower is
betwixt the Law and Gospel prepared for us.

David's rule, Ps. 101.1. and imitate this good Samaritane, in using both wine
and oil in all our cures. S. John Baptist (whose tongue was as rough as his
raiment) must go before Christ to prepare his way: And it were much to be
wished that the Law were more urged and pressed and that Ministers had a
greater measure of the Spirit of conviction, John 16. So that the sinners of
Sion might be afraid, and left as empty and naked, as Saint Paul was Romans 7.18.
Through the great neglect of this it comes that so few consciences are awaked,
and the work of Humiliation so dangerously slighted: Questionless
plausibility is no fit preface for Regeneration; winds and earthquakes should
go before the calm and still voice.

Nor is it good to be continually in denunciation of Judgment; to press the
law too much on some spirits, and too long may cause them to die under the
wound and burden: We are not only to destroy, but we must plant; not only to
throw down, but to build up. To conceal those mercies which the word affords
cannot be justifiable, though the persons we deal withal be vile and wicked:
Act. 8.22. A little suppling oil is useful, as well as wine, mild lenitives
as profitable as biting corrasives; whilst a man is in the state of nature
discomforts are not unprofitable, yet withal it shall be our wisdom to let
in light at some crevice.

In short, Greg. 20. mor.
Gregory's temper is not to be misliked, Miscenda est lenitas cum severitate:
sit amor, sed non emolliens, sit rigor, sed non exasperans. Eli put in too much
oil, do no more so my sons. James and John put in too much wine, when they
called for fire from Heaven upon the Samaritanes: Medio tutissimus ibis. Our
Congregations for the most part are mixed, he walks by rule (whatsoever the
foolish prescripts of our people are) who mixeth both: Moses and Christ met
both upon the Mount (not Moses alone, nor Christ alon^) Mat. 17. both Law and
Gospel are to be conjoined. A two edged sword still we must carry in our
mouths if we would do good; and like the Nurse have both Dugge and Rod, or
like the Arc wherein was both Manna and the Rod of Aaron, laying this ever for
a ground that there is more mercy in Christ then sin in us; So there can be
no danger.

selves and others in attending upon the means, the word preached. The
Ministry of the Word is the hand of God, whereby he plucketh us out of sin
and misery, as we do the beast out of the mire: Heb. 12.18.
And in this Ministry he will thunder and lighten in Mount Sinai (man's
conscience) before he speak unto him in Mount Sion. If thou would have thy
wounds cured, submit thy self to the Ministry of both: Let the Law first do
its office and be content that with that wine thou may be prepared for
receiving of the oil (the Lenitives of the Gospel.) Violence must be offered
to our corruptions ere there can be room for grace. Christ will never come
into that soul, where the Herald of Repentance has not bin before him: David
desires the Lord to purge him with Hysop. Psalm. 51. no matter how smarting so
it may be healing.

And yet withal be careful that you nourish not the disease against the
Physic (as the manner of some is) who cry out for more Wine, thinking they are
not humbled enough when it is high time to apply oil unto the soar: he is
cast down enough who is in case to hear of raising up: And he that has his
soul wrought to an hearty grief for offending God, and a perfect and inward
hatred of sin is in such a case, Act. 2.37.

As for others who are dear unto us, whose good we do desire; let our care be
to bring them to the means. There is some good hope of help and health, whilst
we are under the Physicians hands. Thus Elkanah brought his whole Family, 1 Samuel 1.21. Naaman his company to attend upon the Prophet, 2 King. 5.15.
Cornelius his Kinsmen and near Friends, Act. 10.24. And the godly every one
his Neighbor, Isa. 2.3.

Law, receive hence comfort; For the yoke shall be destroyed, because of the
Oil, Isay. 10.27. You are come to Mount Sinai, which burns with fire unto
blackness, darkness and tempest; Heb. 12.18.
such terrors as made Moses himself say, Expavefactus sum ac tremebundus, I
quake exceedingly for fear: But here shall not be thy rest, there is a Mount
Sion thou art hastening unto where thou shall enjoy the privileges of the
first borne, Gods purpose is not to leave thy soul in that distressed case.

Satan (indeed) like Simeon and Levi with the Sichemites, Genesis 34.
take the time while we are sore to fall upon us; God does not so, Luke 4.18.
he will bind us up and power in oil of comfort in due time.

wine of the Law, before he bring and power in the oil of the Gospel?

mercy; which would not be so sweet unto us, if the terrors of Justice had not
made us smart. A Prince will sometimes suffer the Law to pass upon a
malefactor, and have the head laid upon the block before he pardon; and then
mercy is mercy: it draws down tears, and works marvellously both on offenders
and all that are Spectators.

Secondly, God does this that he may hold and keep the soul from all revolt to
former lusts: This Reason God gives why he lead not the children of Israel out
of Egypt, the readiest and nearest way; but through the wilderness (a way
dangerous and desolate, full of fiery Serpents, where they met with many
dangers) that they might be afraid to return, Exo. 13.17, 18. Thus when God
brings us out of the thraldom of sin, he leads us a painful way indeed
through many tears and sorrows, yea through the fear of death and hell, that
we may not dare to practice sin again, nor think of returning to the practife
of that we have so smarted for before.

Be we of good comfort then; for though there be pain and trouble in the way,
yet there will be comfort in the end. He that was anointed himself with oil
will use oil as well as wine in the healing of all his Patients: In due time
thou shall hear of joy and gladness, Psalm. 51.
so that the bones now broken shall rejoice. Only see that you follow the means
with Eliah; who when he had gone a days journey, was called upon to eat, 1
Kings. 19.
and when he had eaten he was willed a second time, to arise and eat; and
after he had traveled forty days, he must arise and eat again: Still attend
upon the Word: It is an Egyptian trick to take away the means from thy soul,
and yet expect the tale of brick, (Joy, Peace, Righteousness, with other
graces) as if straw were laid by.

And set him on his own Beast.
God has given the Creatures to be serviceable unto us; and that not only
for our necessity, but also for our utility and delight; as the Ox to labor
for us, the Horse to bear our burdens and carry us, etc.

David did, Psalm, 8. and in a special manner take great heed least we be
unthankefull unto him who deals thus bountifully with us: Giving us all things
richly to enjoy; or cruel and unjust to them, we show our selves unthankful
unto him, while (as Iehu did the Messengers sent unto him) we put the Creatures
behind us and enforce them to fight against God in the service of the enemy
Hos. 2.8. This is a provoking sin and causes God in wrath to deprive us of
these blessings, which we so abuse, Hos. 2.9.

We deal too hardly with the Creatures when we overburthen them, and oppress
them, either with load too great, or journies too long, or pace too swift, or
stripes too many, or meat too little; using them as cruelly and hardly (that
work for us, travel with us, bear and carry those loads, that otherwise must
lie upon our shoulders;) as if they every way were noisome and hurtful unto
us: Arighteous man (says Solomon) ^oscit animam jumentisui, knows the soul
of his beast: knows what he stands in need of, and what in his need he
desires, and is ready to afford it him; but the tender mercies of the wicked
are said to be cruel in this respect, Prove. 12.10.

Should God open the mouth of the creature, as sometimes he did the mouth of
Balaams Ass, it would complain of man as that Ass did, Numb. 22.20. Romans 8.
what have I done unto thee that thou thus usest me? How ever God hears the
groaning of the creature in its kind, and will not endure that they should be
abused. Let us therefore with the good man, Genesis 24.32.
be merciful to a beast. And with Abraham's servant (for which he is remembered
in holy Scripture) have a great care of our Cattle that are serviceable unto
us: It is just with God that the creature should rise up against us to hurt us
and destroy us, as 2 Samuel 18.9. 2 Kings. 9.36. Prove. 30.17. while we abuse
them, and rise up in rebellion against God in the sinful abuse of them.

Secondly, it may not be passed over how that this Samaritan (as he took
before the oil and wine which he had to serve him in his journey, and powered
them into the wounds of his neighbor, so here) he lights from of his beast,
and himself walks on foot whilst his neighbor rides, Thence we learn,

To prefer our brothers necessity to our own utility or convenience. Luke
3.11. and 12.33. Acts. 2.45 and 4.34. 2 Cor. 8.14.

Of two evils the less is to be chosen; yet here it holds, Of two goods choose
the better and greater.

Nabals and rich gluttons of our times, who are so far from preferring the
necessity of the needy before their own profit, as that they will not part
with their superfluity to succor their brethren be they in never so great
misery, 1 Samuel 25.10, 11. Luke 16.19, 20, 21. of this they wilfully being
ignorant that the poor in their necessity are the Lords, and owners of rich
men's goods, Prove. 3.27. and that the rich are but Stewards, and dispensers to
them in that case.





Omnis inordinata charitas incipit a seipso, sic etiam omnis regulata charitas
terminatur in socio.
For the farther and better clearing of this doubt, take notice that the things
which men enjoy, are either necessary, profitable, sufficient, or superfluous.
Those are necessary, which serve for the maintenance of our lives: those are
profitable, which serve for our vocation, calling: Those are sufficient, which
serve for our delectation, and those are superfluous, which tend to wantonness
and excess. Now of our superfluity we should spare for our Brothers
sufficiency; of our sufficiency something we should spare for our Neighbors
utility to further him in his calling; out of those things which serve for our
utility we ought to spare to help our poor Brethren in their Necessity and to
preserve their life: But of that which is absolutely necessary for the
maintenance of our lives and families we are not bound to give, except it be
for the preservation of our Prince and safety of the Commonwealth; for in that
case the Public is to be preferred before the Private, 2 Samuel 19 43.

necessity, and the rather, because it is usually brought for a Plea, both in
case of omission of good duties and commission of evil, when indeed there is
no necessity at all why we should be hindered in our duties, or put on upon any
evil practice, what ever we pretend.

Samaritane set the wounded man upon his own beast (and therein preferred his
necessity and profit before his own convenience) So in the Mystery,

Our blessed Savior did prefer our good before his ease.

Paul would teach us, 1 Cor. 11.1^ having in the words immediately before
declared, how that he pleased not himself, adds by way of Exhortation, that we
should be followers of him therein as he was of Christ, implying that Christ
did not please himself to do us good. And Romans 15.3. he does there expressly,
and in plain terms avouch it: For even Christ (says he) (...), non indulsit
sibi-ipsi, pleased not himself; not as if he were displeased with himself for
undertaking the work of our Redemption (that cannot be the meaning) seeing it
was willingly undertaken, Luk 12.50. John 10.17, 18. but the meaning is that in
the work he sought not his own ease nor pleasure, the content and satisfaction
of the inclination of Nature (which abhors pain) but he preferred our good
and the Salvation of our souls before his own Body, Name, Fame, Credit in this
world, etc.

Mat. 4. and 16.22
Why do we prefer our ease before his honor? No impediments whatsoever could
keep him from doing us good.

Satan's temptations could not; Peter's persuasion to favor himself did not;
reproaches, scorns, buffetings, death, torments, these nor any of these, nor
all these could hinder him from effecting our Salvation: But he came leaping
over these mountains, skipping over these hills, Cant. 2.8. But alas for us! We
are so affected with our ease, that we can suffer nothing for his glory: Every
Straw is a block in our way: Every Molehill is a Mountain, which we cannot
pass: The reproaches and scorns of the world are too grievous to be borne,
but if the footmen thou have run withal weary thee, how will thou contend with
horses? If in the land of peace wherein thou trustedst thou art wearied the^ how
will thou do in the swelling of Jordan? Ier. 12.5. Is it like thou will part
with thy liberty, life, all for his honor, as he parted with all for thine,
when thy base heart and spirit is cast down with the blast of tongues.

Imposuit insuum juventum i e in corpus suum me^bra, na^que sua nos secit, and
particeps corperis ejus, and lex quidem non omnes suscipiehat, Moabita inquit,
and Ammonitae non intrahunt in Ecclesia^ Dei, nunc vero in omni gente qui timet
Dominum ab eo susci pitur voles credere and pars ecclesiae fieri, propter hoc
dicit quod duxit eum in stabu^um. Theoph in loc Iumenium ejus est caro qua ad
nos venire dignatus est; Imponi jumento est in ipsam Inoarnationem, Aug de
Quest. Eva^ l. 2. Quest 9 Aug. de vera Rel. c. 16. vino ra^^ (...) non (...)
which is the very use the Apostle makes hereof, Romans 15.1, 2. That every one
of us do please our Neighbor, not wholly nor only seeking our own with neglect
of that which may be beneficial to our brother; but with all (as Cajetan
observes) apponit duo grana salis, he casts in two grains of salt to season
the duty of neighbor pleasing: First for matter, it must be (...) in that
which is good or at least not evil and referred to that which is good:
Secondly, in regard of Vtility, (...), to edification; for all things which are
good and lawful, edify not, 1 Cor. 10 23. If time and place with other
circumstances be not observed it may rather tend to destruction then to
edification, as Theophylact well observes on the place: These observed, seek
to please both in our general and particular calling.

More particularly this setting the wounded man upon his own beast sets forth
(in the judgment of some Expositors) the high advancement of our Nature;
Christ taking it into Union with his divine: he did not only assume our Nature
and so came where we were, but in assuming it, he did nearly and indissolubely
unite it to his divine Nature in the second Person (to his second Person
immediately, but mediately to his Nature in that Person, whence it is called a
Personal Union, because it is made in the singularity of Person not in the
unity of Nature) Ioh. 1.14. 1 Timothy 3.16. Col. 2.9. Heb. 2.16. Gal. 4.4. Romans
9.5. Isa. 9.

And this Union was necessary, that Christ might become a fit person to undergo
the Office of a Mediator: For a Mediator must have some alliance to both
parties which are to be reconciled that he might indifferently arbitrate, and
mediate hence he took part with both natures and became Immanuell, Isay. 7.14.
Mat. 1.23. that he might indifferently partake with each Nature. This is a
weighty point and full of mysteries, too deep indeed and weighty (it may be
thought) to be laid upon so weak a foundation, as this is from the Parable, and
therefore I pass with a word for Use.

Instruction to us all, that we acknowledge our dignity herein, and beware
least we defile by a lewd conversation what God has so highly honored: Leo.
Ser. in not. Dom.
Agnosce O Christian dignitatem tuam (says Leo) Great was the honor God put
upon man at his Creation in making him after his own Image, Genesis 1.26. But a
far greater honor was done to him in his Redemption, God himself becoming
man; flesh of our flesh, bone of our bone: Some love their flesh, says one,
for the beauty of it; some for the shape and proportion; some for strength: But
here is the gr^und of true love, to love it because in Christ it is the flesh
of God, and herein exalted above the nature of Angels, Heb. 2.16.

Comfort: This may be a cordial for all perplexed spirits in their approach to
the throne of grace. Two cannot walk together except they be agreed, Amos 3.3.
but being once agreed it may well be: man's nature through sin was as hateful
to God as any ^oad or Serpent can be to us; but by Christ it is brought again
into Grace and favor. You know if a Prince will be but pleased to come and
abide in some Town or great man's Palace, it is enough to bring it into favor,
although formerly it has bin in great disgrace: So here the divine Nature
resting in the humane has advanced it highly, so that now our own flesh sits
at Gods right hand; which may strengthen our Faith in all our suits to God.

And brought him to an Inn.
(...). From the History it will follow then,

That Inns are of good use for honest refection of Travelers.

Rahab was a Victualler and the spies there had lodging, Josh. 2.2, 3. See Luke
2.7. Act. 28.15. 3. John 5.

goodmans house was an Inn, 2 King. 4.8, 9. Job 31.32. 1 King. 17 Judge. 19.20.
And of later time the poor Traveller was sure to find in every Town of note,
two Inns at least to be refreshed at. The Manner-house and the Parsonage-house:
But in these days (when men are rather known by their houses, then their
houses by the men) the Lord and Master flying and carrying with him a piece of
the Church also; the Manner-house comes to be without drink, and the
Parsonage-house without malt, and then what follows, but the poor Traveller
must to the Inn or Alehouse, or lie in the streets?

Rahab was called, (...), an harlot, Iam. 2.25. But that word in the most
native signification signifies (not an Inkeeper, but) a harlot that sels her
chastity and prostitutes her body for gain; therefore most like it is, that
before her conversion she was not only a Victualer, or Innekeeper, but a
notorious Strumpet, that (...) the Harlot pub^ikely known and noted so to be
in all Jericho. And it is said (though Apocripha) a Victualer cannot be without
sin, i. e. hardly; for did they not sometimes chop away a good conscience for
money, and bid drunkenness welcome, they could hardly pay their Rents, and yet
the Profession it self is not to be annihilated, nor all condemned that are of
the Profession. For my own part I do not doubt, but Inns and Alehouses will
afford some souls for Heaven at the last day.

excess and drunkenness that causes so mighty an increase, that like Hidraes
head, when one is cut off more arises in the room; the Philosopher did
sometime say that where there be many Physicians, there be many diseases: So
where are many Victualing houses usually there are many drunkards, in which
respect authority had done worthily to restrain many, destroying the nests that
those birds may not with their breed taint the country.

In the Mystery, Est enim stabulum Ecclesia, que in itmere mundi lassatos, and
sarc^nis de lictorum defessos suscipit venientes, ubi deposi^e onere peccatorii
viator lassus reficitur, and refectus salubri pascua reparatur, Ch^ys in loc
Ita August. Tom. 1 cont Pelagianos Hypo. l 3. Mat. 5.
the Inn is the Church Catholic, into which our Savior brings those he means
to save. But first consider we, the Church is like unto an Inn, and that in
these respects.

First, An Inn is a place licenced or made to be so: It is not an Inn as it
is a house; So the Church it is selected and called from the rest of the world,
it is licenced by God to have the Word and Sacraments, Numb. 23.9. Ioh. 15.19.
Mat. 10.5. Romans 3.2. and 9.4. 1 Timothy 3.15. Ps. 147.19, 20.

Secondly, An Inn stands in some open place and is obvious to all passengers:
It has a sign also (usually) if it be an Inn: So here the Church is a high
hill, and in general the Cross of Christ is the sign, Ioh. 16. or the
burning bush Exodus 5. In particular this Inn is to be known by the Profession
of the truth and administration of all essentials necessary to Salvation, Act.
2.42. Isa. 2.2. And in this respect it is said to be visible and like a house
set upon a hill: Visible I say Potentia, though not always Actu, simply in it
self visible, though in some other respect to us invisible: An Inn cannot be
discerned in a great mist or dark night; nor by a blind man: so in time of
persecution (as when the Church was saine to fly into the wilderness) or when
men have through fear or anger weekned their sight, Rev. 12 14. Isa 26.20.
It is not discerned by us: So Eliah could not see a Church, when God had 7000.
there.

Thirdly, It is like unto an Inn, it being both spacious and specious; It is
large and fair, so usually Innes are, Cant. 6 4, 10. 1 sal 122 3. Cant. 4.4, 7.
Numb. 24.5. the uttermost parts of the earth are given Christ for his
possession, (whence it is called Catholic) And the beauties of holiness;
though to look on the outward face of it, It may say as Naomi of her self,
call me no more beautiful, etc. Ruth. 1 20.

Fourthly; as an Inn is an house well furnished with all provision fitting to
entertain all guests and passenges; so is the Church, Isa. 25. and 55.1, here
is wine, milk, bread, water, oxen and fatlings killed, etc.

Fifthly; an Inn is a place of safety; so is the Church, Isa. 4.5, 6. Zach.
12.3. Mat. 16. here is a shadow and sweet refuge against all dangers.

Sixthly, it is a place of great resort, multitudes frequent it, as they do an
Inn: Jsa. 2 3.
therefore it is said to be a General Assembly. Heb. 12. And there are many
which shall come from the East and West, Math. 8. and sit down with Abraham,
etc.

Seventhly; there are in an Inn of all sorts; All company comes in: Noble,
ignoble, high, low, good and bad; so in the Church, Gal. 3.28. Acts. 2.5. and
10.11. Math. 13. Rev. 7 9 there is in it a mixed company all sorts included.

Eighthly; in an Inn there are many distinct offices, 1 Cor. 9.19.
and all for service: so in the Church, 1 Cor. 12.28, 29. Romans 12.6. 1 Pet.
4.14. Ephesians. 4.7, 11. Yea, Kings and Queens are nurcing Fathers and nurcing
mothers. Every one must serve the common good of the Church, Isa. 40.23. Mark.
10.43.
and endeavor its peace; Psalm. 122.6.

Ninethly; Disordered persons may by no means be tolerated in an Inn; no
more in the Church, see Deuteronomy. 23.17. 1. Cor. 5.1, 2. Ephesians. 5.3, 5. Math. 18.17.

Tenthly and lastly, (not to insist on more Particulars) Travelers leave their
Inn in as good estate, yea somewhat better then they found it, so should we
the Church after our decease. Acts. 20.28, 29. 2 Timothy 4.5, 6.

Inn, why are we backward to resort unto it? having traveled the whole week
before in the works of our particular Callings, me thinks we should be willing
when the Lords day comes to take up our Inn for rest. The kingly Prophet David
longed for this place, Ps. 84.2. Yea the remembrance of that rest put life into
him, when by reason of his travel he was at the point of fainting, v. 5.6, 7.

And why prefer we a blind alehouse, before so spacious and fair an Inn?
what noble spirit does thus? especially considering the good entertainment may
here be had, read Isa. 55.1, 2, 3. there is the best provision and best usage.

Whom Christ means to save, he brings into the Church. See Acts. 2.47. The
Lord added to the Church daily such as should be saved. So Ephesians. 5.23. Christ
is said to be the Savior of his body; Now the Church is the body of Christ,
therefore none are saved but the Church, (i.e.) none but such as are joined to
Christ, and become members of his body.

This was figured by Noah's Arc: All that were preserved were within it; Genesis
7.23. 1 Pet. 3.20, 21.
As for those without, no gold could buy their preservation, no holes hide
them, no hills help them, nothing in the world, nor the world it self could
save them: And it was signified to us by the covenant made betwixt Rahab and
the spies; all within her house should be preserved, but those without, (though
her own kindred,) should perish. Josh. 2.18.

Hence was it, that the Apostles were willed to stay diverse years in some
places, preaching to them the Gospel, for that God had many souls to save,
who by these means were to be brought within the compass of the net, Acts.
18.10.

Luke 1 33.
For Christ reigns only in the Church of God, Micha 4.7. without the Church
the Devil rules; The incestuous person being cast out of the Church of
Corinth, was delivered up to Satan, 1 Cor. 5.5. so was Hymeneus and Alexander,
1 Timothy 1.20.

Origens error) but that doctrine plucks up the pale and enclosure, and lays
all common to the wilderness, and is full of all absurdities.

Pagans and Infidels) or else being once within the pale keep not within, but
get out again.

Some wilfully skip over, as Familists, Brownists, Anabaptists and such like:
These with Cain leave the presence of God, and fly into the land of Nod, a
receptacle for fugitives, Gen 4.16. And is a withdrawing to perdition, Heb.
10.25, 39. And of these we may say as 1 John. 2.19. They went out from us, but
they were not of us; for if they had been of us, they would (no doubt) have
continued with us: but they went out that they might be made manifest that they
were not all of us.

Others are cast out of the Church, and justly excommunicated by reason of
their evil deeds (as 1 Cor. 5.5.) which sentence is the fearfullest that by
man can be inflicted: Other sentences condemn us in our bodies, goods, or
liberties; but this declares us to be of the community of the ungodly, and
ejects us out of the society of the faithful: Yea so long as we remain
obdurate, it does not only cast us out of the Church militant on earth, but
out of the Church triumphant in Heaven, Mat. 16.19. and therefore to be feared
above any other sentence if deserved justly.

A man indeed may be cast out by such as are usurpers in the Church (so some
Popes have excommunicated Princes) and sometimes for well doing, not for ill:
as John 9.35. Our Savior armeth his Disciples against such thunderbolts, John
16.2. futurum erat (says Saint Austin) ut for as emitterentur cum illo ab eis
qui esse nolint in illo, qui non possent esse sine illo. It should come to
pass that they should be cast out with him, by them, who would not be in him,
nay by them that could not be without him. In this we should not grieve but
rejoice, seeing we are members of his body, and made partakers of his
sufferings.

As is the mother, so is the daughter, as is the head, such are the members of
it.

The Church (you know) is holy and Catholic: So if thou be a true member of
this Church, Holy is thy Christian name and Catholic thy Surname: Holy thou
must be, in it shall dwell nothing unholy or that does desire, and thy
obedience must be to the whole Law of God; which only prooves thee to be a good
Catholic.

I know that as the mothers, 1 King. 3. pleaded for the living child, saying it
is mine, and it is mine; so the children now plead for the mother, whither the
Church of England or the Church of Rome be the true Church, and in which of
these, salvation is probably to be found is (...) hot dispute betwixt us and
Papists: but so fully and learnedly determined by that most reverend Father in
God the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury in his conference with Fisher, that no
more remains to be said of that point.

Noah desired for his son Iaphet when he blessed him, but this, that God would
persuade him to dwell in the tents of Se^^: this place is like that house of
perfumes wherein the Virgins were kept many days, and purified before they came
into Ahasverus his presence, Est. 2. there so often it is called, the kingdom
of Heaven, because it is the Gate of Heaven and inlet thereunto; we being in it,
made fit for Heaven through the Word and Prayer.

And let us bless God for that we are brought out from within the pale of the
present Romish Church, and delivered out of the belly of it as Jonas was out of
the belly of the whale; in which Church though there be a possibility of
salvation (for some) yet no fair probability as is in the Church wherein we
live: Surely God is willing to save us who has hither brought us: Why has he
done all this for us (as the wife of Manoah said to him) Judge. 13.23. if he
were purposed to stay us? Happy we if we knew what belonged to our peace in
this our day.

And took care of him.
(...). As this Samaritane had undertaken the cure, so he does it with care.
Truth it is,

All ought to be providently careful of what we undertake within the compass
of our calling, whatsoever our hand finds to do, we must do it with all our
might, Eceles. 9.10. read Pro. 6.6, 7, 8. and 27.23 and 30.13. 1 Cor. 7.32, 34.
2 Cor. 11.28. 1 Timothy 5.8.

Paul's rule is, so to labor as that we be not chargeable unto others, 1 These.
5.11, 12. And he tells us plainly that who so provides not for his Family has
denied the Faith and is worse then an Infidel: 1 Timothy 5.8.
How this Provision can be made and no care taken, I cannot conceive.

Object. But Mat. 6.31. (...), says our Savior, take you no thought, and
Phil. 4.6. (...), be careful for nothing: no worldly care then it seems is
allowed unto a Christian.

Resp. There is a twofold care. Sollicitudo diligentiae and diffidentiae.

A Care of diligence, this is called, (...), and a care of diffidence,(...),
the former of these is Regular, well confined and kept within the bounds of
moderation: And is described to be, An act of wisdom taking up the
understanding faculty (especially) whereby after a man has rightly judged what
be ought to do, and what not, he with more or less intention of mind
(accordingly as the nature of the thing requires) is provident to find out,
and diligent to use all lawful means that may further his desires, expecting
the success from God with a contented spirit. This care is honest and
warrantable, no where forbidden but every where commanded and commended 2 Cor.
11.28.

The latter of these is Irregular and arises out of a distrust of God and
fear of wants: It is a cutting, dividing, distracting care, nor will it suffer
it self to be limited within the bounds of Christian moderation; but causes
a man over-eagerly and inordinately to pursue his desires, perplexing himself
likewise with fearful thoughts about the success. And this care is still
blamed and in Scripture condemned, and the care that is spoken of in the former
Texts.

As all ought to be careful of what they undertake within the compass of
their callings, so especially those who have undertook the looking and
providing for, of impotent and diseased persons. Such in a special manner are
to have a care over their cure and charge.

The life of man is dear to him and of great worth, Skin for skin and all a
man has will he give for his life, Job 2.4. Solomon calls it animam pretiosam,
the precious life, Pro. 6.26. And so it is both in it self being rational and
so excells that kind of life which the irrational and sensitive creatures live
(And yet anima Muscae est Sole prestantior, the sensitive soul of a Fly is
more excellent in nature then the glorious Sun) As also in regard of Use. For,

1. God has glory by it, Non enim sepulchrum, says Hezekiah, Isay. 38.18, 19.
The grave cannot praise thee, death cannot celebrate Gods glory, Vivens,
vivens, ipse celebrabit te, The living, the living, they shall praise the Lord.

2. The Church and Commonwealth have benefit by it: Saint Paul confesses of
himself, that he abode still in the body for the good of the Philippians,
Phil. 1.24, 25.

3. Much good and profit comes to a man's self hereby; For first the Person of
man is preserved in its esse or being by it, through the personal Union of
soul and body which otherwise would be dissolved. Secondly, through it we
become capable of comfort here: By the blessing of life other good things
become blessings to us (under God) All the comforts of this life are nothing to
a dead man; In which respect Solomon says, A living Dog is better then a dead
Lion, Eccles. 9 4. Thirdly, by means of it we come to be made partakers of the
joys of a better life; whilst we do employ it in working up of our salvation
with fear and trembling. Every way then life is a precious thing; now if we
think our selves bound to preserve a Jewel of our Neighbors committed to our
care and trust, then the life of our neighbor much more, which being far
more precious.

And as life and health is precious in it self, so with much ado it is hatched
up and preserved: The life of no other creature is subject to so many dangers,
outward and inward; nor sooner overthrown then man's: It is like a brittle
glass full of precious liquour, a small knock breaks all: Or like a watch
consisting of many wheels and gimbals which every day must be wound up and
kept in reparation; by meat, drink, sleep, exercise, etc. Often it gathers
dust and grows foul and then the hand of Physic is employed to cleanse it,
which if it be not carefully done, all falls to pieces presently; The body
drops asunder and here lies a pin and there a wheel, here one bone and there
another, till the exquisite workman who first made it, takes it again in hand
to repolish it and reunite it.

Physicians, Surgions and such other as have undertaken cures, consider what a
charge is committed into their hands; and beware how they commit the health and
life of their Patients unto the Apothecary or his boy. Life is more precious
then so; Physic should be taken cum custodia, so likewise administered and
given.

This might likewise be applied to Overseers of the poor in Parishes, whose
care should be that nothing necessary be wanting to impotent and diseased
persons: as also to such as are keepers and tenders of sick: But I leave the
prosecution to your private meditations and come from the History to the
Mystery.

So this sets forth unto us the great care that our Savior (that true
Samaritane) took for man's Salvation,

While he was upon the Earth he was full of care and tenderness for our souls
welfare.

Our Savior makes this care one special note of difference, betwixt himself
and hirelings, John 10.12, 13. And he did notably show it in each part of his
office of Mediatorship: As in his Prophetical, Priestly and Regallfunction, in
none of which was wanting any care.

As our Prophet, he carefully revealed the whole will of his Father to us (so
far as concerned our Salvation, John 15 15. and 17.8.) He went about from
place to place doing good, preaching the Gospel, working of miracles. Act.
10.38. Insomuch that the people who sat in darkness saw great light, Math.
4.16. And as thus in general; so in particular distributions according to the
several estates, and secret demands of each ones particular condition, so as
that each passage of the word was exactly suitable thereunto; whereby he
manifested that his care reached unto particular men: Some were broken hearted,
Isa 61.1, 2, 3. Luke 4.18. Isa 42.3. Mat. 12.20.
them he binds up: Some Captives, to those he proclaimed liberty: Some
mourners, for them he had beauty: Some bruised reeds, smoking flax, these he
did so carefully tend, as that they might not be broken nor quenched,
altogether, he was careful that Judgment might be brought forth into victory:
He had provision for any want: medicine for any disease; comfort for any
distress; answer for any doubt; direction for any difficulty; ready at hand as
occasion should require. There is no estate wherein a Christian can be set, but
the abundant care of Christ toward him is magnified in the Gospel.

Look we upon him in the discharge of his Priestly function, there we shall
find no care wanting, neither in offering up sacrifice, and oblation, nor
making intercession (for in these two acts the Priesthood of Christ consisted)
by the former he satisfies for the debt of man, which debt was two fold. 1.
Active, in doing the duties of Gods Law (which we were bound unto as we were
Gods Creatures.) 2. Passive, in suffering willingly the penalty of the Law,
(and this we owed unto God as we were his Prisoners.) In both these was Christ
very observant; and for both made exact, and punctual payment. Mat. 3 15. and
5.17, 18, Not one ceremonial type remained to be fulfilled, as S. Paul to the
Hebrews ^t large shows. As Soon as ever he was borne he began to pay and fill
all those water pots, Ioh. 2. No sooner does S. Matthew speak of his birth, but
one vessel is filled strait. Mat. 1.22. and that was Esais measure. So Math. 2
17. there was a measure of Hosea filled. Hos. 11.1. and Math. 2.6. there was a
vessel of Michaias filled. Mich. 5.2. and Mat. 2.17. there was a vessel of
Ieremiahs filled. Ier. 31.13. Wheresoever he went he was filling as Mat 2.23.
whatsoever he spoke was to fill up. Mat. 13.35. when he spoke not, it was to
fulfill also. Act. 8.35. whatsoever he did was to fill-full, Mat. 21.5.
whatsoever he suffered was the like, Ioh. 12.38. and 15.25. And at his death he
fulfilled all, Mat. 26.56. and gave not over till all was finished. This may
appear by that of Paul, Col. 2.14. for how could the bond have been cancelled
had not the debt been paid? So Romans 8.3, 4. And in these respects he is said
to be the holy one, and the just one, Acts 3.14. and 4.27. and 2 27. and a Lamb
without spot and blemish, 1 Pet. 1. that takes away the sins of the world,
Ioh. 1.29.

As for the other act of Christ's Priesthood, his Intercession, he was no way
wanting in that neither; See his care in that Prayer of his, John 17. and in
the very time of the Sacrifice, whilst it was hanged up, Luke 23.34. Now that
he sits at Gods right hand, his care is not lessoned. See Heb. 7.25. 9.24. Romans
8.34. 1 Ioh. 2.1.

Lastly, If we look on him in the discharge of his Regal or Kingly office, in
the exercising of those kingly duties which belonged to his regal function, we
shall find his care was no way wanting.

First in the gathering of his subjects to himself, by his Word and spirit,
Isa. 11.11, 12. Ioh. 10.16.

Secondly, In governing those he has gathered. 1. In ruling of their hearts
and leading them in the way, John 10.3, 4. Isay. 30.21. 1 Pet. 2.9. 2 Pet. 1.3.
1 Cor. 1.48.

Next in Protecting or succouring of them in all temptations, Heb. 2.17. Psalm.
121.4. Mark. 4 38.40.
John 16.33. 1 Cor. 10.13. Phil. 4.19 Romans 15.4.

Thirdly, In Execution of Justice. 1. Toward his own Subjects, in justifying
and acquitting them, Romans 8.

And also in distributing of Rewards amongst them, Ephesians;. 1. and 4.1.2.
Toward his Enemies, confounding their Projects, holding up his kingdom in the
midst of their malice.

2. Their Persons, so that not an enemy was left unsubdued. Not Sin, 1 Cor.
15.17. Not Death, 1 Cor. 15.54. Nor Hell, Revel. 1.18. Nor Satan, Colos. 2 15.
Nor the World, Ioh. 16.33.

Pet. 1.10. And yet we neglect so great Salvation. We have a care to preserve a
plant from withering, a beast from perishing, a body from dying, and count of
them who have care and skill this way; but who esteems or accounts of that
care which keeps a soul from damning: The more grace we have, the more shall
we be taken up with the contemplation of this subject and with the continual
study and care after it.

Paul was not ashamed of Persecutions, 2 Timothy 1.
because he knew whom he had believed; he doubted neither of his care nor
power, and therefore committed his soul unto him against the last day when all
forsook him, 2 Timothy 4.16, 17, 18. And surely want of consideration of the care
of God and Christ is the ground of all diffidence, Math. 6. Why do men trust in
themselves and friends, but because they rest assured of their care and
good will toward them? Did men rest assured of the care of Christ, and compare
his affections with other succors, they would rather choose to build their
hopes and assurances on him, hence it is that Saint Peter uses this as an
argument; Cast your care upon him, quoniam ipse cura est de vobis, for he
cares for you, 1 Pet. 5.7. A right Judgment of Christ would help us to employ
our Faith in any condition whatsoever, be it never so hard, as 1 Samuel 26.10,
11. While David had Faith in Gods Providence, he could say of Saul, The Lord
shall smite him, or his day shall come to dye, or he shall descend into the
battle and perish; Absit mihi a Jehovah, God forbi that I should stretch
forth mine hand against the Lords anointed. But when he once began to doubt of
Gods care and providence, then he said, Tandem absumar die unaper manum Saulis,
Surely I shall one day perish by the hand of Saul, 1 Samuel 27.1. See therefore
that we get Faith in Gods Providence, as well as in his Promise; and fear not
any of our adversaries or their malicious practice against us, they shall never
hinder us of salvation, Psalm. 23. None shall be lost that are under his hand,
Ioh. 10.29. It is Gods command that he which has received a calling should
wait upon his calling: Go then boldly to Christ (thou that art of a drooping
spirit) beseech him to continue his care over thy poor soul: It is of his
fold, beseech him not be absent when the woolfe comes: Be not thou wanting to
thy self, and rest assured he will no way be wanting unto thee, 1 Pet. 1.13.

Object. But I am weak, my sins are many: How should he take care of such a
wretch as I am?

Resp. What was in this wounded man to move this good Samaritane to take this
care of him, but compassion in himself and misery in the object? This is it
that puts on Christ, and causes him (as it were) to turn Projector, which way
to show mercy and do good: So Hos. 11.8. The Lord there sets himself to study
and contrive mercy for his people, gathering together his thoughts of mercy to
conquer their sins, which they in pride, as it were, did set up to pose his
Covenant.

Object. But though he has taken this tender care of the Salvation of poor
sinners, will he do so still?

Resp. He is Jesus Christ, heri and hodie, Yesterday and to day and the same
for ever, Heb. 13.8. there is constancy and continuance in this his care; his
mercies endure, his compassions fail not.

Object. But he is now in Heaven, how then can he take care?

Resp. He is so, but there he is our Advocate and practicing for us in that
Court,

Secondly, he has made preparations and provisions for the future for us.

And on the morrow when he departed, etc.
Samaritane could make no long stay upon the Earth, but as he took care of his
Patient while be was present with him, so now being to depart he commends him
to the care of the Host, with whom he leaves money to supply that distressed
man's necessities, and withal gives special charge that he be well looked unto,
promising to pay at his return, what ever (above that he left) should be laid
out.

And on the morrow.
Prima dies suit dies passionis, altera resurrectionis. Quis est ille alter
dies nisi for te ille dominicae r^surrectionis, de quo d^ctum est, hic est dies
quem secit Dominus Ambr. in loc.
(To handle the words as they lie in order.) The time when he departed is here
expressed: It was no long stay he made in this same Inn: So soon as
conveniently he might, he departed thence. From the History first observe,

Victualing houses are not for residence of Travelers; guests are to make no
longer stay at such houses than urgent occasion requires (with the spies) in
the morning they must be gone at furthest, Josh. 2

Ins into abuse:

that such disorders be reformed, we having the edge of the sword of Justice
backed by laws and wholesome statutes; So the poor that are, would be better
provided for in most Parishes, and the increase of poor much abated, if the
penalties imposed, on such disordered persons, by the Statute, were duly
required and inflicted.

Mystically, the departure of this Samaritane from the Inn teaches us,

That this world was no place for Christ's aboade, longer then while he had
finished his work. So soon as his business was over, Christ made no longer
stay upon earth, then needs must.
he departed hence on the morrow (as it were) and tarried not, Ioh. 13.33. and
14.3.4. and 16 7, 8. Luke 24.5, 6. Act. 1.9, 10.



2. He had business else where, Ioh. 16.7. It was expedient that he left the
Church on Earth (in regard of carnal presence) and that for us, not for
himself, first to open Heaven for us, Heb. 10.19. Ioh. 14.2. and 10.20. Ezekiel.
44.1. Ephesians. 2.6. Next to se^d the Holy Ghost unto us, John 16.7. Had he not
left the Earth, the Holy Ghost in such a measure had not bin sent nor given,
John 7.30.

Lastly, That he might lead captivity captive, Ephesians. 4.8. and so make a
perfect triumph over those spirits whom he had conquered on the cross, Col. 2.

Papists, cannot stand with this now delivered; what business has he now upon
the Earth?

Object. But Mat. 28. ult. I am with you to the end of the world?

Resp. True, Spiritually, by the assistance of his Spirit: What is this
concerning his corporal presence, which is in the Heavens, and there must be
contained till his coming unto Judgment.

Peter, It is good for us to be here, let us build here our Tabernacles; But
say and judge with Paul, If we here had only our hope, we were of all men
most miserable.

Colos. 3.1. Like a wheel (says Hilary) which though it continually roll
upon the Earth, yet it has its greatest part from of the Earth. You see in
nature every member will have recourse to the head, because that gives life and
motion to the rest of the body: So seeing Christ our Head has left this world,
and is now in Heaven sitting at the right hand of God his Father, let us desire
to be with him: And when we see death coming toward us by the harbingers that
go before (as aches, pains, sicknesses, gray-haires) let our spirit revive
within us, as old Father Jacobs did, when he saw the Chariots and Horses that
his son Joseph sent for him to come into Egypt.

Surrexit non est hic, He is risen, he is not here.

He took out two pence and gave them to the Host.
Here you see what is left to supply this man's wants and need, and with whom he
left it, with the Host. That I note from the letter of the Parable shall be
this,

Money at an Inn bears the mastery, that makes welcome: What Solomon says of
it in the general, is most true in this particular, Argontum respondet
omnibus, money answers all things, Eccles. 10 19. this causes attendance,
furnishes the Table, fills the Cup, opens Locks, commands all, yea Conscience
it self many times not excepted; that in an Inn is at the beck and command of
money A point so evident that it will seem time misspent to stand upon any long
or large confirmation of it. Therefore for Use.

Alehous-friendship and true friendship. There no longer pay, no longer play:
Friends there, are well read in Theognes, They seem with the tongue to flatter
all, but in their deeds they love none at all, they are like Aristotle's
fallations and falling Stars; Eccles. 6.
Videntur and non sunt. It is the money they are friends unto; while that lasts
they will be as thy self and at thy service, but if that be gone thou shall
find them fail thee, as Pompey did Cicero, to whose house Tully flying for
safeguard of his life, Pompey slipped out at a back door and would not be
seen: Three things only continue them, Much spending, little asking, and
taking nothing at all from them.

Mystery, The Ministers and Pastors of the Church are this Host.

Stabularij sum illi quibus dicitur, Ite in orbe^ universum and praedicate
Eva^gelium universae creaturae, Amb in loc.
So they are in regard of their Authority in the Church (though not over the
souls and consciences of any in the Church, yet) therein they have rule and
command, as an Host has in an Inn: In which respect they are said to be
Masters of the assemblies Eccles. 12.11. Yea Princes of the Congregations, Isa.
43.28. And to have the oversight thereof, 1 Pet. 52 and the Rule, Heb. 13.17.

But besides this general take we notice of some more special resemblances
(whence Gods Ministers may spell their duties.)

If we consider what Saint Paul writes to Timothy and Titus concerning a
Ministers qualifications we shall find them every way fitted for such a 1 Timothy 3
2. Tit. 1.6, and 16
calling; 1 Timothy 3.9.
Every one you know is not fit to be an Host.

First, He would be no Youth that keeps an Inn, it is requisite an Host should
be stayed and grave: So a Minister he may not be (...), and novice, (...) est
nup^r pla^tatus and Ecles^aei situs, quates craat cate^hu^^ni.
one rue en ered (as it were) into the School of Christ: In which respect
under the Law we find, that only such as were of t^irrty years of age were
admitted to serve in the Tabernacle and Temple.

2. An Host would be a man of an unblameable life and conversation. So should a
Minister: A S^andalous person is not fit for that holy function. Tit. 1.6.
S. Paul to Titus wills he should be (...) inculpatus, one against whom no
just exception can be taken. None of Arons sons or seed who had any blemish in
them, might come near the veil, nor stand before the Altar, nor once press
to minister before the Lord, Lev. 21.17. the sacrifice smells of the hand that
offers it.

3. An Host may not be wayward nor selfewilled, Tit. 1.7
but of an affable, courteous and pleasing carriage: such must Gods Ministers
be, not (...) froward, inflexible and stubborn, but (...) modest and gentle, 1 Timothy 3.3.
passing by some injuries for peace sake, endeavoring to give all good content
that may be; and so far as may stand with a good conscience, 1 Cor. 9.20, 22.
1 Cor. 11.1.

4. An Host may not be a wine-bibber, or pot-companion; 1 Timothy 3.3. Tit. 1.7.
drink he may to his Guests, and with his Guests; but not quaffe, nor sit by
it. So Gods Ministers may not be (...), given to wine, under which one kind,
all other kinds of that nature are forbidden. He may use that creature for his
necessity; as 1 Timothy 5.23. Prove. 31.6. Yea and for delight too, John. 2. but he
may not sit at it till he be inflamed by it, Isa. 5.11. nor suffer his heart to
be oppressed thereby, and he made heavy for holy duties, Luke 21 34.

5. An Host may not be a fighter nor quarreller; nor may Gods Ministers. No
fighter; (...) (says S. Paul to Timothy) alienus a pugnis, a jurgijs. (...),
1 Timothy 3.3.
no striker, says the same Apostle to Titus; his duty is to heal wounds not
to make them.

6. An Host would not be covetous, Tit. 1.7.
nor greedy of gain, for then he would chop away a good conscience for money.
This vice as ill becomes a Minister, and therefore required (by the Apostle) as
a necessary qualification in him, that he be (...) no lover of money, (...) nor
given to filthy lucre, this ill beseemes any, much less a Minister. Thou o man
of God fly these things. 1 Timothy 3.2.


7. An Host must be harborous, ready to lodge and entertain strangers. Tit. 1
8.
This in a special manner is required of a Minister, he must be (...), a lover
of hospitality, as has been a ready showed, verse. 31.

8. An Host would be a lover of his good Guests, these should have the best
respect. Tit. 1.8.
So must a Minister be (...), a lover of good men, all should be respected,
but such as honor and fear the Lord should be preferred by him.

9. An Host would be wise, Tit. 1.8.
just, holy, temperate; And all these (which time will not suffer to speak of
particularly) are required of a Minister: He must be (...) a man of a sound
mind; And (...) a just and righteous person; giving every one their own: and
(...) a holy person: For God will be sanctified in all that come near him:
and he must be (...), a continent or temperate person, one that must master
himself and his appetite, and not suffer any inordinate lust to bear sway in
him.

10. To conclude, 1 Timothy 4.
an Host must be watchful, and give attendance. This S. Paul requires of
Timothy,(...), dum venio attend. And so of every other Minister who is willed
to be (...), watching even as the Host watches for a guest to invite him in,
and then attends on him and sees that he has all things fitting; so Ministers
for souls, Heb. 13.17.

Every one of us being as Travelers and strangers here on Earth and too too
often benighted; the shadow of death and darkness being stretched out upon us
before we be aware.

In such a case who would not think it a great part of his happiness to light
upon a good Inn and Host, at whose hand he may find good usage? So in a dark
tempestuous night, when the snares of death do compass us, and horror of
conscience has seized on us, no men's feet shall be more beautiful to us then
these men's, whose face in the day of prosperity we will not know.

But we beseech you brethren know them which labor amongst you, and are over
you in the Lord and admonish you: 1 These. 5.1^.
and see

First, That you esteem them very highly in love for their work and callings
sake. It may be (as Plato was wont to say of his Master Socrates) they are to
look upon, like the Apothecaries gally pots, which on the outside have Apes,
and Owls, and Satyrs on them but I must tell you, within they have precious
drugs for diseased persons, which every one will covet in time of need.

2. As they welcome you, so take you heed of grieving them, Heb. 13.17. For
that will be unprofitable for you; little care has the Host to visit such a
guest; rather glad when the house is well rid of him and the cost cleared.

3. Reward them; The Host is well paid by an honest Guest for all his pains;
and charges are honest^y defrayed, and the Host thanked for his good
entertainment at departure. So in this case it should be, 1 Cor. 11.13, 14. We
owe them much: how much? our goods, Gal. 6.6. our eyes, Gal. 4 15. our selves,
Phile. 19. our lives, Romans 16.4. In former ages Guests were better paymasters
then now they are, they would discharge what was owing, and be bountiful to
the Host and house besides but now we depart away out of our Inn, and leave
all on the score.

4. Give good testimony of them unto others: so does the good Guest of a good
Host, Romans 16.23. 2 John. 1.2. If ever you had received any good by Gods
Ministers, you would assuredly give a good testimony of them, as we read that
plain man did, 1 Cor. 14.24, 25. and Acts. 22.11.

5. Enquire of them as the traveller does of his Host, Hag. 2.12. Mal. 2.7.
about the way wherein you are not well acquainted. So Ier. 6.16. Thus did the
Disciples of our blessed Savior frequently, Mark 4.10 and 7.17. and 10.10.
John. 9.3. So the Corinthians of S. Paul, 1 Cor. 7.1, 10, 22.

6. Forsake them not: the traveller does still know his Host and Inn, Deuteronomy.
12.9.
and cannot easily be drawn away without special cause. In forsaking of thy
Minister see thou be able to approove thy heart to God upon good and
sufficient warrant, there is a brand laid on such as do, 2 Timothy 1.15. and 4.10,
16.

Duo denarij sunt duo Testamenta qua imaginem in se habent aeterni Regis
expressam, quoniam pretio vulnera nostra curantur. Amb. in loc.
Come we next to consider, what was left in hand with this Host, The Text says,

He took out two pence, and gave, etc.]

By the two pence, some understand the two Testaments: others the Word and
Sacraments. But we may safely take the meaning to be more large; and so
understand thereby whatsoever gifts Christ has furnished his Ministers
withal, whether they concern this life, or an other; So S. Austin ( de Quest:
Evang: lib. 2. q. 19.) seems to me to understand the meaning. Vel duo
Sacramenta: aut etiam duplicem doctrinam Legis and Evangelij, paenitentiae and
gratiae. Aret in loc.
It is evident enough,

Christ has betrusted his Ministers with gifts and graces, for the relief and
comfort of distressed souls, Mat. 25.14.

These gifts are of two sorts; Spiritual and Temporal. The Spiritual are
either Ouward, as the Word and Sacraments; these are put into their hands,
Math. 28.19. Or Inward, as the graces of the spirit, such as those spoken of,
Ephesians. 4.8, 12.

The Temporal gifts, we read of in the Law, Deuteronomy. 10.8, 9. Lev. 27.30.
compared with, Numb. 18.21. And in the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.4, 14.

Ministers beggarly and empty fellows. A Bishop (says Nazianzen) is not (...)
a vain and empty name, he is well furnished (if in traveling from Jerusalem
to Jericho he has escaped the Thief) at least it is intended he should so be.
Read, Math. 13.52. There you shall find he is a Rich House-houlder, and is able
(...) to tumble out of his treasury, (...), things new and old.

For we are debtors to you, (says the Apostle, Romans 1.14, 15.) You are apt
enough to make use of our temporals, but not of our spirituals. When you come
into the company of a Lawyer or Physician, you will be inquiring for your
selves, states, children, but the most use you make of some Ministers is, to
bury a corpse; Church (or rather chamber) your wives. Nor let any think to do
well enough without these, God gives his gifts to us through their hands. Luke
15.22. John Baptist must give water; or Christ will give no blood. There is a
necessity to wait upon them (though not Infallibilitatis yet ordinis) if you
would have comfort take it from their hands by whom God sends it. Romans 10.14.


With the two pence a charge is given.

Take care of him, and whatsoever thou spendest more,
So then, Beneficium postulat officium. As speaks the Lawyer, so the Divine,

Who so receives the gift must discharge the duty, Numb. 18 21, 31. Luke 19.13.
Mat. 10.2, 5. 1 Cor. 9.13, 14.

Churches penny. The Ministers reward they love, but care not for the work;
Opes they seek, Opus they shun. Such there are too many, who covet rather the
Churches goods, then the Churches good, which to receive and never labor for,
is horrible injustice (it being a reward and of right belonging only to such as
labor) as our Savior shows when he says, The labourer is worthy of his
hire.

Pensate Fratres (says S. Gregory super Ezekiel. Hom. 6.) quantae damnationis est
sine labor percipere mercodem laboris, quanti criminis precia peccatorum
percipere, and nihil contra peccata predicando dicere. Consider Brethren, how
great a damnation it is to receive the reward of labor without labor, how
great a fault to receive the price of sins, and by preaching to say nothing
against sin. See what God says in the case, Ezekiel. 34.2, 3.

Amongst others our Lay-Impropriators would do well to spend some serious
thoughts concerning the point in hand. True it is, some busy Lawyers may be
found, who question the tenure of Tithes, and will be ready to justify Simon
Magus (as says our Reverend Hooker. Pol. Eccles. lib. 5.. 79. page 249.) There
will be always some skillfull persons, which can teach a way how to grind
treatably the Church with jaws that shall scarce move, and yet devour in the
end more then they that come ravening with open months, as if they would worry
the whole in an instant, yet let these take advice of any who have wrote upon
this Argument, yea of him who has most pleaded for them, who in the Review of
his History of Tithes, says thus, Let him that deteines the Churches Tithes
and thinks them not due jure divino, thinks of the ancient dedication of them
made to holy uses; and how ever they were abused to superstition (as other
large endowments of the Church before the Reformation) yet it follows not that
they may be profaned by commen uses and Lay hands: Consult (says he) with
Divines herein: And withal he tells them what Judgments have followed such
appropiations; and wishes it might be seriously thought on by every Layman
that holds them.

The time of the Ancient Fathers was free from this corruption, Ridl view p.
145.
as yet it had got amongst them neither name or being, but what they would have
judged of it (if in their days it had bin) is not hard to conjecture. Read S.
Austins Sermon de reddendis decimis, there we shall find, Tubes are a debt, and
he that withholds them invades another man's goods, and how many men soever dye
for hunger in the place where he lives (not paying his Tithes) he shall be
counted guilty of the murder before the Tri^unall seat of the eternal Judge,
because he kept that back to his own use, De December chor. c. 12.
which was an others. And elsewhere he tells us, That our Righteousness
exceedes not the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, if we pay not our
Tithes, as they did. More of the Judgment of the Ancient Fathers, together
with the decrees of Counsels, inhibiting Tithes to be paid to Laymen, you
may read in Doctor Willets Synops. 5. Cont. quest. Doctor Carlion. c. 5. M.
Eburne. cap. 6. etc.

What is the Judgment of later Divines herein is evident enough. Where find we
one who has wrote concerning this Subject, but cries out against it, as the
blemish of our Church, the bane of our people; for which many thousands in an
high degree stand obnoxious to the judgment of Almighty God? Consult with
Doctor Howson, B. of Oxon. in his two Sermon. on Math. 22 Doctor Reynolds on
Ohadiah, Verse. 5, 6. who compares them to Achan, and their sin to that of
Anarias and Saphira, beseeching all young Gentlemen to keep themselves from
that abomination; Citing also B. Pilkington on Haggai, who calls these
Impropriations, because they be taken away improperly and held from the Church
by an improper title.

Read likewise Doctor Downhams Sermon, 1 Timothy 3.1. who prooves their Original
to be Antichristian, and them to be without excuse: Now, Quod initio vitio sum
est non potest tractu temporis convalescere. How Laymen became owners and
possessors of Tithes. See Doctor Field of the Church, Lib. 5. Cap. 59. Page
523. And Master Roberts Revenew of the Gospel. Cap. 11.

Doctor Hall B. of Exceter in his Sermon on Zach. 14.20. bewailes the injurious
zeal of these men, whom he aptly describes to be men of vast gorges and
insatiable, devouring up whole Churches, and yet the Sepulchers of their
throats are open for more, commending to all Impropriators or Church-Robbers a
good Example and Caveat in his Contemp. Lib. 21. On Zerubabell and Ezra.

Read also (if you please) M. Fentens Sermon of Simonie and Sacrilege: M.
Richard Bernard of the Ministers maintenance, M. Eburne on the same Subject, as
also his two Sermons on Math. 22.21. Doctor Sclater of the Ministers portion.
Doctor Iacksons Sermon on Cant. 2.15. M. Francis Dillingham his Sermon against
Simonie. M. Jeremy Dike his Sermon against Covetousness, page 56. We might
fill a Volume with Authors and Testimonies, I produce these few amongst those
who are well known and of note, all of them speaking in particular to
Impropriators of Church livings, as to those who stand deeply guilty before God
of Sacrilege.

etc?

Are all men liers, Is there not one Prophet of the Lord amongst us all? Here
than the opinion of such as are impartial. Consult with Sir James Simple his
Reply to M. John Seldons History of Tithes. Sir Henry Spelman de non temerandis
Ecclesijs, p. 119. who tells these men plainly that by taking these gifts
bestowed on the Church, they charge themselves with cure of souls and make
themselves subject to that burden that lies so heavily upon every Minister, to
see the service of God performed, people instructed and poor relieved; for
which three ends parsonages were instituted.

M. Lambart, a Lawyer of great note (in his Preamble of Kent) speaking of an
Impropriation in Kent, thus censures them, One amongst many of those monstrous
birthe of covetousness, begotten by the man of Rome in the dark night of
superstition, and yet suffered to live in the daylight of the Gospel, to the
great hinderance of learning, the impoverishing of the Ministry, and the
infamy of our profession, etc.

Judge Dier is quoted by Sir Henry Spelman (sometimes L. Chief Justice of the
Common pleas, Trin. 36. Hen. 8. fol. 58. pl. 3.) who averreth, that it was an
horrible thing when these Appropriations were made to Prioresses, and houses of
Nuns: for (although they were Religious persons) yet they could not administer
the Sacraments and Divine Service which they ought to do, who hold these holy
rites.

Serjant Rastal (another learned Lawyer, in his terms of the Law, in verbo
Appropriation) says, It is a wicked thing for a Layman to withhold Church
rites, bewailing (in his time) that it continued so long, to the hinderance
(says he) of learning, the impoverishing of the Ministry, and to the infamy
of the Gospel and professors thereof. And Sir Edward Cook another great Dr.
in the Law has reported, that by the common Laws of England, it is evident
that no man unless he be Ecclesiastical, or has Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction, can have inheritance of Tithes. Were this but the suggestion of
some few Clergy men, and those of the poorer sort, (Vicars of Churches and
such like) it might with some show be slighted (though the cry of the poor
ought to be regarded) Deuteronomy. 24.14. and 26.7. Romans 21.13. and 29.7, 14. But
since it is the complaint of so many; both of the superior sort of Clergy men
and others, who with one vote condemn it for a sacrilegious sin, it may justly
challenge mature deliberation. For Proximum sacrilegio crimen est quod
Majestatis dicitur (says Justin, leg. 1. de gest. ad legem Iuliam) Treason is
but a petty sin in comparison of it. S. Austin gives the Reason, tanto gravius
est peccatum quanto committi non potest nisi in Deum; that sin is so much the
more grievous, because it cannot be committed against any other but against God
himself. Alas that these men would consider how woeful and uncomfortable it
is to live in such a sin, as has none to plead, or speak any good word for it
before God nor man. And indeed who can? For,

First, these things have bin dedicated unto God and appropriated to himself as
his own peculiar portion from the beginning, and in whose power is it to
reverse them. The Law of the twelve Tables amongst the Romans of old decreed
thus, Sacrum sacrove commendatum qui clepsirit rapseritque parricida esto. He
that shall rob or purloyne an holy thing or a thing dedicated to an holy use,
let him be a parricide. And Solomon says, Who so robs his Father and mother
and says it is no transgression the same is the companion of a destroyer,
Prove. 28.24. that Tithes were consecrated to God is without contradiction: Now
how can thou (O Impropriatour) keep these back being once consecrated? M.
Dillinghams Sermon against Simony, p. 198


Secondly, where tithes are paid there must be a matter of giving and
receiving, Phil. 4.15. 1 Cor. 9.11. Stipenda Ecclesiastica accipiat, sed qui
Ecclesiae; militat m^tat and colligat, sed qui spargit and seminat, etc. says
Espencaeus in 2 Timothy 2. p. 24. Let him take the stipend of the Church, but he
which warreth for the Church: Let him reap and gather, but he which sows:
Let him feed of the flock, but he which feeds the flock, etc. The milk then
of the flock is due to him that by preaching feeds the flock, and not
otherwise. Now, Qua front, qua conscientia, etc. (says Damasus Decret. 3.)
with what countenance or with what conscience can you receive Tithes and other
Offerings (speaking of Laymen) who cannot offer up Prayers for your selves
much less for others.

B. King on Jonas ( Lect. 33. page 463.) averreth it to be against all equity
and conscience that Gods Tithes and Offerings should be translated unto
strangers, that they should eat the material bread of the Prophets, who never
give spiritual food unto the people, and that they who serve not at the Altar
should live by it.

That which the bad servant spoke to his good Master wickedly, thou reapest
where thou did not sow, may be charged upon these justly, we sow spiritual
things and they thrust their sickle into our Harvest to reap our temporal
things. M. Jeremy Dyke in his Sermon against covetousness, p 56


The world, says a reverend Divine, is wondrous busy about the disquisition
of the tenure of Tithes, by what right they are due; and many are cunninger
herein then in the maine fundamental Articles of their Religion: But in the
mean time there is this most necessary quaere forgotten, by what right
impropriators detain Church maintenance: Let that case be canvased in the
court of conscience, and if God shall there determine on their sides we have
done, much good do it them.

Object. Parcius ista, etc. Let us be sparing in thus charging men before we
hear them, they have nothing of Gods part or of his Ministers, but what their
Ancestors have left them, and which they dearly purchased and paid wel^ for?

Resp. Semel Deo dicatum non est ad usus humanos ulterius transscrendum dec. de
reg. Iuris 6. See House. Ser 1. on Math 22. p. 20. and Fen Sermon. on Prove. 20.25.
p. 15. and D. Down. Sermon on 1 Timothy 3.1
And were these Church revenews left you by your Fathers (says D. Smith.) Alas
so the holy vessels came to Belshazzar from his Father, and yet whilst he
profaned them after his pleasure the hand of God came forth against him end he
died for it, Dan. 5.2, 30. that we read, Ezekiel. 18.14. -- 19. would be thought
on for answer.

2. Say they were purchased by you or your Ancestors, and so bequeathed you,
what then? Caveat emptor, the buyer should have looked to that: He dealt not
fairly with you who sold you that he had no right unto. Read Levit 27.28. There
we shall find that nothing separate from a common use unto the Lord might be
sold: And will you deny that these were ever separated? Besides has not God
entailed them upon his Ministers? See Numb 18.21. and what man has power to
cut of the entaile which God has ratified?

Object. But many an honest Gentleman has an Impropriation in his hand,
Bishops and Colleges have many?

Resp. I grant you many an honest Gentleman may hold them in their hands, but
yet I must tell you, that it is no part of their honesty so to do. That answer
which Sir Richard Brarkley relates a Husbandman gave to the Archbishop of
Cullen may be in this case given. Felicity of ma lib. 2c: z, p. 90.


The Story is this, A poor Husbandman being in the fields at plough, spies a
great troop of horsemen, well armed passing by (after the manner of the
Princes of Germany) he asked of the for most who it was that was coming after,
and being told that it was the Archbishop of Cullen, he fell into a great
laughter, being asked why he laughed, he replied, because S. Peter the Prince
of Prel^tes lived poorly, to leave his Successors rich. The Archbishop being
told what this fellow said, was willing to justify himself, and coming to the
fellow told him that he wore those roabes and rode in that state not as he was
a Bishop, but as he was a Duke; then the fellow laughed more than before, and
answered, Cum damnatus fuerit Dux quid fiet de Episcopo? If the Duke shall
happen to go to Hell for his Pride, what will become of the humble Bishop? It
would be thought on.

For if the Impropriator should hap to go to hell for his sacrilege, what
would become of the honest Gentleman? For my own part I doubt not, but diverse
such God will show mercy unto upon their Repentance, but if after they come to
a knowledge of the truth, they withhold it in unrighteousness, and make not in
some measure restitution; little comfort can they take of the truth of their
Repentance.

In that other plea of the Lay-Improprietary from the example of Colleges,
Bishops, etc. They are no ably deluded through the deceit of their own hearts:
For all these are de familia Ecclesiae and ought to be sustained by the Church,
as Sir Henry Spelman says well; De non temertidis Eccl. p. 113
and that Reverend and learned D. Reynolds in his Comment on Obadiah, Ser. 2.
So that Tithes are quodammodo, the Churches still.

Kings have right to tithes, and it was an ancient custom for Kings to take
them, Vetustissimum suisse morem ut reges decimaret colligitur ex 1 Samuel 8.15.
Call in Number. 18.27 Resp.
as may be collected (says Calvin from 1 Samuel 8 15.) Now says the
Lay-Impropriator, of Kings we hold them.

Whether the Scripture does describe a Just King or a Tyrant is questionable:
Osiander tells us that Samuel there describes to the people the King which
God would give them in his wrath; and speaks of such manners and fashions
which are incident, not to true Monarchies, but such rather as decline to
tyranny, a d so shows not (says Pelican) what a good King may do, but what
this King would do.

Secondly, A King is not mere laicus, says our late Sovereign of blessed
memory, he is Persona mixta, (...) Sir Edward Cook de jure Regis. Eccl. pa. 5.
a person endowed as well with Ecclesiastical Authority as with Temporal. In
which respect both King and Priest of old were anointed with the same oil, (as
the Chalde Paraphrase on Zach. 4.11. has it) which was the holy oil, Psalm.
89.27. And (in these later days) at their Coronations they are not only
crowned with the Diadem of the Kingdom, and girt with the Sword of Justice (to
signify their temporal Authority) but they are anointed also with the oil
of Priesthood, and clothed Stola sacerdotali and vest Dalmatica, as Sir Henry
Spelman in his Tract of the Rights of Churches has demonstrated, p. 117. In
which respect he may (if his necessities require) partake with Levi in his Tyth
(as David did with the Priest in the Shewbread, 1 Samuel 11.6.) and Levi in duty
must yield him a portion, I say Levi yield it, for it must come through his
hand (says Sir James Sempell in his Treatise of Sacrilege, cap. 8.. 3.) for
the avoiding of Sacrilege.

Thirdly, the Tyth spoken of, 1 Samuel 8.15. which Kings used ordinarily to
receive was not Levi his tithe, but another tyth or tenth: After that Levi had
tythed the people, the King should tithe them over again (Thus M. Nettles in
his answer to the Jewish part of M. Seldons History of Tithes, c. 3.. 6. p. 127.

Fourthly, Though a King has power to tithe a people and to take for the
supplying of his necessities a portion of Levies tithe, yet he has not power
(says D. Smith in his addition to D. Willets Hex: in Levit. cap. 25. mor. 5.)
to transfer holy things to profane uses, he may not give them away to his
servants, nor alienate them from the Church to the Churches damage. So also
shows Keckerman, System: Polit. Lib. 1. cap. 21.

Concering such consecrated things, the beginning whereof was superstitious (as
Abbi-lands) which were given for the maintenance of Idolatry, D. Willet on Lev.
c. 5, obs. 5.
and redemption of men's souls, it is not to be doubted (say some) but that the
civell Magistrate has power to divert them to profane uses, as we read, 2
King. 10.27. But there is an other reason of tithes the proper inheritance of
the Church: These were from the first foundation of them dedicated to the
Ministry of the Word, and originally intailed by God upon his Ministers; now
neither the Pope nor King Henry the eight, can cut of an entaile (says Doctor
Smith on Levit. 27. mor. 4) which God has ratified.

To conclude this branch, I could wish that every Lay-Impropriator would
advisedly consider what has bin said, and know, how ever he conceives he has
nothing to answer for before Almighty God but Lay-vocation, yet he bath also
(by taking of the two pence) to make answer for spiritual function; for
Tithes, Transeunt cum onere, they carry their charge with them.

Secondly, forget not that admonition which is given by Lorinus in Levit.
27.30. Caveant hi, etc. Let these Laymen take heed, who have a grant of Tithes
upon this condition, that hereafter they must make restitution, least they be
involved in the punishment of eternal damnation.

Thirdly, Let such as have taken the houses of God in possession, or possess
his portion without his assignement, read those Plagues and Judgments
threatened, Psalm. 83.5, etc. against those who did but say, Let us take, etc.
And what in all ages has bin executed and inflicted on them who did take it,
read D. Howson, and D. Downham on this subject. And in your own observation you
may find the truth of that which Solomon speaks, See Dillingham Ser. on Ps.
14.1 p 113.
Prove. 20.25. Sacrilege is like Pope Adrians sly it will not suffer a man to
leave vomiting til it has gotten up his gall. Ex male quaesitis vix gaudet
tertius haeres.


Lastly, An answer would be studied to Saint Austins question, with what face
can thou expect an inheritance from Christ in Heaven, who have defrauded
Christ of his inheritance on Earth, Be not deceived, God is not mocked, thou
may have wit enough to befoole thy innocent Mother on Earth of her portion,
but with all thy subtilty thou shall never beguile thy Almighty Father which is
in Heaven.

We do but beat the air, these men still resolve to have the tenth of their
Neighbors estates, let their Salvation go whither it will; they will sooner
loose their lives then their livings, as an Impropriatour once rebelliously
spoke, when mention was made of our late Kings willingness in their
restitution: Latere prae abundantia non valet, and prae impudentia non quarit,
Bern. in Cant. Sermon. 33.
However Israel must know his Transgressions, and Jacob his Iniquities, and
such men hear of their Impropriations.

There is another whelpe of the same litter, the unconscionable tyther, or
common defrauder of the Ministers (remaining) dues, through their
unconscionable customs, false prescriptions, and unjust compositions. The
Ammonites had half our apparel before now through these new found out tricks,
the poor Minister is turned out naked, that little which the Canker-worme
left, the Caterpiller has eaten up.

Impropriations are at a stay (we trust) they cannot take from the Church
(says M. Eburne in his second Sermon on Math. 12 21. page 29.) more then
already they have (albeit many a greedy and sacrilegious minded person, elther
desires or attempts it) but these sort of persons do daily more and more
encroach upon the Church to the spoil and bane of it, the hinderance of the
Gospel and decay of learning.

There is scant a man of understanding, who lives in any Parish where the
tithes are impropriated (and such Parishes there are good store in England at
this day, if they be sum'd up aright) but does dislike, Of 9284. Parishes in
England 3845. are impropriated, of which number are within the province of Ca^
3303. and within the province of York, 592. Ca^d
yea disclaim against them (if his own hand be not in the sin.) Now thou that
blamest another do thou even the self same thing? For what are these
unconscionable customs, compositions, prescriptions, etc. but so many petty
and particular Impropriations? Change but the name the thing for substance is
the same; their ground and original is vicious, and the fruits and effects to
the Church most pernicious; as I have on that Parable, Luke 18.10. at large
discovered. I will conclude this Discourse with the report of a great and
learned Lawyer of this Kingdom. Sir Ed Cook. 2 part of his Reports, fol 44.
It is recorded (says he) in History, that there were (amongst others) two
grievous persecutions, the one under Dioclesian, the other under Inlian the
Apostata; Eusebius. Eccl. hist. l. 7. c. 3.
the former intending to root out all Religion, Occidit omnes Presbyteros, he
slew all the Preachers of the Word of God; notwithstanding this, Religion
flourished, for, Sanguis Martyrum est semen Ecclesiae. This Persecution was
grievous: But that under the other was more grievous and dangerous, Niceph. l.
7. c. 3
Quia ipse occidit Presbyterium, he destroyed the order of Priesthood it
self, Theod. hist l. 3. c. 6. and Niceph l. 10. c. 5.
whilst he robbed the Church, and spoiled spiritual persons of their revenews:
Upon which insued in short time great ignorance of true Religion, and the
service of God, and thereby great decay of Christian Profession. Ah vile shame;
whilst Hagar complains of her mistresses persecution, she should carry her
self so insolently: Whilst our Laity complain of the Prelates and the
Priests, they indeed are found to be the greatest persecutors that this day
England has.

More Particularly. From the History we may collect,

Good Hosts should be careful of their Guests.

We read, Josh. 2.2, 6. of Rahab who having once taken charge of the Spies, she
discharged the part of a good Innkeeper, and took great care that no hurt
might befall her guests, hiding them from death with the stalks of that plant
which was made to hide the body from nakedness and shame; and for this she is
commended, Heb. 11.31. Such a good Host was Lot, Genesis 19.6, 7, 8. and Obadiah,
1 King. 18.13.

Profession. Unto these men do no harm (said Lot unto the Sodomites) for
therefore came they under the shadow of my Roof, Genesis 19.8. Yea, he rather
chooses to be an ill Father, then an ill Host, he tenders his daughters to save
his Guests (a faulty offer though a good intention.)

Beda makes mention of an Inn in Arabia, the Host whereof was a notorious theife
and robber, Beda. de imag. mundi.
and did use to bring those passengers he meant to spoil into a goodly Room,
richly adorned with curious pictures and hangings, wherein was a soft bed to lie
upon and delightful to behold, but both the Chamber and Bed were anointed
with deadly poison, in such sort that the infection did slay the Guests before
the morning and whilst they were a sleep: But Gods Judgments slept not, for
within a short time the house was fired by Lightning, and both it and the
Keepers were consumed to ashes.

If we have no such Hosts in England, yet we have heard of some Guests, who
have had their threats cut in their Inns by the consent of Host and Hosters;
and of many more who have had their bane through infectious beds and rooms
poisoned with drunkenness and disorders. I could wish all would take warning
by judgments inflicted upon others; vengeance will not suffer wicked Hosts to
live.

The Heathen had a private and domestical god, whom they termed the god Lar,
which in our language we may interpret, the god of the hearth: Him they held in
such reverence, that if any had sled to the hearth, albeit in the house of his
capital Enemy, yet his Enemy durst not there offer him any violence (by this
means Themistocles the Athenian was saved.) For the hearth was dedicated to the
Goddess Vesta, who was held to have her holy place, where the chief fire of
the house was made: If then no Violence might be offered to our very Enemy
flying to our hearth; much less to those who come Guest-wise under our roof
for succor.

Mystery. Ministers should hence learn, To be careful of those flocks
committed to their cure and charge, Ephesians. 4.11. Ezekiel. 33* ^. Heb. 13.17. 1.
Cor* 3 8, 10.
Act. 20.28. 1 Pet. 5.2. 1 Timothy ^.1.5. and 2 Epist 4.1, 2. Hence are we called
Pastors, Shepherds, Watchmen, Rulers, Planters, Builders, Fishers,
Husbandmen, etc. All which Titles require of us great diligence and careful
attendance.

maintenance is upon this condition, that we work and labor, 1 These. 5.13. 1 Timothy 5.17. Hence Saint Paul acknowledges it a Debt, Romans 1.14. into which debt
he came by his Calling, and the gifts that God bestowed on him for the
Ministry of the Word. Saint Cyprian speaks thus: Debere Presbyteros tanquam
decimas accipientes ex fructu non recedere ab altar, sed nocte dieque
spiritualibus inservire. Epist 66.
Ministers as being receivers of Tithes of the increase ought not to retire
from the Altar, but night and day to attend upon spiritual things.

Ministers transgress who reap the Profits of a place and perform not the
duty thereto belonging, who sheare the Sheep but feed not the Flock: And
indeed they fail in a very high degree: Woe to the idle Shepherd (says
Ezekiell) that leaves the Flock, the sword shall be upon his arm, and his
right Eye shall be utterly darkened. A practice that cannot stand with the love
we pretend we bear to Christ, and which is expected from us, John 21.15.
Love thou me; feed my sheep: Upon which words Saint Gregory thus infers,
Si dilectionis Argumentum est cura pastoralis, quisquis virtutibus pollens
gregem Dei renuit pascere, summum pastorem convincitur non amare; If care and
diligence in a pastoral charge be an argument and certain evidence of the
love we bear to Christ, whosoever furnished with gifts and abilities thereunto
refuses to feed Christ's flock, is to be taken, pro convicto, that he bears
no good affection to the chief Pastor of our souls.

Nor can negligence and unnecessary absence of a Minister stand with that true
love he ought to bear unto his Flock. Then especially does the Devil sow his
tares, whilst the Husbandman is a sleep, then are the Sheep apt to straggle
and run into many dangers whilst the shepherd is from amongst them; Moses was
not above forty days away, but upon his return, he finds his people
worshipping a golden calfe which they had set up, Exodus 31.1.

Nor can this Practice stand with the Laws of Princes and Decrees of
Counsels, which even the darkest time of ignorance have made diverse Cannons
and Constitutions charging a Minister with Residence, as Conc. Antioch. Can.
17. Conc. Sardi. 14. Can. Si qui^ vult, etc. Did. 39. Conc. Calsid. Can. 10.
Conc. Trid. Sess. 7. cap. 8.

Quest. Is there then no just and lawful cause, for a Ministers absence? Is he
so tied to reside upon his cure as that upon no occasion he may absent himself
from his people for a while?

Resp. Valentia with others do observe, that this Commandment of Residing is
praeceptum affirmativum, and so binds not semper or ad semper, nor may it be
laid in the balance stripped from those necessary material circumstances, which
should give it wait: There may be certain cases which may excuse Ministers
absence for a time.

1. Wh^^ it is, Pro vita and viatico, for recovery of health, preservation of
life and necessary mainetenance.

For Recovery of health, this staid Epaphroditus from the Church of the
Philippians: As soon as he was recovered he was sent by S. Paul, Phil. 2.25,
28. So Sylvanus Bishop of Philopolis in Thracia, being of a very sickly
constitution was remooved thence to Troas a hotter Climate, as we read, Socrat.
lib. 7. cap. 37. Thus if a Pastor be sick in body, and the place where he
lives unfit for his Recoverie, it would be hard-heartednesse in a Flock (as
Moscouius notes) to bar the Physician of their souls the use of lawful means.

For Preservation of life: Say a Pastor be personally sought for and cannot
remain with his flock without peril of his life, in this case it is lawful
for him to absent himself. So Elijah fled from Iesabell, 1 King. 19. and S.
Peter left the Church of Jerusalem to escape Herod's fury, Act. 12. And S. Paul
left the Church of Damascus when some sought to lay hands on him and slay him
Act. 9. So Athanasius left his Church at Alexandria and was hid in a dry
Cisterne six years and in his Fathers too be four mouths, and makes this
Apology for himself. Quis mihi mirabiliter and divinitus erepto vitio vertat,
Tripart hist* l. 6 c. 22.
quod non in manus me quaerentium rejecerim? etc. Who can blame me being
miraculously delivered, that I did not cast my self into their hands that
sought me? Our Savior wished his Disciples, when they were persecuted in one
City to sly into an other, Math. 10.

But here S. Austins caveat (in his 18. Epist.) to Honoratus must be observed.
The Persecution must be Personal not General; for a general persecution
(both of Pastor and flock together) is likened by that Father to the equal
danger of Mariners and Merchants in the same Ship in a great tempest: Now God
forbid (says he) that the Master leaving his passingers behind should save
himself by boat and commit the Vessel to the mercy of the unmercifull waves.
Such a Minister is compared by our Savior to an hireling, Ioh. 10.

For, necessary maintenance. Nature allows that a man should keep himself from
hunger and unrelieved penury. D. Den. expos* on 2 Pet. c. 1 verse 1, p 122
So S. Paul, 2 Cor. 11.8. And indeed it is a kind of Persecution to mussle the
Ox which treads out the Corn. In case of want a Minister may lawfully leave
this or that particular Congregation and take another.

So when a Minister is to give attendance in some Courts of Justice, where he
is impleaded; or has some necessary suit in Law depending, which requires his
personal presence and appearance: In this case Councels have by their Canons
grated liberty for a Minister to absent himself a while from his people.

2. As a Paestour may be absent in these and such like private cases: So when
the business about which he goes is more public and tends to the Profit
either of the Universal Church, or of some Particular.

Campcius, Moscomus and others which write upon this Subject do reduce hereto
the going to Generallor Particular Synods for compounding differences: Writing
against the Churches adversaries, and such like profitable employments.

Thus S. Ambrose, Sermon. 28. makes his Apology to his People, Alterius
Ecclesiae necessicatibus evocatus minime vobis solitum studium dependisse
videor, being called forth by the necessary business of another Church, I seem
not to have bestowed on you my wonted care. There are other cases which might
be alleged, but this shall serve for the first answer to the Quare.

2. We must distinguish of Residence: It is two fold, Personal or Pastoral:
Not so much the former as the latter is required, jure divino.

Some are Personally resident, but not Pastorally; urgent Occasions, public
Attendance, and such like before spoken of requiring their absence, they feed
their Flock immediately themselves so often as they can, and mediately by
others when themselves cannot. Thus Timothy to whom S. Paul had committed the
Church of Ephesus, went to establish the Church in Dalmatia, and Titus who was
Bishop of Crete, was upon an occasion sent for to come to Rome, 2 Timothy 4. but
yet so, that neither Titus left his flock unprovided of many instructours,
which before he had ordained there; nor Ephesus wanted Tychicus (as Calvin
observes) who was sent unto them to supply Timothies ro^me. This kind of
Residence is that which is especially required.

Some are neither Pastorally nor Personally resident, such have much to answer
for before Gods Tribunal: If any go about to withold their Tithes or other
Ecclesiastical dues, they straight ways cry out of Sacrilege, when they
themselves in the mean while are by CHRIST'S own testimony Thieves and
Robbers, wronging Gods Flock by their wicked customs.

Some are both Pastorally and Personally resident, he that can receive this,
let him receive it. In all ages such have bin most honored and best liked; in
brief seeing there is a care which God expects of every man that has a Flock,
let us discharge it conscionably and not suffer the grace bestowed on us to be
in vain: 1 Cor. 15 c
As for those whom either service or great employments call away, let them with
the Apostle though they be absent in the flesh, yet be present in spirit,
knowing that a hirelings negligence shall not excuse him, if the wicked be not
warned from his way.

Secondly, Observe we from hence (with S. Bernard)

That all that is required of this Host is care; Petitur a vobis cura non
curatio, he says not, ^^rn. de Consid. l. 4.
Sana illum, Heal him, Sed curam illius habe, Take care of him.

Non est in medico semper relevetur ut aeger.

The Physician may prescribe the potion, it is God that must give the blessing:
So shows the Apostle, 1 Cor. 3.7.

Prophets a charge to preach, when before hand he has told them that their
words would not be received by those who heard them, Ier. 7.27. Ezekiel. 2.3, 4,
7. He that planteth would willingly eat of the fruit he sets; and he that
sows reap; and he that administreth Physic, desires that it may kindly work
and effect that which is intended; but if the succesle be not answerable to our
hopes, we may not faint, Nullus doctor est dator boni quod docuerit (says S.
Bernard) we may be doctores gratia, but datores we cannot be, we may teach but
we cannot give. Rebecka may cook the Venison, Isaac must bless it. If Rachel
be barren, Jacob is not God to give her children.

Not is our labor lost; whether our people profit, or profit not, we shall
have our fee, Isa. 49.4. We are a sweet savor to God, not only in them that
are saved, but in them that perish, 2 Cor. 2.15. Hence it is that those
messages which have contained nothing in them, but curses against an obstinate
people, have yet bin as honey in the mouths of them that brought them, Ezekiel.
2.10. and 3.3. As the Physician (then) omits no point of his art (though the
recovery of his patient be desperate, and (it may be) dies under his hand) no
more should we; but still be diligent and careful; remembering what follows in
the Text,

Whatsoever thou spendest more, when I come again I will repay thee.
A promise is annexed (to encourage us) that whatsoever should be laid out,
about supply of the wounded man's necessities, should be discharged. From the
History we gather,

Suretiship is lawful. Or, It may be a work of charity to pass our words for
them that are in extreme necessity and misery.

Read, Genesis 42.37. and 43.9. Philemon verse. 18. Acts 17.5, 8, 9. David with an
holy boldness desires this favor from the hands of God, that he would be
surety for his servant, Psalm. 119.122. Had it been a thing absolutely
unlawful. surely that Princely Prophet would not have been so bold that way
with God. And such was Gods unspeakable goodness as to hear him, and to do
it for him, and not for him alone, but for all mankind. Heb. 7.22.
Had not the Son of God become surety for us, how had the hand writing
against us ever been cancelled or blotted out? He paid the things he never
took, Psalm. 69.5. Amb. de Tob. c. 9.
Qui nihil debebat pro omnibus solvebat (says S. Ambrose) He that owed nothing
paid for all.

Prove. 6.3. and 17.18.

Solomon, but rash and unadvised suretiship. Whosoever thinks no more belongs
to suretiship, then passing of the word, or clapping of the hand, shows
himself to be a man destitute of understanding; and which in a while, may
wring those hands in sorrow, which before he did clap in joy: and with the same
hand strike himself in anger, wherewith in a foolish kind of suretiship he
struck the hand of another.

The wicked will not become surety, and he that is of an unthankefull mind, for
saketh him that delivered him, Eccles. 29.18.
and who is he that if he had not had a surety, had not been still a debtor to
destruction?

Object. But he that hates suretiship is sure, says a wiser then he, Prove.
11.15. Adi forum and inter litigantium frequentias, nihil frequentius auditur
quam sponsionum pericula, and sponsoris suspiria, Go to the courts of Law and
in the frequency of those that follow causes, there is nothing heard more
frequently then the dangers of suretiship, and the sighs of him that is a
surety (says one) And Clemens Alexandrinus cites the saying of one of the
wise men of Greece, sponde, noxa prasto est; be surety for another and be sure
that harm is near thee.

So that (as some say of dice, the best cast is to cast them clear away) the
best surety is not to be surety at all.

Resp. All this comes through the abuse of what is in it self lawful. As S.
Paul speaks of the Law, 1 Timothy 1.8. So may we of Suretiship; It is good if it
be used lawfully, else hurtful and prejudicial. It is a point in which a man
may on either hand miscarry, either by an over great forwardness to wrong
himself, or by an over great backwardness in helping others. Wherefore the
Cautions given in the practice of this point, would not be forgotten.

They have respect,

1. To the Person for whom we are bound. See Master Dan Dyke in his Com. on
Phile. v. 18. p. 177.
2. To the Person to whom we are bound. 3. To the Person himself that is
bound, and becomes Surety.
For the first, the Person for whom we become Surety must be no stranger, Prove.
11.15. and 20.16. and 27.13. He that is Surety for a stranger (says Solomon)
shall smart for it: and thereupon he inferrs, He that hates Suretiship ( viz.
for such Persons) is sure, that is he is free from that trouble which such a
rash and credulous engagement brings with it. It is therefore requisite,

1. That we know his Person: Say the man be such a one as a man may safely
undertake for, yet it follows not that we should undertake for him, not
knowing who he is: This is too much rashness and may bring us woe.

2. We must know then, as in the Face so in the Faith: He is a Stranger in
Salomons account, who is not religious and pious. Who so is a stranger from the
Common wealth of Israel is the greatest stranger in the world; Nor is it a
strange thing for such a stranger to leave us in the lurch, who so is false to
God will be true to no man.

3. We should not be a stranger to the cause: Whither that be lawful would be
inquired into: He that undertaketh for a bad matter may be suspected to be
little better than an accessory. We read, Genesis 38.17, 18 Judah promised Thamar
a Kid of the Goats for the unlawful use of her body: Had it bin fit for any
to become surety for Judah, had Thamar required it? Surely, as the Leprosy of
Naaman did cleave to Gehazi: So the sin of the Creditor would cleave to the
Surely in such a case.

4. The Ability of the Person: Whereby he is able to discharge us of what we
undertake for him, would be likewise known. There is (says Solomon) who
makes himself rich having nothing, Prove. 13.7. Fair shows and large promises
will not bring out of those snares and nets which Suretiship commonly brings a
man into, Pro. 6.1.

For the second, the Person to whom we become bound, he would be no stranger
neither. Prove. 6.1. True it is, the Surety is to make account to pay the debt
(or see it paid) unto the Creditour, be he what he will be, yet it is more
comfortable to deal with a religious then an irreligious person, what ere
should happen, Mat, 18 Say (through default in the Principal) thou that art
the Surety comes to be arrested; whilst thou art in the snare of a cruel
Creditor, thy Profession comes to be arrested likewise. A wicked worldling
flies upon thy Profession strait. This is the man that was so precise and
strickt, does such rashness and unadvisednesse beseem the Clients of the
Gospel? For our own comfort and the credit of the Gospel we should take heed
with whom we strike hands.

Lastly, Concerning our selves who pass our words or enter into bonds for
others; two things would be considered of us.

1. The Sum for which we are to be obliged.

2. Our own willingness and ability to discharge the Sum without impairing
thy estate, overthrowing of thy Family and undoing thy Posterity for ever.

Confider well the Sum: Tell it over (as it were) in ready money, look well upon
it, and think if thou should part with so much, whither it would not break
thy back, undo thy Family, cause thee and thine all thy life long after to live
most uncomfortably. Eccles. 8.13.
It is a wise saying of the Son of Syrach. Be not surety above thy power: For
if thou be Surety think to pay it. Every Surety that undertakes for an other
makes the debt his own and stands in conscience charged with it, Gen 44.32, 33.
And the Creditor oftentimes relies more upon the sufficiency of the assurer
then upon the honesty of the borrower. Now if thou have nothing to pay (says
Solomon, Pro. 22.27.) be not thou of them that strike hands, nor amongst them
that are Surety for debts, why causest thou that he should take thy bed from
under thee: By taking Suretiship upon thee thou do (as it were) put thy self
under the Creditour and make thy self to be the bed upon which his trust does
rest. If by not paying thou take from the Creditour the bed of his Rest, it
is but just for him to take away thy bed from under thee for payment.

To conclude this point remember that of Solomon, Prove. 27.12. A Pru^ent man
foreseeth the evil, viz. of rash Suretiship (for that is joined in the verse
immediately following) and hides himself by a wise refusal; But the simple
pass on rashly and carelessly, and are punished with the loss of goods and
garments. Be no longer foolish least your bonds increase upon you.

In the Mystery observe we,

Whatsoever Gods Ministers shall lay out (about the wounded man's necessities)
more then they have here received, Christ has undertaken to see it
discharged.

In the Parable of the Pounds and Talents, Luke 19.12 Math. 25.14. This is
evident. The stock is given to the Servant, but what is acquisite and through
the industry of the servant obtained and thereto added shall be plentifully
rewarded by the Lord.

If we search the Court-rooles of holy Writ, we shall find none have such large
Promises made for provision and protection as Gods Ministers. For Provision,
Read Deuteronomy. 10.8, 9. Where we see how God in a special manner undertakes to
provide for Levi, for that he is separated to his service. So under the Gospel
Christ has passed his word to us, Math. 10.10. And for Protection, Read Psalm,
132.16. I will cloth her Priests with Salvation (says the Lord) So Ier. 1.18.
and Revel. 2.1. These Stars are held in the right hand of Christ: Who is able
to pluck them thence?

wounded man's Surety, power in wine and oil, spare not: God has said he will
repay us again, and will do it to the full.

Who is there amongst us that did ever shat the doors of Gods Temple for
naught, or kindle a fire on Gods Altar for naught? Mal. 1.10. Wherefore we need
not be grieved nor discomforted with the measure we receive from the world.

As for the men of this world they will not repay us lay out what we will, they
set us not on work they say: If you can dress a Horse, or drench a Cow, set a
bone or heal some bodily disease; you shall be well paid for your pains and
have thanks: But Ministers are Physicians of noe value, little set by.

Yea so far are many from repaying us our charge as that they hate and spoil
us so much the more for our pains. Amara est veritas, Hier. cont. Iov. l. 2.
and quisquis eam praedicat amaritudine satiabitur (says S. Hierom.) The truth
is bitter and who so preaches it shall be filled with bitterness. See it in
Ieremiahs case, Ier. 11.7, 19. and in Micaiabs, 2 Chronicles. 18.7. and in S. Paul's
case, Gal. 4.16. the more we cast holy things before Dogs and Pearls before
Swine, the more are we rent and torn by them, but.

Tu ne cede malis, sed contra audentior ito. Indeed the men of this world are
not able to repay us, if they had a mind thereto: We labor about the Salvation
of their souls and endeavor to bring them unto God. Now what can a man give
in exchange for that?

It was a saying of old amongst the Heathen, that no man could make a
sufficient requital to God, to his Father who begot him, nor to his Tutor who
taught him humane learning: O what does a man owe then to his Minister who
instructs him in the Mystery of Christ? Surely they owe themselves, as S. Paul
tells Philemen, verse 19.

Cast we then our eyes from off man, and though our entertainment from them be
course and slender, yet behold we another Master, another day, another payment,
and let us comfort our selves herewith.

Sed quando reverteris Domine, etc. (says S. Ambrose) when will thou returno o
blessed Lord? In die Iudicij redibit Dominus (says Saint Bernard) at the Day
of Judgment he comes again, and then will he repay us as he has promised,
Matthew 25. So then,

Not here in this life must Gods Ministers look for their Reward, but
hereafter in Heaven: It must be expected when Christ comes again. See Math.
5.12. 1 Pet. 5.4. 2 Timothy 4.8. Dan. 12.13. Rev. 11.18. Mat. 20.8.

Hic jugulantur Haretici (say the Papists) qui mercedem bonorum operum negent,
the Heretics throat is here cut, which deny the reward of good works, etc.

But those Heretics they mean, First acknowledge a reward due to good works,
Heb. 11.6. Secondly, that this Reward shall be according to the proportion of
their goodness, as we lay out we shall receive, Dan. 12.3. 2 Cor. 9.6.
Thirdly, that it is lawful in serving God and suffering for him, to do it
intuitu mercedis, with an eye to the recompense of reward, Heb. 11.10, 26, 35.
and 12.2. Yet that may not be respected, solum and praecipue, only or chiefly.
Nolo ad praemium diligere Deum (says S. Austin) ipse sit pr^mium tuum. In
Evang. Joan tract. 2.
God himself must be our reward. And to love him only, or principally for the
rewards sake is too mercenary: He is to be loved without it (says S. Bernard)
yet served he may be sincerely with an under respect unto it.

Nevertheless, that Axiom of theirs, Bellar. de justific. l. 5.
that merces and meritum are Relatives, we disclaim; that merces and opus are,
we grant them. A Relation there is betwixt a Reward and Work, or reward and
promise, but not betwixt a reward and merit. God rewards our works yet not for
any merit in them, but of his own free mercy: It is a reward of Grace not of
Debt (the Apostles own distinction, Romans 4.4.) Donum liberalitatis, non
stipendium virtutis (says S. Ambrose) a reward proceeding from the benignity
of the Rewarder, not from the dignity of the rewarded. I have heard (says
David) that power belongs to God, and that thou Lord art merciful, for thou
rewardest every man according to his work, Psalm. 62.12. Saint Paul expected a
crown, but what crown, not that which he had merited, but that which God had
promised, Rhem. in loc. (...) non fignificat agere quippiam supra praeceptum
sed erogare quod ultra duos denarios in praesenti traditos, Muthes in loc.
and which for his promise sake he would bestow on him, 2 Timothy 4.8.

Much less can we approove of their collection from this place (and such
other) that a man may supererogate in doing more then he needed or is bound to
do. The word will not help them in the Text, nor that of S. Austin, who
though he speaks of S. Paul's supererogating, yet he explaines himself in the
whole Chapter, he serving, as Christ's soldier, without taking wage, (as he
might) supererogated more then ^he Churches could require of him; but not more
then the Lord either could or did. And for Optatus (whom they likewise allege)
his applying this Parable to S. Paul's counsel of Virginity, 1 Cor. 7. as to a
work of supererogation; he so expounds himself as that he serves nothing to
the Jesuits purpose: For expounding the two pence to be the two Testaments, he
shows that the other is no Commandment fully laid out, giving us thereby to
understand that it is so a counsel that it is also a commandment, although
not so expressed and laid out as the two pence given to the Host, but reserved
in the deck until circumstances draw it forth. And S. Chrysostom in his
Exposition of this Parable acknowledges that the governor of the Church can
bestow no more then is contained in the Gospel; what is it then that the
Governor can bestow more then he has received? But that which is his own
duty, in which he is bound to endeavor that he lay out that which is committed
to him; In his Judgment then (on this place) no works of supererogation can be
done: Sure I am, our Savior our has thus determined the Point: Luke 17.10.
So likewise ye when ye have done all that ye can do, say we are
unprofitable Servants. But to come something closer home.

reward to be expected here, must we stay for that till Christ comes again?
Why then with Patience possess we our selves: God has not left us altogether
destitute; whilst he is absent, we have some salarie or stipend, some
comfortable allowance for the present (though the unthankefull world do their
best (or worst rather) to cozen us of it) Who goes a warfare (says the
Apostle) at his own charge, who planteth a vineyard and eats not of the
fruit thereof? Or who feeds a flock and eats not of the milk of the flock?
1 Cor. 9.7. But our chief pay is behind, that is reserved for us till Christ's
second coming, he shall bring it with him

Object. But it is a long while thither?

Resp. How know you that? Say it be, Heaven will pay for all; not an hour that
you have waited; not a night that you have watched; not a drop of oil that you
have wasted; not a tear that you have shed; not a penfull of ink that you
have spent, but shall be fully recompensed with no less than a Crown and
Kingdom, so that you have little cause to whine and make complaints of his
long tarrying.

You know what is related of Alexander the great, he passing into Asia, gave
large donatives unto his soldiers, and being asked by Parmenio what he would
leave for himself, he answered Hope, saying withal, that he preferred the
riches of Asia hoped for, before all that his Father Philip left him in
Macedonia. Let us make the like answer to men of this world, who ask us what
is left (when they have stripped us naked through their corrupt and
unconscionable customs, etc.) Heaven still is reserved, for us that they
cannot Impropriate to themselves, and this we prefer^e before all that they
have bought so dear with their souls loss.

The sweetness of the honey makes the Bear to despise the sting of the Be.
The sweetness of these thoughts would make us pass little what men say or
do: Read, Math. 5.12. Heb. 11.36 -- 40. I end this with that of Saint Ambrose.
Beati quibus es debtor: Vtinam nos simus idonei debitores, utinam quod
accepimus possimus exolvere. Happy is that servant whom his Lord when he comes
shall find well doing.

Which now of these three,
We are come to the Conclusion of the Parable, and therein consider we,

First the Question made by our Savior.

Secondly, the Answer made by the Lawyer unto the Question.

Before we come to the Particulars, it will not (I suppose) be amiss, to
observe something in the General.

The sweetness and benignity of God in composing himself to the disposition
of man: As face answers face (according to Salomons Proverb) so does he apply
himself to the humors and several affections of men so far as may be.

Christ might have proceeded to sentence without Bill and Answer, but he was a
Lawyer he had to deal withal, and therefore propounds a Quaere.

Thus he called the wise Astronomers of the East by a Star, Mat. 2.10. Luke
5.6. Joh. 20.15. Luke 24 16.
he drew Fishermen to him by a draught of Fish. To Mary in the Garden, he
appears like a Gardener. To the Disciples traveling, he appears like a
Traveller, etc.

Beloveds does thus woe us, how inexcusable are we if he does not win us? God
does allure us by our own delights, and take us in our own ways and studies:
What we most affect in Earth or Heaven, he makes a bait to take us with, and
that not for any need that he has of us, but for our own Salvation.

Quibus exemplis doctores Evangelij monentur, etc. (says Muscul. in Mat. 4.)
by which Examples the Preachers of the Gospel are admonished to become all
unto all that they may win some: Not only as S. Paul, Qui omnibus ingenijs se
accomodavit, who did apply himself to the capacities of all hearers, but even
as this our Text-Master (who spoke as never man spoke) in framing our selves to
all men's knowledge and natures.

Secondly, observe we,

The profit of this practice in questioning about things taught and heard. Had
not this bin a profitable way of teaching our Savior would not have bin so
abundant in it: Ipse Christus Catechista, Christ's preaching was a Catechizing
(says Canisius that great catechizer amongst the Papists.)

I know not then, why any should slight this course of Catechizing as childish
and unprofitable.

The slight answer of men betraies them (as a Reverend Divine observes well)
ask them if their Minister did preach to day, they answer, no, he did but
catechize; Dan. Rogers his pract. Cate the Epist to the Reader.
not considering that the laying on of the foundation skilfully is a matter as
of greatest importance (it bearing up the whole though it make least show) so
is it the Masterpeece of the wisest builder, 1 Cor. 3.10. And let the
learnedest try even when they please (says that Reverend Archbishop of
Armath) and they shall find that to lay the ground work rightly (that is to
apply our selves to the common capacity of vulgar auditory, and to make an
ignorant man understand the Mysteries of Religion in some good measure) will
put them to the trial of their skill a great deal more then if they were to
discuss a controversy or handle a subtle point of learning in the Schools.

In the Primitive times there were Catechumenoi, such as received instruction
by word of mouth in the fundamental Articles of the Christian Religion (the
heads we have laid down, Heb. 6.1, 2, 3.) and that was catechizing. The
necessity of which course they well discerned, and therefore they instituted a
particular Office, a calling in the Church of Catechisers. This Office Optatus
exercised at Carthage (as we find in S. Cyprians 42. Epist.) And Origin at
Alexandria: Clemens Alexandrinus (that great man) was such a Catechist. Why
then should any man (be he never so great a Scholar) think it suits not with
his credit or learning to stoop thus low, as to teach the rudiments?

Nos hoc munus suscipimus (says Canisius) we make Catechizing our Profession,
and in that Profession (says he) we have S. Basil, S. Augustine; S. Ambrose,
S. Cyrill in our Society: In that indeed they have as Catechisers, but go no
further; for as they are Jesuits those Fathers leave them. He goes on, Si
nihil alind, etc. If nothing else, yet this alone should provoke us to a greater
diligence in Catechizing, that our Adversaries the Protestants do spend so much
time in Catechizing. Di Dun on Jud. 5.20. p. 57.
It seems this was our use and in intermitting it, we intermit one of our best
advantages. The diligence and care therefore of authority can never be
sufficiently commended in taking order, that the Catechism should in our
ordinary Ministry be diligently propounded and explaned unto the people
throughout the Land, which we have cause to wish were as duly executed every
where, as it was piously intended, which being wisely and conscionably done
would be soon found to be more profitable then preaching without Catechizing:
For let us preach (says D. Usher) never so many Sermons unto our people, our
labor is but lost, so long as the Foundation is unlaid and the first
Principles untaught upon which all other doctrines must be builded.

Come we now to the Particulars, And first of the Question.

Which of these think thou was Neighbor to him that fell amongst Thieves?
Here we have, First, The Subject matter of Christ's demand.

Secondly, the Lawyers Opinion concerning it considerable.

The Subject about which the case is put is true Neighborhood.

Which of these was Neighbor, etc.]
Quest. But what is this you will say to the Point in hand? For the Question
propounded by the Lawyer, ver. 29. was this, Who is my Neighbor? Not, who am I
neighbor too?

Resp. Neighbor is a name of Relation and signifies both him that does help
as also him that is helped: Now our Savior in this answers fully, showing that
our enemies are our Neighbors of what nation or condition soever: As also that
those noted Samaritans were better Neighbors, than the Jews (what ever was
pretended) in that they were more ready to succor a wounded Jew, then the
Jews to succor a distressed Samaritane. And so he purposely turns his answer
this way, the better to inform the Lawyer of his duty, and the more fully to
instruct him in the point.

That we observe is this,

Who is a man's Neighbor is a thing questionable. A man may very well make a
case of it, and that in two respects especially.

First, in regard of the many false and corrupt Glosses put upon the Text by
Pharisees, and such like, who took him only for a Neighbor, who was near in
friendship, and wished well unto them; whence they collected that it was a
thing lawful for them, to hate their enemies, Math. 5.23. But that corrupt
gloss our Savior there corrects.

True it is, sometime in Scripture by Neighbor we are to understand some
bosom Friend. So Deuteronomy. 13 6. Job 2.11. But other where we shall find our very
Adversaries are to be esteemed as our Neighbors. So Exodus 11.2. The Egyptians
were Neighbors to the Israelites. And Deuteronomy. 22.1, 2, 3. He is called a
Neighbor or Brother, who before Exodus 23.4, 5. was called an Enemy. And by
this Parable our Savior teaches that the man in distress (though a Jew and
wounded) was the Samaritanes Neighbor, and yet the one of these Sects did hate
the other.

Others think, those only to be their Neighbors who are near in place or
dwelling. This is the Common gloss (and so Vicinus is usually taken) but yet
we find that Neighbor is of a larger extent than so, Romans 13.8, 9. he is
(...), who is of our Flesh and Blood, Act. 17.26. Isa. 58.7.

Thus S. Austin most truly tells us, Epist. 52.
Proximus hoc loco non sanguinis propinquitate, sed rationis societate
pensandus est, in qua socij sunt omnes homines: Our Neighbor is not to be
esteemed him which is nearest to us in blood or place, but he which is our
companion in reason: Every man being a rational creature; every man is our
Neighbor.

S. Hierome gives a witty and weighty reason, In Ephesians. 4.
why every man is to be esteemed our Neighbor. It is commanded in the Law
(says he) Thou shall not lie with thy Neighbors wife; now if Neighbors be
only Christians and friends, then to commit adultery with Turks and Infidels or
with the wife of an Enemy should be no fault. The common gloss then upon the
Text is no good gloss though generally received.

Secondly, Who is our Neighbor may very well be questioned in regard of
Corruptions crept into the Text it self. Psalm. 15.3.


There should be love and faithful dealing, but where is it to be found? The
best is as a bryar and thorn, says Mich. 7.4.5. When the poor sheep runs to
them for shelter in a storm, it is entangled and loses a great part of its
fleece, if not its flesh; such will rather wound then power in either wine or
oil to cure.

Some Neighbors are like Dipthongs, double tongued, and double hearted, they
help not the sound; with the tongue they flatter all, but with the heart love
none at all.

And there are many whose Neighborhood is tied only by the Teeth:
Trencher-Neighbours who will be kind whilst the Pot boyles, and no longer
Neighbourly. But how few helpefull Neighbors shall you meet with?

So then to have a good Neighbor indeed is not so ordinary a thing as the most
take it to be: He that dwells at the next door is not evermore the man; one may
be near enough to us in respect of dwelling, who yet is far enough off in
regard of Affection: We may very well then make it a case, Who is our Neighbor.

Neighbor (and so the case resolved) bless God for it, think thy self happy
above many others. It is not the lot of every man; he that wants a good
Neighbor can tell thee what a blessing it is to have one.

A great Scholar and learned, D. John White his Sermon. at the Spittle.
and before a great and learned Auditorie relates out of Agathias how one Zeno
a Lawyer in Constantinople was served by his next neighbor one Anthemius a
Mathematician. The Lawyer had given him some discontent by taking away the
light of his house and setting up a new building over him, he in his anger thus
vexed the Lawyer: He did set in his Celler (which was under much of his
neighbors building) great caldrons of boiling water, with heat multiplying the
motion of the vapors, and then turning them all into narrow pipes gave them
vent under the Lawyers floor, which made such an Earthquake as that it shook
all his house and made the glass to jarre in the windows: And then with fire
glasses, and empty barrels, he so thundered and lightened, by casting (at
seasons) the Sunne-beames upon his windows and tumbing his empty tubbs about
the house, as that the Lawyer had no other shift but to forsake his dwelling;
saying, that he could deal well enough with his adversary at the Bar, but
against Jove's thunder and Neptunes Earthquakes he could make no resistance. It
is applied by that Reverend Doctor to godly Preachers, who fare no better when
they deal with some worldly and wicked men, armed with power and
maliciousness; let them but touch their Coppyholds and reproove them of their
sins, and they shall find themselves so haunted in their Tithes and duties as
that their best way is to make their peace, or to remoove their dwellings,
least the Thunder and Lightning and Earthquake of those great ones so shake
them as that they feel it all the days of their lives: Sure I am that many an
honest man is so afflicted through the vapors of Neighbors secret slanders,
the Earthquakes of open contentions, the thunder of raylings and the flashes
of burning malice, as that he is enforced to cry out with David, Woe is me
that I dwell in Mesech, and that I have my habitation near the tents of Kedar.

No marvel then that Themistocles, (as Plutarch has it) being desirous to put
off a Farm, caused the Common-crier to publish (amongst other commodities)
that there were good and quiet Neighbors near it, thinking good neighborhood
would put it off at a higher rate: For he that has a good Neighbor shall not
want a good morrow (according to our Proverb.) And as Hesiodus that ancient
Poet (in his Book of Days and works) To have a good neighbor, whether in
the City or in the Country is a Sovereign good: Good neighborhood being a
little Image of Heaven; a modale and abridgement of the Communion of Saints,
where one does love an other, and all love God; shining like a Firmament of
bright Stars, not one malevolent aspect amongst them: Being like a Quire of
tuneable voices, every one keeping time, and his own part, all singing in a
sweet Harmony Gods praises. But alas how much ground may a man measure and cast
behind him ere he meet with such a Society.

Chrysostom in Mat. 22. He tells us that by Neighbor is understood Christ
Jesus. He (as you have heard) is the true Samaritane that powered in both Oil
and Wine into our soars, and this is a truth without all Question.

Prophet once cried, O ye heavens drop down righteousness, as if the Earth
had quite lost it, being taken up above the Clouds: We must expect that the
Heavens shall send this good Neighbor to us: Why seek we the living amongst
the dead, He is risen, he is not here. But the same Jesus who is ascended
shall likewise once more descend and come amongst us: And if we be as we ought
to be, the world shall then be well amended with us, and be worth the dwelling
in, when such a Neighbor shall be enjoyed.

Think thou]
This learned Lawyer could not but be convinced by this Parable propounded, and
now his opinion is by our blessed Savior required. q. d. In hearing this thine
own Conscience tells thee which of the three was Neighbor to this distressed
man; thou have concluded it within thy self, but let me hear thy Judgment,
What think thou, etc.

Observe from hence,

It is a safe appeal to conscience for sentence, after the understanding is
rightly enlightened and informed. Thus does God, Isa. 5.3. Hag. 1.2. And Christ
does so, Math. 21. And so the Saints, Romans 9.1. 2 Cor. 4.2. and 5.11. Act. 4.9.

For the further explicating of this Doctrine, we must of necessity take some
short notice of the Nature of Conscience.

(For I may not here make any large Discourse thereof.

There are few or none that treat of Conscience but conclude it to be a kind of
Practical Syllogism. For look what discourse it has with God or the mind of
man, it does Syllogistically or by way of reasoning, as thus: Every murderer
or manslaier is guilty of death; But thou art a murderer, therefore, etc. The
Proposition is called the (...) of Conscience, the Assumption, (...), the
Conclusion (...)

The Proposition is made by the help of certain Principles in the mind; for
without the help of the Understanding, it can conclude nothing, it must have
the help of the rule and knowledge of that else it cannot be called Conscience.
The Understanding must first discern of truth and falsehood, of good and evil,
before Conscience can approove or dislallow, or do its offices. So that
Ignorance is not conscience.

The Assumption is made by the help of Memory: For though Conscience takes
information from the Understanding, yet by the aid of Memory that must be
retained which the Understanding has concluded: If Memory fail, our
knowledge is so far lost; for what we remember not, we know not, and so no
Conscience can be of that. Thus the word forgotten is made no Conscience of.

In these respects Conscience is defined to be Scientia cum alia Scientia, A
Science conjoined, or a knowledge with another (as the word imports) or as S.
Bernard has it, Conscientia, quasi cordis Scientia, and so he distingusheth
betwixt Scientia and Conscientia: Scientia (says he) is when the heart knows
other things; Conscientia quando cor novit se, so that the Etimology is not to
be rejected being taken with his meaning.

The Proposition and the Assumption being thus made, conscience accordingly
concludes, and this is the sentence of the soul, the proper work of
Conscience, in which respect Conscience is by some defined to be, A kind of
concluding Science, it concluding with a man or against a man, Romans 2.15.
procuring quietness or vexation. So then conclude, Conscience cannot bind of
it self, but where the word binds first. In short, Conscientia quasi
concludens scientia. So it necessarily implies a precede^t understanding.
the Schoolmen define it to be, Explicatio Scientiae ad factum seu faciendum:
And some of the best of our rue Writers say, it is a function of the
Vndrstanding, whereby we apply the general knowledge that is in us to our
particular thoughts, words, and actions, and this is it our Savior here
requires [What think thou] This in brief for Explication, now a word or
two for Use.

Conscience: But God knows how to make use of it, when the Understanding of a
sinner is once enlightened (as in David's case) Memory being a little helped,
Job. 13.26.
(as Psalm 50. it appears it shall;) then Conscience concludes for God, Prove.
20.27. and so God hereby brings infinite honor to himself and confusion to a
sinner.

Secondly, The appeal made to Conscience by man; as in our usual speech (when
we are wronged) I leave it to your Conscience: Between God and your Conscience
be it: 2 Cor. 4.2. and 5 11.
Or when accused and suspected; My Conscience bears me witness, Romans 9.1.
For what man knows the things of a man save the spirit of a man within him? 1
Cor. 2.11. we may state the Question amiss to others, but Conscience speaks
home. Thus S Austin being accused by Petilian for a Manichee answered, Me
Petilianus Manichaeum esse dicit etc. Petilian gives out that I am a Manichee,
and this he speaks of an others Conscience; I plainly affirm I am none of that
Sect, and this I speak from mine own Conscience; Cont. lit. Pet. l. 3 cap. 10.
now choose ye which of us two you will believe. And surely this appeal is a
safe appeal and very comfortable, For if our Conscience condemn us not, we
may have boldness, but if our Conscience condemn us, God is greater then our
Consciences.

Conscience gives; through often sinning (as through often trampling upon
Tomb-stones, nothing is left legible, unless it be (as was left of Iezabells
carcass) the palms of the hands and feet, and a little piece of the skull to
know it by) we make not Conscience under God our Judge, we hearken not to what
it says, whence it is that as Saint Paul told the Master of the Ship; Acts
27.21. We suffer so much harm and loss.

Quest. But does not Conscience miss it sometimes, does it always speak
sooth and as the truth is? Will it always give right sentence?

Resp. There is a good Conscience and a bad: The good Conscience is that which
is well informed, and concludes rightly; the bad Conscience is that which is
wrongly informed and concludes falsely. More Particularly.

It cannot be denied, but sometimes and in some things Conscience stirrs not;
and again at some times and in some other things it stirrs and passes
sentence but erroneously.

Sometimes it is speechless, being dead in a man's body how can it stir then?
1 Timothy 4.2. where it is compared to a part of the body that is not only without
sense and rotten, but seared with a hot iron: These are like Dionisius the
Herocleate, whose belly was so fat as that he felt not Needles, which were
thrust into it: And this is the condition of many who have lived a long time
wilfully in some gross sin, secret or open (to whom custom is become another
nature) and it is joined with a reprobate mind, Ephesians. 4.18. Romans 1.28. But as
the mute and dumb Devil charged by Christ found a tongue, Mark. 9.26.
so this dead and dumb Conscience in the end will speak.

Or else if it be not seared and stark dead, yet it is very weak and feeble
through the ignorance and darkness that is in it, having only in the mind and
memory a few ^^urall Principles (as Abimelech had) which are altogether
insufficient to direct in the particular occasions of men's lives. Whence it is
that it works (like the child in the womb,) so weakly that the mother
cannot perceive whither it be alive or no.

Sometimes, it could speak and would speak, but it cannot be heard, and
therefore as good never speak.

Some silence it either through subtilty of wit, finding extenuations or
subtle distinctions to evade it (as Saul in saving the beasts for Sacrifice)
or through violence of Affection overswaying it, (as in Ammons abusing his
Sister Thamar against Consciences advice, Pilate passing sentence upon Christ.)
Or through cares and pleasures of this world opposing and choking it, so that
there is no time to hear it (as Faelix said to Paul.) You see how it is with
one that runs in have, he hears not what a stander by says, though he gives
him direction for his race: So is it with those that have after the world,
Conscience bids them take heed of lying, cousenage, etc. but they hear not.

Lastly, Through Wilfulness it is silenced, Romans 14.22. When men allow what
Conscience condemns; or with Caine deny what Conscience says is true, or put
it wilfully away that it may not trouble them in their course (as did
Himenaeus and Alexander.) Thus you see that sometimes Conscience may be quiet,
and still, and like the man without the wedding garment, say nothing, but then
it thinks the more; and when it speaks not it is writing and will find a time
to read what it has recorded, though for the present with may outreason it,
wealth out-buy it, or might outface it. Sometimes it passes sentence but
erroneously or else speaks doubtingly, Erroneously; such a Conscience had Paul
before conversion, Act. 26.9. and those Ioh. 16.2. and such is the Conscience
of some Papists, Anabaptists, Brownists, etc. and many amongst us in these
days in the practicing of some sins (as Usury, Swearing, etc.)

Secondly; it sometimes speaks, but scrupulously, or doubtingly: If
doubtingly then it passes no sentence either way, but stands debating in the
mind, what is fit to be said or done, Romans 14.23. And this befalls many a child
of God especially in things of an indifferent nature. If Scrupulously, then it
concludes with some fear or doubting: But all this proceeds through Ignorance
or misapplying of the Rule. The light of the Understanding is either lost and
gone, or marvellously darkened; so as that we are ignorant of the Rule (for
Ignorance of Scripture makes us to err) or else abuse the Rule by false
Expositions and Interpretations, or misapply the Rule according to our own
conceits and fancies: But if (according to the Doctrine propounded) the
Vunderstanding come to be rightly informed and enlightened, we need not doubt
to appeal to Conscience and stand unto its sentencce, as most sure.

Conscience, seeing God has thus advanced it. It is that to which next under
him we must commend our cases and Estates: He has placed it within us as a
Judge to hear, determine and pass sentence, against which God will admit of
no appeal; whom it binds on Earth shall be bound in Heaven; whom it loses
one Earth shall be loosed in Heaven; the sentence of it God will second. The advice of it we must take in all our actions and undertakings; our Arbitrator
it should be in all differences to whose decree and order we must be content to
stand: It will make us honest men and maintain our honesty in despite of
Devils: It will gain us credit and become our surety, so that we may be
trusted for more than we are worth; and (if we worthily use it) it will not
fail us in this life, at death, nor at the day of Judgment. What think
thou? To conclude then, as Saint Paul writing unto Timothy, 1 epist. 1.18. This
command commit I unto thee, that thou should fight a good fight, having
Faith and a good Conscience. So say I to you, this advice I give to you, if you
would fight a good fight under the colors of our Savior, keep Faith and a
good Conscience.

It was once said of Troy that so long as the Image of Pallas was kept safe in
it, that City should never be won: That was a fiction, this without all
fiction is most true; so long as a man keeps a good Conscience safe within him,
the sons of Violence shall never be able to do him any hurt; Let the winds
blow, the waves beat upon his house, yet it shall not fall, because it is
grounded on such a Rock: Let a good Conscience be clad in poverty, exposed to
injury; yet it gives a blessed satisfaction to all: 2 King. 4. 2 King 2.
Like Elishaes meal, this makes our meat sweet, when else it would be bitter:
Like Elishaes salt, it makes our drink wholesome, when else it may be our death:
It made John Baptists garment please him, when it was but hair. It made Jacobs
lodging please him, when his pillow was a stone. It makes us laugh when others
weep, sing when others howl: but seek not the living amongst the dead; 2 Cor.
1 12.
this living joy in a dying Conscience, non est hic, you shall not find it here.

Those Judges knew this who acquitted those two sons suspected for murdering
of their Father, one T. Clelius, a rich Roman (the Story we have in Tully) who
going well to bed was found slain in the morning, the doors of his Chamber
open, and his two sons in bed in the same Chamber, but fast a sleep, upon
which they were acquitted of the suspicion; the Judges concluding peremptorily
that it was impossible for the vilest Miscreant to sleep so soon upon the
committing of a fact so horrid: Abad Conscience breaks sleep: A good Conscience
brings it.

And he said,
We have here the Answer to our Saviors Demand, where,

1. The Answerer who he is [He]

2. The Answer it self, which is fairly and fully put in by the Lawyer, and
then Ratified by the Lawgiver.

He] that Lawyer spoken of before, verse 25. who made the Question, ver. 29
[He] is the Respondent.

How contrary the Gloss of the Pharisees was to this Answer you have heard
before, and may read, Mat. 5.43 yet here he is enforced though an Adversary to
testify the Truth.

Thence note,

The truth wants not sometimes the testimony and suffrage of an Adversary,
Exodus 8.19. Judges 7.14. John 11.49-53. and 19.22. Math. 27.54. Luke 4.22.

This testimony does every Hypocrite and dissembler give whilst they profess
the truth, for if it be not worthy, why do they make any Profession thereof? Now
God is pleased to have it thus.

Deuteronomy. 32.15.
That the truth may be glorified; what stronger testimony than the testimony of
an Adversary? True it is, Non eget testimonio hominis, Ioh. 5.34. It self is
testimony enough, and therefore called the Testimony, Isa. 8.20. It bearing
witness to it self: It is of the Nature that God himself is, whose Glory is
not capable of any augmentation, nor passive of any diminution: As the
Splendor of the Sun is not enlarged by them that bless it, nor eclipsed by
them that hate it. The Sea may be multiplied, the Earth swelled bigger, the
Heavens stretched out, Hell enlarged; but God and truth is ever the same, 2
Pet. 2 2.
and yet in respect of us both the one and the other may be said to be
magnified or dishonored. We may make them appear greater in us though they
cannot be made greater by us: It may be made to appear more glorious or
inglorious to others, though it cannot be made either glorious or inglorious in
it self.

Secondly, That the godly may be more settled and confirmed in it: To hear a
Saul preach, Balaam bless, Caiaphas prophecy is a notable strengthening and
confirmation to our Faith, that what is delivered is of God and not of man.

Thirdly, This makes for the further confusion of wicked ones, who sin against
the known light and testimony of their own Consciences; had not God revealed
the truth unto them their damnation would be the easier, their judgment the
lighter, but now that they say they see, their sin remains, Luke 12.47, 48.
Ioh. 9.41.

Neighbors. Truth is fallen in the streets and equity cannot enter (says the
Prophet, Isay. 59.14.) And the way of truth is evil spoken of (as says S.
Peter, 2 Epist. 2.^.) And the talk is, that truth is not only in a swoone, but
like to die for want of Confession, because there is none to be found who will
be her Confessor.

Yet not after the wont of wayward men (as sometimes spoke a Reverend Prelate
of ours) let us so bemoane what we want, D Senhouse B. of Carlisle.
as not to bless God for what we have: The voice of truth is heard in our land
(as Solomon spoke of the Turtle) and as God said of Corinth, I have much people
in this City; So both in City and Country, God has many, who are ready to
believe truth on her bare word: But what are these flocks of kids, being
compared with these mighty troops of Aramites? Tell the Politicians of this
world, Papinians truth, that is the best po^licie which ^^k^^ most for piety:
(...) a covetous man of S. Paul's truth, that the love of money is the root of
all evil. etc. Strait she must prove her honesty by witness. Or if the like
liberty were given to those, whose hearts arise against these truths, as was by
Gideon in the audience of all the people to the timorous and faint hearted, to
depart, our auditories, which are now thin enough, would soon be thinner, Vel
duo vel nemo. We seem to entertain the truth lucentem, but we hate it
redarguentem (as says S. Austin) And as the Friar told the people, that the
truth was like to holy water, which every one will call for, yet when it came
to be cast on them, they would turn away their faces, so we call to have the
truth preached to us, but the truth is, it will not by many be endured.

truth want testimony sometimes from the mouth of a very adversary? why then it
is a shame if the professed friends of truth should fail her: Veritatem
Philosophia quaeris, Theologia invenit, Religio possidet (says Miranaula)
Philosophy seeks truth; Divinity has found truth; Religion professes truth;
And yet with the Church in the Canticles, may truth complain, I am wounded in
the house of my friends. Had it been an enemy that had thus reproached me,
then I could have borne it (says David) So may truth say, had it been a
Heathen and Pagan I could better have suffered it, but it was a Professor, a
Christian I suffered by, this is grievous.

Quest. But who does thus?

Resp. Those spoken of, Romans 1.18. who imprison truth through wilful
disobedience, and hold her in injust captivity, and will not suffer the truth
revealed, to have her perfect work in them for their through sanctification,
Ioh. 17.17. Those also who walk not in it, nor worthy of it, 3 Epist. Ioh. 4.
such cast aspersions on the fair cheek of Gods truth, and stick not to give
her the lie.

But let all such as indeed love the truth, have courage for her. Let
Magistrates be seen in her Livery; Moses was counseled by Iethro, to choose
Viros veraces, men of truth for judicature. The Egyptian Judges had the Picture
of truth always in a chain about their necks; And Charles the great, had
this written on his sword, December Praecep^orum custos Carolus: Charles keeper of
the ten Commandments.

Let the Priests of God be clothed with Righteousness and have veritatem
written on their breast plate, as Aaron had always, when he gave sentence:
remembering that of Tertullian, nihil veritas erubescit, nisi solummodo abscondi.

And let all that profess the truth witness in her behalf, both Actively and
Passively; Our Lord and Master tells us, that his coming into the world was,
to bear witness to the truth, and our being in the world is for the same
end. God is truth; his ways are the ways of truth; his word is truth; his
works are truth, all truth, Blessed are they who defend his truth.

Object. But veritas odium parit; and who but children or fools tell truth?

Resp. Veritas odium parit, sed non est odiosa. (as says judicious M. Calvin
in Gal. 4) It brings hatred, but it is not hateful, but every way most
excellent and glorious, so that in all our sufferings for it, the spirit of
glory and of God rests on us, 1 Pet. 4.14.

2. Gods eyes are upon the truth, as speaks Jeremiah, and upon them also that
stand out in her defense, 2 Pet. 2.9. Ps. 37.6. Lam. 3.56, 57.

3. Though none (unless children and fools) will tell the truth, yet unless
we be such fools and children, we may not think to enter into the kingdom of
Heaven, Psalm. 15.

ever be the bringer; Do we like the Sun ever the worse because it breaks out
of a dark cloud? why should we disregard the truth, breaking forth of an
enemies lips? S. Paul rejoiced herein, and would rejoice that Christ was
preached. Phil. 1.17, 18.

Do we not often send a letter by a dirtie carrier? and some disorderly
messenger brings us money which is none of his own. Balaam may bring a
blessing in his mouth though himself a wizard; Elijah be fed by a Raven,
though an unclean bird: Balaams Ass did speak to another understanding,
though not to his own: Moses may have good counsel given by a Midianite: and
do you not know the Apothecaries boy gathers herbs and simples for other mons
diseases, not for his own?

Conclude it then to be (if not wickedness) yet waywardness at least, in
those who turn their care away from the testimony given to the truth by a
wicked man. It is not so in civil things, why is it thus in spiritual? All
truth is sweet (it being Gods, not ours) wheresoever it is found, the Kings
Coin is current, though found in a foul clout, or impure channel: Receive
the testimony given to truth as S. Paul did, though coming out of a Heathens
mouth, Tit. 1.13.

The Midianites dreamed a dream which fell out true, Judge. 7.13. But the
benefit redounded neither to the dreamer, nor interpreter thereof: So one may
deliver the truth and testify the same, who yet shall never taste the
sweetness and comfort thereof. Let us not then stumble at this, but be more
confirmed that the truth delivered is Gods, not man's; And as one spoke once of
Atheism, that nothing should more confirm us against it then to here an
Atheists testimony; so I here of wicked men, that testify to the truth of
Christ.

ex ore inimicorum, out of the mouth of a very adversary, can fetch testimony
to his truth We are not ignorant how the wicked resist and rebel; how that
they draw away their wecks from obedience, and cast away the cords of
discipline from them; yet God can so overpower them, as that they shall read
their own sentence of condemnation, and denounce their own doom. This is
that Solomon speaks of, Prove. 16.1. there are many preparations in the heart
of man; Thoughts and words set in battle array against God and his truth, so
that we may conclude with our selves, both what to speak, and how to speak;
yet God overrules: so that nothing shall be said of spoken, but what he
pleases to permit, Numb. 22.35. Genesis 31.24. and 33.

He that showed merey on him]
Object, What then? was not the Priest nor Levit neighbor to the wounded man?
was the Samaritane he, and none else? if so, how agrees this with what was
before delivered?

Resp. Our Saviors intent is not to teach the Lawyer, who was not his
neighbor, but who was: That the former were, the Lawyer made no question of,
he doubted of the latter; Now our Savior shows, that the two former came
far short of the Samaritane in the duties of true neighborhood, and
concludes,

He that heales our wounds, and helps us in our miseries is to be preferred
in respect of neighborhood.

We have an excellent Proverb tending to this purpose, Prove. 18.24. the meaning
of which Proverb is, that as all friends and neighbors ought to be respected
by us; so that neighbor in a more special manner, whose heart is glued to us
as Ionathans to David; whom we find more ready to minister help then a
natural brother or kinsman, he above the rest should be respected and esteemed.

Let this inform our judgments of the lawfulness of preferring one before
another, in the affection of neighborhood. True it is all are neighbors; but
amongst all, those are most to be respected (as true neighbors) who do the
offices of neighbors. Nor should others grudge or repine, if they hear others
in this respect have praise above themselves.

And amongst all others, the godly are to be accounted of, who are the members
of this good Samaritane, who bound up our wounds, and powered in this oil.
These are more excellent then their neighbors, and to be preferred, Pro. 12 26.

Then said Jesus unto him. etc.]


1. The Duty, [Goe and do thou.] 2. The manner of performing it, [Likewise.]
In the former,

1. A Dismission, [Goe.] 2. A Commission, [Doe.]
Then said Jesus unto him.]
1. Something in general is to be learned, in that our Savior admits of
this his Answer, (though he were his enemy) and approves it, it being
discreetly and directly to the point.

What is good in any, is to be liked and allowed of, though he be an enemy or
adversary. Romans 10.2. Mark. 10.21. 2 Samuel 1.23. Luke 16.8.

Iam. 1.17. and therefore is to be liked.



with nothing led more kindly then with commendation, Act. 26.27.28. Phil. 4.8.

Besides it cherishes concord, and friendship amongst men, when the neglect
does often stir up strife and hatred.

weakness (as not being able to distinguish betwixt the work of God, and the
work of sin) or through wickedness and envy, shutting their eyes that they
may not give virtue its due praise; this is not to be like God, who omits not
the due praises of those Churches, whom he sharpliest reproves; and does
readily take notice of the least good thing in his, both to commend it, and
reward it. The little goodness found in Abijah amongst all the sons of
Jeroboam, 1 King. 14 13.
the Lord passes not without mention and recompense.

Act. 26.
say not as Festus of S. Paul, he is mad. Is he bountiful and a good house
keeper? say not of him as it was said of Christ, Luke 7.
he is a glutton or a wine bibber. Is he temperate and sober, judge not as
they of John the Baptist, that he has a devil. What man but has something
in him good? that take notice of, and commend, be he what he will.



Go and do.]
Here is the Charge, where,

1. The Duty. 2. The Person on whom it is imposed.
In the former we have two Particulars.

1. Go. 2. Do.
Both these require action, and we will handle both as one in this Observation.

Our knowledge must be practical. It is not a verbal profession, nor a
formal show, but action that must prove a good Christian.

This Lawyer, who was of the sort and sect of the Pharisees, as you have heard,
had questioned and discoursed much about eternal life, and our Savior had
before called upon him really to practice what he did profess, verse. 28. But
that would not beat him of; Still he goes on (being desirous to justify
himself) and so falls into a new discourse; which (as you see) our Savior
thus concludes, Go thou and do likewise. q. d. If thou would be as thou
should, leave talking, fall to walking; forbear discoursing, fall to doing:
like as that Samaritane has done before thee, Go, do thou.

As Christ said of himself, so may it be said of this Doctrine, In the whole
volume of thy book it is written of me that I should do thy will o God: Law
and Gospel, Prophets and Apostles, yea and Christ himself when he was upon
the earth required action, Deuteronomy. 4.1. and 8.1. Ioh. 13.17. Mat. 7.26. Iam.
1.22. Ps. 15. and 106.3 2 Pet. 1.10. Phil. 4.9.

Godliness there is a Form and a Power, 2 Timothy 5.3. Now the Form is taken up
by many, but will not prove a Christian: Power is the life of Christianity, and
that consists in doing. Christian Religion is more practical than Theoricall,
rather an Ocoupation than a mere Profession dwelling (as we say) like the
Artisans wit at his fingers ends.

formal Professors and Hypocrites, whose Religion is all outside, no lining:
Profession of many is only talk and discourse, it is turned into a very vizard
by this age, it has mouth and Eyes, and Nose, but all painted.

Of the Heathen Idols it was said, They have mouths but they speak not, Eyes
but they see not, etc. Psa. 115.5. It cannot be said so of these kind of
Professors, for they have mouths and they speak; Eyes and they see; Noses and
they smell; but in this one thing they are like, they have hands and they do
not work, Feet and they walk not; this is a shame to the Calling, a disgrace
to the Profession; better it were that we would say less and do more. It
argues a dead Faith, a dead Profession. Revel. 3.1. Jam. 2.26.


Opera testantur de me. John 10.25. So let our deeds of us. It is not enough to
say as it is in the Psalm, Credidi and ideo locutus sum, I believed, therefore
I spoke, but Credidi and ideo operatus sum, J believed and therefore I wrought;
No man can work unless he believes, no man can believe unless he works.

To stir us up to walking and doing, let not these things be forgotten.

1. Bare Profession (though a thing excellent yet) it is no characteristicall
difference to discriminate a sound Christian from a reprobate; we do not judge
of the health of the body so much by talk as by the pulse, S. Paul speaks of a
possibility to have all knowledge yet be nothing, 1 Cor. 13.2. So to know as
we ought to know is to practice that we know, 2 Cor. 8.1. this seek after, Go
and Do.

2. Consider the end of our Profession is not idle speculation, but practice:
God gave us his precepts not to know but do; wherefore serves the Sun, but that
man may go forth unto his labor? So for the same end the light of Knowledge,
God lends to us, Ephesians. 5.8. Philip. 2 15. Tit. 1.1. It must be knowledge after
Godliness, it must help forward that work; while Knowledge swimmeth only in
the brain, it has not attained his end; the scope of Christianity being not to
know, but the scope of Knowledge is to be a good Christian. This graceth
Profession; as the managing of a trade honors it above the Knowledge of it.
You may remember that passage, Christ knew no sin, why so? Surely because he
did no sin: So much as we do, so much we know and no more: In Music we have
learned that Lesson when we have practiced: So is it in Christianity; therefore
see you Go and Do.

3. The sweet of Christianity is in Practice. What is it that makes the study
of Law sweet to so many (as is well observed by one) but the practice of it? Is
there not difference betwixt hearing of the sweetness of Sugar and honey, and
the taste of the sweetness? So it is and such it is, betwixt the discourse of
godliness and the practice thereof. Besides the Retribution is for doing, Math.
11.28. Revel, 1.3. Mat. 25.21. and that is the sweet indeed, wherefore Go and
Do.

4. The danger is great if we practice not. Ignorance does not take away sin,
but knowledge (without practice) takes away all excuse, Ioh. 9.43. this the
Apostle shows, 1 Timothy 1 13. as if he should say, had his sin of Blasphemy and
Persecution bin joined with Knowledge, he should not have received mercy.

These things amongst many other should prevail so far with us as to cause us
to walk and act. And thus much for the matter here enjoined. The Person is
next considerable on whom this duty is imposed [Thou] Hence learn.

That the duties of Charity and such other Christian services are actually and
personally to be performed by ones self.

The Charge you see is, [Doe Thou] as well as others: Others have bin
Charitable, Merciful, be thou so too.

A Doctrine strongly confirmed in Scripture, which injoyning the duties either
of first or second Table, speaks singularly and particularly in the second
Person as to one man. So was the Law delivered, [Thou] shall have no other
Gods, etc. So the Gospel. If [Thou] beleevest, he it unto thee as [Thou]
beleevest, etc.

Prophet gives it for sound Doctrine. Hab. 2.4. The just shall live by his own
Faith.

2. And the Question at the last shall be, what have thou done, not what have
others, Mat. 25. Every man must be countable for himself to God.

have matter of rejoicing in our selves, not in others; this we shall when we
put our hands to those holy duties God requires of us, not being like these
Pharisees which would bind heavy burdens to lay on others shoulders.

There be some duties that belong to men in their particular stations or
places, as to the Magistrates, Ministers, etc. which concern not others, of
which we may say, as Christ to Peter, what is that to thee.

But there is no duty that belongs to a Christian as he is a Christian, but
belongs to every Christian, Mat. 28.20. Teach them to observe all things, Phil.
4.8. Whatsoever things, etc. 2 Cor. 8.7. In every thing, 2 These. 2.17. both
word and works. See then thou gettest into thy soul the conscience of every
Commandment, Legal, Evangelicall, and keep thy self in a readiness to the duty
within the compass of thy Calling and ability.

Likewise
Not as the Levit and Priest, but as the good Samaritane did, so do thou.

Whence we learn first,

Examples are Instructions. God teaches as well by them as by Precepts, Mat.
5.12. and chap. 12.

Hence it is that Scripture is so stored with Examples of all sorts, we may
reduce them to two heads: Such as concern God or man.

Those that concern God, respect either his Justice or his Mercy.

Examples of his Justice are written for our profit, 1 Cor. 10.11. 2 Pet. 2.6.
Luke 17.32.

So also those that are of Mercy, Psalm 32 6. Iam. 5.11.

Examples of Men, are either of Saints or Sinners; if of Saints, then either of
Virtue or of Vice, the one sort is propounded for imitation, as Romans 4.22, 23.
Mat. 12.42.

The other for Caution, being set up as Rocks in a Map to be avoided.

Examples of the wicked, these must likewise teach. See Mat. 12 41. 1 Cor 10.6,
7, 8.

Reason is evident, Romans 15.4. If every thing written be written for our
learning, then Examples (questionless) Scriptae sunt etiam ruinae priorum ad
cautelam posteriorum. Ardeus.


Senses there are of learning, seeing, hearing: Neither of these you see are
without means of Instruction. To our sight he has laid open the book of the
Scriptures, and the great book of the creatures, wherein we may read his Power,
Wisdom, Justice, Mercy; he has both described a way to life, and set up
leaders and guides in that way: Not a virtue commended, not a vice forbidden;
but God has exemplified in some pattern, both for the better direction of the
faithful and greater condemnation of the wicked: An help it is to have a
copy, but a greater help, to see the Master make the letter.

Examples, Job 8.7. and not slightly pass over those recorded in the Word,
and daily brought to light (as we do strange Countries in a Map) but so read
and observe, as if we did see acted before our eyes, what in Scripture is
recorded to have bin done by or befallen others.

Good Examples of the Saints, God sets up like lights to direct us in the way
of Piety. Thou have a good Neighbor by thee, a godly man dwelling near thee
thou should be better by him and profit by his Example; as the contempt of
the Word, so the contempt of Example, makes us liable to Gods wrath.

Object. But say he is an ill one?

Resp. Something must be learned notwithstanding: How often in Scriptures are
the Examples of Heathens (in some actions) propounded for Instruction? If Good
to shame and provoke us, Ier. 2.11. Mal. 3.8. 1 Cor. 5.1. If Bad to work
detestation in us, Deuteronomy 18.9. Ephesians. 4.17. Something still must be learned out
of the sinners School. As Cato senior did sometimes say, Wisemen have more to
learn of fools, then fools of wisemen.

Secondly, we learn hence,

Priest and Levite he must imitate, but the Samaritane. Hence the Example of
Angels is propounded, Mat. 6. And of the Saints, Iam. 5.10. Heb. 11. and 12.1.
1 These. 1.6. Phil 3.17. yea of Christ himself, Heb. 12 2. 1 Pet. 2.21. Ephesians.
5.2. nor would Paul himself be followed further then he was a follower of
Christ, 1 Cor. 11.1.



Seneca well suites the times; Men commonly live not ad rationem, but ad
similitudinem: and through the vicious dispositions of our hearts it comes to
pass, that the worst examples have our greatest allowance.

As for the practice of Saints commended to our imitation we can give their
practice the praise, Laudamus veteres sed nostris utimur annis. Abraham's
obedience; Sarahs modesty, etc. shall have commendation, but every Iesabell, or
courtly Herodias; every Saul or Achitophell shall rather be followed. What is
this, but to be like the Dog or Swine; to imitate them in their beast^y
practices.

Or if we do follow them, it shall be in their erring, Noah in his
drunkenness; Lot in his incest; Jacob in his lying; Abraham in his doubting;
David in his adultery; Peter in his backesliding, loving that in the Saints,
which the Saints never loved in themselves, (their vices:) Like flies we slip
over all the sound parts of the body, and light upon soars and ulcers; making
the Saints foil, to be our jewel; their shame, our glory. Thus Theodosius
excused a foul fact, because David had done the like, to whom S. Ambrose makes
this answer, qui sequutus es errantem, sequere paenitentem: But this we cannot
hit on. A light pensill can draw the wharts, and wrinkles of the face, but not
the visage to the life.

Lapsus sanctorum, ut non cadamus, non ut cadamus prebentur exempla: Such as
pass by the good examples of the godly, and imitate them in their sin, I
cannot better resemble then to the Egyptians, who beheld the Sun, the Moon
and all the glories of nature without admiration; but if they meet with a Cat
or Crockodile, they strait bow their knees, and fall down to worship.

Christ he is the pattern of patterns; the rule and measure of examples, he
gave us an ensample that we should follow his steps, 1 Pet. 2.21. The Saints
are next: and their examples bind us to imitation: now how far we may make
their practice our pattern would be enquired.

And here that usual distinction of Actions, Ordinary and Extraordinary, would
be remembered.

Some of their Actions were Extraordinary: being done by virtue, or
Extraordinary calling, as Genesis 12.1, 2. and 22.10. or Extraordinary instinct:
as Eliah calling for fire from Heaven, 2 King. 1.10. so Number. 25.7, 8.

Or occasioned by special necessity of times, as Act. 4.32. and Act. 20.34.

Other of their Actions were Ordinary: and those admit of a threefold
distinction: some were good, others bad, others of an indifferent nature.

As for those which are noted as sinful, wherein they bewray humane infirmity,
they are as the dark part of the cloud which waited on the Camp of Israel;
which while the Egyptians followed, they were deceived, and in the end drowned.
These are spectacles of humane frailty, not examples for like practice.

Their good Actions were their practices, according with the Law of God: as
their meekness, obedience, patience, etc. which is like the first part of the
cloud that was toward the Israelites themselves, to guide them: herein we must
follow and imitate them.

Their Indifferent Actions are those, which in themselves (considered without
circumstances) were neither commanded nor forbidden: In Actions of this nature,
we may, or may not follow them: For this is an undeniable rule; an example does
no farther bind, then it is backed with a precept. In it self it has but the
power of illustration of what is in the precept, and it does contain in it the
force of the rule. So that an example of some good man (in such Actions as are
not contradictory to precepts,) only warrant the same Action in an other; (as
Abraham's making a feast at his childs weaning; Christ's closing the book after
he had read the Text, etc.) but does not charge conscience with the doing of
it. For where is no Law, can be no transgression. In this case we are not to
esteem of any above what is written, so as to clog our consciences with duties
only upon bare examples.

examples, seeing in so doing we shall have the honor to become presidents and
patterns for future ages: (the greatest honor that can be given to the Saints
in this life.)

This does not only make Religion to be well spoken of, but it profits many,
even a world of people, 1 These. 1.7. Romans 16. A good example is like fire, many
candles are lighted at it, and it self neither the worse, nor the less. Or
like a stone thrown into the water, which though of it self it makes but one
circle, yet it begets a 100. Ioh 5.50. When Christ told that noble petitioner,
thy son lives; at the first hearing he believed, but when he came home and
waighed the m^tter, not only himself, but his whole house believed. Yea many
that we know not, may receive good from our good example given, Vibis ad
exemplum.
and left, 1 Pet. 5.5. It will not only like Aarons ointment, run down to the
skirts of our own garments, but it will run like Nilus over all the Country.
Yea the virtue of good Examples, shall last when we are dead and rotten, and
do good for a long time after (in some cases) to the worlds end, keeping the
sent so long as no other perfume can: (as you see here this example of the
Samaritane did.) It shall be upon record while the world stands. You may
remember what Ioab said of Rabba, It will be called after my name. So it is
true of many exemplary sins, as Ieroboams, Onans, Balaams, Corahs, Sodoms, etc.
They are called by the Founders own names; and though few men will confess
their sins, yet many men's sins will confess their master. To be a president of
vice, is like the setting ones house on fire, which burns many of the
neighbors, and so he that does it is to answer for all their ruins: Such a
bitter root must answer for it self, and for all the corrupt branches. On the
other side, in virtuous Actions, (both ways) a man lives when he is dead, and
is working to the worlds end: so that those deeds we have done while we were
living on the earth, we shall not only receive for, but those also done
through our example in future ages. Great need then have we to be good
presidents, seeing it is a thing of so great consequence.

example, be much made of in every place. Good examples are like Common
Schools, and they are the better, because they are Free. Such a privilege how
well do we to like off, for our childrens good? Then highly regard this, which
so much concerns thy souls good: And as you will spread abroad the fame of
one, so by the humble acknowledgement of the praises of others, spread abroad
the light of good Example, so far as may be, 1 These. 1.7, 8. As for those,
who by slanders and calumnies, do endeavor to blemish the good conversation of
the godly, and so rob the world of the profit of their examples, they shall
bear their sin.

Further observe, in that we are willed to do as this Samaritane, (whom we
heard before was hated as an enemy.)

No matter who it is that gives examples; the example being good must be
followed.

Some will not do good works, because Papists do them; some not hear Sermons,
because Precisians do so: but do thou likewise: look on the work, no matter
for the person.

Again in that we are willed to do likewise as he did, Observe,

Works of charity must be so done, as this Samaritane did them.

Now then as the Traveller having got up the hill, looks back on the Town
he has left behind him, so do you, Consider well what has been said, and
the Lord give us understanding in all things.

FINIS.
AN ALPHABETICALL DIRECTION TO SOME OF THE CHIEF THINGS IN THE FOREGOING
EXPOSITION.
A
ABilities must be improved, Page 46. In case of necessity we are to go beyond
our Ability, page, 123. Abrogation, it is a plausible doctrine, p. 79. Adam,
what power he had by Creation, p. 16. Advocate, Christ is ours and practices
for us in the Court of Heaven, p. 156. Affections, Christ had, page 115. They
are lawful, 116. The inordinatenesse of them blamed, Ibid. They should be in
Heaven, pa. 161. Afflictions of others should affect us, p. 111. Affliction may
not be added to Affliction, p. 61. Afflicted should be visited, page 60.
Alehouse friendship is unsound p. 162. Alehouses may afford Heaven some
souls, 146. Alms not to be given at doors p. 92. Wherein the truth of
Almsgiving consists, p 113. What order is to be observed in Giving. See
Giving. Answer, how many ways made, p. 9. Christ will Answer us how and when,
page 10, 12. What must be done that he may Answer us, page 11. We should be
ready to make Answer, p. 12. An Answer is not always necessary, p. 13. Why
Christ Answered not the Priests; p. 12. Antinomians their error, p. 77.
Appeal to conscience is safe, p. 205. Arc of Noah a figure of the Church, p.
148.
B
Beast, man is worse through his fall, p. 33. Beggars, if common not to be
relieved at doors, but in case of Necessity, page 92. Bowels of mercy put on;
page 114.
C
Calling, we are to keep within the compass of it, page 25. God blesses us
in them, p. 99. Care two fold. p. 151. It must be had of what we undertake, p.
151. We may not be Careless under pretense of Religion, pa. 151. Great Care
Christ took for our good, p. 154. Catechizing of great importance, p. 197. More
profitable (if duly performed) than preaching, p. 198. Ceremonies of diverse
sorts, pa. 75. Those of order not abolished, ibid. Romish Ceremonies become not
CHRIST'S Spouse, page 76. Chance what it is and how taken, p. 48. There is
Chance, ibid. Charity is the breath of a Christian, p. 121. It is to be
measured more by the mind than purse, page 122. The Charity of some affoards
no good words, page 119. And of most no good works, ibid. It well becomes
Ministers, pa. 53. It is the Sum of all their Sermons, p. 54. Christ, our
salvation is from him, p. 157. He is to be come unto for help p. 129. He
preferred our good before his own ease, p. 142. He came where we were, and how,
p. 102. Few give him entertainment, p. 104. How we should Come to him, p. 105.
We must be content with his worst, as well as best, page 116. Church, it is
like unto an Inn in many respects, page 146. Whence it is called Catholic, p.
147. None saved out of it, p. 148. Christ reigns there, p. 149. The good of
it must be sought by those who receive the goods of it, p. 168. True members of
it how known, p. 150. It is the house of Perfumes and the gate of Heaven, page
151. Comfort, none to be had but in Christ, p. 95. Communion of Saints is to be
loved, p. 27. Company, good to be desired, p. 25. Companions there will be in
sin p. 65. Compassion Christ was touched with, p. 117. It moved him to seek
our Salvation, page 118. Conformity in evil dangerous, p. 68. Conscience, what
it is, page 204. It binds not, but where the Word binds first, page 205. It
must be hearkened unto, page 206. It is sometimes speechless, but than it
writes, p. 207. The use of a good Conscience, p. 208. The Privileges of it, p.
209. Conversation it should be in Heaven, p. 161. Conventicles by some preferred
to publik meetings* p. 148. Cover our sins Christ does and how. p. 129. Cruelty
to be abhorred, page 59. Cursing, how lawful, p. 90. Creatures given both for
necessity and delight, p. 137. Creatures not to be over-burthened, ibid.
Customs, defraud Ministers, p. 178.
D
Death frees the godly from the sight of much evil, p. 108. Dead how far man
by nature is, p. 47. Debt of man double, p. 155. Degrees, God proceeds by in
curing our diseases, p. 131. Descention for us by Christ, p. 102. Diseases of
all sorts cured by Christ, p. 190. Diseases infections we are not bound to
visit, p 62. Devils, they are thieves in many respects, p. 34. There are more
in the air than men on Earth at one time, p. 38. There is a chief amongst
them, p. 38. Doing required of a Christian, p. 218. The power of Christianity
consists in that, p. 219. Door, Christ enters in by that, not by the window,
p. 9. Duties belonging to a Christian are to be personally performed, p. 220.
Some Duties concern not all, p. 221.
E
Election, not universal, p, 149. Event not alike to all, p. 51. Examples of
all sorts in Scripture for our learning, page 222. They no further bind than
they are backed with a precept, p 224. Best Examples are to be follow. ed, p.
67. Good Examples very profitable, p. 225. Examples of Saints how far they
may be followed, p. 225. Contempt of Examples lays us open to wrath, p. 223.
Bad Examples take heed of, p. 66. The Examples of Superiors (if bad) very
dangerous, p. 67. Excommunication a fearful sentence, p. 149. If unjust then
not to be feared p. 150. Eye, a great help or hinderance to the soul, p. 106.
It is quick in apprehension and sure, ibid. Most sins begin there, p. 107. We
should cast them on good objects, p. 107. On whom God casts his Eye he settles
his affection, p. 109.
F
Fall, sin is in diverse respects, p. 39. Faith is a weapon offensive and
defensive, p. 24. It is a good staff, p. 25. Fear of God where it is not,
there no good can be expected, 82 Flesh of man is the flesh of God p. 144. Our
Flesh sits at Gods right hand in all our suits, ibid. Filling, all that Christ
did or suffered was to fill up, p. 155. Fortune how taken* p. 49. Whither any
thing come to pass by it, ibid. The name was first brought in through
ignorance and blindness, p 49.
G
Garment, Gods Image is and that in many respects, page 40. It is a Garment to
be respected p. 41. Gifts of two sorts God has betrusted his Ministers
withal, p. ^66, Giving unadvisedly is the worst kind of loosing. p. 91. What
we are to give and how much* p. 122. Rules to be observed in Giving p. 119 What
order is to be observed in Giving, p. 42. Godliness has both a form and
power, p. 218. Goods of the Church belong only to Churchmen, page 168.
Gospel is very precious, page 85. It is like Oil, p. 133.
H
Hand, God stands at our right hand to bless us, p. 99. Healing, it is from
Christ, page 130. He Heales upwards, p. 132. Signs of one foundly Healed, p.
133. Why men are not Healed, p. 132. Heaven the fairest prospect, p. 18. It is
a place of peace, p. 19. It will pay for all our pains about it, p. 196. Honor
of Christ to be preferred, p. 142. Hope there is whilst there is life p. 47.
Humility to be learned from Christ's Example, p. 105. Hypocrites respect
Ceremoies above the substance, p. 64.
I
JESUS, a sweet name, p. 96. Image of God, is man's clothing p. 41. How far it
is lost in man, ibid. Imitation, our nature is apt to it, p. 66. One sin
Imitates another, p. 66. Imprecations how used in Scripture, p. 91.
Impropriations, the Judgments of Divines and some Lawyers concerning them, page
169. Impropriators are hard Masters p. 173. Their Pleas answered, ibid.
Special considerations for them, p. 176. Inns, two wont to be in every Town,
p. 145. The Church resembled to an Inn, vide Church. Inns are of good use, p.
145. There money bears the Mastery p. 162. Inferiors follow Superiors
Examples, p. 66. Intercession, Christ not wanting in it, p. 156. Iournies, in
them commend our selves to God, p. 21. Christ took a Journey to us, so should
we to him, p 104. Justification, 3. things required to it, p 70. Jericho, a
figure of this world, 20 Jerusalem a type of heaven, page 17.
K
Kings have both temporal and Ecclesiastical authority, p. 175. Kingly office
of Christ, he carefully discharged, p. 156. Knowledge without practice leaves
us inexcusable, p. 220.
L
Laws of 3. sorts, p. 74. How some that good gave may be said not to be good,
p. 69. Law is like wine and how, page 133. It is not the proper cause of death;
p. 69. How it is the ministration of death, p. 70. How it is said to be weak,
ibid. It is impossible to be kept how p. 71. It discovers sin, p, 72, 73. Why
the Law was first given, p 73. How far abrogated, p. 74. Law, Judicial and
Ceremonial, what, p. 74. The Law a Schoolmasters, page 76. Why God suffers
his to be long under the lash of it, page 136. Law of man not to be pressed too
far in case of Ministers maintenance, p. 57. Liberty not to be abused, page
78. Liberality may be lost by liberality. p 92. How our Liberality should be
extended, p. 93. Life of man is precious, p. 152. Much ado to hatch it up, page
153. Some Life remains in man since his fall, p. 44. Love it begins at home, p.
141. It works on the whole man, p. 112. Levite what was his office, page 50.
M
Man his blessed condition in his creation, p. 15. Means weak God works by to
confound the proud, p. 82. Mercy, our Ears are altogether for it, p. 72. It is
much mistaken in the world, p. 113. It must be extended to all in Misery, p.
86. Mercy to an enemy overcomes him, p. 88. Misery is the object of mercy, p.
87. Merit to be disclaimed, p. 118. Ministers, the Devil seeks to spoil them
especially, p. 51. They should be pitiful, p. 53. And fly all covetous
practices, p 54. And all kind of cruelty, p. 55. They should be liberally
Maintained, p. 56. What is enough for them, p. 58 They are like Hosts in sundry
respects, p. 163. How they should become all to all, p. 197. They are no empty
fellows, p. 167. God has betrusted them with much; p. 166. And gives us
blessings through their hands, p. 167. They are little set by of man, p. 191.
Large promises are made them by God, p. 191. Man cannot recompense them p. 192.
They should be careful of their cures, p. 180. In what case they may be
absent, p. 181. Money answers all things in an Inn, p. 162.
N
Nature of man highly advanced by Christ, p. 143, Corrupt Nature too much
advanced by Papists, Page 43. Yet we may not think of it less than is fitting,
page 43. It is to be respected in our charity, p. 88. Necessity is wisely to be
judged of, p. 141. Our Brothers Necessity is to be preferred to our superfluity,
p. 141 What is to be accounted necessary, p. 122. Neighbor what it imports, p.
199. Who is to be understood by Neighbor in the Scriptures, 199 Every man is a
Neighbor, page 120. Some Neighbors are dipthongs p. 201. The benefit of a
good Neighbor, p. 202. It is lawful to prefer one before another in
Neighborhood, p. 216. Who helps in misery is best Neighbor, p. 215. Christ is
our Neighbor. p. 203
O
Occasions of sin avoid, p. 63. They are of two sorts, ibid. Offering, Christ
made one for us, p. 155. Opportunity to be laid hold on, p. 100. Reasons
pressing it. p. 101. Overseers of the poor to be careful of their duties,
page 154. And to visit them often. p. 1^4 Oil the Gospel resembled to it, p.
133.
P
Parables useful and profitable p. 8 13. Passions of two sorts, p. 115. How
far Christ took them on him* ibid. Difference betwixt his and ours, p. 116,
Comfort against inordinatenes of them, ibid. Patterns make choice of the best,
vid. Example. Persecutors who the greatest this day in the Church of England,
p. 179. How lawful for a Minister to fly in case of Persecution, p. 183.
Practice, and the sweet of Christianity is in it, p. 220. Praise to be given to
whom it is due. p. 217. Physicians of ancient standing, p 127. Christ is the
souls Physician, p. 129. Physicians should be careful of their Patients. p.
154. Neglect of Physic when need requires is a fault p. 127. How to use it,
p. 128. Whence it is it does no good to some, ibid. Please others we should and
with what cautions, p. 143. Poor of whom they begged in former times, p. 55.
Power of God doubted of by us p. 131. Profession, the end of it is not idle
speculation, p. 219. The most forward in it do not ever deal best, p. 83. Yet
Profession is not in fault, nor to be cried out against. p. 84. Professors
should be careful of their actions, p. 85. Some Professors are like Images p.
219. Prophetical office of Christ discharged, p. 154. Projector, Christ is for
our good p. 158. Providence of God all things come to pass by it, p. 49. Have
Faith in it as well as in Gods Promises, p, 158.
Q
Questions four that shall not go unresolved, p. 11. Christ will make answer
to our Questions, p. 12.
R
Rahab how she was an harlot, p. 145. Redemption in the work of it God showed
not so much his face as bowels, p. 117. Greater honor done to man's nature in
it than in creation, 144. Religion of some is all outside no lining, p. 219. It
must be commended by a Religious life, p. 85. It is the strongest bond, p. 34.
Relief, who is fit to have it, 93 Residency enjoined on Ministers, p 182. It
is two fold, and which is especially required, jure divino, 184 Restitution
four for one by what Law, p. 28. Reward, there is due to good works, p. 193.
But not of merit, ibid. Riches not perfectly good. p 32
S
Sacrament, against carnal presence in it, p. 160. Salvation by Christ alone,
p 94 Not by the Law, p. 71. Not of all, p. 149. Salvation of the soul the
greatest Salvation, p. 96. It must be had by attending on the means. p. 135.
Doctrine of Salvation to be received with joy, p. 96. It requires from us
greatest thanks, p. 98. Savior, none l ke Christ, p. 93 How to get him to be
our Savior, ibid. Samaria a royal City, p. 80. Samaritans how esteemed of by
the Jews, p. 81. Satan his power limited. p. 39. Saying, difference betwixt it
and speaking, p. 9. Scripture, not to be abused by jesting with it, p. 14.
Senses, both seeing and hearing furnished with helps. Sick are to be visited.
vid, visit. Sin should not be varnished; 17 Similitudes, delightful and
profitable, p. 8. Singularity when a virtue, 66. Snare, how to escape it, p.
24. It lies in all worldly things, ib. Strength, our own trust not to, p. 16.
Suffering of sinners how it should affect us, p. 112. Superiors should look to
their carriage, p. 66. They are oft-times the chief in sinning, p. 67.
Suretiship is lawful, page 186. Cautions in using it, page 188.
T
Theft many ways committed, p. 29. It is a greater sin under the Gospel than
under the Law, page 28. Thieves, Devils are vid. Devils Who are to be counted
for Thieves, p. 27. They are Fellons, p. 33. There are great store abroad, 30
There are some great Thieves who are a terror to little ones, ibid Truth has
testimony from her Adversaries, p. 210. It suffers hardship in the world p.
211. It is to be received who ever brings it, p. 214. It cannot be believed on
her word, p. 212. The friends of it are to testify for it, p. 213. Traveling
is dangerous, p. 21. Tithes the tenure of them questioned by busy headed men,
168 They are a debt, p. 169, 172. And have bin consecrated to God, p. 172. They
carry a charge with them p. 177. Kings may partake of Levies Tyth. p. 17^. They
had a peculiar Tyth by themselves, ibid. They may not alienate Tithes from the
Church, p. 176. God has Tyth out of a strange field, p. 58. Unconscionable
Tythers are persecutors, p. 178. Time to be redeemed, pa. 100. Both the godly
and wicked husband it, p. 101.
V
Vessels in the Gospel how filled, p. 155. Victualing-houses not simply to be
condemned, p. 145. Where are many of them are usually many drunkards. No long
stay to be made in them, p. 159. Victualers in former times infamous* p. 145.
Visibility of the Church what, p 146. Visit the sick and afflicted, p. 60 121.
How the infected should be visited, p. 126. Christ is our Visitour, p, p. 125.
He is to be visited, p. 105. Union of our nature with Christ's how necessary and
comfortable, 143.
W
Walk we must and act, p. 219. Free Will in man and in what, p. 44. It must be
governd by grace, 45 Wine, the Law is compared unto p. 133. Word our guide, p.
26. Two parts of it p. 133. It is to be attended unto, read and preached, p.
135. Words of Christ, comfortable words, p. 125. Works of supererogation
condemned, p. 193. A compassionate heart full of good Works, p. 113, 119. Good
works rewarded yet merit not, p. 193. Co work we must with God, 46. World is a
very Hospital* p. 43. The World is every where, 27. It is no place of
continuance, p. 161. It is full of dangers, p. 22. How to use it, p. 23. The
pleasures of it are bitter, p. 20. It is to be destroyed, ibid. It must not be
our Center, 32. The things of it are taken with a Palsy, p. 31. Wounds, man's
soul full of, p. 42 None past Christ's cure, page 43, 129. How he cures them,
p. 129.
FINIS.

