Tam-Marti, Quam Mercurio.


The Ho.ble and learned Knight S. Walter Raleigh.

To: Vaughan Sculp

SIR WALTER RALEIGH'S SCEPTICK, OR SPECULATIONS.

And OBSERVATIONS of the Magnificency and Opulency of CITIES.

His SEAT of GOVERNMENT.

And LETTERS to the KINGS Majesty, and others of Quality.

Also his Demeanor before his EXECUTION.

LONDON, Printed by W. Bentley, and are to be sold by W. Shears, at the sign of
the Bible, over against the North door of S. Paul's. 1651.

Sir Walter Raleigh's SCEPTICK.
The SCEPTICK does neither affirm, neither deny any Position: but doubts of
it, and opposes his Reasons against that which is affirmed, or denied, to
justify his not Consenting.

HIs first Reason arises, from the consideration of the great difference
amongst living Creatures, both in the matter and manner of their Generations,
and the several Constitutions of their bodies.

Some living Creatures are by copulation, and some without it, and that either
by Fire as Crickets in fornaces; or corrupt water, as Gnats; or slime, as
Frogs; or dirt, as Worms; or herbs, as Canker-worms: some of ashes, as Beetles;
some of trees, as the Worms Psenas bred in the wild Fig Tree; some of living
creatures putrified, as Bees of Bulls, and Wasps of Horses. By Copulation many
creatures are brought forth alive, as Man; some in the egg, as Birds; some in
an unshapen piece of flesh, as Bears. These great differences cannot but cause
a diverse and contrary temperament, and quality in those creatures, and
consequently, a great diversity in their fantasy and conceit; so that they
apprehend one and the same object, yet they must do it after a diverse manner;
for is it not absurd to affirm, That creatures differ so much in temperature,
and yet agree in conceit concerning one and the same object?

But this will more plainly appear, Seeing
if the instruments of Sense in the body be observed: for we shall find, that
as these instruments are affected and disposed, so does the Imagination conceit
that which by them is connexed unto it. That very object which seems unto us
White, unto them which have the Jaundise, seems Pale, and Red unto those
whose Eyes are bloud-shot. For so much then as living creatures have some
white, some pale, some red eyes, why should not one and the same object seem to
some white, some red, to some pale? If a man rub his eye, the figure of that
which he beholds seems long, or narrow; is it then not likely, That those
creatures which have a long and slanting Pupil of the eye, as Goats, Foxes,
Cats, etc. do convey the fashion of that which they behold under another form
to the imagination, than those that have round Pupils do do?

Who knows not, that a Glass presents the outward object smoother, or
greater, according to the making of the glass? If it be hollow, the object
seems smaller than it is, if the glass be crooked, then the object seems
long and narrow. And glasses there be, which presents the head of him that
looks in them, downwards, and the heels upwards. Now then, seeing the eye
which is the instrument of Sight, in some living creatures is more outward, in
some more hollow, in some plain, in some greater, in some less; it is very
probable, that Fishes, Men, Lions, and Dogs, whose eyes so much differ, do not
conceive the self same object after the same manner, but diversely, according to
the diversity of the eye; which offers it unto the fantasy.

The same reason holds in Touching; Touching.
for seems it not absurd to think, that those creatures, which are covered
with Shells, those which are covered with Scales, those which are covered with
Hairs, and those which are Smooth, should all be alike sensible in Touching?
and every one of them conveigh the image, or quality of the same object which
they touch, in the very same degree of heat or cold, of dryness or moisture,
roughness or smoothness unto the imagination?

So might it be showed in Hearing, Hearing.
for how ca^ we think that the Ear, which has a narrow passage, and the Ear,
which has an open and wide passage, do receive the same sound in the same
degree? or that the Ear; whose inside is full of hair, does hear in the same
just measure, that the Ear does whose inside is smooth? Since experience
shows, that if we stop, or half stop our Ears, the sound comes not to us in
the same manner and degree, that it does if our ears be open?

The like may be thought of Smelling, Smelling.
for man himself abounding with Fleagm, is otherwise affected in smelling, than
he is, if the parts about the head be full of blood; and many things afford a
delightful smell to some living creatures, which smell to other living
creatures seems not to be so.

In the Taste the same reason appears; Tasting.
for to a rough and dry tongue, that very thing seems bitter (as in an Ague)
which to the moister tongue seems not to be so. Diverse creatures then having
tongues drier, or moister according to their several temperatures, when they
taste the same thing, must needs conceit it to be according as the instrument of
their taste is affected, either bitter, or sweet, etc. For even as the hand in
the striking of the Harp, though the stroke be one, yet causes a sound,
sometimes high, sometimes base, according to the quality of the string that is
stricken. Even so one and the same outward object is diversely judged of, and
conceited, according to the several and diverse qualities of the instrument of
Sense, which conveieth it to the imagination. Ointment is pleasing to Man; but
Beetles and Bees cannot abide it. Oil to man is profitable; but it kills Bees
and Wasps. Cicuta feeds Quails, and Henbane Sows; but both of these hurt Man.
If a Man eat Ants he is sick; but the Bear being sick, recovereth by eating
them.

If then one and the very same thing to the red eye seem red, to another pale,
and white to another: If one and the same thing, seem not hot or cold, dry or
moist, in the same degree to the several creatures which touch it: If one and
the self same sound seem more shrill to that creature which has a narrow ear,
and more base to him that has an open ear: If the same thing, at the same
time, seem to afford a pleasant and displeasant Smell to diverse and several
creatures: If that seem bitter in taste to one, which to another seems sweet,
that to one hurtful, which to another seems healthful, I may report how these
things appear diverse to several creatures, and seem to produce diverse effects.

but what they are in their own nature, whether red or white, bitter or sweet,
healthful or hurtful, I cannot tell. For why should I presume to profer my
conceit and imagination, in affirming that a thing is thus, or thus, in its own
nature, because it seems to me to be so, before the conceit of other living
creatures, who may as well think it to be otherwise in each one nature, because
it appears otherwise to them than it does to me?

They are living creatures as well as I, why then should I condemn their
conceit and fantasy, concerning any thing, more than they may mine? They may
be in the truth and I in error, as well as I in truth, and they err. If my
conceit must be believed before theirs, great reason that it be proved to be
truer than theirs. And this proof must be either by demonstration, or without
it; without it none will believe; Certainly, if by demonstration, then this
demonstration must seem to be true, or not seem to be true; if it seem to be
true, then will it be a question, whether it be so indeed as it seems to be;
and to allege that for a certain proof, which is uncertain and questionable,
seems absurd.

If it be said, that the imagination of Man judges truer of the outward
object, than the imagination of other living creatures does, and therefore to
be credited above others, (besides that which is already said) this is easily
refuted by comparing of Man with other creatures.

It is confessed, the Dog excels Man in smell, and in hearing, and whereas
there is said to be a twofold discourse, one of the mind, another of the
tongue, and that of the mind is said to be exercised in choosing that which is
convenient, and refusing that which is hurtful in knowledge, justice, and
thankfulness: This creature chooses his food, refuses the whip, fawneth on his
Master, defends his house, revengeth himself of those strangers that hurt
him. And Homer mentions Argus, the dog of Ulisses, who knew his master having
been from home so many years, that at his return, all the people of his house
had forgot him. This creature, says Chrysippus, is not void of Logic; for
when in following any beast, he co^eth to three several ways, he smells to
the one, and then to the second, and if he find that the beast which pursues
be not fled one of these 2 ways, he presently without smelling any further to
it, takes the third way, which, says the same Philosopher, is as if he
reasoned thus, the Beast must be gone either this, or this, or the other way;
but neither this nor this, Ergo, the third: and so away he runs.

If we consider his skill in Physic, it is sufficient to help himself; if he
be wounded with a dart, he uses the help of his Teeth to take it out, of his
Tongue to cleanse the wound from corruption; he seems to be well acquainted
with the Precept of Hippocrates, who says, that the Rest of the Foot is the
Physic of the Foot, and therefore if his foot be hurt, he holds it up that
it may rest; if he be sick, he gives himself a Vomit by eating of Grass, and
recovereth himself; the Dog then we see is plentifully furnished with inward
discourse.

Now outward speech is not needful to make a creature Reasonable, else a dumb
Man were an unreasonable Creature.

And do not Philosophers themselves reject this as an ene^ie to knowledge? and
therefore they are Silea when they are instructed; and yet even as Barbarous
ans strange people of speech, but we understand it not, neither do we perceive
any great difference in their words: but a difference there seems to be, and
they do expres their thoughts and meanings one to another by those words. Eve^
so those creatures, which are commonly called unreasonable, do seem to parlie
one with another; and by their speech to understand one the other. Do not Birds
by one kind of speech call their young ones, and by another cause them to hide
themselves? do they not by their several voices express their several passions
of joy, of grief, of fear in such manner, that their fellows understand them?
Do they not by their voice foreshew things to come? But we will return to that
creature we first did instance in. The Dog delivers one kind of voice when he
hunteth, another when he howleth, another when he is beaten, and another when
he is angry. These creatures then are not void of outward speech.

If then these creatures excel Man in sense, and are equal to him inward and
outward discourse, why should not their conceits and imaginations conveigh the
outward object in as true a manner as ours? and if so, then seeing their
imaginations are diverse, and they conceit it diversely according to their diverse
temperaments, I may tell what the outward object seems to me; but what it
seems to other creatures, or whether it be indeed that which it seems to
me, or any other of them, I know not.

But be it granted, that the Judgment of Man in this case, is to be preferred
before the Judgment of Beasts; yet in Men there is great difference; both in
respect of the outward shape, and also of the temperature of their bodies: For
the body of the Scythian differs in shape from the body of the Indian, the
reason of it arises (says the Dogmatiques) from a predominancie of humors in
the one more than in the other; and as several humors are predominant, so are
the fantasies and conceits severally framed and effected. So that our country
men delight in one thing, the Indian not in that, but in another which we
regard not. This would not be, if their conceits and ours were both alike, for
then we should like that which they do, and they would dislike that which we
would dislike. It is evident also, that men differ very much in the temperature
of their bodies, else why should some more easily digest Bief than Shel-fish?
and other be mad for the time, if they drink wine? There was an old woman about
Arbeus, which drunk three drams of Cicuta (every dram weighing sixty Barley
corns, and eight drams to an ounce) without hurt. Lysis, without hurt, took
four drams of Poppie; and Demophon, which was Gentleman-Sewer to Alexander, was
very cold when he stood in the sun, or in a hot bath; but very not when he
stood in the shadow. Athenagoras felt no pain if a Scorpion stung him. And the
Psilli (a people in Lybia, whose bodies are venom to serpents) if they be stung
by serpents, or Asps, receive no hurt at all.

The Ethiopians, which inhabit the river Hydaspis, do eat serpents and
scorpions without danger. Lothericus a Chyr^^gian, at the smell of a Sturgeon,
would be for the time mad. Andron of Argos, was so little thirsty, that
without want of drink, he traveled through the hot and dry country of Lybia.
Tyberius Caesar, would see very well in the dark. Aristotle, mentions of
Thratius, who said, that the image of a Man went always before him.

If then it be so, that there be such differences in Men, this must be by
reason of the diverse temperatures they have, and diverse disposition of their
conceit and imagination; for, if one hate, and another love the very same
thing, it must be that their fantasies differ, else all would love it, or all
would hate it. These Men then, may tell how these things seem to them good, or
bad; but what they are in their own Nature they cannot tell.

If we will hearken to men's opinions, concerning one and the same matter,
thinking thereby to come to the knowledge of it, we shall find this to be
impossible; for, either we must believe what all men say of it, or what some
men only say of it. To believe what all men say of one and the same thing, is
not possible; for then we shall believe Contrarieties; for some men say, That
that very thing is pleasant, which other say is displeasant. If it be said we
must believe only some men, then let it be showed who those some men are; for
the Platonists will believe Plato, but the Epicures Epicurus, the Pythagorians
Pythagorus and other Philosophers, the masters of their own Sects: so that it
is doubtful, to which of all these we shall give credit. If it be said, that
we must credit the greatest number, this seems childish, for there may be
amongst other Nations a greater number which deny that very point, which the
greatest number with us do affirm: so that hereof nothing can certainly be
affirmed.

This Argument seems to be further confirmed, if the differences of the
Senses of Hearing, Seeing, Smelling, Touching, and Tasting be considered; for
that the Senses differ, it seems plain.

Painted Tables (in which the art of Slanting is used) appear to the Eye, as if
the parts of them were some higher, and some lower than the other, but to the
Touch they seem not to be so.

Honey seems to the Tongue sweet, but unpleasant to the Eye: so Ointment does
recreate the Smell, but it offends the Taste. Rainwater is profitable to the
Eyes, but it hurts the Lungs. We may tell then, how these things seem to our
several senses, but what they are in their own nature we cannot tell: for why
should not a man credit any one of his senses as well as the other?

Every object seems to be presented diversely unto the several instruments of
Sense. An Apple to the Touch seems smooth, sweet to the Smell, and to the Eye
yellow; but whether the Apple have one of these qualities only, or more than
these qualities, who can tell? The Organ has many Pipes, all which are filled
with the same blast of wind, varied according to the capacity of the several
Pipes which receive it: even so the quality of the Apple may be but one, and
that this one quality may be varied, and seem yellow to the Eye, to the Touch
smooth, and sweet to the Smell, by reason of the diverse instruments of the
Sense, which apprehend this one quality diversely,

It may be also, that an Apple has many qualities besides, but we are not able
to conceive them all; because we want fit means and instruments to apprehend
them: for suppose that some Man is born blind, and deaf, and yet can touch,
smell, and taste; this man will not think that there is any thing, which may be
seen or heard, because he wants the Senses of hearing and seeing, he will
only think there are those qualities in the object, which by reason of his
three Senses he conceives: Even so the Apple may have many more qualities; but
we cannot come to know them, because we want fit instruments for that purpose.

If it be replied, that Nature has ordained as many instruments of Sense, as
there are sencible objects; I demand, What Natures? for there is a confused
controversy about the very Essence of Nature. Some affirming it to be one
thing, others another, few agreeing: so that what the quality of an Apple is,
or whether it has one quality or many I know not.

Let a man also consider, how many things that are separated, and by themselves
appear to differ from that which they seem to be, when they are in a mass or
lump; the scrapings of the Goats horn seems white, but in the horn they seem
black, but in the lump white. The stone Taenarus, being polished, seems
white, but unpolished and rough, it seems yellow. Sands being separated,
appear rough to the Touch, but a great heap, soft. I may then report, how these
things appear, but whether they are so indeed, I know not.

Sir Walter Raleigh's OBSERVATIONS Concerning the Causes of the Magnificencie
and Opulencie of CITIES.
THAT the only way to civilize and reform the savage and barbarous Lives, and
corrupt Manners of such people, is, 1 To be dealt withal by gentle and loving
Conversation among them, to attain to the knowledge of their Language, and of
the multitude of their special discommodities and inconveniences in their
manner of living. 2 The next is to get an admired reputation amongst them, upon
a solid and true foundation of Piety, Justice, and wisdom, conjoined with
fortitude and power. 3 The third is, discreetly to possess them with a
knowledge of the condition of their own estate. Thus Orpheus and Amphion, were
said to draw after them the beasts of the field, etc.


And this must be first wrought by a visible representation, of the certainty,
truth, and sincerity of these, together with the felicity of a reformed
estate.

All which is but to give foundation, bottom, and firm footing unto action, and
to prepare them to receive wholesome and good advise, for the future profit and
felicity of themselves and their posterity.

For the more commodious effecting of this Reformation in a rude and barbarous
people, they are to be persuaded to withdraw and unite themselves into several
Colonies; that by an interchangeable communication, and commerce of all things
may more commodiously be had, and that they may so live together in civilitie,
for the better succor and welfare of one another: And thereby they may more
easily be instructed in the Christian Faith, and governed under the Magistrates
and ministers of the King, or other superior power, under whom this
Reformation is sought; which course the Stoic tells, that Thesius took, after
he had taken upon him the Government of the Athenians, whereby he united all
the people into one City, that before lived dispersedly in many Villages. The
like is put in practice at this day by the Portugalls, and Jesuits, that they
may with less difficulty and hinderance reform the rough behavior, and savage
life of the people of BraZeel, who dwell scattered and dispersed in caves and
cottages made of boughs and leaves of the Palm Trees.

Alexander the Great, built more than seventie Cities; Seleucus built three
Cities, called Appanice, to the honor of his wife; and five called Laodicea,
in memory of his mother; and five called Seleuciae, to the honor of himself.

Safety for Defense of the People and their goods, in and near the Town.
Situation for Safety, and Plenty.
IN the Situation of Cities, there is to be required a place of Safety, by
some natural strength, commodiousness for Navigation, and Conduct, for the
attaining of plenty of all good things, for the sustenance and comfort of man's
life, and to draw trade and intercourse of other Nations, as if the same be
situate in such sort, as many people have need to repair thither for some
natural commodity, or other of the Country, which by traffic and
transportation of commodities, whereof they have more plenty than will supply
their own necessity, or for receiving of things whereof they have scarcity.
And much better will it be, if the place afford some notable commodity of it
self, from whence other Nations may more readily, and at better rate attain the
same. Likewise, and withal, be so fertile, pleasant, and healthful of it self,
that it may afford plenty of good things, for the delight and comfort of the
inhabitants.

Multitude of Inhabitants.
In former times, great Nations, Kings and Potentates have endured sharp
conflicts, and held it high Policy, by all means to increase their Cities,
with multitudes of inhabitants. And to this end the Romans ever furnished
themselves with strength and power, to make their Neighbor-people, of
necessity, willing to draw themselves to Rome to dwell, and overthrow their
Towns and Villages of mean strength, down to the ground.

So did they for this cause utterly destroy many Cities, bringing always the
vanquished Captives to Rome, for the augmentation of that City.

Romulus, after a mighty fight with the Sabynes condescended to Peace, upon
condition, that Tacius their King should come with all their people to dwell at
Rome: Tacius did accept and made choice of the Capitol, and the Mount
Quirinalis for his seat and Palace.

The same course held Tamberlain the Great, whereby he enlarged the great
Sarmacauda, still bringing unto it, the richest and wealthiest Citizens he had
subdued.

And the Ottomans, to make the City Constantinople rich and great, brought to
it many thousand Families, especially Artificers out of the subdued Cities, as
Mahomet the Great from Trabizond, Selim the First from Cairo, and Soliman from
Tauris.

Authority and necessity, without the consideration of the conveniences, and
commodiousness of Situation above mentioned, are of small moment in the
foundation of a City, thereby only it would be unlikely, either to grow or
continue in Magnificencie or Opulencie: for if Profit, Height, and Delight, go
not companions therewith, no authority or necessity, can retain much People
or Wealth.

But if the place whereupon a City is to be founded, be commodious for the
aforesaid conveniences, which help greatly for the felicity of this life;
then, no doubt, the same is likely to draw much abundance of people and riches
unto the same, whereby it may, by the help of Arts and Industry in time,
become magnificent and glorious.

Unto the good estate, greatness, and glory of a City, those things hereafter
mentioned do greatly avail, and are of much importance, viz.

Religion, Religion.
which is of such force and might, to amplify Cities and Dominions, and of
such attractive virtue to replenish the same with people and wealth, and to
hold them in due obedience, as none can be more; for without adoration of some
Dietie, no Commonwealth can subsist.

Witness Jerusalem, Rome Constantinople, and all other cities that have been
famous for the profession of Religion, or Divine worship. And no marvel, for
there is not any thing in this world of more efficacy and force to allure and
draw to it the hearts of Men, than God, which is the summum bonum. He is
carefully desired, and continually sought for of all creatures; for all regard
Him as their last end and refuge.

Light things apply themselves upwards, heavy things downwards; the Heavens to
Revolution, the Herbs to flowers, Trees to bear fruit, Beasts to present their
kind, and Man in seeking his tranquillity and everlasting glory. But forasmuch
as God is of so high a nature, as the sense and understanding of Man cannot
conceive it, every man directly turns himself to that place where he leaves
some print of his power, or declares some sign of his assistance. And to such
persons whom he seems more especially to have revealed himself.

Academies, Academies.
and Schools of Learning, with convenient immunities and privileges for
Scholars, and means for Recreation for Delight, are of great importance to
enlarge and enrich a city: forasmuch as men long for honor and profit, and of
Arts and liberal sciences some bring certain wealth to men, and some promotions
and preferments to honorable functions: for by this means, not only young
men, and those that are desirous of Learning and Virtue in the same
Commonwealth, will be retained in their own Country; but also strangers will
be drawn home to them. And the more will this be available if occasion be given
to Scholars and students, to rise to degrees of Honor and preferment by their
learned exercises, and that by the Policy of the same city, good Wits be
accounted of, and rewarded well: and that the same Academies and Schools be
stored with plenty of Doctors and learned men, of great fame and reputation.

Courts of Justice, Courts of Justice.
with due execution of the same in a city, do much enable, enlarge, and enrich
it; for it fasteneth a great liking in a city to virtuous men, and such as be
wealthy, that therein they may be free, and in safety from the violence of
the oppressions of covetous and wicked men: and there will be rather resort
thither to inhabit, or traffic there as occasions may minister unto them. And
many others that have cause of suite will repair thither, whereas they may be
sure to find Judgment and Justice duly executed, whereby the city must needs
be enlarged and enriched: for our lives, and a(...) ever we have are in
th(...)ds of Justice: so that if Justice be not administered amongst men, in
vain is there any society and commerce, or any other thing can be profitable
or safe; so much is love and charity failed, and iniquity increased upon the
face of the earth.

The excellency and multitude likewise of Artificers exercising their manual
arts and trades, Artificers.
do marvellously increase and enrich a State, whereof some are necessary, some
commodious for a civil life, other some are of pomp and ornament, and other
some of delicacie and curiosity (...)reof does follow co(...)se of people that
labor and work, and current money which does enrich and supply of Materials
for laborers, and workmen, buying and selling, transportation from place to
place, which does employ and increase the artificious and cunning parts of the
wit of Man; and this art and exquisitness of work-manship and skill is so
powerful herein, that it far excels the simple commodities and materials that
Nature produces; and is alone sufficient of it self to make a City or State,
both magnificent and glorious: and the daily experience we have in these our
days, and in former times, does manifestly approve the same, and make evident
without all contradiction.

Some natural benefits that a City also may have for the excellency of Art,
or work-manship of some special commodities above any other place, either
through the quality of the Water, or other matter whatsoever, or some hidden
mystery of the inhabitants in working thereof, may be a great help for the
enlargement and enriching of a city.

The command of a Country that affords some proper commodity, is of it self
sufficient mightily to bring a City to great wealth, and to advance it to
great power, and draws thereby dependencie and concourse, much advantageous
also, as well for the public weal, as the private person.

A City also may be Lord of much Merchandise and traffic, by means of the
commodious situation to many Nations, to whom it serves and has relation to,
as Warehouses, Roomth and Storehouses, by reason whereof, the nations
adjoining do use to resort thereunto to make their provisions of such things.
And this consists in the largeness of the Ports, the fitness of the gulphs
and creeks of the seas, in the Navigable rivers and channels, and the plain and
safe ways that leads to the City, or that come, or turn by or near it.

Privilege and freedom from Customs and exactions, Priledg
does greatly increase the Trade, and draw inhabitants to a city, whereby the
same may become both rich and powerful; whereof the Marts and Fairs, and
Markets bear good witness, which are frequented with great concourse of people,
Tradesmen and Merchants, for no other respect, but that they are there free and
frank from Customs and exactions. And the cities in Flanders are lively
testimonies hereof, where the Customs are very small.

By reason whereof, all such as have erected new Cities in times past to draw
concourse of people unto it, have granted large immunities, and privileges at
the least, to the first inhabitants thereof.

The like have they done that have restored Cities emptied with Plague,
consumed with Wars, or afflicted with Famine or some other scourge of God. In
respect whereof, Freedom of Cities has been often granted to such as would,
with their families, inhabit there, or would bring Corn and other necessaries
for provision of victual.

The Romans, to increase their Cities, made the Towns that well deserved of
them (which they after called Municipia) to be partakers of their franchises
and privileges.

The first means the Romans used to allure people to make their habitations
rather in Rome than else where, The first (...) of Rome to allure stranges, was
Sanctuary.
was the opening the Sanctuary, and giving liberty and freedom to all that
would come unto them. In respect whereof, there flocked thither, with their
goods, numbers of people that were either racked with exactions, thrust out of
their habitations, or unsafe, or unsure for their lives in their own Countries
for Religion sake.

The very same reason in a manner has increased so much the city of Geneva:
forasmuch as it has offered entertainment to all comers out of France and
Italy, that have either forsaken, or been exiled their Countries for Religious
sake.

Likewise, triumphs, Triumps.
goodly buildings, battles on the water, fights of sword-players, hunting of
wild beasts, public shows and sights, plays solemnized with great pomp and
preparation, and many other such things do draw the curious people to a city
inspeakably, which leaves behind them much treasure, and for such cause will
rather settle themselves to inhabit there, than in other places. This was also
the devise of Rome in her infancy to enlarge her self.

The Causes that Concern the Magnificencie of a CITY.
TO confirm a City in her Greatness, Justice, Peace, and Plenty are the
undoubted means: for Justice assures every man his own. Peace causes all Arts
and negotiations whatsoever to flourish: and Plenty of food and victual, that
sustaineth the life of Man with ease and much contentment. To conclude, All
those things that cause the Greatness of a City, are also fit to conserve the
same.

Sir Walter Raleigh's Seat of GOVERNMENT.
That the Seat of Government is upheld by the two great pillars thereof, viz.
Civil Justice, and Martial Policy; which are framed out of Husbandry,
Merchandise, and Gentry of this Kingdom.

THey say, that the goodliest CEDARS which grow on the high mountains of
Libanus, thrust their roots between the clifts of hard Rocks, the better to
bear themselves against the strong storms that blow there. As Nature has
instructed those kings of Trees, so has Reason taught the Kings of Men, to
root themselves in the hardy Hearts of their faithful Subjects. And as those
kings of Trees have large Tops, so have the Kings of Men large Crowns; whereof
as the first would soon be broken from their bodies, were they not underborn by
many branches; so would the other easily tytter, were they not fastened on
their heads, with the strong chains of Civil Justice, and Martial Discipline.

1. For the administration of the first, even God himself has given direction,
Judges and Officers shall thou make, which shall judge the People with
righteous judgment.

2. The second is grounded on the first Laws of the world and nature, that
Force is to be repelled by Force. Yea Moses in the 20 of Exodus, and else
where, has delivered us many Laws and Policies of War. But as we have heard of
the neglect and abuse in both, so have we heard of the decline and ruin of
many Kingdoms and States long before our days: for that Policy has never yet
prevailed (though it has served for a short season) where the counterfeit has
been sold for the natural, and the outward show and formalitie for the
substance. Of the Emperor Charles the Fourth, the writers of that age witness,
that he used but the name of Justice and good order, being more learned in the
Law than in doing right, and that he had by far, more knowledge than
conscience. Certainly the unjust Magistrate that fancieth to himself a sollid
and untrasparable body of Gold, every ordinary wit can vitrifie, and make
trasparant pierce, and discern their corruptions; howsoever, because not
daring, they cover their knowledge, but in the mean while it is also true, That
constrained dissimulation, either in the proud heart, or in the oppressed,
either in public estates, or in private persons, where the fear of God is not
prevalent, does in all the leisure of her lurking, but sharpen her teeth, the
voluntary being no less base, than the forced malicious. Thus it fared between
the Barons of England and their Kings, between the Lords of Switzerland and
their people, between the Sicilians and the French, between the Dolphine and
John of Burgoign, between Charles the Ninth and the French Protestants, and
between Henry the third, his successor, and the Lords of Guise, and hereof in
place of more particulars, the whole world may serve for examples.

It is a difficult piece of Geographie, to delineate and lay out the bounds of
Authority; but it is easy enough to conceive the best use of it, and by which
it has maintained it self in lasting happiness, it has ever acquired more
honor by persuading, than by beating; for as the bonds of Reason and Love are
immortal, so do all other chains or cords, both rustie and rot Noble parts of
their own Royal and Politic bodies.

But we will forbear for a while to stretch this first string of Civil Justice;
Husbandmen.
for in respect of the first sort of Men, to wit, of those that live by their
own labor, they have never been displeased where they have been suffered to
enjoy the fruit of their own travels, Meum and Tuum, Mine and Thine is all
wherein they seek the certainty and protection. True it is, that they are the
Fruit Trees of the Land, which God in Deuteronomie commanded to be spared, they
gather honey, and hardly enjoy the wax, and break the ground with great labor,
giving the best of their grain to the easefull and idle.

For the second sort, which are the Merchants, Merchant.
as the first feed the Kingdom, so do these enrich it, yea their trades,
especially those which are forcible, are not the least part of our Martial
Policy, as hereafter proved; and to do them right, they have in all ages and
times assisted the Kings of this Land, not only with great sums of money, but
with great Fleets of Ships in all their enterprises beyond the seas. The second
have seldom or never offended their Princes, to enjoy their trades at home upon
tolerable conditions, has ever contented them for the injuries received from
other Nations, give them but the Commission of Reprisal, they will either Right
themselves, or sit down with their own loss without complaint.

3. The third sort, which are the Gentry of England, Gentry
these being neither seated in the lowest grounds, and thereby subject to the
biting of every beast, nor in the highest Mountains, and thereby in danger to
be torn with tempest; but the Valleys between both, have their parts in the
inferior Justice, and being spread over all, are the Garrisons of good order
throughout the Realm.

Sir WALTER RALEIGH'S LETTERS.
Sir Walter Raleigh's Letter to Mr Secretary Winwood, before his Journey to
Guiana.
Honorable SIR,
I Was lately persuaded, by two Gentlemen, my ancient Friends, to acquaint your
Honor with some offers of mine, made heretofore for a Journey to Guiana, who
were of opinion, That it would be better understood now, than when it was first
propounded, which advice having surmounted my despair, I have presumed to send
unto your Honor the Copies of those Letters which I then wrote, both to his
Majesty, and to the Treasurer Cecill, wherein as well the reasons that first
moved me are remembered, as the objections by him made, are briefly answered.

What I know of the riches of that place, not by hearsay, but what mine eyes
has seen, I have said it often but it was then to no end: Because those that
had the greatest trust, were resolved not to believe it, not because they
doubted the Truth, but because they doubted my Disposition toward themselves;
where (if God had blessed me in the enterprise) I had recovered his Majesty's
favor and good opinion. Other cause than this, or other suspicion they never
had any. Our late worthy Prince of Wales was extreme curious in searching out
the Nature of my offenses, The Queens Majesty has informed her self from the
beginning, The King of Denmark at both times of his being here was thoroughly
satisfied of my innocence, they would otherwise never have moved his Majesty
on my behalf.

The Wife, the Brother, and the Son of a King, do not use to sue for men
suspect; but Sir, since they all have done it out of their charity, and but
with references to me alone. Your Honor (whose respect has only relation to
his Majesty's service) strengthened by the example of those Princes, may with
the more hardness do the like, being Princes to whom his Majesty's good estate
is no less dear, and all men that shall oppugn it, no less hateful, than to
the King himself.

It is true Sir, That his Majesty has sometimes answered, That his Council
knew me better than he did; meaning some two or three of them. And it was
indeed my infelicitie; for had his Majesty known me, I had never been here
where I now am: or had I known his Majesty, they had never been so long there
where they now are. His Majesty not knowing of me has been my ruin, and his
Majesty's misknowing of them, has been the ruin of a goodly part of his
estate: but they are all of them now, some living and some dying, come to his
Majesty's knowledge. But Sir, how little soever his Majesty knew me, and how
much soever he believed them, yet have I been bound to his Majesty both for my
Life, and all that remains, of which, but for his Majesty, nor Life, nor ought
else had remained. In this respect Sir, I am bound to yield up the same life,
and all I have for his Majesty's service; to die for the King, and not by the
King, is all the ambition I have in the world.

Walter Raleigh.

Sir Walter Raleighs's Letter to his Wife, from Guiana.
Sweet Heart,
I Can yet write unto you but with a weak hand, for I have suffered the most
violent Calenture for fifteen days, that ever man did, and lived: but God that
gave me a strong heart in all my adversities, has also now strengthened it in
the hellfire of heat.

We have had two most grievous sicknesses in our Ship, of which forty two
have died, and there are yet many sick, but having recovered the land of
Guiana, this 12 of November, I hope we shall recover them. We are yet two
hundred men, and the rest of our Fleet are reasonable strong, strong enough I
hope to perform what we have undertaken, if the diligent care at London, to
make our strength known to the Spanish King, by his Ambassador, have not
taught the Spanish King to fortify all the enterances against us; howsoever we
must make the Adventure, and if we perish, it shall be no honor for England,
nor gain for his Majesty to loose among many other an, hundred as valiant
Gentlemen as England has in it.

Of Captain Baylies base coming from us at the Canaries, see a Letter of
Kemishes to Mr Skory, and of the unnatural weather, storms and rains, and
winds. He has in the same letter, given a touch of the way that has ever been
sailed in fourteen days, now hardly performed in forty days; God I trust,
will give us comfort in that which is to come.

In passage to the Canaries, I stayed at Gomerah, where I took water in peace,
because the Country durst not deny it me; I received there of an English
race, a Present of Oranges, Lemons, Quinces, and Pome-granates, without which I
could not have lived; those I preserved in fresh sands, and I have of them yet
to my great refreshing. Your son had never so good health, having no distemper
in all the heat under the Line. All my servants have escaped but Crab and my
Cook, yet all have had the sickness. Crofts and March, and the rest are all
well. Remember my service to my Lord Carew, and Mr Secretary Winwood.

I write not to them, for I can write of naught but miseries: yet of men of
sort, we have lost our Sergeant Major, Captain Pigott, and his Lieuetenant,
Captain Edward Hastings, who would have died at home, for both his liver,
spleen, and brains were rotten. My sons Lieuetenant Payton, and my cousin Mr.
Hews, Mr. Mordant, Mr. Gardner, Mr. Haward, Captain Iennings the Merchant,
Kemish of London, and the Master Chyrurgion, Mr. Refiner, Mr. Moor the
Governor of the Barmoudas, our Provost Marsh. W. Steed, Lieuetenant Vescie,
but to mine inestimable grief, Hamon and Talbot. By the next I trust you shall
hear better of us, in Gods hands we were, and in him we trust.

This bearer, Captain Alley, for his infirmity of his head I have sent back,
an honest valiant man, he can deliver you all that is past. Commend me to my
worthy friends at Loathbury, Sr. John Leigh and Mr. Bower, whose Nephew Knevit
is well, and to my cousin Blundell, and my most devoted and humble service to
her Majesty.

To tell you that I might be here King of the Indians, were a vanity, but my
name has still lived among them; here they feed me with fresh meat, and all
that the Country yields, all offer to obey me. Commend me to poo^ Carew my son.

From Galliana in Guiana the 14 of November.

Sir Walter Raleigh's Letter to Sir Ralph Winwood.
SIR,
AS I have not hitherto given you any Account of our proceedings and passages
toward the Indies, so have I no other subject to write of, than of the
greatest misfortunes that ever befell any man: for whereas, for the first, All
those that Navigate between Cape de Verd and America, to pass between fifteen
or twenty days at most, we found the wind so contrary, and which are also
contrary to nature, so many storms and rains, as we spent six weeks in the
passage, by reason whereof, and that in so great heat we wanted water: for at
the Isle Prano of Cape de verd, we lost our Anchors and Cables, and our water
Casks, being driven from the Island with a Hurlicano, and were like all to have
perished. Great sickness fell amongst us, and carried away great numbers of our
ablest men both for sea and land. The 17 of November, we had sight of Guiana,
and soon after came to Anchor in five degrees at the River Galliano, here we
staid till the fourth of December, landed our sick men, set up the Barges and
Shallops, which were brought out of England in quarters, washed our Ships, and
took in fresh water, being fed and cherished by the Indians of my old
acquaintance, with a great deal of love and respect, my self being in the hands
of death these 6 weeks, and was not able otherwise to move than as I was
carried in a chair, gave order to 5 small Ships, to sail into Orinoque, having
Captain Kemis for their Conductor toward the Mines, and in those five Ships
five Companies of 50 under the command of Captain Parker, and Captain North,
brethren to the Lord Mounteagle and the Lord North, valiant Gentlemen, and of
infinite patience for the labor, hunger, and heat which they have endured, my
son had the third Company, Captain Thornix of Kent the fourth Company, Captain
Chidley, by his Lieutenant, the fifth: but as my Sergeant Major Captain Piggot
of the Low Countries died in the former miserable passage, so my Lieuetenant
Sir Warham S. Leiger lay sick without hope of life, and the charge conferred on
my Nephew George Raleigh, who had also served long with infinite commendations;
but by reason of my absence, and of Sir Warhams was not so well obeyed as the
Enterprise required. As they passed up the River, the Spaniard began the War,
and shot at us both with their Ordinance and Muskets, whereupon the Companies
were forced to charge them, and soon after beat them out of the Town. In the
assault, my son (more desirous of honor than safety) was slain, with whom (to
say truth) all the respects of this world have taken end in me. And although
these five Captains had as weak Companies as ever followed valiant Leaders, yet
were there amongst them some twenty or thirty valiant adventurous Gentlemen,
and of singular courage, as of my sons Company, Mr. Knivet, Mr. Hammon, Mr.
Langworth, Mr. John Pleasington; his Officers, Sir John Hamden, Mr. Simon Leak
Corporal of the Field, Mr. Hammon the elder Brother, Mr. Nicholas of
Buckingham, Mr. Roberts of Kent, Mr. Perin, Mr. Tresham, Mr. Mullinax, Mr.
Winter and his brother, Mr. Wray, Mr. Miles Herbart, Mr. Bradshaw, Capt. Hall,
and others.

Sir, I have set down the names of these Gentlemen, to the end, that if his
Majesty shall have cause to use their service, it may please you to take
notice of them for very sufficient Gentlemen. The other five Ships staid at
Trinidado, having no other Port capable for them near Guiana. The second Ship
was commanded by my Vice Admiral Capt. John Pennington, of whom (to do him
right) he is one of the sufficientest Gentlemen for the Sea that England has.
The third by Sir Warham S. Leiger, an exceeding valiant and worthy Gentleman.
The fourth by Sr John Fern. The fifth by Captain Chidley of Devon. With these
five Ships I daily attended their Armando of Spain, which had they set upon us,
our force divided, the one half in Orinoque, an hundred and fifty miles from
us, we had not only been torn in pieces, but all those in the River had also
perished, being of no force at all for the Sea Fight; for we had resolved to
have been burnt by their sides, had the Armando arrived: but belike, they staid
for us at Margarita, by which they knew we must pass toward the Indies: for it
pleased his Majesty to value us at so little, as to command me upon my
Allegiance, to set down under my hand the Country, and the River by which I
was to enter it, to set down the number of my men, and burden of my Ships, and
what Ordinance every Ship carried, which being known to the Spanish Ambassador,
and by him to the King of Spain, a dispatch was made, and letters sent from
Madrid, before my departure out of the Thames; for his first letter sent by a
Barque of Advise, was dated the 19 of March 1617. at Madrid, which letter I
have here enclosed sent to your Honor, the rest I reserve, not knowing whether
they may be intercepted or not. The second by the King, dated the second of
May, sent also by a Coronel of Diego de Polonieque, Governor of Guiana,
Elderedo, and Trinidado. The third by the Bishop of Porericho, and delivered to
Polonieque the 15 of July, at Trinidado. And the fourth was sent from the
Farmer and Secretary of his Customs in the Indies. At the same time, by that
of the Kings hand, sent by the Bishop, there was also a Commission for the
speedy levying of three hundred soldiers, and ten pieces of Ordinance to be
sent from Portricho, for the defense of Guiana, an hundred and fifty from
Nuevo Remo de Grando, under the command of Captain Anthony Musica, and the
other hundred and fifty from Portricho, to be conducted by C. Franc. Laudio.

Now Sir, if all that have traded to the Indies since his Majesty's time knew
that the Spaniards have flayed alive all the poor men which they have taken,
being but Merchant men, what death and cruel torment shall we expect if they
conquer us? certainly they have hitherto failed grossly, being set out thence as
we were, both for number, time, and place.

Lastly, to make an Apology for not working the Mine, (although I know his
Majesty expects) whom I am to satisfy so much, as my self, having lost my
son, and my estate in the Enterprise, yet it is true, that the Spaniards took
more care to defend the passage leading unto it, than they did the Town, which
by the Kings instructions they might easily do, the Countries being Aspera and
Nemosa.

But it is true, that when Capt. Kemish found the River low, and that he could
not approach the Banks in most places near the Mine by a Mile, and where he
found a descent, a volley of Muskets came from the woods upon the Boat, and
slew two Rowers, and hurt six others, and shot a valiant Gentleman of Captain
Thornix, of which wound he languisheth to this day. He, to wit, Kemish,
following his own advice, thought that it was in vain to discover the Mine; for
he gave me this for an excuse at his return, that the Companies of English in
the Town of S. Thome were not able to defend it, against the daily and nightly
assaults of the Spaniards, that the passages to the Mines, were thick and
unpassable woods, and that the Mine being discovered, they had no men to work
it, did not discover it at all: for it is true, the Spaniards having two gold
Mines near the Town, the one possessed by Pedro Rodrigo de Paran, the second by
Harmian Frotinio, the third of silver, by Captain Francisco, for the want of
Negroes to work them: for as the Indians cannot be constrained by a Law of
Charles the Fifth, so the Spaniards will not, nor can endure the labor of those
Mines, whatsoever the Bragadochio, the Spanish Ambassador says. I shall prove
under the Proprietors hand, by the Custom-Book, and the Kings Quinto, of which
I recovered an Ingot or two: I shall also make it appear to any Prince or State
that will undertake it, how easily those Mines, and five or six more of them
may be possessed, and the most of them in those parts, which never have as yet
been attempted by any, nor by any passage to them, nor ever discovered by the
English, French, or Dutch. But at Kemish his return from Orinoque, when I
rejected his counsel and his course, and told him that he had undone me, and
wounded my credit with the King past recoverie, he slew himself; for I told
him, that seeing my son was slain, I cared not if I had lost an hundred more in
opening of the Mine, so my credit had been saved: for I protest before God, had
not Capt. Whitney (to whom I gave more countenance than to all the Captains of
my Fleet) run from me at the Grenades, and carried another ship with him of
Captain Wollestons. I would have left my body at S. Thomes by my sons, or have
brought with me out of that or other Mines, so much Gold-oar, as should have
satisfied the King. I propounded no vain thing; what shall become of me I know
not, I am unpardoned in England, and my poor estate consumed, and whether any
Prince will give me bread or no I know not. I desire your Honor to hold me in
your good opinion, to remember my service to my Lord of Arrundel and Pembrook,
to take some pity on my pour Wife, to whom I dare not write for renewing her
sorrow for her son; and beseech you to give a copy of this to my Lord Carew:
for to a broken mind, a sick body, and weak eyes, it is a torment to write
many Letters. I have found many things of importance for discovering the state
and weakness of the Indies, which if I live, I shall hereafter impart unto your
Honor, to whom I shall remain a faithful servant.

Walter Raleigh.

Sir Walter Raleigh's Letter sent to his Wife, Copied out of his own
handwriting.
I Was loath to write, because I know not how to comfort you, and God knows, I
never knew what sorrow meant till now. All that I can say to you is, that you
must obey the will and providence of God, and remember, that the Queens
Majesty bare the loss of Prince Henry with a magnanimous heart, and the Lady
Harrington of her son. Comfort your heart (dearest Bess) I shall sorrow for us
both, I shall sorrow the less, because I have not long to sorrow, because not
long to live. I refer you to Mr. Secretary Winwoods Letter, who will give you
a copy of it, if you send for it, therein you shall know what has passed; I
have written that Letter, for my brains are broken, and it is a torment for me
to write, and especially of misery. I have desired Mr. Secretary to give my
Lord Carew a copy of his Letter. I have cleansed my ship of sick men, and sent
them home; I hope God will send us somewhat before we return. You shall hear
from me if, I live, from the Newfound land, where I mean to make clean my
ships and revictual; for I have Tobacco enough to pay for it. The Lord bless
and comfort you, that you may bear patiently the death of your valliant son.

This 22. of March, from the Isle of Christophers, yours Walter Raleigh.
Postscript.
I Protest before the Majesty of God, That as Sir Francis Drake, and Sir John
Hawkins died heartbroken when they failed of their enterprise, I could
willingly do the like, did I not contend against sorrow for your sake, in hope
to provide somewhat for you and to comfort and relieve you. If I live to
return, resolve your self that it is the care for you that has strengthened my
heart. It is true that Kemish might have gone directly to the Mine, and meant
it, but after my sons death, he made them believe he knew not the way, and
excused himself upon want of water in the River, and counterfeiting many
impediments left it unfound. When he came back, I told him he had undone me,
and that my credit was lost for ever; he answered. That when my son was lost,
and that he left me so weak, that he resolved not to find me alive, he had no
reason to enrich a company of Rascals, who after my sons death made no account
of him. He further told me that the English sent up into Guiana, could hardly
defend the Spanish town of S. Thome which they had taken, and therefore for
them to pass through thick woods it was impossible, and more impossible to have
victual brought them into the Mountains. And it is true, that the Governor
Diego Polenego, and other four Captains being slain, whereof Wats slew one,
Plessington, Wats servant, and John of Moroccoes, one of his men, slew other
two. I say five of them slain in the entrance of the Town, the rest went off
in a whole body, and took more care to defend the passages to their Mines (of
which they had three within a League of the Town, besides a Mine that was about
five miles off) than they did of the Town it self. Yet Kemish at the first was
resolved to go to the Mine; but when he came to the banck side to Land, and had
two of his men slain outright from the bank, and six other hurt, and Captain
Thornix shot in the head, of which wound, and the accident thereof, he has
pined away these twelve weeks.

Now when Kemish came back and gave me the former Reasons which moved him not
to open the Mine, the one the death of my son, a second the weakness of the
English, and their impossibilities to work and to be victualled; a third that
it were a folly to discover it for the Spaniards; and lastly my weakness and
being unpardoned; and that I rejected all these his Arguments, and told him,
that I must leave him to himself to resolve it to the King and State, he shut
up himself into his Cabin, and shot himself with a pocket Pistol which broke
one of his ribs, and finding that he had not prevailed, he thrust a long Knife
under his short ribs up to the handle and died. Thus much I have written to M.
Secretary, to whose Letters I refer you to know the truth. I did after the
sealing break open the Letter again, to let you know in brief the state of that
business. which I pray you impart to my Lord of Northumberland, and Silvanus
Scory.

For the rest, there was never poor man so exposed to slaughter as I was; for
being commanded upon mine Allegiance to set down not only the Country but
the very River by which I was to enter it, to name my Ships number, men, and my
Artillery. This now was sent by the Spanish Ambassador to his Master the King
of Spain, the King wrote his Letters to all parts of the Indies, especially to
the Governor Palamago of Guiana, Elderado, and Trinidado, of which the first
Letter bore date 19 of March 1617, at Madrill, when I had not yet left the
Thames, which Letter I have sent to Mr Secretary. I have also other Letters of
the Kings which I reserve, and one of the Councels. The King also sent a
Commission to leavie three hundred soldiers out of his Garrisons of unie Regno
de Granado e Portricho, with ten pieces of brass Ordinance to entertain us; he
also prepared an Army by sea to set upon us. It were too long to tell you how
we were preserved, if I live I shall make it known; my brains are broken, and I
cannot write much, I live yet, and I told you why. Witney for whom I sold all
my Plate my Plymouth, and to whom I gave more credit and countenance than to
all the Captains of my Fleet, ran from me at the Grenades, and Wolleston with
him, so as I have now but five Ships, and out of those I have sent some into my
Flyboat a rabble of idle Rascals, which I know will not spare to wound me, but
I care not. I am sure there is never a base slave in all the Fleet has taken
the pain and care that I have done, that have slept so little, and traveled so
much, my friends will not believe them, and for the rest I care not; God in
heaven bless you and strengthen your heart.

Yours Walter Raleigh.



Sir Walter Raleigh's Letter to Mr Secretary Winwood.
SIR,
SInce the death of Kemish, it is confessed by the Sergeant Major, and others
of his inward friends, that he told them, that he could have brought them unto
the Mine within two hours March from the River side; but because my son was
slain, my self unpardoned, and not like to live, he had no reason to open the
Mine either for the Spaniard or for the King; they answered, that the King
(though I were not pardoned) had granted my heart under the Great Seal. He
replied, that the grant to me was to no man, non Ens in the Law, and therefore
of no force; this discourse they had, which I knew not of till after his death:
but when I was resolved to write unto your Honor, he prayed me to join with
him in excusing his not going to the Mine, I answered him I would not do it;
but if my self could satisfy the King and State, that he had reason not to
open it, I should be glad of it: but for my part, I must avow that he knew it,
and that he might with loss have done it; other excuses I would not frame: he
told me that he would wait on me presently, and give me better satisfaction:
but I was no sooner come from him into my Cabin, but I heard a Pistol go over
my head, and sending to know who shot it, word was brought me that Kemish shot
it out of his Cabin window to cleanse it; his boy going into his Cabin, found
him lying upon his bed with much blood by him, and looking in his face saw him
dead; the Pistol being but little, did but crack his rib, but turning him over
found a long Knife in his body, all but the handle. Sir, I have sent into
England with my cousin Harbert (a very valiant honest Gentleman) diverse unworthy
persons, good for nothing neither by sea nor land, and though it was at their
own suit, yet I know they will wrong me in all that they can. I beseech your
Honor, that the scorn of men may not be believed of me, who have taken more
pains, and suffered more than the meanest Rascal in the Ship; these being gone,
I shall be able to keep the Sea until the end of August, with some four
reasonable good ships. Sir, wheresoever God shall permit me to arrive in any
part of Europe, I will not fail to let your Honor know what we have done, till
then, and ever I rest

Your Honors servant W. Raleigh.

Sir WALTER RALEIGH'S Letter to King JAMES, at his return from GUIANA.
May it please your most excellent Majesty,
IF in my Journey outward bound, I had my men murdered at the Islands, and yet
spared to take revenge, if I did discharge some Spanish Barks taken without
spoil, if I forbear all parts of the Spanish Indies, wherein I might have taken
twenty of their Downs on the seacoasts, and did only follow the enterprise I
undertook for Guiana, where without any directions from me, a Spanish Village
was burnt, which was new set up within three miles of the Mine. By your
Majesty's favor, I find no reason why the Spanish Ambassador should complain
of me. If it were lawful for the Spaniards to murder twenty six English men,
tying them back to back, and then cuting their throats, when they had traded
with them a whole month, and came to them on the land without so much as one
sword, and that it may not be lawful for your Majesty's subjects, being
charged first by them, to repel force by force, we may justly say, O miserable
English!

If Parker and Metham took Campeach and other places in the Honduraes, seated
in the heart of the Spanish Indies, burnt Towns, and killed the Spaniards, and
had nothing said unto them at their return, and my self forbore to look into
the Indies; because I would not offend, I may as justly say, O miserable Sir
Walter Raleigh!

If I have spent my poor estate, lost my son, suffered by sickness and
otherwise a world of miseries; if I have resisted with manifest hazard of my
life, the Robberies and Spoils, with which my Companions would have made me
rich, if when I was poor, I would have made my self rich, if when I have gotten
my liberty, which all men and nature it self do much prize, I voluntarily lost
it, if when I was sure of my life, I rendered it again, if I might elsewhere
have sold my ship and goods, and put five or six thousand pounds in my purss
and yet brought her into England, I beseech your Majesty to believe, that all
this I have done, because it should not be said to your Majesty, that your
Majesty had given liberty and trust to a man whose end was but the recoverie
of his liberty, and who had betrayed your Majesty's trust.

My Mutiniers told me, that if I returned for England I should be undone, but I
believed in your Majesty's goodness more than in all their arguments. Sure, I
am the first that being free and able to enrich my self, yet has embraced
poverty and peril. And as sure I am, that my example shall make me the last:
but your Majesty's wisdom and goodness I have made my judges, who have ever
been, and shall ever be,

Your Majesty's most humble Vassal Walter Raleigh.

Sir Walter Raleighs's Letter to his Wife, after his Condemnation.
YOu shall receive (my dear Wife) my Last words in these my Last lines; my love
I send you, that you may keep when I am dead, and my counsel, that you may
remember it when I am no more. I would not with my will present you sorrows
(dear Bess) let them go to the grave with me, and be buried in the dust. And
seeing that it is not the will of God that I shall see you any more, bear my
destruction patiently, and with an heart like your self.

First I send you all the thanks which my heart can conceive, or my words
express, for your many travels and cares for me, which though they have not
taken effect as you wished, yet my debt to you is not the less; but pay it I
never shall in this world.

Secondly, I beseech you, for the love you bare me living, that you do not hide
your self many days, but by your travels seek to help the miserable Fortunes,
and the Right of your poor Child, your mourning cannot avail me that am but
dust.

Thirdly, you shall understand, that my Lands were conveyed ( bona side) to my
Child, the writings were drawn at Midsummer was twelve months, as diverse can
witness, and I trust my blood will quench their malice who desired my
slaughter; that they will not seek also to kill you and yours with extreme
poverty. To what friend to direct you I know not, for all mine have left me in
the true time of trial. Most sorry am I, that being thus surprised by death,
I can leave you no better Estate, God has prevented all my determinations,
that great God which works all in all, and if you can live free from want,
care for no more, for the rest is but a vanity; Love God, and begin betimes,
in him you shall find true, everlasting, and endless comfort, when you have
traveled and wearied your self with all sorts of worldly cogitations, you
shall sit down by sorrow in the end. Teach your son also to serve and fear God
whilst he is young, that the fear of God may grow up in him; then will God be
an Husband to you, and a Father to him, an Husband and a Father, that can never
be taken from you.

Baylie owes me a thousand pounds, and Aryan six hundred; in Jernesey also I
have much owing me. (Dear wife) I beseech you, for my Souls sake, pay all poor
men. When I am dead, no doubt you shall be much sought unto, for the world
thinks I was very rich; have a care to the fair pretenses of men, for no
greater misery can be fall you in this life, than to become a prey unto the
world, and after to be despised. I speak (God knows) not to dissuade you from
Marriage, for it will be best for you, both in respect of God and the world. As
for me, I am no more yours, nor you mine, death has cut us asunder, and God
has divided me from the world, and you from me. Remember your poor Child for
his Fathers sake, who loved you in his happiest estate. I sued for my life, but
(God knows) it was for you and yours that I desired it: for, know it, (my dear
Wife) your Child is the Child of a true man, who in his own respect despises
Death and his misshapen and ugly forms. I cannot write much, (God knows) how
hardly I steal this time when all sleep, and it is also time for me to separate
my thoughts from the world. Beg my dead body, which living was denied you, and
either lay it in Sherborn or in Exeter Church by my father and mother. I can
say no more, Time and Death calls me away. The everlasting God, powerful,
infinite, and inscrutable God Almighty, who is goodness it self, the true
Light and Life, keep you and yours, and have mercy upon me, and forgive my
Persecutors and false accusers, and send us to meet in his glorious kingdom. My
dear Wife farewell, Bless my Boy, Pray for me, and let my true God hold you both
in his Arms.

Yours that was, but now not mine own Walter Raleigh.

Sir Walter Raleigh's Letter to Prince Henry, touching the model of a Ship.
Most excellent Prince,
IF the Ship your Highness intends to build, be bigger than the Victory, then
her beams, which are laid overthwart from side to side will not serve again,
and many other of her timbers and other stuff, will not serve, whereas if she
be a size less, the timber of the old Ship will serve well to the building of a
new.

If she be bigger she will be of less use, go very deep to water, and of
mighty charge, our Channels decaying every year, less nimble, less mannyable,
and seldom to be used Grande Navio, grande fatica, says the Spaniard.

A Ship of six hundred Tuns, will carry as good Ordinance as a Ship of twelve
hundred Tuns, and where the greater has double her Ordinance, the less will
turn her broad side twice, before the great Ship can wind once, and so no
advantage in that overplus of Guns. The lesser will go over clear where the
greater shall stick and perish; the lesser will come and go, leave or take, and
is yare, whereas the greater is flow, unmanyable, and ever full of encumber.

In a well conditioned Ship, these things are chiefly required.

1. That she be strong built. 2. Swift it sail. 3. Stout-sided. 4. That her
Ports be so laid, as that she may carry out her Guns all weathers. 5. That she
hull and try well. 6. That she stay well, when boarding, or turning on a wind
is required.
To make her strong, consists in the care and truth of the workman; to make
her swift, is to give her a large Run, or way forward, and so aftward, done by
art and just proportion, and that in laying out of her bows before, and
quarters behind, the Ship-wright be sure, that she neither sink nor hang into
the water, but lie clear and above it, wherein Ship-wrights do often fail, and
then is the speed in sailing utterly spoiled.

That she be stout-sided, the same is provided by a long bearing floar, and by
sharing off from above water to the lower edge of the Ports, which done, then
will she carry out her Ordinance all weathers.

To make her to hull and to try well, which is called a good sea-Ship, there
are two things principally to be regarded the one that she have a good draught
of water, the other that she be not overcharged: And this is seldom done in the
Kings Ships, and therefore we are forced to lie, or try in them with our main
Course and mizen, which with a deep keel and standing streak, she would perform.

The extreme length of a Ship makes her unapt to stay, especially if she be
floatie and want sharpness of way forward. And it is most true, that such
overlong Ships, are fitter for the narrow Seas in summer, than for the Ocean,
or long voyages and therefore an hundred foot by the Keel, and thirty five
foot broad is a good proportion for a great Ship.

It is to be noted, that all Ships sharp before, not having a long floar, will
fall rough into the sea from a billow, and take in water over head and ears;
and the same quality have all narrow-quartered ships to sink after the tail.
The high Cargeing of ships, is that that brings many ill qualities it makes
them extreme Lee-ward, makes them sink deep into the seas, makes them labor
sore in foul weather, and oft-times overset. Safety is more to be respected
than shows, or niceness for ease; in sea-journeys both cannot well stand
together and therefore the most necessary is to be chosen.

Two Decks and an half is enough, and no building at all above that, but a low
Masters Cabin, Our Masters and Mariners will say, that the ships will bear
more well enough; and true it is, if none but ordinary Mariners served in
them. But men of better sort, unused to such a life, cannot so well endure the
rolling and tumbling from side to side, where the seas are never so little
grown, which comes by high Cargeing. Besides those high Cabbin-works aloft, are
very dangerous in fight, to tear men with their splinters.

Above all other things, have care that the great Guns be four foot clear above
water when all lading is in, or else these best pieces are idle at sea; for if
the Ports lie lower, and be open, it is dangerous; and by that default was a
goodly Ship, and many gallant Gentlemen lost, in the days of Henry the Eigth,
before the Isle of Wight, in a Ship called by the name of Mary-Rose.

Sir Walter Releigh's PILGRIMAGE.
GIve me my Scallop shell of Quiet,
My Staff of Faith to walk upon;
My Scrip of Joy immortal Diet;
My Bottle of Salvation.
My Gown of Glory (Hopes true gage)
And thus I Will take my Pilgrimage.
Blood must be my Bodies only Balmer,
No other Balm will there be given
Whilst my Soul, like a quiet Palmer,
Travelleth toward the Land of Heaven.
Over the silver Mountains
Where springs the Nectar Fountains,
There I will kiss the Bowl of Bliss,
And drink mine everlasting fill
Upon every Milken hill.
My soul will be adrie before,
But after, it will thirst no more.
I Will take them first, to quench my Thirst.
And taste of Nectars suckets,
At those clear Wells
Where sweetness dwells,
Drawn up by Saints in Crystal Buckets.
Then by that happy blestfull day,
More peaceful Pilgrims I shall see,
That have cast off their rags of clay,
And walk apparelled fresh like me.
And when our Bottles and all we
Are filled with Immortality.
Then the blessed Paths we will travel,
Strow'd with Rubies thick as gravel,
Sealings of Diamonds, Sapphire flowers,
High walls of Coral, and Pearly Bowers.
From thence to Heavens bribeless Hall,
Where no corrupted voices brawl,
No Conscience molten into Gold,
No forged Accuser bought or sold,
No cause deferred, no vain-spent Journey,
For there, CHRIST is the Kings Attorney;
Who pleads for all without degrees,
And he has Angels, but no Fees:
And when the twelve Grand-million Jurie
Of our Sins, will direful Jurie,
Against our Souls black Verdicts give,
Christ pleads his Death, and then we Live,
Be thou my Speaker [taintless Pleader,
Unblotted Lawyer, true Proceeder.]
Thou would Salvation even for Alms,
Not with a bribed Lawyers Palms.
And this is mine eternal Plea
To him that made Heaven, Earth, and Sea,
That since my Flesh must die so soon,
And want a Head to dine next noon,
Just at the stroke?, when my Veins start and spread,
Set on my Soul an everlasting Head.
Then am I ready, like a Palmer, fit
To tread those blessed Paths which before I writ,
Of Death and Judgment, Heaven and Hell,
Who often does think, must needs Die well,
Sir Walter Raleigh's VERSES; Found in his Bible in the Gate House at
Westminster.
EVen such is Time, which takes in trust
Our Youth, our Joys, and all we have,
And pays us naught but Age and Dust,
When in the dark and silent Grave:
When we have wandered all our ways,
Shuts up the story of our days:
And from which Grave, and Earth, and Dust,
The Lord shall raise me up I trust.
Sir W. RALEIGH, On the Snuff of a Candle the night before he died.
Cowards fear to Die, but Courage stout,
Rather than Live in Snuff, will be put out.
Sir WALTER RALEIGH'S SPEECH Immediately before he was beheaded.
UPon Simon and Iudes day, the Lieuetenant of the Tower had a Warrant to bring
his Prisoner to the King's Bench in Westminster Hall, where the Attorney General
demanded Execution, according to the Judgment pronounced against him at
Winchester, the Lord Chief Justice caused the Indictment, Verdict, and
Judgment to be read, and after asked him, what he could say, Why he should not
die according to the Law; his answer was, That this fifteen years he had lived
by the mere mercy of the King, and did now wonder how his Mercy was turned into
Justice, he not knowing any thing wherein he had provoked his Majesty's
displeasure, and did hope, that he was clear from that Judgment by the Kings
Commission in making him General of the Voyage to Guiana, for (as he conceived)
the words, To his trusty and welbeloved subject, etc. Did in themselves imply
a Pardon. But Master Attorney told him, these words were not sufficient for
that purpose. Whereupon he desired the opinion of the Court, to which the Lord
Chief Justice replied, it was no Pardon in Law.

Then began Sir Walter Raleigh to make a long description of the events and
ends of his Voyage, but he was interrupted by the Chief Justice, who told him,
that it was not for any offense committed there, but for his first fact that he
was now called in question, and thereupon told him, That seeing he must prepare
to die, he would not add affliction to affliction, nor aggravate his fault,
knowing him to be a man full of misery; but with the good Samaritane
administer oil and wine for the comfort of his distressed Soul. You have been a
General, and a great Commander, imitate therefore that noble Captain, who
thrusting himself into the midst of a Battle, cried aloud, Mors me Expectat,
and ego Mortem Expectabo, as you should not contemn so to do, nor should you
fear death, the one shows too much boldness, the other no less cowardice, so
with some other few instructions the Court arose, and Sir Walter was committed
into the hands of the Sheriff of Middlesex, who presently conveyed him to the
Gate House in Westminster.

Upon Thursday morning this Courageous, although Committed Knight, was brought
before the Parliament House, where there was a Scaffold erected for his
Beheading, yet it was doubted overnight that he should be hanged, but it fell
out otherwise. He had no sooner mounted the scaffold, but with a cheerful
Countenance, and undaunted Look, he saluted the Company. His Attire was a
wrought Nightcap, a Ruff band, a hair-coloured Satin Doublet, with a black
wrought Waste-coat under it, a pair of black cut Taffety Breeches, a pair of
ash-colored Silk Stockings, and a wrought black Velvet Nightgown; putting off
his Hat, he directed his Speech to the Lords present, as follows.

My honorable Lords, and the rest of my good friends that come to see me die,
Know, that I much rejoice that it has pleased God to bring me from darkness to
light, and in freeing me from the Tower, wherein I might have died in disgrace,
by letting me live to come to this place, where though I lose my life, yet I
shall clear some false accusations, unjustly laid to my charge, and leave
behind me a testimony of a true heart, both to my King and Country.

Two things Sir W. Raleigh accused of.
Two things there are which have exceedingly possessed and provoked his Majesty's
indignation against me, viz. A Confederacy, or Combination with France, and
disloyal and disobedient words of my Prince. For the first, his Majesty had
some cause, though grounded upon a weak foundation, to suspect mine inclination
to the French faction, for not long before my departure from England, the
French Agent took occasion, passing by my house, to visit me, had some
conference, during the time of his abode, only concerning my voyage, and
nothing else, I take God to witness.

Another suspicion is had of me, because I did labor to make an escape from
Plymouth to France; I cannot deny, but that willingly, when I heard a rumor,
That there was no hope of my life, upon my return to London, I would have
escaped for the fafeguard of my Life, and not for any ill intent or conspiracy
against the State.

The like reason of suspicion arose, in that I persuaded Sir Lewis Steukly, my
Guardian, to flee with me from London to France, but my Answer to this is, as
to the other, That only for my safeguard, and naught else, was my intent, as I
shall answer before the Almighty.

It is alleged, That I feigned my self sick, and by art made my body full of
blisters when I was at Salisbury. True it is, I did so; the reason was, because
I hoped thereby to defer my coming before the King and Council, and so by
delaying, might have gained time to have got my Pardon. I have an Example out
of Scripture for my warrant, that in case of necessity, and for the safeguard
of life, David feigned himself foolish and mad, yet was it not imputed to him
for sin.

Concerning the second Imputation laid to my charge, that I should speak
scandalous and reproachful words of my Prince, there is no witness against me
but only one, and he a Chimical Frenchman, whom I entertained, rather for his
Jests than his Judgment: this man to incroach himself into the favor of the
Lords, and gaping after some great reward, has falsely accused me of Seditious
speeches against his Majesty; against whom, if I did either speak, or think a
thought hurtful or prejudicial, the Lord blot me out of the book of Life.

It is not a time to flatter or fear Princes, for I am a subject to none but
Death; therefore have a charitable conceit of me. That I know to swear is an
offense, to swear falsely at any time is a great sin, but to swear false before
the presence of Almighty God, before whom I am forthwith to appear, were an
offense unpardonable; therefore think me not now rashly, or untruly to confirm,
or protest any thing.

As for other objections, in that I was brought perforce into England, that I
carried sixteen thousand pounds in money out of England with me, more than I
made known; that I should receive Letters from the French King, and such like,
with many Protestations he utterly denied.

FINIS.

