Sir Thomas Row HIS SPEECH At the Councell-Table touching Brasse-Money, or
against Brasse-Money; with many notable observations thereupon, July, 1640

Printed Anno 1641.

Sir Thomas Row his Speech at the Council Table, touching Brasse-Mony, or
against Brasse-Money, with many notable observations thereupon, July, 1640.
MY Lords, since it has pleased this Honorable table, to command amongst
others my poor opinion concerning this weighty proposition of money, I must
humbly crave pardon, if with that freedom that becomes my duty to my good and
gracious Master, and my obedience to your great commands, I deliver it so.

I cannot my Lords, but assuredly conceive this intended project of infeobling
the Coin, will trench very far both into the honor of Justice, and profit of my
Royal Master.

All estates do stand Magis fama quam vi as Tacitus says of Rome; And wealth
in every Kingdom is one of the essential marks of their greatness, and is
best expressed in the measures and purity of their moneys. Hence it was that so
long as the Roman Empire, a pattern of the best Government held up their
glory* or greatness, they ever maintained with little or no change the
standard of their Coin, but after the loose time of Commodus had led in need by
excess, and so by that shift of changing the standard, the Majesty of that
Empire fell by degrees. And as Vopiscus says, the steps by which that State
descended, were visible most by the general alteration of their Coins; and
there is no surer simptomes of consumption in State, then the corruption of the
Money.

What Renown is left to the Posterity of Edw. 1. in amending the standard both
in purity and weight, from that of elder and barbarous times; it must needs
stick as a blemish upon Princes that do the contrary.

Thus we see it was with Hen. 6. who after he had begun with a baiting the
measures, he afterward fell to abasing the matter; and granted Commission to
Missend, and others to practice Alcamie to serve his Mint.

The extremity the State in general felt by this agrievance, besides the
dishonor it laid upon the person of the King, was not the least disadvantage
his disloyal kinsman took, to ingrace himself into the peoples favors, to
his Sovereigns Reign.

When Hen. the 8th. had gained as much of power and glory abroad, of love and
obedience at home as ever any, he suffered a loss by this Rock.

When his Daughter Queen Elizabeth came to the Crown, she was happier in
Council to amend that error of her Father, for in a memorial of the Lord
Treasurer Burleighs his hand, I find that he and Sir Thomas Smith, a grave and
learned man, advised the Queen that it was the Crown, and the true wealth of
her self and people, to reduce the standard to the ancient party, and purity
of her great Grandfather Edward the 4th. and that it was not the short end of
wits, nor starting holes of devises, that can sustain the expense of a
Monarchy, but sound and solid courses, for so are the words; She followed their
a devise, and began to reduce the moneys to their elder goodness, stiling this
work in her first Proclamation Anno 30. a famous Act. The next year following,
Anno 30. having perfected, as it after stood, She tells her people by another
Edict; That She had conquered now that monster that had so long devoured them,
meaning the variation of the standard. And so long as that sad adviser lived,
She never (though often by Projectors importuned) could be drawn to any shift
or change in her Moneys.

To avoid the trouble of permutation, Coyners devised as a rule and measure of
Merchandise and Manufactaries, which if mutable, no man can tell either what he
has, or what he owes, no contract can be certain, and so all commerce both
public and private destroyed, and men again enforced to permutation with
things not subject to will and fraud.

The Regulating of Coin has been left to the care of Princes, who have ever
been presumed to be the Fathers of the Commonwealth, upon their honors they
are debtors and warrants to the subjects in that behalf.

They cannot says Bodin, alter the price of moneys to the prejudice of the
subject, without incurring the reproach of Faux moneyars. And therefore stories
term Phillip le Belle falsificator de monet. omnino monet. integritas debet
quaeri ubi vultus noster Imprimatur, said Theodoret the Goth to his
Mint-master. Quidnam erit tutum si nostra peccetur effigy, Princes must not
suffer their faces to warrant falsehood.

Although I am not of opinion with the Minor des Justices, the ancientest books
of the Common Law* That Le Roy ne poi^s money impair ne a mander saus Lassent
des touts les Counties, which was the great counsel of the Kingdom. Yet
cannot I pass over the goodness and grace of many other our Kings, as Edw. 1.
Edw 3. Hen. 4. and the the 5th. and others; who out of the rule of their
Justice. Quod ad omnes spectat, ob omnibus debet approbari, have often advised
with their people in Parliament, both for the Allay, weight, number of pieces,
rate of Coynage and exchange, and must with infinite goodness acknowledge the
care and Justice now of my good Master, and your Lordships wisdoms, that
would not upon the information of some few officers of the Mint, before a free
and careful debate, put in execution this Project. Yet I must under your
Lordships favor suspect it would have taken away the tenth part of every man's
due debt or rent already reserved throughout the Realm, not sparing the King,
which could have been little less then a species of that which the Roman
stories call Tabula nova, from whence every sedition has sprang, as that of
Marius Grantidianus in Livio, who pretending in his Consulship, thatt the
current money was wasted by us, called it in, and altered the Standard, which
grew so heavy and grievous to the people, as the Author says, because thereby
no man knows certainly his wealth, that it caused a tumult.

In this last part which is the disprofit that the enfeobling the Coin, will
bring both to his Majesty, and to the Commonwealth. I must distinguish the
moneys of gold and silver as they are bullion and commodities, and as they are
measures, the one of the extrinsique quality, which is at the Kings pleasure,
as all other measures to name, the other the intrinsique quality, of pure
metal, which is in the Merchant to value as their measure, shall be either to
be lessened or enlarged, so is the quantity of the commodity that is to be
exchanged, if then the King shall cut his shilling or pound in money less than
it was before, a less portion of such commodities as shall be exchanged, for
it, must be received, it must then of force follow, that all things of
necessity, as victuals, apparel, and the rest as well as those of pleasure,
must be inhaunsed. If then all men shall receive in their shillings and pounds
a less proportion of silver and gold than they did before this projected
alteration, and pay for what they buy at a rate enhaunsed, it must cast upon
all a double loss, what the King will suffer by it in the Rents of his lands*
is demonstrated enough by the alteration since the 18 of Ed 3. when all the
Revenues of the Crown came unto the receipts pondere and numero, after 5 Groats
the Ounce, which since that time by several changes of the Standard is come to
5s. whereby the King has two third parts of his just Revenues.

In his Customs, the book of rates being regulated by pounds and shillings,
his Majesty must lose alike, and so in all and whatsoever moneys, that after
this he must receive the profits of his Coynage, cannot be much more permanent
in the loss lasting, and so long as it reaches to little less than yearly,
to accept part of hi Revenue, for in every pound tale of gold is 7 Ounces, 1d*
weight, and 19 grains loss, which 25l. in account, and in 700l. tail of
silver, which is 14l. 17s. more. And his Majesty shall undergo all this loss
hereafter, in all his receipts, so shall he no less in all his dibursments,
the wages of his soldiers must be ratably advanced, as the money is decreased.
This Edward the 3, as appears by the accounts of the Wardrobe and Exchequer,
as all the Kings after him were enforced to do, as often as the lessened
Standard of the moneys of what shall be bought for his Majesty's service, must
in like manner be inhaunsed on him. As his Majesty has the greatest profits of
receipts and issues, so must he of necessity taste of the most loss by this
device.

It will destroy or discourage a great proportion of the trade in England,
Impair his Majesty's Customs for that part, being not the least that passes
upon trust and credit will be over-thrown, for all men being doubtful of
diminution hereby of there personal estates will call in their moneys, already
out, and no man will part with that which is lying by himuppon apparent loss,
as this must bring; what damage may befall the State by such a sudden stand of
Trade I cannot guess.

The moneys both of gold and silver formerly Coined and abroad, richer then
those intended, will be made of the most nereby Bulloin and so transported;
which I conceive will be none of the least inducements that has drawn so many
Goldsmithes to side this Project, that they may be thereby Factors for the
Strangers, who by the Law of Mintage bring but two shillings silver to the
pound weight, and 4 shillings for gold; whereas with us the one is and the
other 5 shillings, many make that profit beyond the Sea, they cannot here, and
so his Majesty's Mint unset of work.

And as his Majesty's loss appears in the alteration of many a 14th in the
silver, and a 25th part in all the gold they after shall receive; so shall the
Nobility, Gentry, and all other landed men in all their former settled Rents,
Annuities, Pensions, and sums of money, the like will fall upon the laborers
and workmen in their statute wages. And as their receipts are lessened hereby,
so are their issues increased either by improving all prices, or disfurnishing
the Marker, which must necessarily follow; for in the 5th of Edw. 6th. 3o Mary,
4to Eliz. as appears by their Proclamations. That a Rumor only of alteration
caused such effects, punishing the author of such reports, with Imprisonment,
and Pillory. It cannot be doubted, but the proiecting of such a change, must be
of far greater consequence and danger to the State, and would be wished that
the Actors, and authors of such disturbances in the Commonwealth at all times
hereafter, might undergo a punishment proportionable.

It cannot be held, I presume, an advise of best indgement that lays the
loss upon our selves, and the gain upon our enemies, for who are like to be in
this the greatest thrivers, is not visible that the strangers who support, or
money for bullion, our own Goldsmiths, who are their Brokers, and the
Hedgminters of the Netherlands, who termed them well, will have a fresh and
full trade by this abasements. And we do not the Spanish King, our greatest
enemy, a greater favor than by his, who being Lord of these commodities by his
West Indies, we shall so advance them to our impoverishment, for it is not in
the power of any State to raise of the price of their own, but the value that
their neighbors, set upon them, experience has taught us that the enfoebling
of Coin is but a shift for a while, as drink to one in a dropsy, to make him
swell the more, but the state was never thoroughly cured, as we saw in Henry the
Eighths time, and the late Queens, until the Coin was made rich again.

I cannot but then conclude my honorable Lords, that if the proportion of Gold
and Silver to each other be wrought to that purity, by the advice of the
Artists that neither may be too rich for the other, that the Mintage may be
reduced to some proportion of neighbor parts, and that the issue of native
commodities may be brought to overbalance the entrance of the foreign, we
need not seek any shift, but shall again see our trade to flourish, the Mint
as, the pulse of the Commonwealth, again to beat, and our Materials by
Industry, to be Mines of Gold and Silver, which we all wish and work for,
supported unto us, and the honor of Justice, and Profit of his Majesty.

Certain general Rules collected concerning Money and Bullion, out of the late
Consultation at Court.
GOld and silver has a two fold estimation in the extrinsique, as they are
moneys, and Princes measures given to his people, and this is a Prerogative of
Kings in the Intrinsique, they are commodities valewing each other according to
theplenty or scarcity; and so all other commodities by them, and that is the
sole power of Trade.

The measure in a Kingdom ought to be constant, It is the Justice and honor of
the King; for if they be altered, all men at that time are deceived in the
precedent contracts, either for lands or moneys, and the King most of all; for
no man knows either what he has, or what he owes.

This made the Lord Treasurer Burleigh in Anno 1573. when some Projectors had
set on foot a matter of that nature, to tell them that they were worthy to
suffer death, for attempting to put so great a dishonor upon the Queen, and
detriment and discontent on the people; for to alter this public measure is to
leave all the Markets of the Kingdom unfurnished: and what will be the
mischief the Proclamation of 5. and 6. 30. Mary, and 4th. of Eliz. will
manifest, when but a rumor produced that effect so far, that besides the
faith of the Princes to the contrary delivered in their Edicts, they were
enforced to cause the Magistrates in every Shire respectively, to constrain the
people to furnish the Market, to prevent a mutiny.

To think then this measure at this time short, is to raise all prices, or to
turn the measure or money now current into disuse and Bullion; for who will
depart with any, when it is by seven more in the hundred in the mass, then the
now moneys, and yet of no more value in the Market.

Hence the necessity of it will follow, that there will not of a long time be
Minted of the new to drive the exchange of the Kingdom, and so all trade at
one instance at a stand; and in mean time the Markets unfurnished, and thus
far as money is a measure.

Now as it is a commodity, it is respected and valued, by the intrinsique
quality, and first the one metal to the other.

All commodities are priced by plenty or scarcity, by dearness or cheapnesse,
the one to the other. If then we desire our silver to buy gold as it has
lately been, we must let it it be the cheaper and less in proportion valued,
and so contrary for one equivalent proportion in both, will bring in neither;
we see the profit there of the unusual quantity of gold brought lately to the
Mint by reason of the price, we rate it at above all other Countries, and gold
may be bought too dear; to furnish then this way the Mint with both, is
impossible.

And at this time it was apparently proved both by the best Artists, and
Merchants most acquainted with the Exchange, in both the examples of the
Mint-masters, in the Rix-dolor, and Royal of Eight, that silver here is of
equal value, and gold above with foreign parts in the intrinsique, but that
the fallacy presented to the Lords by the Mint-masters, is only in the
nomination of extrinsique quality.

But if we desire both, it is not the raising the value that does it, but the
balancing the Trade, for we buy more then we sell of all other commodities, be
the money never so high priced, we must part with it to make the disproportion
even, if we sell more then the contrary will follow.

And this is plain in Spanish necessities, for should that King advance to a
double his Royal of Eight, yet needing it by reason of the barrenness of his
Country, more of foreign wares, then can countervaile by exchange with his
wares, he must then part with his money, and gain the more by enhaunsing his
coin, but he pays a higher price for the commodities he buyeth, if this work
of raising be his own.

But if we shall make improvement of gold and silver being the
Staple-commodities of this Kingdom, we then advancing the the price of his
abase to him our own commodities.

To shape this kingdom to the fashion of the Netherlands, were to frame a
Royal Monarchy by a society of Merchants, their Country is a continual
Fair, and so price of moneys must rise and fall to fit their occasions; we see
this by raising the Exchange of Franckford, and other places, of their usual
time of the Marts.

This frequent and daily change in the Low Countries of their moneys is no such
injustice to any there, as it would be here, for there they being all
Merchants, or mechanics, they can rate accordingly their labor and their
Ware, whether it be Coin, or other merchandise, to the present condition of
their own money in Exchange.

And our English Merchants to whose profession it properly belongs, do so
according to their just intrinsique value of their foreign Coin in all barter
of commodities or Exchange, except usance which we that are rated and tied by
the extrinsiques measure of moneys in all our constant reckonigs, and annual
bargains at home cannot do.

And for us then to raise our Coin at this time, to equal their proportions
were but to render our selves to a perpetual incertainty, for they will raise
upon us daily them again, which we of course shall follow, else receive no
profit by this present change; and so destroy the Policy, Justice, honor, and
tranquillity of our State for ever.

FINIS.

