THE Disabled Debtor Discharged: OR, Mary Magdalen Pardoned.

Set forth in an EXPOSITION ON THAT PARABLE

Luke 7.40. -- 51. There was a certain Creditor, which had two Debtors, etc. By
Nehemiah Rogers, Minister of the Gospel.

Inter Curas maxima cura est refroenare curiosos, Aug. Ep. 56. LONDON: Printed
for Geo. Saubridge, at the Bible on Ludgate Hill, MDCLVIII.

TO THE RIGHT VIRTUOUS AND TRVLY RELIGIOUS GENTLEWOMAN Mrs. Jane Done, eldest
daughter of that worthy KNIGHT (and of blessed memory) S. John Done, late of
Vtkington in Cheshiere deceased.
Worthy Gentlewoman,
THe labors of many of GODS faithful servants (in all ages) have been
commended to the Church of God through the gracious hands of women. S. Hierom
writes to many, as to Salvina, to Faria, to Celantia, Marcellina, Asella; most
of his works he dedicates to Eustochia a noble and honorable Virgin. Which
practice of his (in preferring that Sex) was objected against by some (as
appears in one of his Epistles) but by him defended, Epist. 140.
and very justly: For however the honor of that Sex was much blemished
through Transgression, yet (with Mary) may the virtuous say, He that is mighty
has magnified us; not only in vouchsafing that a woman should be his mother,
when no mortal man was his Father (as Hugo speaks) but likewise in endowing
them with may excellent Gifts and Graces of his Spirit, Exodus 15.20 and 38.8.
Judge. 4.4. 2 Kings 22.14. 2 Samuel 14.4. and 20.14.
as Knowledge, Faith, Repentance, Zeal, Boldness, Humility, Patience,
Charity, Judge. 13.9, 22, 23. 2 Kings 4.8, 9. Matthew. 15.22, 28. Luke 24* 8, 9,
11. Judge. 4.21. Ester. 8* 4. Act. 8.3. and 9.2. and 16 13. Luke 8.3. and 10.39.
Courtesy and Constancy in well doing (wherein they have many times excelled)
leaving upon a perpetual record, their prais-worthy works for the serious
imitation of men: directing withal the Penmen of holy Scripture to write
Epistles to them (as S. John to the elect Lady) yea to dedicate whole Books to
their names (as that of Ruth and Ester) for their everlasting Honor.

Through your gentle hands I commend this poor piece of my studies to the
world. It is not necessary that I should give it an account why I seek so
far from home: GOD has wrought my heart to love those that love him, and
distance of place cannot abridge my duty: Withal this I would the world should
know that I am one, amongst those many, who truly honor You for Your virtues:
In testimony whereof I make this Dedication to Your worthy name, which I
beseech You to accept of, as an acknowledgement of that debt I owe, and the
unfeigned desire I which the Prayers shall never be wanting of him, who is

Obliged to serve and honor You Nehemiah Rogers

TO THE READER.
I Have made my self thy Debtor by promise, and resolve upon a speedy payment
(if God lend life:) Fishes wax scant at shore and (in such a case) it is not
amiss to lanch forth into the deep: God may so bless our labors, that we
may have cause to beckon to our Fellows to come and help.

Thy former acceptance of those rude notes of mine upon some other Parables
encourages me to send thee these upon two other. I have given that liberty to
my pen in the Press (in respect of Quotation) which I held not fit to give my
tongue in the Pulpit: It is an Exposition I intend, wherein I love to follow
such sound Interpreters (both Ancient an Modern) as have gone before: Let not
that offend thee. Who are disposed to carpe and cavil will pick matter to
work upon out of the best Books (Gods own not excepted) There are faults
escaped the Press, nor will Books be without them, whilst men have them; make
no more then there are (thou shall no need) mend those thou find, and so
(who knows, but) the Book may help to mend thee; how ever pray for him who
is,

Thy Servant (if thou be the Churches) Nehemiah Rogers.

Errata in the Penitent Citizen
Page 3. line. 24. s^r He read She. p* 29. l. 12. for (...), p. 35. marg.
vocabilum, r. vocabulum. p. 77. marg for a iota, r ab iota p 56 l. 13. for are
r. 2^. p* 130. marg ^mlationem, r* emulationem. p. 168. l. 3^, for eying, r.
lying, p. 206. (...)* 5. for w^ought, r. wrote, page 224. l. 10. for (...).

Errata in the ^^ona Samaritane.
Page 57. lin 20 for escaped of, read escaped the plague of, p. 36. l. 18. for
miscendae, r. miscend^. p. 157 l. 34. for ipse 1. ipsi, p. 64. l. 3^. for i^s
readi^^^.

The Text, Luke 7. Verse 40, 41, etc. Verse 40. And Jesus and answering, said
unto him, Simon, I have somewhat to say unto thee: And he says, Master, say
on. Verse 41 There was a certain Creditor, which had two Debtors: the one
ought five hundred pence and the other fifty. Verse 42 And when they had
nothing to pay, he frankly forgave them both, Tell me therefore, which of them
will love him most? Verse 43 Simon answered and said, I suppose that he to whom
he forgave most: And he said unto him, Thou have rightly judged. Verse 44 And
he turned to the woman, and said unto Simon, See thou this woman, I entered
into thine house, thou gave me no water for my feet: but she has washed my
feet with tears, and wiped them with the hairs of her head. Verse 45 Thou
gave me no kiss: but this woman, since the time I came in, has not ceased
to kiss my feet. Verse 46 Mine head with oil thou did not anoint: but this
woman has anointed my feet with ointment. Verse 47 Wherefore I say unto thee,
Her sins which are many, are forgiven, for she loved much: but to whom little
is forgiven, the same loves little. Verse 48 And he said unto her, Thy sins
are forgiven. Verse 49 And they that sat at meat with him, began to say within
themselves, who is this that forgiveth sins also. Verse 50 And he said to the
woman, Thy Faith has saved thee, go in Peace. A brief view of the Method
observed in this Exposition upon that Parable of the Creditour and his two
Debtors, Luke 7. verse. 40, 41. etc.
In this Parable, Luk 7.40, 41, etc. We have considerable. The Preface, verse.
40, and therein The words of the Evangelist to us declaring The Author of the
ensuing Parable [Iesus] The Occasion of propounding it, which was a Question
made secretly by Simon, to which [He answering said]
The words of our Savior to Simo^, co^taining An Excitation to Attention, and
there The Person nominated [Simon] Our Saviors purpose and intent intimated [I
have somewhat to say]
A Replication made by Simon, where A reverend Appellation [Master] His
submisse and ready Attention [Say on]


The Parable it self, v. 41, etc. containing, An Allegorical narratio^, v. 41,
42, 43. where a case Propounded, v 41, 42. wherein is specified, The Parties
whom it did concern, viz. A Creditor who is described, By his Profession or
course of life in General [There was a certain Creditour] or Usurer By his
Dealing with these his Debtors in special, [He frankly forgave them both, etc.]
And his two Debtors described, By their number, [Two] Alike Both were indebted
to him Both were forgiven by him

Unlike One owed a greater Sum then the other One loved more than the other

By their Condition, which we must consider as it was Alike Both were indebted
to him Both were forgiven by him
Unlike One owed a greater Sum then the other. One loved more than the other

The Quere made, wherein, The Thing demanded [ Tell me which of these, etc.] The
Ground of that demand. [Therfore]

Resolved, v 4^ wherein is declared, Simons Sentence or Opinion [I suppose he,
etc] Our Saviors approbation [Thou have rightly judged]

The moral or Application, v 4^, 4^, 46, etc. where our Saviors. Posture,
ver. 44. there His Act or motion He turned The Object or Person [To the woman]
Speech and that To Simon, verse 44-48. containing An Interrogation, v. 44 where
A Duty enjoined [Seest thou this woman] The Person on whom it is imposed
[Thou] Against, Civility, Thou gave me no water, etc.] Against Charity, Thou
gave me no kiss. Against Ho^pitality, my head with oil thou did not
anoint.

An Expostulation, v. 44-47. which has in it.
To the woman, ver. 48, etc. d^claring. Her Absolutio^, v. 48 49. and in it The
Sentence give^ ver. 48. By who^, he said For who^, thy sins A Pre^erence,
wherein A Reprehension of Simon ^^r his Defects. A Commendation of the woman
for her respects laid down Antithetically. She has washed my Feet with tears,
etc. She has not ceased to kiss my Feet, etc. She has anointed my feet with
ointment, etc.

An Inference verse. 47. and there The Doctrine delivered containing A Position
in which The Point [Her sins] etc. The Proof [for she loved much]
An Opposition [But to whom little is forgiven, the same loves little.]
The Confirmation [Wherefore I say]
The thing effected [Hath saved]

The Exception there at taken, v 49. where The person, they that sat, etc. Their
accusation, who is this, etc.

Her dismission, v 50 wherein A certificate showing A Pasport prescribing The
means [Thy Faith] The way [In Peace] The course [Goe]









A TABLE OF THE DOCTRINES AND OBSERVATIONS COLLECTED and Prosecuted in this
ensuing Exposition of that Parable, Luke 7.40, 41, etc.
VERSE 40.
1. CHRIST much affected a parabolicall way of teaching. 9. 2. The Heart has a
tongue in it. pa. 11. 3. God has an answer for the words of the mind, page
12. 4. Sinners (not sinning presumptuously) are to be reprooved with the spirit
of mockenesse, page 13. 5. It is lawful sometimes to reproove by name, p. 16.
6. When our Brother sins, we should say somewhat to him, page 19. 7.
Courteous usage should not hinder reproof, p. 22. 8 The name and disposition
are sometimes suitable, p. 25 9. Reverence and respect is due to Gods Prophets*
p. 27 10. What Christ says we should readily attend unto, page 31.
VERSE. 41.
1. Borrowing and lending is a practice of long standing, 36. 2. God is a
Creditour, page 40. 3. Sinners are indebted Persons, page 44. 4. The elect
before conversion are indebted with the wicked, page 50. 5. All are not alike
indebted to the Lord, page 51.
VERSE. 42.
1. Sinners are disabled Debtors, 55. 2. Disabled debtors should be dealt
mercifully with, page 61. 3. Remission of sin is feisable and attaineable, p.
62. 4. Whom God forgives, he fully forgives, page 67. 5. Remission is of free
Grace and Mercy, page 71. 6. It is general to all who cast themselves on Gods
free mercy for it, page 78. 7. God forgiveth great debts, so well as small,
page 81. 8. Who owes least needs pardon, as well as he who owes most, page 83.
9. Who have been beneficial to us should be respected of us, page 87. 10. The
more kindness we have received from any the more should they be endeared to
us, pa. 1. 11. God is truly loved of all whose sins are pardoned, pa. 92. 12.
All that love God do not yet love him with the like degree of Love, page 97.
13. Who loves God most? is no unprofitable Question, page 103. 14. Love is
Loves lodestone, page 105. 15. After the Judgment is rightly informed,
Sentence may be passed, page 108.
VERSE. 43.
1. A wise Reproof is not in vain to an honest heart page 100. 2. The truth
must be told, page. 113. 3. The more mercy in the Forgiver, the greater Love
(as may be supposed) is in the Forgiven, page 122. 4. The truth should be
received, whoever brings it, pa. 125. 5. There is place for praise as well as
for reproof, p. 129
VERSE 44.
1. Upon our turning to God, God will turn to us, 132. 2. Sorrow is often
silent, page 135. 3. The deportment of a true Penitent, is worth our observing,
page 37. 4. It is lawful to behold a woman, page 140. 5. Not only the guilt
of sin, but the stain of it is done away by true Repentance, page 144. 6.
The best women are best worthy seeing, page 146. 7. By weak instruments, God
confounds the wisdom of the wise, page 147. 8. Circumstantiall omissions in
the entertainment of our friends may forfeit much of our thanks, page 151. 9.
Christianity is no enemy to courtesy, page 155. 10. Things (in themselves
lawful) superstitiously abused may notwithstanding such abuse be used lawfully
page 157. 11. The lowest member of the body may not be despised page 161. 12.
Where sin is truly repented it is lamented, page 166. 13. The greatness of
sin should be answered with the greatness of sorrow, page 177. 14. What has
been abused in the service of sin, true Repentance converts to the service
of God, page 181. 15. The best ornament is not thought too good for Christ by a
true Penitent, p. 182.
VERSE 45.
1. The signs of true affection may not be forgotten, 184. 2. Whos^ loves
Christ will kiss the Feet of Christ, page 186.
VERSE 46.
1. God allows both for necessity and delight, 191. 2. Mirth at Feasts is
allowable, page 191. 3. Love is liberal of the best it has, page 198.
VERSE. 47.
1. Doctrines delivered should be well grounded and aptly inferred, 201. 2.
Christ's word is sufficient confirmation of Doctrine page 202. 3. Incontinency
of life is accompanied with other sins p. 204. 4. Grievous sinners upon
Repentance shall find mercy, p. 208. 5. A proof from the effect is very
demonstrative, p. 215 6. Love of Christ is a sure sign that sin is remitted,
page 216. 7. Loving much, argues much received, page 219. 8. Proportionable to
that assurance which we have of Remission by Christ will be that love we bear
to Christ, page 220.
VERSE. 48.
1. The power of Absolution belongs unto Christ, 223. 2. It is not enough that
our sins are pardoned in Heaven, but the Assurance thereof in our own
consciences should be sought after, page 229.
VER. 49.
1. Christ was sociable, page 233. 2. Those that d^p in the same dish with us
are sometimes enemies unto us, 2^6. 3. Sinners are worse within then without,
page 273. 4. The thoughts of the heart are known to Christ, pa. 240.
VERSE 50.
1. Who so are absolved by Christ are dismissed the Court, 253. 2. The true and
believing Penitent even in this life is saved, page 256. 3. Faith, Hope,
Charity and other Graces are concomitants, page 258. 4. Who so would be
justified and saved must have a Faith of their own, page 261. 5. More is
required of a Christian then bare believing* page 265. 6. Peace of Conscience
is the fruit of Justification by Faith, page 271.
The PENITENT CITIZEN: OR, Mary Magdalens Conversion.
LUKE 7 VER. 40, 41, etc. And Jesus answering said unto him, Simon, I have
somewhat to say unto thee, and he says, Master, say on. There was a certain
Creditor which had two debtors, etc.


OUr Savior being invited by a Pharisee to eat meat; honored the Inviter
with his blessed presence, he went into his house and sat down to meat,
(says the Text. D. H^ll. Cont. in Nov. Test. lib. p. 73.
) Not for any pleasure that he took in the dishes (for what was that to him who
began his work in a whole Lent of days?) but that he might do his Fathers
will, which was his meat and drink, John 4.34. and for the benefit of his so
winning a conversation, who coming down from Heaven, did not only frame
himself to our nature, but being on Earth, complied himself to the several
dispositions of men, becoming all things to all, that he might win some.

Whilst our Savior sat at meat, A very memorable passage fell out in the
Conversion and public remission of a sinner, led in with a note of wonder,
verse 37. Behold a woman in the City, etc.

To hear of a true Convert is both Good news and Great: A greater work it is
to Convert, then to Create, should we put into the one hand of God the World
created, and into his other hand a soul converted; the glory of this hand
would be the greater. If at our Creation David falls a wondering, Surely I am
fearfully and wonderfully made, much more should we admire the work of our
spiritual Regeneration and Conversion.

Every Penitent may justly be brought in with a shoute; this by an eminence;
whose Change in the order and disposition of her life, Luke 15.
was far more strange then the Return of that Prodigal in the Parable, who
yet went very far, as there we read.

He was urged and driven thereto with the storms of affliction and distress;
Need, Impatient hunger, and a base service did beat him back; But this Woman
enjoying the morrow as to day, and every day solemnizing (as it were) the
Coronation of her sinful pleasures, in the height of glory, when she might
have vied with the Summer-beames in pride and glistering: Then (like the King
of Nineveh) to arise from this her throne, Jonah 3.
and lay aside those roabes of her delights, and to cover her self in a wave
of salt and bitter tears (as with sackcloth.) And (sitting down in the ashes
of her sorrow) to proclaim a perpetual Fast from sin; why, this (in mortal
eyes) if ever any thing were strange, was even strangely wonderful and full of
admiration.

Should we but cast our eyes on each Particular Circumstance of her Faith and
Repentance, as we have them re^ated in the Text, we should find them worthy our
best consideration.

First, she was a woman by Sex, and so the weaker vessel, 1 Pet. 3.

Secondly, a woman in the City (whether Naim or Jerusalem, it much matters not)
a place usually supplied with more variety of temptations then ordinarily the
solitary and still Country; and might be rubbs in her way and hindrances to
her Conversion.

Thirdly, a woman in the City that was a Sinner, one infamously dissolute, and
obdured in a notorious trade of evil. Now that such an one, should presume to
come to a Pharisees house, a place of an awful and severe presence; and at
such a Time, when there was a Feast whereat Christ was present, who was purity
it self. And after such a manner, in a kind (as it may seem) of importunate
unmannerlinesse (unwontedly incident to a woman's condition) to thrust in, and
then lay hold upon her Savior; why these, every one severally were pregnant
Circumstances of a most extraordinary representation of a rare Faith in so
young a Convert.

Nor do the other Circumstances of her Repentance, deserve any less accent of
admiration; be having found her Jesus, shows the true remorse of her heart in
six particulars.

First, in her Humility; she takes her stand at the feet of Christ, esteeming
the lowest place too good for her, so vile an abject.

Secondly, Bashfullnesse and shame; she does not boldly face Christ, but gets
behind him; being conscious of her sins, which thus placed her deservedly.

Thirdly, Sorrow; The Rock is now turned into a water-poole, and the flint into
a river of waters: she weeps, and in such abundance, as that she washes
Christ's feet with those streams of Penitence.

Fourthly, Revenge; That hair which she had so often gently combed, and
cunningly broydered against the glass, and then spread forth as a net to catch
her amorous Companions withal, she now imployes in the wiping those Feet,
which she had with her tears washed.

Fifthly, Love; manifested in kissing Christ's Feet, acknowledging thereby that
she tasted of the Comfort that was in him. O how gladly will one that has
escaped drowning kiss the shore!

Sixthly, Bounty; she powers a precious and costly ointment upon those Feet she
had thus washed, and kissed: Every way she approved her self a perfect
Penitent And therefore no marvel (the great prize coming) if the Trumpets
sound; the news of this rare Convert is proclaimed with an Ecce, Behold a
woman.

All this did Simon the Master of the Feast behold, but yet a squint; none
stood so much upon the terms of their own righteousness, as the Pharisees;
nor did any more scornefully disdain the company of a person infamous, then
did they. This Pharisee (though of the better sort, as we may conceit in that
he invited such a guest as Jesus) did strongly savor of the leaven of his
Profession; for where he should have admired Christ's Mercy, he questions his
Calling; Before this he judged him a Prophet; now he questions whether he were
so much: were this man a Prophet he would surely know what manner of Woman this
is that touches him, for she is a sinner, q. d. I thought I had invited a
Prophet to my house, but I see he is none. He is no Prophet who is ignorant of
the life of one so vicious coming so near him as to touch him. But of the
vicious life of this woman who touches him and washes his feet he is
altogether ignorant: It cannot be therefore that he is what I took him to be.
The Proposition he takes for granted, 1 King. 14.6. 2 King. 1.3. 2 King. 5.26,
which yet is not true; for every Prophet, knew not every thing, no nor did the
best Prophet ever know all things; their knowledge reaches only so far as
it shall please God to extend it, See 2 King. 4.27. etc. 2. ver. 3, 4.

The Assumption he thus makes good, did he know how vicious a woman this is, he
would not suffer her to come behind him and wash his feet, etc. But this he
suffers willingly, therefore he (questionless) is ignorant what she is.

Our Blessed Savior well perceiving Simons error to arise out of Ignorance or
weak mistaking, and not proceeding from a malicious spirit (as did other
Objections made by some of his fellow Pharisees) Returns a Convictive Answer
by way of Parable, telling him of a certain Creditor which had two debtors:
wherein he does first vindicate himself, and make it evident to Simon, that he
knew both this woman's life and heart, and so was a Prophet, yea and more then
so. Secondly, defends this woman, proving that she was not now what she had
been, nor as he conceived her to be. For she was changed from what she was,
and therefore not to be censured for that she is not.

In which Parable, we have First, the Prologue or preface to it, v. 40.
Secondly, the Parable it self, to be considered, v. 41. -- 50.

The Parable is prefac'd, First with the words of the Evangelist to us, [And
Jesus answering said,] And Secondly, with our blessed Saviors words unto
Simon, [ I have somewhat to say unto thee, etc.]

The words of the Evangelist to us, acquaint us both with the Author and the
Occasion.

The Author of the ensuing Parable, is Jesus, A Prophet mighty both in word and
deed, (however Simon esteemed him to be.)

The Occasion was, the Objection that Simon made within himself, upon the
ground you heard before; His Heart made the Question, and Christ makes Answer
to it.

The words of our Savior to Simon conteyne in them; An Excitation of Simon to
Attention, [Simon I have somewhat to say unto thee,]. To which is added the
Replication that Simon made to Christ, [Master say on,]

In the Former we have considerable; 1. The Person nominated [Simon.] 2. The
Purpose or Intent of our blessed Savior specified, [I have somewhat to say
unto thee.]

In the Latter, we may take notice, First of the Reverend Appellation given by
Simon to our Savior, [Master.] Secondly, of his Submissive obedience, and
ready attention, [Say on]

The Parable it self follows, from, verse. 41. to the end. Where more
particularly consider we, First, the Allegorical narration. [ The was a
certain Creditor, etc. verse. 41. -- 44.] Secondly, The Moral or Application.
[ And he turned to the Woeman, and said, etc. verse. 44, etc.]

In the Narration we have, First a case propounded, verse. 42. And then
resolved and determined, v. 43.

In the Propounding part, we have First, A Relation made of the parties whom
the case concerns, verse, 41 Secondly, a Quere made upon it, verse. 42.

The Parties are, A Creditor and his two Debtors: The Creditor is described to
us, First in General, he was a certain Usurer, (for so the word is.)
Secondly, by his Practice or dealing with these his Debtors in particular, [hee
frankly forgave them both.]

The Debtors are set forth, First by their Number; [Two,] Secondly, By their
Condition, which is to be considered; First, As it was Alike, and that in two
things; 1. Both were indebted. 2ly. Both were forgiven. Secondly, as it was
Unlike, and that in two things. 1. One ought a greater sum then the other. 2.
That one loved more then the other.

The Quere made upon this Relation, we have in those words, [ Tell me
therefore, etc. verse. 42.] Wherein consider we, First, the Demand made, [Tell
me.] Secondly the Ground thereof, [Therefore.] It being as has bin related to
thee.

This Case being thus Propounded, is Resolved and determined, verse. 43. [Simon
answered and said,] Wherein we have considerable, First, Simons Sentence, [I
suppose he to whom he forgave most.] Secondly, our Saviors approbation of it,
[thou have rightly judged.]

The Application follows, verse. 44. to the end. Wherein observe we First, the
Posture our Savior used. Secondly, the Speech our Savior made.

Our Saviors Posture is laid down in these words, [And he turned to the
woeman,] Where first his Action, secondly, the Object must be considered.

Our Saviors Speech is directed, First, to Simon. Then unto the Woeman. To
Simon, verse. 44. -- 48. And it conteyneth in it, First, an Interrogation or
Question. [Seest thou this woeman?] Secondly, an Expostulation with Simon about
what had formerly passed, [ I entered into thy house, etc.]

In the Interrogation, there is first a Duty imposed, [seest thou,] i.e. Behold
her better, see her Conversation and behavior. 2. The Person on whom this duty
is imposed [Thou] who hold thy self to be more righteous and just then she.

In the Expostulation made with Simon, we have first a Preference, verse. 44,
45, 46. Secondly an Inference, verse. 47.

The Preference has in it, First, a Reprehension of Simon for his defects;
Secondly, a Commendation of the Woeman for her respects. And these are laid
down Antithetically; the one by way of opposition to the other, for the better
illustration.

Simons defects for which he was reprooved were three 1. Against Civility, he
gave him noe water for his feet, 2. Against Charity, he gave Christ noe kiss.
3. Against Hospitality, he anointed not his head with oil, yet Invited him to
a feast.

The Woemans respects were seen in supplying all these wants, 1. The want of
water she supplies with her Tears. 2. In stead of kissing his cheek or lips,
she kisseth Christ's Feet; (the lowest member of his body.) 3. In stead of
annoynting his head, she powers her ointment upon his feet, which before she
had washed, and kissed.

Next our Savior directs his speech unto the woeman, [ And he said to her,
verse. 48, 49, 50.] Wherein we have 1. Her Absolution, verse. 48, 49. 2. Her
Dismission, verse. 50.

In the Former we have, First, the Sentence given. And in it consider. 1. By
whom: [hee said.] 2. To whom, Thy sins, etc. Secondly, Offense thereat taken,
verse. 49. Where the Persons that are Offended, They that sat at meat, 2. The
Ground of it, and that was their Ignorance of Christ and his office, [ Who is
this, etc.]

In the Latter, the woemans dismission, verse 50. We have mention made, first of
the Isntrumental cause of her justification, [Thy faith has saved thee.] 2.
Of the Effect, [Goe in peace.]

Parables, (like Trees,) have in them both Bark, and Pith. It is not Gods
mind that we should stick in the Bark, Creditor i will Deus est, in cujus albo
omni um mortalium continentur nomina. Aret in loc. Adunbratur per hos Simon and
mulier illa peccatrix (...) vero totum genus humanum equo nemo quisquam
s^lvendo exsistat, qua^ vis ratione peccati actualis vnus altero plus debeat.
Muthes in loc.
or outward letter, but endeavor the mystical and more noble sense. Who
(then) this Creditor is; and who these Debtors are, and what that Debt is which
was owing, and forgiven; would be briefly known.

The Creditor is, God almighty, so he is compared in other places, as Math.
18.24. Our Savior expounds this himself, verse. 35. And in the application
of the Parable he does the like.

The Debtors here spoken of, were Simon the Pharisee and this Woman, who had
been a notorious and loose liver. But more generally, All mankind under these
two are comprised, even the whole Posterity of Adam; especially such as are
within the Pale of the Church, and profess Gods truth. All of us are Debtors
to the Lord, yet one more deep then another, in respect of Actual
trangression, and breach of his Law.

Our Sins are our Debts, which Debt no man is of himself able to pay: only
Remission can discharge and free us from it: Debitum quid est nisi peccatu^
etc. Aug de verb. Dom. c. 28
and this we do obtain through the mercy of God in Christ. These with other
Particulars in the Parable, shall be further opened and explained in the
prosecution. We now look back again upon the parts; and so first begin we
with the Preface.

[And Jesus answering said unto him.
These are the words of the Evangelist to us; yet indicted by the Spirit, (as
was all other Scripture,) and so no less to be esteemed Gods, then that which
follows; albeit they were not spoken immediately from Christ's own mouth. They
acquaint us with the Author of the ensuing Parable, together with the Occasion.
Text. True convert on Luke 15.1, 2. Familiare est Syris, and max i am
Palestinis, ad omnem ser monem suum Parabolas jungere, ut quod per simplex
praeceptum teneri ab auditoribus non potest, per similitudinem exemplaque
teneatur, Hier. in Math. 18. and Clem. Alex. l. 5. Strom. Lege Chrysolog Ser.
96. Arist. lib 3. de anima. text. 39.
The Author was Jesus.

[And Jesus said unto him.]
Our Savior much affected this Parabolicall way of teaching, the Reasons I
have acquainted you withal, on some other Parables, one or two here shall
suffice to give, why our Savior so ordinarily opened his mouth in Parables.

First, he used this kind of teaching (then much in use in the place he taught)
for the botter Instruction of the simple, with whom a Parable does often more
prevail then a Sillogisme. Thus Mark 4 33. It is said that with many such
Parables spoke he the Word unto the people, as they were able to bear it.
Saint Matthew numbers seven, Chap. 13. at the same time delivered. Saint Mark
adds further, that without a Parable he spoke not unto them; Endeavoring to
help the Soul by the Body, the Understanding by the Sense, and by earthly
Objects to raise up our souls to heavenly Meditations.

Secondly, Innata nobis via est ut a notioribus ad minus nota vobis
progrediamur. Arist. in lib. 1. Phy c. 1 Obscura and diffi^ilia in Scripturis
magna ingenia exercent, and somnum oscitantiamque discutiunt, ut ad fructum
intelligentiae perveniant. Aug. in Psalm 140. Use.
for the better stirring up of the affections, and quickening the attention of
the willing. Truths are conveyed to the Understanding with the more delight in
Parables; and make a willing mind more inquisitive after knowledge. Thus an
edge was set upon the desires of the Disciples by Parables; they come to their
Master, and desire him to acquaint them further with the mysteries of the
Kingdom.

Thirdly, he used this Method, for the better Conviction of the Impenitent and
Obstinate. So Mat. 21.41. They are enforced to pass their own sentence: and
Simon here is fetched in, ere he be aware and made to pass sentence against
himself, for her, whom he before condemned.

Let us delight in reading of these Parables and studying of them. God has
furnished his Word with many, even with so many as there are weeks in the year
(as some observe.) How willing is Christ to bring us unto Heaven who thus uses
the help of Art for that end, Mat. 13. Coelorum regnu^ idcirco terrenis rebus
simile dicitur, ut ex ijs quae animus novit, surgat ad incognita, quae non
novit. Quatenus exemplo visibilium, se ad invisibilia rapiat and per ea quae
usu didicit, quasi confricatus incalescat, etc. Greg Hom 11. in Evang. Text.
and speaks to us in such a Dialect, of the Mysteries of his Kingdom as we
may best understand? We know what sowing seed is; such a thing is the Kingdom
of Heaven; what a Pearl is, what a Treasure, what a grain of Musterd seed,
what Leaven, etc. Why the Kingdom of Heaven (says Christ) is like to these.
In the sight and use of these earthly things raise up your thoughts. Of this
see more on the Parable of the Lost sheep, Luke 15.3, and on The good
Samaritane, Luke 10.30.

Answering] Here the Evangelist acquaints us with the Occasion of propounding
the ensuing Parable, which was a Question or doubt before arising in the mind
of Simon; so we read in the foregoing verse, Simon said within himself. Now he
answers, non ad verba sed ad cogitationes, quas in Pharesaei animo prospexerat,
(says Maldonat) not to the words, (for we read not that the Pharisee said any
thing at all) but to the thoughts of his heart Christ answered: Audivit enim
Dominus Pharisaeum cogitantem, says Saint Austin. So then

The heart has a Tongue. Thoughts are (...), the words of the mind; what we
think we speak.

Thus we speak to God, as did Hannah, 1 Samuel 1.13. So did Moses, Exodus 14 15.

And to our selves, Psalm. 10.6, 11, 13. and 14.1. and 53 1. Eccles. 2.15, Mat.
3.9. and ^4 48. Luke 16.3. Romans 10.16.

Quicquid pudet dicere, pudeat and cogitare. Hier. in Epist. ad Demetriadem.
as well as of your words, and what you are ashamed to speak be ashamed to
think. They only want a Shape, to be audible to Others, which the Tongue gives
them: Could men know them, and convince them, they should be no less liable to
censure, then if they came forth clothed with words: God knows them, and
judges of them accordingly; yea he knows them and understands their language
better then our selves, Deuteronomy. 31.21. Aug. Confess. lib. 10. c. 27.
Saint Austin speaking unto God says thus, Intus tu eras and ego foris, Thou
were within and I was without, Jer. 4.15. Quum reproborum mentibus occasio
perperrandi peccati deest, desideriorum cogitationes eorum cordibus nullatenus
defunt: and quam non semper Diabolum sequuntur in orere, valde tamen se illi
alligant in cogitatione. Greg. mor. 14. Si quid cogitaveris, cito apparebit:
conversantibus: been cogitata si excidunt non occidunt. Seneca in Proverbijs.
thou knew my secret thoughts when I my self was ignorant of their meaning.
Give no way to wickedones; think it not lawful to range in conceit upon any
folly or lust. Play not with the devil in Imagination (as Gregory says some
do) for this kind of sport is an unlawful game. After that the Froggs of
Egypt have got into the chambers of your hearts, the Caterpillars of Egypt
will soon destroy the fruit of your land. Be we more abundant in Good ones;
make precious account of them with David, Psalm. 94 19. They are Good
Companions; whence it is that God speaking of his Commandments, Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7.
and 11.19. says, They shall be in thy heart, and thou shall speak of them
when thou sit in thy house, and when thou walk by the way; when thou
lie down, and when thou risest up. Now this speaking and talking is not
only (though principally) to be understood of outward conference with others,
(for many a man walks alone, and lies alone, etc) But also of talking with our
selves, according to that of Solomon, Prove. 6.22. When thou awakest it shall
talk with thee, that is, when thou and it are alone, it shall teach thee, and
find thee good discourse; this should make us count good thoughts precious.

God has an Answer for the words of the Mind as well as for the words of the
Mouth. The very Thoughts of our hearts expect to have met withal, Mat. 9.3, 4.
and 12.25, Luke 5.22. and 6.8. and 11.17. and 24.38.

Ieroboams wife did, disguised: Who will say what they think? with what a
deal of fair pretense do men cover their hypocrisy and guile of spirit? Yet
God has a Candle that gives light into all the Bowels of the belly; he has
no need that any man should testify of man, Pro. 20.27.
for he knows what is within man, Ioh. 2.24. And he has fitted his Word, and
framed it of purpose (by his All-seeing Spirit) that it may discover what is
hid, and converse secretly in the bosoms of men, Heb. 4. verse 12. daily
experience makes this good.

Whilst the Word is Preaching it does so ransacke the heart, 1 Cor. 14.25.
that such as hear it cannot but be persuaded the Minister is acquainted with
their sins, and that he aims at them; Wilfully, being ignorant of this, that
the Word will search them, though the Minister never saw their faces. The Bow
is drawn at an adventure by our hand; It is God that guides the flight into
Ahabs bosom; he answers you according to the Idols in your hearts, Ezekiel.
14.4. When you come to a Sermon know you come to a narrow Searcher, which will
tell you of your Adulteries, Oppressions, etc. And reveal unto you (as Elisha
did to the King of Israel) whatsoever is done privily in your private chamber.

And guided the Tongue of his servants to the very point that troubled us? God
can strangely be our Physician, and yet no creature know our disease. But this
is not spoken as if men should repress or smother doubts; for if the Lord does
not answer otherwise, we are to propound them to the Wise and Learned, who are
able to resolve us.

We now come to the words of our Savior to Simon, which are very insinuative:
He winds into his Affections, in naming of him so lovingly; and prepares his
Attention in craving Audience. Simon must be answered, and reprooved for the
thoughts of his heart; yet not in Judgment (as the obstinate and malicious
were,) but in Mercy, in a gentle convictive way. He comes not on him as the
Syrians did on Gilead, Amos 1.3. threshing him with a flayle of iron; nor
scourging him (as Rehoboam threatened to scourge Israel) with Scorpions, 2 Chronicles. 10.11. but with all meekness and moderation of spirit according to the
nature of his error, knowing it to be through ignorance and weakness. From his
Example learn we

To answer our Brother (not sinning presumptuously) with the spirit of
meekness.

So exhorts the Apostle, Gal. 6.1. If any be fallen into any fault, (i.e.
through infirmity) ye that are spiritual restore such a one (...), Nihil
probat spiritualem virum, sicut peccati alieni tractatio: quum liberationem
ejus potius quam insultationem, potiusque auxilia, quam convitia meditatur, and
quantum facultas tribuitur suscipit. Aug. sur. Epist. ad Galat.
in the spirit of meekness. Look as Chyrurgions and Bone-setters (for to
them the Apostle does allude) in restoring and setting right a dislocated
joint, do it with all the tenderness that may be, so tenderly should we go
about this business of Reprehension, having to do with a weak and flexible
delinquent.

Upon which words of the Apostle, Martin Luther, though his spirit were as the
spirit of Elias; fiery, and vehement, (the hottest burning Taper that ever yet
shined in the Church of Germany,) delivers and commends this Doctrine to our
wisest Considerations, in as much as the contrary hereunto savours too much of
that Popish racking and tormenting of the consciences of men, for every small
offense committed, and too little of that Spirit of Christ, by the Apostle
there commended; which (not in the zeal of severe Justice, but) in lenity and
mildness lifts up them that be fallen, and gently restores that which is
decayed, either through the deceit of Satan, or the weakness of sinful flesh.

And as there were some in his days (of whom he there complains) so are there
in ours, who when they should refresh and comfort thirsty consciences, they
give them gall to drink, as David's enemies did him, and the Jews Christ.

Their Reproves are like the thoughts of jealousy, Cant. 8 Implacable and
Cruel, as the Grave; and under the cloak of friendly Reproof they cast forth
their flames and brands of consuming heat, as if that Mars and Saturn were in
some fiery conjunction over their tongues.

Qui blando ver^o castigatus non corrigitur, acrius necesse est arguatur: cum
dolor sunt ab scindenda quae leniter sanari non possunt. Ibid de Sum: beno.
(...) Luke 13.32.16.15. Mat. 23.13. Acts 7.52.
I would not be mistaken, as if hereby I would insinuate, that always mild,
and gentle Reproof is to be used; Sharp Reproof has his place al^o, and is
as necessary and fruitful as the other, (being done with discretion and
regard) 1 Cor. 4.21. 1 Cor. 13.10. Those evil Beasts and Slow-bellies the
Cre^ians, (who were always word signifies.) Tit. 1.13. Thus did our Savior at
other times Reproove. He called Herod Fox, and the Master of the Synagogue,
Hypocrite: and the Scribes and Pharisees, Vipers ana the sons of the devil.
Saint Steven calls the Jews Traitors and Murderers. And Saint Paul the
Galathians, Sotts and Fools. But such cutting Reproves are for rotten
Sinners: a weak Dose will but stir up and anger their ill humors, not purge
them away: there must be thundering, and a tempest of words, where sins are
crying: Gods Word must be as the fire, and Hammer to break the stone: But
having to deal with more flexible dispositions; (and for infirmities and
frailties) we must observe another method, after our Saviors own example; who
finding the Jews to buy and sell in his Fathers Temple, for the first time,
reprooved them mildly, Ioh. 1.16. but finding them presumptuously to
transgress a second time, he said (not as before, you have made my Fathers
house a house of Merchandise, but) you have made it a Den of Theoves, Mat.
21.13.

And yet withal, as the likeness of Amber came out of that fire that
compassed the cloud, Ezekiel. 1.4. So should love shine out of this fire of zeal,
which we bring with us to consume the black cloud of sin: If true Love have not
a part in this Scene, we do but act a Tragedy; and with Hazael under pretense
of easing Benhadad, we do but stifle our Brother with a thick cloth dipped in
water, 2 Kings 8.15.

Should we come upon our Brother in Heat and Choler, as Eliah came on David, 1 Samuel 17. we should at best but do what the Jews blasphemously charged Christ
withal, cast out Satan by Satan, nor will these harsh and galling
reprehensions ever work kindly on a tender disposition. The wrath of man (says
S. James) works not the righteousness of God. James 1.18.
A furious and railing reprehension does never so persuade a man as to bring
him to God or goodness.

It was not the heat, but cool of the day, when God came with a Reproof to
Adam: It was a still and mild voice, wherein God appeared to Elijah. Hier. ad
Theop.
And as Saint Hierom speaks, Christus non fulminans and tenans, sed in presepi
vagiens, and tacens in cruce salvavit humanum genus. A gentle fire (they say)
makes the best distilled waters.

Never let my tongue enter into their rest, who repose themselves with Shomei
in Bahurim, that when David passes by, they may fling their answers, like
stones, at him, and say it was done only in Love: being not ashamed to imprint
this golden stamp of loving Reproof upon the base iron and eating Canker of
foul Accusation. This fly of Envy is that which makes this precious ointment
of Reproof to stink.

But on the other side the incense of our Lips will be sweet when this spice of
Myrrh and Cinomon, Exodus 35.23. and 30.23.
Love and Mildness is mingled with the anointing ^yle: How fair art thou,
show me thy sight, and let me hear thy voice, for it is sweet: Thy Lips drop
as honey combs, honey and milk are under thy tongue? And the savor of thy
garments is as the savor of Lebanon. And thus much in general. Come we now to
a more particular Examination of the words.

Simon I have somewhat to say unto thee.
He prepares him by naming of him [Simon] which is as much as hearing or
obeying. Shamaang Obedience.


There is a double use (we know) of Names: First, Civil, for distinctions
sake, Nomen quasi notamen. Secondly, Religious, which is observed at our
Baptism. So often as we hear our selves named, we should remember our
Covenant with God there made.

Christ names him first, to distinguish him from the rest present: He it was
that questioned whether Christ was a Prophet; our Savior (therefore)
addresseth himself to him especially. Hence we learn

It is (sometimes) lawful to single out men by Name in Instructing, Reproving,
and admonishing of them, Mat. 26.40. Gal. 2.14. Luke 10.

And yet this must not be taken for a general Rule, some Cautions must be
added. First, this liberty is allowed in Private rather then in Public.
Secondly, when in Public, then not in a Fraternall, but in a Iuridicall way.

In Private Reproof, our Savior directs us all, Mat. 18.15. If the sin be
private, known to he alone, or some few else, Corripe inter te and illum;
Reproove him betwixt thee and him, (or before two or three at most,) make no
words of it to a multitude, Vbi malum oritur, Optimum sepulchrum peccati inter
te and illum.
ibi moriatur, where an evil arises, there let it dye and by buried: No
better Sepulcher then that between thee and him, to bury thy brothers
faylings. For he that proclaims it openly, says S. Cirill. lib. 3. in Levit.
non corrigat, sed infamat, defames and reprooves not his neighbor.

And this was our Saviors own practice, he did not reproove the woeman of
Samaria, Ioh. 4. whiles his Disciples were present, but when they were gone
into the City, and she alone, he comes unto her. Quae peceaniar coram omnibus
coram omnibus corripie^da sunt, ut omnes timeant. Qui secreto peccavit in te
secreto corripe nam si solus nosti, and cum vis coram alijs arguere non es
corrector, sed proditor, Aug. de verb. Dom. Sermon. 16.
So in curing that man who was deaf and dumb, Mark. 7.33. (the Text says) he
took him aside from the multitude. Thus must we; where the fault is private,
and not public and scandalous, take them aside that have offended. Our
reprehension in such a case must be auricular, no care must hear it, but
theirs who do offend. And so they may hear, both their name and fault as
Simon heard here.

If the Reproof be Public and in the Ministry of Preaching in a Fraternall
way, the like liberty is not granted. Therefore (its well observed) S. Paul
directing Titus how to proceed with the Cretians in reprooving of them, says
(...) redargue illos, not (...), redargue illum, Rebuke privately [him]
publicly, not [him] but [them.] He would not that he should turn his Sermons
into Philippicks. Should I particularize in my reproves (says S. Austin)
essem proditor non correptor, I should not be a Rebuker but a Betrayer. I smite
indeed (says he) the cares of all men in my Preaching, but I convent the
consciences of some few; Wherefore I say not, thou Adulterer correct thy self,
but whosoever. are infected with that vice in this people correct thy self. It
is not safe nor seemly for a Preacher to tax any personally; He may not come
as Nathan to David, in his public Ministry, with T^ fecisti. It is indeed the
hearers duty, to make particular application to himself of what is generally
spoken, but no part of the Ministers to single out any from the rest by Name.

But if in case the Church (using the keys) proceeds against any scandalous
and notorious Person Iuridically, then the sinner may be named, that he may be
avoided, 1 Timothy 1.20. and 2. c. 1. v. 17. and 4.14.

Reproove as not to blemish: so to name our Brother as not to disgrace him. We
read, Exodus 37.23. God required that there should be Snuffers made for the
Lamps of the Tabernacle, and Snuffe-dishes of pure gold. God would teach his
Churcy hereby (as some conceive) First, that they who censure and reproove
others, should themselves be blameless, the Snuffers were to be of gold?
Secondly, the faults which we reproove our Brethren for, are to be forgot. The
Rabbis say, those snuffe-dishes were filled with sand, to bury the snuffes in.
You know, if a man should top a candle (as we say) and then throw the snuff
about the room, he would offend more with the stench he makes, then please by
his diligence. Remember there are Snuffe-dishes as well as Snuffers, use both:
and take him for a Surgeon who does heal the face without a scarre.

I have somewhat to say unto thee.
We read Isa 53.7. Math. 27.12, 13, 14. Ioh. 19.9. that our Savior was dumb
as a sheep before his shearer, but no where can we read that he was dumb as a
sheapheard before his sheep, See the good Samaritane. pa. 12.
he had still somewhat to say as occasion was offered.

Simon had overshot himself, and our Savior was desirous to cure him of his
malady, he had somewhat to say unto him for this purpose. We (especially
Ministers) may learn hence.

To say somewhat to our Brother, when we see him run into anerror. In such a
case we may not be silent, Lev. 19.17. Thou shall in any wise rebuke thy
Neighbor and not suffer sin upon him. Observe.

Here is no Posterne gate closely to entertain a substitute. For reproof is
like the Peace Offering made by fire, Levit. 17.30. Thy own hands must bring
it, [Thou.]

Here is no corner for excuse, if thou do it not: a necessity is laid upon
thee. The command is absolute. [Shalt in any wise.]

Here is no Exemption of persons, all being Neighbors, by the condition of our
birth, mortality, and hope of the heavenly inheritance. [Thy Neighbor.]

Here is no dispensation to be granted for any transgression of what kind
soever, Sin may not be suffered upon him.

And as God in the Law; so Christ in the Gospel, requires this duty of us,
Math. 18.15. And after him his Apostles, 1 These. 5.14. 2 Timothy 2. Yea Law and
Gospel, Prophets and Apostles, like Righteousness and Peace, Truth and Mercy
in the Psalm, kiss each other. Conforting all in one, and in sweetest melody
like a Quire of Angels, they tune their strings and notes to this ditty, The
duty of reproof.

Nec obmutescas amplius; as God said to Exekiell, Ezekiel. 24. ult.
hold your Faith, hold your Truth, hold your Profession, but hold your Peace no
more, Thou shall speak and be no longer dumb. Break the strings of thy tongue
like the dumb son in Herodotus; suffer no sin like the Persian, to kill thy
Father, Brother, Neighbor, through thy silence.

It was a Law in Israel, Thou shall not see thy Brothers Ox or Ass to sall
down by the way, and hide thy self from them. Does God take care for Oxen?
nay for us are these things written. But pity it is (says S. Bernard) cadit
asina, succurriturei; cadit anima non est qui relevet came, the Ass falls and
is succored; a soul falls and there is none which by seasonable reproof
will relieve it.

These be those latter days, so long since foretold by our blessed Savior,
wherein Iniquity should increase, and love wax cold. Iniquity spreads her
Cockatrices wings from East to West, from Dan to Beersheba: It has increased
with the increase of mankind, as the Ivy does with the Oak^. Were love burning
in the hearts of men, (like that fire in the holy Temple) or had men their
faces one toward another, (like those Cherubins which covered the mercy seat
with their wings, Exodus 25.20.) they would not only Return themselves, but
likewise by their friendly Admonitions and Reproof, cause others to return
from their transgressions.

Tot quotidie occidimus quot admortem ire tepidi and tacentes videmus. Greg.
Gods Ministers could not (then) but have somewhat to say to sinners and not
(through the silence of one) suffer two to die, Themselves and their erring
Brother: Themselves through the omitting of this duty, (as we read, Ezekiel
3.18.) Their Brother through continuance in his sins that he has committed.

Object. But this Age will not endure Reproof. Ahab counts Elijah his enemy;
The Galathians esteemed Paul no better for this service of Love, and liberty of
speech.

Resp. Why should they be taxed for liberty of speech seeing men set no bounds
unto their sins? Mihi aliquando arguere permissum, Amb. Ser. 65. Audebo
pecca^ti mala sua ostendere: vitia ejus si non excidero, inhibebo: non desinent
sed intermittent. Fortasse autem desinent, si intermittendi co^suetudinem
fecerint. Senec. de mor.
tibi nunquam peccare, says S. Ambrose, we have Commission for the one, they
have no Commission for the other. Why then should we fear to execute it, or
suffer sin to affront us without smiting it? Heathens have been more bold.

In the first of the Kings 20.35. we read of one who entreated his neighbor
in the name of God to smite him, which he refusing to do, was stain by a
Lion. Sin will not say as that man of God did, percute me, smite me I pray
thee, yet God has commanded us to smite it; and if we refuse to do so, Gods
wrath will smite us as it did that Refuser. Therefore deal we with it, as that
other man did with the Prophet, verse 37. Smite it where ere we find it. Genesis
4.15.
God did set a mark on Cain least any one finding him should slay him; we may
not set a mark on the forehead of any sin, or sinner (unless he be a Scorner)
for the sparing of it; we are to smite it, 1 King. 2.
yea to slay it, where ere we find it, though with Ioab it fly to the Altars
side for shelter.

To every one is given the dispensation of this Grace in due time and Place: As
Joshua said unto the people concerning Ai, Josh 8.8.
you shall set the City on fire according to the Commandment of the Lord, so
shall you do, may it be said to all the Tribes; Rebuke you every one his
neighbor, set this stubble of sin on fire, to consume it according to Gods
Command.

Consentire est silere cum arguere possis, (says Saint Bernard) Silence in the
presence of sin implies a consent unto it. Though thou say not Euge (says
Saint Austin,) yet if thou say not Apage, there is a mutual Approbation. Nay
the same Father in Mat. 16. goes farther yet, Pejor es tacendo (says he) quam
ille convitiando, our silence in not rebuking of our neighbor is more
dangerous to us, Ita peccat, qui videt fratrem peccare, and tacet. sicut qui
paenitenti non indulget, etc. Rab Sup. illud Mat. 18. Si peccaverit in te
frater tu^s.
then his sin is to himself. Sure I am, he that said if thy Brother repent
forgive him, said also (and in the first place) If thy Brother sin, Reproove
him: Our fault may be held to be as great, not to reproove our Brother when he
has offended, as not to forgive him when he has repented.

How to perform this duty aright, is one of the greatest difficulties incident
to humane discretion: And yet it is easier known, then done; and sooner may we
have Rules prescribed, then practiced: God has dealt with us, as he did with
Israel in the siege of Jericho; Josh. 6.
who, for the avoiding of danger, were before hand instructed, how to marshall
their Companies; what to do, when to be silent without any noise at all; and
when to shout aloud that the walls of the City might fall down flat: So in the
Assault and expugning of this spiritual Jericho, sin; we have direction from
the mouth of God in holy Writ, for the Companies to be marshaled: No railing
Shemei nor furious Iehu is fit for this March (as before was showed) Next when
to be silent without any noise at all, Eccles. 3.7. Amos 5 13. Isa 58.1.
for as much as all things have their times and seasons: And there is an evil
time, when the Prudent will keep silence: Then when to use a stiller voice, and
when a louder, that the walls and buildings of this leprous house may fall
down slat, and be laid level with the earth. But if I should launch forth
into this deep, my voyage would be too long in this point, my Text not leading
me so directly to so large a discourse. Wherefore I come to the Consideration
of the Person to whom our Savior had to say.

To thee]
Simon was the Master of the Feast, he it was that had invited Christ unto his
Table; and that, out of the good respect he bare him; Yet to him has our
Savior something to say, etc.

Courteous usage should not keep us from telling men of their faults and
discovering their failings to them.

Belshazer promised Daniel great preferments; Dan 5.^6.
He would cloth him in Scarlet, put a Chain of gold about his neck, make him
the third Ruler in the Kingdom; but all this could not bribe him so as to make
him forbear Reproof; he spares not to tell him of his Pride, Sacrilege,
Idolatry, Verse 23.
Voluptuousness, and other his horrible Impieties committed against God.

Herod pretended to be a great friend to John the Baptist, he did hear him
often, reverence him much, amended many things that John reprooved: But all
this could not make S. John forbear to tell him to his face, Mat. 14.4.
that it was not lawful for him to have his Brother Philips wife.

Christ was sundry times invited by the Pharisees to Luke 11.37.
Dinner, and he never refused to go unto them, (that we read of;) But being at
their Tables, he entertained them with as many Woes, as they did him with
Dishes. Let it be Martha ( Lazarus sister whom he loved so dearly) that shall
offend, Luke 10.41, 42
he will not suffer her to go away without a check.

Nihil in sacerdote tam periculosum apud Deum, tam turpe apud homines quam quod
sent^at veritatem non lib ere pronuntiare. Amb in Epist. ad Theo. Imper.
It is a fault for any to be musted, but for a Minister, it is piaculum, a fault
of a high nature, and yet, wealth and worship carries so strict a hand over
some servile spirits, that they are feign to run at the stirrup, and come in at
the least rebuke; and (as Erasmus notes Harpocrates was pictured) hold their
finger in their mouths.

It is storied of Alexander the Great, that having had a Philosopher a long
time with him, at length he said thus unto him; recede a me prorsus, consortium
tuum nolo: Be gone from me, I desire not thy company, and being asked the
reason, he made this Answer, Quod cum tanto tempore mecum degeris, nunquam me
de vitio aliquo increpasti; because in living so long with me, thou have never
reproved any vice in me; either thou have not observed me to err, (which is a
great Argument of thy Ignorance,) or else knowing me to err thou have held thy
peace, (which is an evident proof of thy unfaithfullnes,) this made much to
the praise of that great Monarch.

There are those in these days, who will keep Levits in their houses, and feed
Preachers at their Tables, but it is no otherwise then the Thief does feed the
dog, porrigit panem ut sileat, they give him bread that he may not bark:
Balaack offered Balaam promotion upon these terms, Numb. 23.

And indeed it falls out sometimes very unhappily, many are kept by this means
from barking: So we read, Isa. 56.10, 11. Mich. 3.5. Their good Benefactors are
the Vowels, and they themselves the Consonants, needs must they follow the
sound of their vowels. These are like Spaniels; if they hunt, or quest at all,
it must be that way their Patron looks. Or like silent Setters, they must
hear, see, and say nothing.

This should not be, neither Favor, nor Benevolence, should tongue-tie the
Truth; Gods cause must be pleaded though it be against our best friends: I will
not (says S. Bernard) Favere Majestati magis quam veritati, be a servant to
Caesar and a Traitor to the Truth: Plato is my friend, and so is Socrates, but
the Truth is more.

Say we be blamed for rudeness and incivility. etc. Better it is that we
hazard our Reputation this way, then purchase the Reputation of fair behavior
by speechless sufferance; or smoothing flattery, sewing pillowes where we
should quilt thorns.

Sometimes (I grant) that in connivencie may be a religious Policy, Pro.
19.11.20.3. Amos 5.13. Acts 19 37. (...). cel Rhod. lib. 29. c 8.
every light offense is not to be observed: but continual winking is worse
then blindness. What the Philosopher said to one that very gravely said
nothing (for fear of displeasing) when there was need of his reply, is true;
if a fool hold his peace he does wisely, but if a wiseman when he should speak
he does foolishly.

A great deal of discretion likewise must be used in dealing with men; due
respect of persons must be had, 1 Timothy 5.1. Job 34.18. Great ones love not
boisterous usage, we must come to them verbis byssinis, with soft and silken
words, as the mother of Cyrus charged him, who was to speak unto the King.

It is none of the worst observations we meet withal in Oleaster; that the
holy Prophets in dealing with great ones have spoken most an end in Parables,
(as our Savior did here to Simon.) Let Reproof be as good and wholesome diet
as a Partridge, yet it would not be served in to a great man's Table raw, or
with the feathers on, but cooked and seasoned. Reproof of them must be well
wrapped up (as we do a Pill in sugar) that it may the more easily be swallowed,
Objurgationi semper aliquid blandi commisce: facilius penetrant verba quae
mollia vadunt, quam quae aspera Senec. Magis amat objurgator Sanans, quam
adulator dissimulans. Aug. Pro. 28.23. Psalm. 141. Text.
and work before they think on it. But it may not be wholly withheld from any
man whatever, be he our dearest friend: In so doing we should deal unkindly
with them who deal friendly with us. Unhappy is that friendship (says
Carthusianus,) quae illum quem diligit tacendo tradit Diabolo, which favoring
our Brothers ears does break his neck: such friendship David puts in his
Letanie and desires God to keep him from. And thus much of the Excitation,
Simons Replication follows.

And he says Master say on]
Simon here makes good his Name, Convenient rebus nomina saepe suis; It
sometimes falls out, that the Name and disposition are suitable.

God at the first giving Names did suit them to the natures of the creatures.
As to the Day, Night, Heaven, Earth, Sea, etc. And Adam observed this in giving
particular names unto them by Gods appointment. Their (...) he made to be
(...). The Patriarchs went by the same rule, in naming of their children. The
Son of God was called Jesus, for that he was the Savior of his people.

sound; being called, they will not with Samuel answer here am I.

And there are more who answer not the Signification of their names. There are
many John's, but few gracious: many Simons, but few obedient ones: many
Elizabeth's, but few peaceable ones: many Hannahs, and many graceless ones.
They cross their Names, as many Popes have done; none more Vnclement amongst
them then the Clements; more Impious then their Piusses; more Noxious then
their Innocents; more Turbulent then their Vrbanes, etc. So these by their
lives may be thought with Massula Corvinus to have forgotten the name they are
called by.

Nomen inane est crimen immane. A favor it is, that our names sound
prosperously; yet we may not presume too much upon them, as it seems one
Bonasus did, whom S. Hierom writing unto, thus reproves; An ideo tibi bellus
videris, quia justo vocaris nomine? Do thou think thy self a fine man,
because thou have gotten thy self a fine name? If we think that grace is
necessarily tied to the name of any mortal creature, we deceive our selves.

This Name, mentioned in my Text was commonly (as is well observed by some) a
happy Name in Scripture. We read of Simon Peter a sanctified man; of Simon
Zelotes, Mat. 10.2. Acts 1.13. Acts 9.6. Mat. 27.32. Acts 8.9.
a zealous man: of Simon the Tanner, a charitable man; of Simon of Cyrene, a
compassionate man; And (that none might too much presume on Names) we read of
Simon Magus, a disobedient man, one who was a Witch, a Sorcerer, the Fountain,
and Father of all Heresies.

How often have we heard of the woeful wrack of many goodly ships with their
glorious titles? Christiani nomen ille frustra sortitur, qui Christum minime
imitatur. Quid enim tibi prodest vocari quod non es, and nomen usur pari
alienum? Sed si Christianum te esse delectat, quae Christianitatis sunt gere,
and merito tibi nomen Christiani assume. Aug de vera Christ. Psalm. 79 9.
(As the Triumph, Conquest, Save-guard, Good-speed, etc.) So many with good
names have perished, yea with that glorious name of Christian, first given us
at Antioch, that cannot save us if we sin against it.

To conclude this, S. Paul says of Christ, Heb. 1.4. He was made so much more
excellent then Angels, by how much he obtained a more excellent name then they.
As any has received a more excellent name then others, (and in that case is
advanced above them,) so let such endeavor to excel in godliness and Piety.
And as David uses this often for an argument to the Lord, For thy names sake,
so let it prevail with us, For our names sake let us learn to be more
righteous.

Master say on.
We have considerable, first the Reverend and respective Appellation given by
Simon to our Savior, (...), Master. Secondly, his Ready and submissive
Attention, in that word (...), Say on.

Of the first: Simon doubted (as I have said) whether Christ were a Prophet,
but he said it within himself, etc. for he was held to be a Prophet, and in
that respect he styles him Master. We see then,

Reverence and Respect is due to the Prophets of the Lord. That there is an
honor due to them appears, Judge. 13.17. Manoah taking the Angel (who brought
him word of the birth of Sampson) to be a Prophet, asked him his name; giving
this for the Reason, that when his sayings were come to pass, (and so prooved
to be a Prophet) he might honor him. See 1 Timothy 5.17. Heb. 5.4. Phil. 2.29.

The want of this is noted for a great fault, Ioh. 4.43, 44. and a sign of
horrible confusion, Lament 4.16.

Cadmus had sown the earth with Saul's Teeth, and Sheme'is Tongue) so many rise
up armed against David, against Ahimelech and a linen Ephod.

The day was, when the feet of Gods Prophets seemed beautiful upon the
mountains, Isa. 52.7. when they have been entertained as the Angels of God,
Isa. 52.7. Romans 10.15.
yea as Christ himself, Gal. 4.14.

A Calling that has been honored not only of the meaner sort, but even of
the honorable themselves. Obadiah a great Courtier, calls Elijah Lord, 1 King.
18.7. Naaman the only Favorite of the King of Aram, styles himself Elishaes
Servant, 2 King. 5.18. Ioash and Ioram style him Father, 2 King. 13.14.
Nebuchaduezzar the Monarch of the world falls on his face and boweth before
the Prophet Daniel 2.46. Herod reverenced John the Baptist, Mark. 6.20. and
Alexander honored Iaddus: Constantine used the Bishops at the Council of Nice
with more then ordinary respect.

And (to the shame of us Christians) we shall find that Heathens, and Idolaters
have far exceeded us in honoring of their Priests, Be unto me a Father and a
Priest, says Michah, Judge. 17. So said the Danites to the young Levite in
Michaes house (whom they allured to go with them) Come with us to be our Priest
and Father, Valor. Max. lib. 1. c. 1.
Judge. 18.19. And to say no more, It is storied of Albinius one of the Roman
Consuls, that when the Galls had taken Rome, and the Flamen and Vestall
virgins fled with the Implements, Instruments of Religion, the said Albinius
carrying his Wife and children in a Wagon, caused them, (with himself) to
descend, Sacerdotis aspice dignitatem, agitur in terra sed officium coelestibus
negotijs continetur, etc. Per ipsos Christum induimis, per ipsos Dei silio
conjungimur, per ipsos membra beati ipsius capitis efficimur. Quomodo ergo
nobis isli non so'um reverendi magis quam reges aut judices, sed etiam nobis
magis crunt honorabiles quam parents. Chrysostom. de dignitate Sacer. lib. 2.
and placed therein those their Priests and Votaries, preferring public
Religion before his own or his peoples ease, which blind devotion of his
caused one to say, that that homely Wane did equal yea excel the most
glittering triumphant Chariot in the world. Yea the Devil himself speaking of
Gods Ministers, cannot but speak honorably of them, as he did of Paul and
Silas, Acts 19.15.

If you would know the Reasons, why you should honor and respect them, I will
acquaint you with some briefly. First, they serve a great Lord, one who is
higher then the highest; they are his special servants, Ier. 7.25. 2 King.
1.11. They are the Stewards of his house, 2 Cor. 4.1. Secretaries of State,
Amos 3.7. His Ambassadors, 2 Cor. 5.10. They are Gods mouth, Ier. 15.19. Will
Rabsekah have Hezekiah the King stand in awe of the least of his Masters
servants, the great King of Assyria, 2 King 18.24. And shall not these
servants, which are in such high places under the God of heaven (whose service
Kings themselves may not scorn) have resepect? Secondly, honor is due unto
them in regard of their Gifts; it is a barbarous thing not to honor learning;
and above all gifts and learning the best gifts should be honored most, of
which sort theirs are, 1 Cor. 12.31. and 14.1, 5. In short, They are our
Fathers and Masters, Eccles. 12.11. 1 Cor. 4.15. and therefore honor is their
due from us, Mal. 1.6.

Now I beseech you Brethren know them which labor amongst you, and are over
you in the Lord, and admonish you: Rectify your Judgments and Opinions, as
concerning them, and their Callings; Account of them as of the Ministers of
Christ and stewards of the Mysteries of God. You think them to be as S. Paul
speaks of himself, Ephesians. 3.8. (...), less then the lowest, when in Gods
Judgment a Prophet is (...), greater then the greatest.

The Angel Gabriel said of John the Baptist, he shall be great in the sight of
the Lord, Luke 1.15. And yet his Calling is not so great, as theirs is, under
the Gospel; A greater then he, (our aviour says) was not borne of a woman;
that is, amongst those ancient Prophets which have been most famous in the
world in former times, none greater then John; yet he that is least in the
Kingdom of Heaven is greater then he: that is, the meanest Minister under the
Gospel has a more excellent office and function then he had. They preaching
the same Savior which he did; and that not only exhibited (wherein John
excelled the Prophets before him) but as having fully satisfied for mankind,
triumphed over Death, and Hell, and ascended into the glory of his Father. Yea
so great is this Calling of theirs, that the Son of God himself did not
disdain to live in it, Luke 4.18. The latchet of whose shoes John Baptist
thought himself unworthy to stoop down and unloose, Mark. 1.7.

The mean and base opinion that the world has of Prophets, is through the
subtilty, and deceit of Satan, who well knows, that the Doctrine shall little
or nothing be esteemed of, where the Person is not reverenced, and regarded.
This was the cause why our blessed Savior himself, would stay no longer in
Nazareth, (though it was the Town where he was brought up, Luke 2.39.4.16.
and where his Parents formerly had dwelt) but went into other parts of Galile;
For that a Prophet has no honor in his own Country, Ioh. 4.14. Why stood he
so much upon his honor? He told us that he seeks not his own praise, Ioh.
8.48, 49. Nor did he, but yet he knew full well that none could receive benefit
by his Ministry, who did not reverence his Person. And thence it was he stood
so much upon his honor, as that he would preach no where but where he might be
honored.

The contempt that is done to them, reaches to the holy things that they are
employed in; yea it reaches to God himself, Exodus 16.8. Luke 10.16. whence it
is that God has taken it so heinously, and punished the contempt of his
Messengers so severely as we read, 2 Chronicles. 3.16. 2 King. 2. 1 King. 13. Mat.
21.43. and 23.39.

Herod (you know) pretended great love to John the Baptist, yet to pleasure a
minsing Damsel, he cut off his head, and gave it her for a favor. Did God
take this well? When Christ was before him, he would not answer him a word,
which shows he was not well pleased with him: He spoke to the High Priest some
words, though not many; to Pilate some; but when he came before Herod, never a
word at all, (and no wonder, John was vox clamantis, the voice of Christ, and
Herod in beheading John had taken away Christ's voice before) Be assured Christ
will do the more when he is silent.

Object. Think us not proud whilst we press this Doctrine on you. Humility you
say becomes us; We would be Lords and Kings over Gods heritage, etc.

Resp. In preaching this Truth, we preach not our selves but Christ Jesus, 2
Cor. 4.5.

2. In pressing this, we plead not for Pharisaicall pre-eminence, Mat. 23.6.
nor do we challenge to our selves that Civil Authority and reverence that is
due to Magistrates, and great men of the world; but that which is due to our
work and Calling which is more Inward and Spiritual.

3. Humility is a Grace becomes all; Princes as well as Prophets; and yet
though it beseemes both Prince and Prophet to humble themselves and practice
humility, it becomes not the people to humble either of them. Wherefore Render
to every one their dues, Tribute to whom Tribute is due, Fear to whom Fear,
Honor to whom Honor. Romans 1^.7.
But enough of this you will say.

Say on.
The Word Christ speaks ought to be received with all readiness of spirit.
Thus Simon received it, so ought we.

God begins his Law with Hear O Israel, Deuteronomy. 5.1. and 6.34. and the Gospel
with This is my beloved Son hear him, Mat. 17 5. And this is the praise of
the worthy Bereans, they received the word with all readiness of mind, Acts
17.11.

Luk 11. And in coming to the Word bring with us a hearing Ear, which all
that have ears have not, Mat. 13.43.

S. Bernard has this description of a good Ear, Bern. in quadam Epist.
Qua libenter audit utilia, prudenter discernit audita, obedienter operatur
intellecta; which willingly hears what is profitable and good, wisely
understands what it hears, and obediently practices what it understands.
For such an Ear the Pearls of the Gospel are prepared, but it is rare to
find.

Some will hear, but not what is good; they have an itching Ear, 2 Timothy 4.4.
and the more it is rubbed the further it spreads; they gave after some witty
conceit or pretty note (as they call them) with the Athenians they give
themselves to nothing else but hearing news, Acts 17.21.
(and that must come from Placentia too, Isa. 30.10. not from Verona, Lavat. in
Ester
Ier. 44.10.) Made dishes and pleasant fauces they affect, but wholesome
Doctrine they cannot away withal, 1 Timothy 6.3. They applaud (says S. Austin)
not Consultoribus utilitatum, Aug. de Civit. Dei. lib. 2. cap. 28. Prudens
Auditor omnes libenter audit, omnia legit, non per sonam, non Scripturam, non
doctrinam spernit; ab omnibus indifferenter, quod sibi deest, and quod deesse
videt, quaerit, non quantum tciat sed quan sum ignorant considerat. Hugo de
Sanct. Vict. in suo didascal.
but Largitoribus voluptatum, not the teachers of Conscience, but the ticklers
of Sense; who wound the head to claw the tail, Censure Magistracy, yea
Sovereignty; who please their humors are Preachers for them.

Or say they sometimes lend an Ear to what is good, yet they come not with an
open heart, ready to hear whatsoever Christ shall say, and to receive it
whoever be the bringer. (Like a bad Porter,) the ear admits of none that comes
not in gay clothing; plain stuff (as the doctrine of Faith, good works,
etc.) is thrust back: It may be the word of Doctrine they will attend unto, but
not the word of Application; the word of Exhortation, but not the word of
Reprehension. When with rebukes God does chasten a man for sin (in the
Ministry of the Word) he is as a moth fretting a garment (says our
Translation) Psalm. 39.11. Now we say, Tinea damnum facit non sonitum, a moth
does mischief and makes no noise; so sinners, they will be fretting secretly,
though they make no show of it opeenly: If they find no hole in the Reproovers
coat, they will make one before they leave fretting, Acts 7.54. Hos. 4 4.

Secondly, some Hear, but they understand not what they hear, like those,
Mat. 22.22. they marvelled, and left him and went their way. Or with those who
accompanied S. Paul, Acts 9.7. they heard a noise but knew not what it meant.
Their tidings from Church are much like those which Ahimaaz brought David, 2 Samuel 18.29. I saw a great tumult but I knew not what it was; no difference can
they put betwixt Truth and Error, they are unskilful in the word of
Righteousness, Heb. 5.13.

Let not these forget what they read, Mat. 13.15. A more fearful sentence
cannot be uttered in this life against a man then this, Omnia ipsis in
Parabolis fires, all is spoken to them in Parables. If our Gospel be now hid,
it is hid to them that are lost, 2 Cor. 4.3. Of Christ's Disciples it is said,
To you it is given to understand the Mysteries of the Kingdom, Luke 8.10. Of
all this is called for, Mat. 15.10.

Lastly, some understand the Grammar of the Gospel well enough so as they can
discourse thereof, etc. But the Rhethorick of it they understand not, they
bring not their Hearing into Practice (wherein lies the sweet of hearing.) Such
Hearers had Ezekiel, Chap. 33.31. They hear thy words but they will not do
them, they are resolved before hand what they will do and not do. So Ier.
4.16. We have piped to you says our Savior, and ye have not danced, Mat.
11.17. These kind of Hearers mind the Ministers pipe, they have no care of
their own feet to practice what they have heard.

O that once GOD would be pleased to make us good Simons; that in hearing what
CHRIST has to say unto us, we would come as Cornelius did, Acts 10.33. and
with those, Acts 2. verse 41. gladly receive the Word whoever brings it. This
is made a note of a true subject of Christ, Isa. 32.3. Provided there be
Caesar's stamp and arms upon the Coin, and that it come out of his Mint, and
will abide the Touchstone; if so, let it pass for current with us.

Old Eli was desirous to be acquainted with every part of Gods blessed Will; he
had great cause to fear, that what Samuel was to deliver to him, would make
little for his comfort, yet see how he does adjure young Samuel to tell him
all, 1 Samuel 3.17. Such should be the desire of all Gods people, that Gods
Ministers would deal faithfully with them in delivering the whole Counsel of
God unto them; as well one part as another. Wantons you know come into a garden
to pick only flowers; here they pick a gay, and there another; but the good
houswife comes to gather herbs; so should we come into Gods House to hear his
Word.

To conclude this point; Remember every Hebrew servant, who liked well his
Masters service was to have his ear boared with an Aule against the door,
Exodus 21.6. If you desire to be in the lists of Gods servants, Via Domini ad
cor dirigitur quum veritatis Sermo humiliter auditur. Greg. Hom. 10. Sup Ezekiel.
you must have a Boared ear; Indeed the Ear is the door by which Christ
takes possession of the soul, and where he takes possession it must be fair.
See Romans 10.14, 17. The first link of the golden Chain is fastened to the
Ear; Faith comes by Hearing: upon the ring of the door he lays his blessed
hand, and cries, Open to me my Sister, Cant. 5.2.
my Love, my Dove, making a gracious promise of entrance upon our opening,
Psalm. 24.7. Revel. 3.20.

The Devils study is to keep this door shut, that Christ may not enter: Like
a Iaylour he will sometimes be content to let his Prisoner have hands and feet
free; provided the prison doors and gates be fast locked and barred: his
Captives shall sometimes give an alms, or do some other outward work of
mercy; come to Church to satisfy the Law, etc. But he cannot endure the doors
should stand open for fear of an escape. So Acts 7.57. Psalm. 58.45. Search the
Scriptures and you shall find that none was cured with greater difficulty,
then he that had a deaf and dumb spirit. Thus much of the (...), the Prologue
or Preface to the Parable: Come we now to the (...), the Speech or Parable it
self.

There was a certain Creditor, etc.
In these words unto the end, we have considerable, A Narration to verse 44.
And the Moral or Application in the rest.

In the Narration there is a Case related, that was betwixt a Creditor and his
two Debtors, together with the Quaere, which is both made upon the Case, ver.
42. and Resolved, ver. 43.

In relating of the Case, we have both the Creditor, and the Two Debtors
described u to us. The Creditor we are first to speak of, whose practice must
be considered; and that either more Generally toward all; or more Particularly
toward these two here mentioned.

First in General, he was (...) Foenerator, an Usurer: A difference is made
betwixt Usury, and Faenorie. Pelican. Com. in Pro. 28.8. and Hugo Card. in
Loc.
Vsura dicitur quod supra sortem datur ex pacto, Faenus quod libere datur supra
sortem sine pacto, yet oftentimes they are taken promiscuously, both in one
sense; and so in this place.

The Latins make a distinction betwixt Vsuarius and Vsurarius. Vsuarius they
call him, whom the Grecians name (...), the man that takes, receives, or
enjoys the use of a thing. Vsurarius they call him, whom the Grecians name
(...), the man from whom the use or occupying of a thing is taken and received.
So that in the native and proper signification of the word, Vsura vocabilum
inhonestum non est; Abusus reddidit inhonestum. Bulling. Decad. 3. Ser. 1.
Usury is but Vsus rei, the use of any thing: and an Usurer is any man from
whom, or by whom the use of any thing is had or enjoyed: In this sense neither
Usury nor the Usurer may be challenged as unlawful; for the benefit and
commodity of things consists in their use: and God has so disposed of men,
that each one should be commodious and beneficial to another. Such an Usurer
was he my Text speaks of. I hasten to some profitable Observation.

The Scripture is compared by David to a honey-combe, Psalm. 19 10. and Pliny
observes, (what experience confirms) of honey-combes, that the thinner and
weaker honey runs out of them at first, but the best and thickest is squezed
and pressed out at last. In opening of Parables it is thus; the easier, and
more vulgar observations arise from the letter, and drop of their own accord,
but the choysest and most useful doctrines arise from the Mystical sense or
Application, and like the thickest honey come out last, and that with more
pains and labor.

That Borrowing and lending has been a practice very ancient and of long
standing.

Israel had Laws given them concerning it, Exodus 22.14. Levit. 25.37. Deuteronomy.
15.6, 8 and 23.19 and 24.10, 11.

It was enjoined, 2 King. 4.3. Mat. 5.42. Luk 6.35.

It was practiced, Exodus 12.35. Deuteronomy. 28.12. 2 Kings 6 5. Nehem. 5.4. Luke
6.34. and 11.5. Psalm. 37.26. and 112 5.

So that neither the practice, nor the lawfullnesse is to be questioned.

Non omnis fert omnia tellus.
All have not for all necessities and turns. This Country must have supply
from that: Mesek King of Moah was Lord of sheep; Hyram had store of Timber;
Ophir was famous for gold; Chittim for Ivorie; Basan for Oaks; Libanon for
Cedars; and there must be a path from Egypt to Ashur. God is pleased so to
dispose, that one Country must stand in need of another; and so one neighbor
of another, for the maintenance of good-fellowship and Christian society: That
as in the body one member may not say to an other, I have not need of thee, so
in the Church and Commonwealth one must want an others help.

Romans 13.8. Owe no man any thing but Love.

Prohibition, Borrowing is not simply forbidden: The Apostle rather admonishes
to pay such debts as are owing, q.d. Endeavor to come out of pecuniarie debts;
but for the debt of love, still owe that, and be ever paying it; for that is
such a debt (says S. Chrysostom) ut semper reddatur and semper debeatur, it
is always paid and yet ever owing.

Object. But borrowing is a fruit of sin.

Resp. True; so was laboring unto sweat: and yet now such an ordinance is on
it, as that he who labors not, shall not eat, 2 Thessalonians. 3.10.

Si duo de nostris tollas pronomina rebus, Praelia cessarent, pax sine lite
soret.
no mine nor thine, all things must be like the waters of a common river, where
a man may take what he pleases, and leave what he lifts. And then (say they)
there will be Peace.

But the Statute of Meum and Tuum was enacted by God himself. If we look as
far as we can, even into Adams time, (the first man of all the world,) there
we shall find that he had no sooner begotten two sons, Cain and Abell, but
even then out of the great common field of the world began Terriers (as it
were) to be made, Gen 4.3, 4.
and men's parts to be shared and severall'd out to their proper use. For
howsoever it was said of wicked Cain, that he brought an Oblation to the Lord
of the fruit of the ground, (in general) as if all had lain common to him; yet
of holy Abell it was said, that he brought unto God of the first fruits of his
sheep, showing that even from the beginning it was Gods good Will that there
should be a distinction of each man's part, that none might invade the
possession of an other.

An this is set down to be a Law perpetual, Exodus Chap. 20. ver. 15. Thou
shall not steal. Were all things left in common unto all, there could be no
stealing; and so no need of any such precept.

This Statute was after wards by Christ in the Gospel revived, and set down
in plain terms, Mat. 20.14, 15. where it is said. Take that which is thine
own: and Is it not lawful to do with mine own what I list?

God is a God of Order and not of Confusion; and thinks it better that every
one should know his own, and have it bounded out, then Chaos like to lay all
upon a heap confusedly. No common purse will he have to be, (as is amongst
Thieves:) nor common prey as it is amongst Wolves and beasts of the Forest.

Yea he has thought it fit, not only to establish a Propriety, but also to
establish an Inequality. And as in bestowing of spiritual graces every one had
his proper gift of God. Mat. 25.15.
but not all alike (for one had five Talents, another two, another one) so is
it in conferring of Temporal blessings: the heads of some he annoints with the
oil of gladness above their fellows; and that the music of mankind might
not be marred, Cytharedus ridetur Chorda qui semper, etc. Horat.
some must be for Trebles, some for Means, and some for Bases, as well as
either; no Harmony consists of Unions (says Aristotle) nor any verse of one
foot; some must be poor, and some rich; some must be to borrow as well as some
to lend; how could that Christian grace of the Righteous man's lending shine,
Psalm. 37.26.
if either all things were common, or all men's estates equal? How could these
sacred Laws of sweetest pity and compassion stand, if the charitable
commercement of giving or lending to the poor, who beg or borrow by community
or equality wanted matter whereon to work?

Borrowers and Lenders, Creditors and Debtors know their liberty, and not abuse
it.

It is lawful to borrow, and a practice almost as ancient as the world; yet
let no man needlessely become a borrower, nor deal unjustly with those that
lend him, when his necessity has caused him to be beholding to his neighbor.

Some become borrowers through their Riot in wastfull spending upon their
lusts: Lucullus shall not outgo them in Building, nor Cleopatra in Feasting,
nor the Assyrian King go beyond them in the newness of their pleasures: and
wanting Fuel of their own to maintain the wildfire of their excess, they
presently fly to the Sanctuary of Borrowing, where many times they find every
stick like Moses Rod turned into a Serpent, and so with Iehoram too late they
find themselves there wounded unto death, Genesis 7.10.2 King. 9 15.16.
where they thought to have found some ease and remedy of their wounds.

As the good huswife therefore, Pro. 31.16. before she bought a field, did
first consider it. And the good husband in the Parable, before he built a Tower
did first sit down and count whether he had sufficient to perform it; so let
Borrowers sit down and see what ability they have to pay before they go in
debt: Remembering that witty Apothegme of a wise and worthy Counselor of
State; who said, that he had rather eat his meat out of wooden dishes, and pay
silver for them, then out of silver dishes and make wooden payments.

Debere verecundum est, Lib. de Tob. c. 21.
non reddere verecundius (says S. Ambrose) There is a kind of basendesse in
borrowing, for the Borrower (says Solomon) is a servant to the Lender; Pro.
22.7. Deuteronomy. 15.6.
and why should a man bring himself into servitude and need not? But there is
a higher degree of baseness, in not paying what is borrowed, such are branded
by God himself for wicked men, Psalm. 37.21.

And yet there are some, who have broken hearts with their broken estates; they
would pay if they were able; and it is a great grief to them that they are not
able to pay; like as it was to that son of the Prophets, who going forth in
the company of Elisha to enlarge their borders, as he was felling of a tree for
building, on the banks of Jordan, it happened that his Axe head which he had
borrowed of a neighbor, flew of into the river, with which loss he was so
grieved, that he runs unto Slisha, and acquaints him with it, implores his
help, crying out, Alas Master it was but borrowed, q.d. Had it been mine own
my grief had been the less, but through my sides my neighbor receives a
blow, I am not able to return what I borrowed of him, which is the greatest
cause of this my grief. Into the wounds of such, Charity will power the oil
of Comfort, and tell them, that God accepts of Votall restitution for Total.
Yet let them resolve to pay what is owing if ever God enable them: 2 King. 4.
Antiq. lib 9.
as did that Prophets widow left in debt, (whom Josephus with diverse others (as
S. Hierom, Oecolampadius, Lyra, etc.) thinks was the wife of Obadiah, who did
and maintained a 100. Prophets in the time of Iesabels persecution, by which
means he was brought behind hand:) who having out of one ^arre of oil a
miraculous increase, did first sell so much a would pay the debt owing by Gods
special command, and then she and her children did live on the remainder.
Whilst she had nothing it was no sin to owe, but when she had wherewith to
discharge her Creditors, she could not have been guiltless, if she had not
paid before she had stored up. And thus much from the letter of the Parable we
thought good to observe.

S. Hierom condemns their perverseness, who (as he says) Capere nituntur
veritatem, and concludere terrenis sensibus, non recordantes quod debeamus de
litera ascendere ad spiritum, de terrenis ad coelestia: From the letter we must
ascend to the spirit, and from things earthly to heavenly. Otherwise in our
earthly Expositions we captivate the truth, and keep it prisoner in the
Judgment of that Father.

Having (with Jonathan) dipped the end of our Rod into the thinnest of the honey,
1 Samuel 14.27.
which drops out of this waxen comb, and tasted of it by the way; we now come
to the spiritual and more noble sense, on which as the best and thickest honey
we mean to feed. And so

God is this Creditor, he trusts us with his goods, what we have we have from
him to use.

Mat. 18.23. and 25. 14-31. Luke 16.5. and 19.12-14. 2 Timothy 6.17.

Chron. 29.11, 12. Psalm. 24.1. Both the house, and Furniture in it are his; and
he lays claim to all, Isa. 66.1. Psalm. 50.10. Hag. 2.8. Hos 2.2. His claim
is sufficient evidence (were there no other) that all is his. For he pretends
no false Titles being Truth it self.

Man's need is great and that daily, he cannot subsist, if his wants be not
howerly supplied: the natural lamp of our life will out, if there be not a new
supply of oil, 1 Cor. 15.31. Now no other is able to supply it, but God alone,
who has all; therefore we are taught every day to seek bread at his hands;
Mat. 6.11.

God would not that his Riches should lie dead, His will is that they should be
employed for his gain and advantage, as Mat. 25.14. Luke 19.13, 14.



First, how many daily spend of Gods stock and store; Neither Man nor Beast,
(for the use of Man) but daily receive from his hand, and seek to be further
trusted, Psalm. 104.27. It would undo the richest man that ever was, to have so
many in his debt at once.

Secondly, think how prodigal and expensive men are, in spending on Gods
stock; How prodigal of his Mercy, Patience, Goodness, etc. Romans 2.4, 5. How
lavish are men of the Time lent, of health, wealth, etc. Luke 15. Look but on
the life of some one sinner, and judge of the rest, Hos. 12.1. Ier. 20.7.

Thirdly, consider we with our selves how long God has forborne and been out
of purse. When he lends, he lends but for a day, and limits all his mercies to
that time, Psalm. 2.7. Deuteronomy. 26.16, 18. Ier. 1.10. Psalm. 95.7. Heb. 3.7. Mat.
6.11. But he forbeares forty days, Jonah 3.4. yea three years, Luke 13.7. yea
forty years, Acts 13.18. A hundred and twenty years, Genesis 15.16. Three
thousand years, Acts 14.16. yea almost these six thousand years (ever since
man was upon the face of the earth) has God forborne, and been out of purse.
How could this be, were not this Creditor as he is elsewhere called. Luke 16.1.
A very rick man.

Lastly, add to all Gods Bounty and liberality, which is renewed to us daily;
He is as willing still to lend us, as if we had paid him in all, and owed him
not a groat, Psalm. 104.30. Hierom.
and 68.19. Semper largitor, semper donator, every day, every minute carries
with it a successive renovation of his gracious kindness.

false gods; as Hos. 2.5. or to themselves most falsely, Dan. 4.30. Psalm. 124.
Shall I take my bread and my meat (said churlish Nabal, 1 Samuel 15.11.) Plena
deceptionis sunt verba, (as one says) This word Mine deceives Town and
Country; my House, and my Land, my money, my Farm, my Church; they are mere
cheating words, they defraud the poor of their parts, and delude the eyes of
the Possessor. Of all we may say as he of the hatchet, Alas Master it was but
borrowed. How comes it then to pass that we acknowledge not the Lener,
Superbia est and delictun maximum, uti datis tanquam innatis, and in acceptis
beneficijs gloriam usurpare beneficij. Lib. de diligendo Deo.
or ascribe unto our selves what is his due? to use datis tanquam innatis,
these things that are added to us as if they had been bred in us, argues
horrible Pride and Rebellion against God, as says S. Bernard.

I have read of one Thales Milesius, who communicating an admirable Invention
of his, concerning the motion of the Heavens to one Maudrita a Philosopher,
asked no other reward of him, but in the discovery of it he would acknowledge
him to be the Author and Inventor, and no way ascribe it to himself. This is
that which God requires of us, that in receiving of his Blessings we
acknowledge him the Lender. He keeps nothing to himself but his Honor; (as
Joseph's Master kept nothing from him but his wife; and Pharaoh nothing but his
Throne) yet in this glory of his, we are too forward to be sharers.

Object. But the earth God has given to the children of men, Psalm. 115.16.

Resp. To use he has; but the right and propriety of all things he still
keeps unto himself.

In which respect S. Chrysostom finds great fault with the Wills and
Testaments of great Personages in his time, by which they be queath Lands,
Lordships, Chrysostom. Hom. 2. ad Pop. Antioch
and Inheritances in their own Name and Right; as if those things were
absolutely in their own power; wherein (says he) they usurp upon Gods
Prerogative. Omnes usum and fructum habemus, dominium nemo.



In things of this life we count it a great happiness, Benignus exactor est
and non egens and qui non crescit ex redditis, sed in se crescere faciat
redditores: quia quod ei redditur, reddenti additur. Aug. Epist. 45. ad Arment.
and Paulinam. Luk 11.7.
to have a friend, who will lend us at our need; and we can tell how to improve
it as occasion serves: O that we were as wise to make use of this Friend and
Creditor, none like him: For,

First, he is a Bountiful Creditor and no needy one; better provided then any
other: He has for our need and always is at home. If he see we want, and
that which we desire is convenient for us to have, he will not say with him in
the Proverbs, Go and come again to morrow. Nor with him in the Parable,
Trouble me not now, the door is shut, I am in bed, and my children are with
me, I cannot rise to give thee But he will supply our wants to the full, and
satisfy our desires speedily.

Secondly, he stands not upon any great security, he is willing to take our
words, our promises for the payment, Genesis 28.20. 1 Samuel 1.11. Mat. 18.26, 27.
Only he expects that we should be just of our words that we may be again
trusted, Eccles. 5.4.

Lastly, and though we borrow of him to day, yet if we stand in need of him to
morrow (as questionless we shall) and desire to be further trusted, he will be
willing to pleasure us; especially when he sees we employ those Talents well
wherewith he has has betrusted us. The further description of this Creditor in
his Carriage toward these his Debtors, we shall speak of in its proper place.
Now of the Creditors.

They are described to us by their Number and Condition: Their Number, [Two]
not as if God had no more; but under these all mankind are comprised; So then
observe

Sinners are indebted Persons.

Thus our Savior teaches us to account of sinners, Mat. 6.12. Now what is
there called Debt, is Luke 11.4. called Sin. So Luke 13.2. having used the
word (...), he uses the word (...), Debtors. And Mat. 18.24. A sinner is there
compared to a Debtor that owes then thousand Talents.

The like resemblance we have in other places, as Psalm. 51.1. Blot out all my
Transgressions (says David) In forgiving sin, there is a wiping out of the
score, or crossing of a Debt-book as it were, and Psalm. 32.2. the phrase of not
imputing sin does imply as much.

Now in two respects are Sinners Debtors. First, as they are servants of God;
in respect of that absolute authority he has over them; as he is their
Sovereign Lord, and as they have received Talents to employ, so they stand
bound to his Mercy and owe Obedience, Exodus 20.1. Mat. 25.

Secondly, as they are Sinners against God, and have transgressed that
righteous Law of his, and are liable to the penalty thereof, viz. the curse
which is as the Condition of the Bond, Deuteronomy, 27.26 Gal. 3.12. In regard whereof
the Law is called (...), Colos. 2.14. An hand writing against us For to this
Obligation or Bond every man's conscience has set to the hand and Seal, Romans
2.15 And must one day acknowledge it, as Israel did, Deuteronomy. 27.26. And thus we
stand indebted to Gods Justice.

The Debt of Righteousness and Obedience is truly and properly called a Debt,
being a payment of what before we have received.

The Debt of Punishment is so called figuratively and improperly.

First, for that it does arise after the manner of a Debt, upon the non-payment
of what is due, and breach of Covenants; so because we have not rendered to the
Lord that which is his due; and which we in the Covenant of works (Do this and
Live) have covenanted with him for, we are his Debtors.

Secondly, for that it brings a man into the state of a Debtor: It makes a man
to hide his head for shame (as Adam did) and to sly the presence of God (as
Cain did) yea live in fear of an Arrest, Heb. 2.15. And at last brings him to
Jayle, where he is clapped up and not released till the utmost farthing be paid.

And thus both in respect of the Antecedent, Righteousness, which we should
have paid, but did not; and in respect of the Consequent, Punishment, which is
due for non-payment of what was owing. Sin is a Debt, and Sinners Debtors.

etc. when alas they owe a debt far worse then money, nor are any other so
great debtors as themselves.

For first, a day is set for the payment of other debts; till the day be come
we fear no arrest, they cannot be exacted: But the sinner goes in danger every
hour; God may arrest him whenever it pleases him, as he often does and has
done, when men think themselves most safe, 1 Samuel 15.32. Dan. 5.4. -- 30. Job
21.13.

Secondly, other debts make us liable but to a bodily arrest only, the
Conscience may be free; but the debt of sin does endanger both Body and Soul
too: All that a man has is to be sold, not our Goods only, but our Two
Sons, Body and soul must go to pay the Creditor* Mat. 18.16.

Thirdly, other debts may be forgotten, and so not required; but the debt of
sin cannot be forgotten of the Lord, Amos 8.7. he keeps a Debt-booke wherein
all is written, with the day and place. etc. Isa. 65.6. Caines debt is as fresh
in Gods mind, as if it were but yesterday.

Fourthly, from other Debtors there may be some protection, either Place or
Person may keep us from arrest: but there is no protection against the Lords
Attachments. Angels nor Men cannot save us, Job 10.7. The horns of the Altar
cannot protect us, 1 King 2.28.31. Nor can Mountains and Rocks conceal us
Revel 6.16.

Fifthly, there may be a flying away from other Debtors, and a hiding our
selves from man's Attachments; but flying here will not save us, Psalm. 139.7.
Whether shall I fly from thy presence? Chrysostom. Hom. 1. de paenttent. Ionae.
which words, S. Chrysostom applying unto Jonah when he fled away from God,
asking him why he fled when he heard David say thus, answers himself, Tale est
peccatam, quod ad multam ignorantiam redigat animam, such a thing is sin that
it brings the soul to a great deal of ignorance.

Sixthly, in Man's prison some favor may be showed, good usage obtained; but in
the prison wherein sin does cast us, there is no ease, but continual torture
and torment, a dreadful dungeon it is of utter darkness, Mat. 21.13. All the
dungeons in the world are not to be compared to that prison which God does cast
his debtors into; a hollow Cave and Chaos of confusion.

Seventhly, thou may have a friend which may undertake for other debts when
thou art in Prison, and compound for part, or use some other means for
liberty; but being cast into this prison there is no such hope; amongst the
Celestial company thou can not find one comforter; not one amongst your
selves can help another. If Children should call on Parents, yet there they
will not, cannot pity them, they can have no such compassion. Or Parents make
petition to Children, Ibi clamabit pilosus as pilosum, anus ad alium, demon ad
daemonem, Percute, dilacera, intersic, evelociter, spolia detrahe, cito
praedare, infer prunas, and ebullientibus impone lebetibus. Bern. in quodam
Sermon.
O our bowels and our blood, bone of our bone, flesh of our flesh, speak for
your poor tormented Parents, etc. they will not, they cannot help; words will
be but spent in vain, out of this Pit is no pity, one Brand calls on
another, and on Devil to another, that is all.

Lastly, if thou art not freed out of the hands of other Creditors, by friends
or other means, yet death will free thee. But it is not so here, the debt
which sin casts thee into is most called for, and most terrible after death:
as soon as thy soul departs from thy body, it goes to the Prison of Hell, and
within a while, both Body and Soul must be arraigned at Gods dreadful bar,
whose Justice will be so exact, and infinite, that every particular sin with
the aggravations thereof shall be put into the Plea, and prooved against thee:
upon which a Sentence shall pass, and the execution of fearful damnation both
of Body and Soul shall be served on thee. Thus you see, of all debt the debt
of sin is the worst, and amongst all debtors none like to sinners.

What madness is it to seem to be so much troubled with other debts, and yet
this never thought on, or not to purpose? To an honest mind it is a Grief and
Shame, to owe more then they can pay; little honesty have men, no more to
regard this debt owing to the Almighty. Debt breaks many a man's sleep, I
never knew that sleep paid any debt. O the security of sinners! who owing so
great a debt can sleep so quietly.

Augustus hearing that the goods of a Merchant who died much in debt were set
forth to sale, he sent to buy his pillow; saying, that he thought it had some
rare virtue in it to get one asleep, seeing he that owed so much could sleep
on it so quietly. As for these who are so deep in arrerages with God, and in
such danger by reason of their debt, and yet sleep securely, God keep me from
their Bed and Pillow. That sleep of theirs is but Porkepose playing before a
tempest.

sinners be more wise, and hearken to the counsel which Solomon gives, Pro.
6.1. -- 6. There is none on earth, but is much in debt to God as you have
heard. Eve took up sin at first upon her own bare word, by Loan, Adam by his
unadvised consent subscribed to the Bond: Vsura crevit posteritati, the Burden
of their Interest lies on all their posterity, we inherit our Parents goods and
so are liable to our Parents debts; and he had need to be well stockt that can
pay that sum.

But besides that debt, O the innumerable actual Transgressions committed by
us! they are more then the hairs are upon our heads, and the least is more
then we are able to discharge, (as we shall hereafter see.)

It was David's resolution not to go up unto his Bed, Psalm 132.4.
nor give any sleep unto his eyes, till he had found out a place for the Lord:
Let it be the resolution of thy heart not to give any rest unto thy eyes, till
thou have gotten thy Quietus est from the God of Heaven.

Take the advice given us by our bl^ssed Savior, Mat. 5. ver. 22. And speedily
while we are in the way follow it; Zach. 5.3* 4.
many Writs are already sent out by God against sinners; against the house of
the Liar, Swearer, etc. And his Bayliffes are abroad to arrest us, Sickness,
Death, Judgment, etc. these lie in wait for us in every corner: yea they have
already been at our houses, and made demand; been upon our grounds and
streined: and will a man run into arrerage with his Prince, when the Sheriffs
and Bailiffes are sent to drive away his Cattle and impound them? To disturb
his wife, children, servants, and attach his Person? Should a man in this case
fall to sporting, gaming, drinking and never care for compounding and staying
of the matter, would we not think him frantic? yet this is the case of many of
us; we are deeply run into arrerage with the Almighty; He has sent out his
Sergeants and Bailiffes which strain our goods, and attach our Persons: Plato
in dialogo contra mortem. 1 Cor. 11.
From one is taken his Sight, from another his Hearing, from a third his Taste,
from a fourth his Friend, Child, etc. yea many amongst you are weak and sick.
etc. says the Apostle, yet we seek not to stay the matter and compound the
business with the Lord.

How grievous was the sin of Belshazer, who notwithstanding those many
Provocations of cruelty and Oppression, Isa. 14 6. Idolatry and Superstition,
Ier. 51.44, 52. Enchantment and Divination, Dan. 2.3. Isa. 47.9. Sacrilege and
Profanation of the vessels of the Temple, Dan. 5. ver. 3.23. having at the
very instant enemies without, Cyrus and Darius beseeging him; and Traitors
whithin, Gadata and Gobryas ready to attach him: yet in all this dang^r
trusting to the high walls and strong fence of Euphrates, would make a Feast
for his Princes, and insult against God and his Israel; causing the golden and
silver vessels which his Father Nebuchadnezzar had taken from the Temple, to be
brought, that he, his Princes, and Concubines might drink therein; and that not
for any necessity, but in a drunken vein; and to fillfull his measure, rested
not here, but praised the gods of silver, gold, and brass, giving them the
honor of that plenty and victory; when immediately the palm of a hand
appeared, and writes his sentence, which the same night was executed on him,
and he slain. God is highly provoked when being under the execution we remain
void of his fear, Ier. 5.3, 4. The child that relents not under the rod, we
think to be in a manner past grace: when the arrest is served on us, if we
then think not of paying our debts, or compounding with God betimes, we may be
thought desperate.

etc. Great need there is: Sin is a debt, and sinners are indebted persons. It
is not good to run into unnecessary debts, nor strike hands with such, least
before we be aware we ensnare our selves.

When a man comes into the City, (says an Ancient) he sees a number of goodly
things which do allure him, and set his desires on fire, but if he be wise he
will consider what his means are, and ability is; and be content to forbear
rather then to run into debt for them: so is it with a wise Christian; blame
him not for it; consider of sin as a debt, yea as a forfeiture of the soul,
and the case is answered.

As all mankind in General by these two may be understood, so the righteous in
Special (as may be thought) for that these were such whose debt was pardoned:
now none but the righteous have their sins remitted, and thus it acquaints us
with their Condition before Conversion and Remission, and may afford us this
Observation,

That the very Elect before Conversion are alike indebted which the wicked
world. As great debtors they are, and grievous sinners as those who remain
uncalled.

Ephesians. 2.3. T^t. 3.3. Colos. 3.6. 1 Cor. 6.9, 11. Romans 3.9.

Corruption of nature in them that others have; All have sinned, and are
deprived of the glory of God, Romans 3.22.

And they have the same occasions and provocations to sin from the Devil and
the world that others have.

to walk humbly, seeing they have been as bad as any other; when they see
other run into riot and excess, they should with Pharaohs Butler call their
own sins to remembrance.

2. To walk the more watchfully, seeing we carry a nature about with us, that
has been so disobedient unto God; counting it enough that we have heretofore
followed the lusts of the world, resolving to spend that little time remaining
in a more careful Obedience unto Gods Will, ceasing from sin, 1 Pet. 4.1, 2*3.

3. To carry our selves more meekely toward all; despairing of the Conversion
of none, but patiently waiting; proving if at any time God will give them
Repentance and bring them out of the snares of the Devil, 2 Timothy 2.25.

Come we now to the Condition of these Two Debtors, and first as it was Unlike.

The one ought five hundred pence,
Their Case was not alike in regard of the sum owing to the Creditor, the one
ought a greater sum, the other a less, whence observe we

All are not alike indebted to the Lord. Some are more indebted to him then
others.

This appears by that Parable, Luke 16.5. And by other express Scripture,
Mat. 11.21. and 12.31. and 23.14, 15, 24.

number of Pounds nor Talents. He has not given to all alike stock to trade
with. Luke 19.14. Mat. 25.14.

Again, Aquin. 1.2. q. 82. Art. 4. Estius 2. Senten. Did. 33. Sect. 5. Psalm.
19 13. Mat. 12.31. and Chap 23.15. 2 Timothy 3.13. 2 Pet 2.20.
all are not alike deep in respect of Actual Transgressions. For albeit
Original sin be equally and alike extended unto all, nec suscipit magis aut
minus, it has no degree nor parts in any child of Adam, more then other; yet
actual sins committed by us are of a thousand kinds, and every vice has its
latitude and degree; some are bound up in Folio, other some in Quarto, others
in Octavo, and the sins of some other in a Decim^ sext^, See 2 Kings 3.2. Ier.
3.11. Ezekiel. 23.11. John 19.11.

We read of a Moate or Fescue, and of a Beam which may be sawen into many
quarters, Mat. 7.3. of Gnats, and Camells, Mat. 23.24.

There are Funiculi Vanitatis, Cords of vanity, Isa. 5.18. and there are Funes
peecatorum, Ropes of sin, Pro. 5.22. and Vinculum plaustri, Cart-ropes or
Waine-ropes, Isa. 5.18. By which phrases in holy Scripture it appears, in
Actual Transgression all are not alike deep.

Tullies Paradoxes) against all sense, feeling and opinion of mankind (as S.
Austin shows.) Iovinian sided with them, Epist. 29. ad Hier.
and was strongly confuted by S. Hierom out of the Scripture, as S. Austin
testifies, and evidently appears in that second Book which S. Hierom wrote
against Iovinian.

The Papists charge us with this error, (but most untruly) Their reason is, for
that we refuse their distinction of sins Mortal and Venial; what we hold and
teach concerning Venial sin, and wherein we and they differ in that point,
we shall hear when we speak of the mercy and compassion of this Creditor in
the next verse.

And yet (it cannot be denied) there are amongst us, who seem to incline this
way. Reproove them for sinning, they will answer you they are sinners as others
are, etc. as if there were no difference to be put betwixt sinner and sinner,
debtor and debtor in respect of the score. These are ignorant and blinded by
the god of this world, and in judgment they are given up to believe a lie.

Paritie of sins we hold it to be an idle dream; besides what has been
already said, the diversity of Sacrifices we read of in Scripture proves the
inequality of offenses, as Levit. 4.3. For the Priest, a young Bullock without
blemish must be offered: For the Magistrate a male Kid served the turn, verse
23. If an Ordinary man offended, for him a Female, either Goat, or Lamb
should be accepted, verse 28, 32.

2. Greater punishments both Criminal and Capital were ordained for some,
then others: He that steals a man must die, Exodus 21.16. But he that stoale an
Ox or Sheep should only restore fourefold, Exodus 12.1. He that killed a man
unwillingly was to be protected, Exodus 21.13. But if he killed him willingly,
the horns of the Altar could not save him, verse 14. So Adultery of common
people was to be punished with common death, Levit. 20.10. But if the Priests
daughter played the Whore, she must be burnt with fire, because she profaned
her Father, Levit. 21.9.

Paenae singulorum inaequales intention, paenae omnium aequales duratione.
Aquin.
And as in this World so in another; some shall have soarer punishments then
others, Heb. 10.29. Mat. 23.15. Luke 12.47, 48. and Revel. 22.12. God will
reward every one according to his works, which had been superfluous to say,
were all sins equa^l



To help us a little in this our search, take this for a General rule,
Iniuria patientis auget culpa^ facientis. Salvian. Psalm. 51.4.
the more directly any sin is done against God, the greater the sin is to be
accounted of, and the more the debt. Thus the sin against the Holy Ghost is the
greatest sin; because he who commits that sin, sins of malice, purposely
to despite the Spirit of Grace. Hence it follows,

1. The sins of the highest degree against the first Table are greater then the
sins of the highest degree against the second Table. (For if we compare the
lowest of the first Table with the highest of the second, it will not hold)
Thus Samuel speaks of Witcheraft, and Idolatry as of the greatest sins, 1 Samuel 15.23. And our Savior calls the first Table, the first and great
Commandment, Mat. 22.38.

2. Those sins that are committed against the means which should keep us from
sin are greater then other, Mat. 11.24. So sins against Knowledge are greater
then those that are committed out of simple ignorance, Luke 12.47. James 4.17.
And as it is thus in the sins of Omission, so also in the sins of
Commission, Acts 3.17. 1 Timothy 1.13. he found mercy, because he did it
ignorantly. So sins against the Gospel are greater then those against the
Law, for that they are committed against more light; This is the condemnation
says Christ, that light is come into the world, John 3.19. To commit sin in
the clear light of the Gospel, is a reproach not much unlike that of Absalom,
He committed wickedness in the sight of the Sun A Tapor in the hand of a ghost
makes it look more ghastly. Thus the sins of the Rogenerate are more heinous
then the sins of the Unregenerate, for that God suffers more by them then by
others, Deuteronomy. 32.6. Levit. 22.31, 32. 1 Timothy 6.1. Tit. 2.5. When Simeon and
Levi had dealt so lewdly with the Sichemites, Jacob told them that they had
made him to stink in the sight of the Inhabitants of the land, Genesis 34.30. He
had no hand in their sin, but did abhor it, yet it is the fashion of the
world, for the sin of one or two religious men, to open their mouth wide
against Religion it self. In which respect, David prays God that none might
be ashamed because of him, Psalm. 69.6.
that they might not have the dirt of his foul and scandalous sins cast in
their faces; Indeed this was that the Prophet laid so heavily to David's charge
after his fall, By this deed thou have given great occasion to the Enemies of
God to blaspheme, 2 Samuel 12.14.

3. Sins often committed are greater then those but once committed by us, for
that here is an abusing of Gods Patience and Forbearance, Romans 2.4, 5. Ier.
5.6. 2 Pet. 2.22. In Arithmetic a figure in the first place stands for it
self, in the second place it stands for ten, and in the third place for a
hundred, and so higher. So here.

Thus learn we to judge of sin; and be assured that thou who art a Christian
can not sin so good cheap as may an Indian or Pagan. An Englishman cannot
swear, lie, be drunk, commit whoredom, at so easy a rate as a Spaniard, or
Italian; Places of much knowledge, are chargeable places to practice sin in. We
in this Land are more indebted to Gods mercy for the means of Grace affoorded
then any other Nation under Heaven; and in respect of our unthankfullnesse and
unworthy walking more indebted to his Justice.

And when they had nothing to pay]
Non habentibus illis unde redaerent, etc.

In this then they differed not; both were alike in respect of their Indigencie
and Inability for payment, They had nothing.

Sinners are weak and disable debtors. They are no way able to pay that debt
which is due to God, Job 9.3. Pro. 13 7. Revel. 3.17. Mat. 18.

In this respect our Lord and Master Christ, has taught us to beg for pardon,
Mat. 6.12. And such is the course the godly have ever taken, Psalm 51.1 and
143.2, 13. Daniel 9.

Man by sin has disabled himself from doing any thing that in any respect may
carry any show of Recompense, 2 Cor. 3.5. like desperate Prodigalls we lost all
at one throw, we are stripped naked through our fall. See the good Samaritane.
No creature on earth so naked and indigent as man; Naked he is borne, Job 1.
and naked shall he return.

Secondly, Offensio in Doum est infinitae magnitudinis, says Bellarmine, Psalm.
130. Recompense therefore which must be given for discharge of that debt must
be likewise infinite.

Now the debt is infinite, 1. Because our sins are infinite in number, David
propounds a Quoties, Psalm. 19.12. Who can tell how often be offends? no man
ever yet could find a Toties to it. David was a good Arithmetician and numbered
his days well, but his sins he could not number: the hairs of a man's head may
be told, but his sins were more then they: the Stars in the Firmament appear
in multitude, and some have undertaken to number them too, but it is in vain
to undertake a numbering of our transgressions; before we can recount a
thousand, we commit ten thousand. Like Hidraes heads, whilst we are cutting
off one by repentance, a hundred more grow up.

Secondly, for that sin is committed against an infinite Majesty, and so
provokes an infinite wrath, and cannot be taken away but by an infinite art:
no finite power can do this, or make a payment of such worth. What shall a man
give, says Christ, in exchange for his soul, Mat. 19. or wherewith redeem
it, Psalm. 49.6, 7, 8.

Thirdly, Had Man any ability left, and were able to do something toward the
payment of the debt due, yet if he cannot do all, Quis vel super justitia sua
gloriabitur, cum audiat Deum per Prophetam dicentem, quia omnis justitia vestra
sicut pannus menstruati. Orig. in Epist. ad Romans cap, 3.
how is the debt paid? Let but twelve pence be wanting in the payment of a 100
lb. the Bond (you know) is not discharged; let light gold be tendered will it
be accepted? Our best works are full of imperfections, Isa. 64.6. Hereupon
Origin groundeth that Question, who dare brag of his righteousness, when he
hears God saying by his Prophet, All our righteousness is as filthy rags: If
our righteousness are as menstruous clouts, what are our monstrous sins.

Fourthly, all the good a man can do (though he do more then ever any man
did) is it self a due debt, and how shall that go for a discharge of former
debts? one debt will not discharge another, nor the payment of this years rent
discharge the last years forfeiture.

Sicut Christus passione sua, etc.
The Vanity of Popish Satisfaction may be hence discovered; as Christ by his
Suffering satisfied for our sins, so we by satisfying suffer for our sins
(says the Trent Council.) The Schoolmen go mad in the Point. Aquinas
says, that a man may, Vindicare divinam vindictam, and compensare divinam
offensam, Deliver from Gods vengeance and recompense God offended: And he
makes the satisfaction equivalent to the wrong done, per aquivalentiam non
quantitatis sed proportionis etiam pro alienis peccatis, by the equivalencie
not of quantity, but of proportion, yea for other mens-sinnes also.

Sure I am that Scripture teaches otherwise; Omnis humana justitia injustitia
esse convincitur, si districte judicetur, Greg mor. l. 9. c. 11.
If thou Lord should mark iniquities. (says David, Psalm. 130) who could
abide it. Job says, He could not answer one of a thousand, Job 9.3. Who can
say I have made my heart clean (says Solomon, Pro. 20.9.) In many things we
offend all (says S. James) And if we say we have no sin, we deceive our
selves (says the Disciple that leaned on the breast of our Savior, Da mihi
alique^ sine prolapsione Delicti. Ambr. Apocal. c. 4.
1 Ioh. 1.8.) Some may be sine crimine, but none, sine peccato: Thou may seek
such a man, but shall not find him.

Philosophy teaches that there is no pure metal to be found in the Mines of
the Earth, nor unmixed Element in the world: But why speak we of the Earth?
Quem non invenies usquam, esse putes nusquam.
The Stars of the sky are not clean, nor the Angels of Heaven pure in the
eyes of God, Job 25.5. And shall we boast of our abilities to make satisfaction
to Gods justice for our transgression?

Questionless, sin hinders the virtue of satisfaction. If a man be a sinner,
he cannot please God; and if he cannot please God, how can he satisfy him?
This Doctrine of the Church of Rome we cannot but condemn: Non peccare Dei
jnstitia est, hominis just itia Dei indulgentia, Ber. in Cant. Sermon. 23.
Acknowledging that we have sinned, and that there is no way to satisfy the
Lord, but by free pardon and forgiveness through the merits of Christ (as we
shall hear afterward.)

The Ignorance of many carnal Protestants comes here to be met withal: Reason
with them about their hope; how they look to be freed from the rigor of Gods
Justice; they will tell us a story of their good Deeds and Works; were they
able to do as much as any Saint on Earth, or all the Saints together did: Nay
(says S. Bernard) so infinite is the debt we owe to God, that if all the lives
of the sons of Adam were in one man, and all the virtues that were in the
holy Patriarchs and Prophets and other holy men of God in the soul of one,
yet all were nothing to do God service with, and discharge what is owing; In
omnibus monitis Dei atque mandatis, una ^ad^mque ratio est and divinae gratiae
and humanae obedientiae; nec ob allud unquam datur praeceptum, nisi ut
quaeratur praecipientis auxilium.
for my own part (says that Father) I have but two farthings to pay the Lord
withal, (and they be of the least size and measure) my Body and my Soul, yea
I have but one Farthing, and that is my good Will, and what is one Farthing to
pay so great a debt withal.

Object. If it be thus, that we cannot satisfy the Justice of God by our
obedience, whereto tends it? Why are we required to obey Gods Precepts?

Resp. The Answer Prosper gives, may satisfy us; In all Gods Admonitions and
Commands, there is one and the same reason both of Gods Grace and of Man's
Obedience; Neither is the Commandment at any time give for any other thing,
Hoc in loco utitur Christus co^pofito vocabulo vocans hos^^de. bitores (...) ut
o^tendat nos omnes cora^ judicio Dei prorsus ^on esse sol^endo, nam (...)
simpliciter p^o se de^itore^ significat, and (...) significat indi* gent^am
atque e gestatem, qu^ non est solvendo. Chem. Harm c. 57. p. 986.
but that the help of him that commands may be sought for: Gods Precepts
must be turned into Prayers: So much Obedience as Gods Law requires of us, so
much Grace we stand in need of: And this we are to obtain of him, who is the
Fountain of all Grace.

Let this (that has been delivered) teach us to empty our selves of all proud
and high concei^s, and put us upon an ingenuous Confession of our own Poverty
and Nakedness. We are not only Debtors, but Banquerouts (as the word here
used by our Savior shows) Such as have nothing at all to pay through our
extreme indigence and poverty. And indeed the Resemblances between the one
and the other are many: We will name some.

A Banquerout makes great show of what, he has not: So does a Sinner, Prove.
13.7. He makes himself rich, yet has nothing: He is an empty vine, Hos. 10.1.
A cloud without water, Jude v. 12. A form of Godliness he may have, but he is
without the Power, 2 Timothy 3.5. He has nothing in Truth, Nothing in the right
use, Nothing in Acceptance; all his treasure lies in sin: Nothing is his, but
that: And that is his, 1. In respect of Patrimony, he has it from his Parents,
2. In respect of Practice: He has sinned after their example, 3. By Purchase,
it is his, He drawing on himself both the Guilt and Punishment of the Sins
of his Neighbors many ways. This is all a sinner can lay claim unto, as his,
and all this is but Beggarie and Nakedness, Revel. 3.17.

2. A Banquerout will be borrowing of every one, but pay none to whom he is
indebted; thus the Sinner borrowes of all. Of God, of Man, of the Creatures;
but that Love, Duty, Service, that is expected he performs not. Promise,
Vows, Bonds, all are broken, Romans 1.31. They are branded for Covenant-breakers
by the Lord himself, and so he has found them to be, Hos. 6.7. Neh. 9. Dan.
9, Psalm. 106.

3. A Banquerout will take up at high Rates, and put off at Low, buy dear, but
sell cheap: So does the Sinner. Ahab takes up Land, Naboths vineyard: Achan a
wedge of gold, Gehezi, a bribe: Esau, Jacobs pot^age: Judas, thirty pence. All
these took up their wares at dear rates (as do the Sinners of these days.)
But one day will be enforced to cry out with Lysimachus, How great a Kingdom
for how small a pleasure have I lost!

4. A Banquerout will be offering Composition to his Creditours; but it shall
be very little, three or four shillings in the pound, it may be not so much:
Thus deals the sinner: he will be offering a composition as Pharaoh did, Exodus
8.25. Go sacrifice in this Land; if that will not be accepted, then, Go into
the wilderness and Sacrifice, but go not far, verse. 28. Will not that be
taken? then Go you men and Sacrifice but all may not go, your little ones
shall stay behind, Cap. 10. verse 11. Will not this be hearkened unto? then, go
you your selves, and let your little ones go also: only let your Flocks and
herds be stayed, verse. 26. Something they will do, but the whole debt, they
resolve they will never pay.

5. A Banquerout cannot be trusted of any one that knows him, no more a
Sinner, God will not trust him, Job 4.18, 19. Christ will not trust him, Ioh.
2.24. Nor will the godly (if they be wise,) Ier. 9.14. Mich. 7.2. Job 19.14,
15. We may expect Love and Duty from them; but how can they pay, who have
nothing?

6. A Banquerout in a short time hides his head, He is not to be seen; so is
it with a Sinner, Psalm. 37.10. Yet a little while, and the wicked shall not be,
yea thou shall diligently consider his place, and it shall not be. And verse
35, 36. I have seen (says David) the wicked in great power, and spreading
himself like a green Bay Tree, yet he passed away, and lo he was not, yea I
sought him, but he could not be found.

The serious Consideration of this our weak estate by Nature, would cause us
(not to say with that Debtor, Matthew. 18.26. Have Patience Master, and I will
pay thee all.) (For we are not able to pay half nor quarter, nor any thing at
all to wards satisfaction of divine Justice, but) to pray with David for Mercy
and Forgiveness: Which is the next Point we are to speak unto, and that
whereby this Creditor is further described unto us and set forth, (...), He
frankely forgave them both. And here consider we the Act of this Creditor [He
frankly forgave] and then the Object [Them both.]

He frankely forgave them both.]
To deal mercifully with such as are disabled Debtors.

Dent. 15.1, 7. Which Law whether it is to be understood of a porpetuall
release of the debt at seven years end; (as the Hebrews for the most part
understand it) and therefore had their Limitations for some debts and debtors)
or only as an Intermission for the seventh year, Maimony in his Treat of the
Release, c. 9.
wherein was neither sowing, nor reaping, nor other works of Husbandry, so
that the poor had not such means for paying of their debts as in other
years; yet it figured the year of Grace, the acceptable year of the Lord,
which Christ preached, by whom we have obtained of God the release of our
debts, The forgiveness of our Sins, Luke 4.18, 19. And calls upon us
likewise to show mercy to our poor decayed Brother, and forbear Exaction,
Nehem. 5.3, 11. Isay. 58.6, 7.

In the Gospel our Savior wills us to tend looking for nothing again, Luke
6.35. Beza.
which is not (say some) to be understood only of Use, or Loan, but of the
Principal, in case it should so fall out, that they are by the hand of God
disabled: Sure I am there is a Parable propounded by our blessed Savior which
acquaints us with Gods severity against Savior which acquaints us with Gods
severity against such rigorous Creditors, as upon that Parable and passage I
have more fully showed. Therefore a word or two of this Point shall here serve.

Creditors are there like to him here spoken of? It is no rare matter to meet
with some like him we read of, Mat. 18.28. Who will take their Debtors by the
throat and call for speedy payment of what is owing: These may be resembled to
Plinies Hinona, Lib. 8. c. 30.
they eat up the carcasses of men; utterly undoing by Executions and perpetual
Imprisonments those who are disabled by Gods immediate hand (as by fire, water,
sickness, etc.) and not through their own negligence or improvidency.

I deny not, but debts owing are to be required: God himself has given liberty
to the Creditor to take a pledge for his security, Deuteronomy. 24.10, 11, 12.

I (likewise) grant that more strictness and extremity may be used in
requiring a Debt of such as rashly cast themselves into it (though they be
poor or pretend Inability, when indeed it is but a pretense,) (as the manner
of many in these days is,) Prove. 22.26. and 27.13.

But in the behalf of the poor and needy; the well minded Debtor, the Lord
gives an other charge, Exodus 22.26. If thou shall receive to pawn the garment
of thy Neighbor, restore it unto him before the Sun goes down; for that
only is his covering, that is his garment for his skin, wherein shall he sleep?
Therefore when he cries to me I will hear him, for I am merciful.

Yet no debt whatever may be axacted without Mercy, still remember, as man in a
Debtor unto thee, so art thou unto Mercy: Thus St. Paul ( Romans 15.27.) shows
the Macedonians and Achaians were. Whereupon St. Ambrose thus speaks, In
tantum nos humanos and misericordes vult esse Apostelus, Amb. in Romans cap. 15.
ut and debitores nos dicat ejus. So far does the Apostle press to be
merciful and courteous that he affirms us to be debtors unto it. Therefore
so exact thy Debt that God may forgive thee all thy Debts.

Mystically, this sets forth Gods merciful and gracious disposition toward
poor sinners, and serves first to inform us of this truth.

Remission and Forgiveness of Sins is attaincable, there is a possibility
for a sinner to have his Debts pardoned and remitted, Act. 3 19 and 19.43. and
26.18.

The Sacrifices under the Law prefigured as much, Heb. 5.1. and the gracious
promise under the Gospel make it good, Isa. 1.18. and 55.7. Ezekiel. 33.16. Mat.
12.31. And the faithful performances of those gracious promises in so many
Instances put us out of all doubt concerning this truth, Psalm. 32.5. Isa.
38.17. and 44.22. Mat. 9.2. Mark 2.5, 9.

The grounds are two; First, Mercy in God, who desires not the death of a
sinner, Ezekiel. 33.11. It is his Name to be merciful: an Attribute as infinite
as himself, it suits with his Nature.

Secondly, Merit in Christ: By his Sacrifice he satisfied Gods Justice, and
paid the debt of sin, 1 Cor. 15.9. Gal. 1.4. Ephesians. 1.7. Colos. 1.14. 1 John
3.5. Heb. 9 26.

Hence comes that sweet concurrence of Mercy and Justice spoken of by the
Psalmist, Psalm. 85.10. Mercy and Truth are met together, Righteousness and
Peace have kissed each other. They met together and that diverse times, but did
never kiss till Christ reconciled them; when they met before, they met in a
kind of opposition (as S. Bernard shows in Dialogue) A great contention there
was betwixt them about man's Redemption. Ser. 1. de Annun Dom.
Mercy pleads hard, What has God forgotten to be gracious, will he cast us of
for ever and be no more entreated? That by no means wills the death of a
sinner; Justice steps in, and requires that she may have her due, and that the
soul that sins may die; Have not thou said it, and shall not the Judge of
all the earth do right? Thus the Plea hangs; our salvation lies as it were a
bleeding, we as guilty prisoners still stand at the Bar. Christ steps in,
gives Justice satisfaction, ends the quarrel, and makes all kind, kissing
friends. For in giving himself a ransom for man, he did at once pay both
Justice her debt, and obtain for Mercy her desire.

of a possibility to procure a discharge, to put a new life and spirit into us
as it did into the hearts of the people, when they heard Shecaniah tell them
that there was hope in Israel concerning this thing, Ezra, 10 2.

It may also encourage us to use speedy means for the obtaining of a Pardon;
seeing in seeking after it, we seek after that which is honorable and worth
the having.

A mercy of all mercies it is to have our sins forgiven; there needs no more
but that, to make us truly happy, Psalm. 32.1. Romans 4.6, 7. Salvation stands in
it, and under that one benefit, all the good that we receive by Christ is
comprised; It is put for the whole Covenant, and for all the privileges
therein contained, Acts 10.43. and is esteemed the greatest blessing which
flows from Christ's blood, Mat. 26.28. That is the Fountain (as it were,)
other blessings are but streams issuing thence; the things of this world are
made true blessings by it.

And yet how unworthily is this put in the last place in most men's endeavors?
Should a man stand with Solomon in the window of his house, and look and
consider the courses of men, how should we see them busied? Some eagerly
pursuing wealth, other greatness, other following pride and vain delights;
like children they run after Butter-flies: But not one amongst many who spends
his time and study this way, how to get a pardon of sin, and a discharge of
that debt he owes to Gods divine Justice; Pray you to the Lord (said Pharaoh
unto Moses) that he may take away the frogs from me: Exodus 8.8.
he desired not that his sins might be taken away, which were the cause of
them; so is it with the men of this world, they pray to have sickness,
poverty, lamenesse etc. removed from them, but for their sins they pass not,
that debt least of all troubles them.

Quest. But whence is it that men are so careless in seeking after this one
thing necessary?

Resp. Diverse Reasons may be rendered of this great neglect.

erroneous judgment about the thing it self: Some think it is that which
cannot be had, or if it be feisable yet it is not so necessary as other
blessings, which lies them more in hand to seek after. The error of which
opinions what has been said before, discovers.

Secondly, this great neglect arises from want of due consideration of men's
present states, they spend no thoughts this way; like Banquerouts, they love
not to cast up their accounts. Men are not aware how many Bills of particular
sins hang upon the file, and are upon record against them in the Lords Court of
Justice; they consider not how they lie open (till discharge be had) to all
Gods plagues and curses, which dog and follow them at the heels in every
corner like so many Serjants to arrest them at Gods Suit, Deuteronomy 28.19. They
consider not that after death there is no Redemption: If a discharge be not
obtained before death, lay hold upon them, there is no way but one, to prison
with them. And how Hell follow s death at the ^eeles, Revel. 6.8. Nor do they
bethink themselves how suddenly death may seize upon them* as the fishes that
are taken in an evil net, (even whilst they are flating and playing at a
fly,) and as the Birds that are caught in the snare, so are the sons of men
snared in an evil time, when it falls suddenly on them (says Solomon) Were
these things well thought on, men would fear to let the temples of their heads
take any rest in the omission of this duty.

Thirdly, this arises in some through a bold presumption of Gods mercy,
conceiting that God will forgive us our sins, though we take no pains about
it. God indeed is merciful, and his mercy is above all his works; but still
it is restrained to those that seek it, Lament. 3.25. Psalm. 103.11. Mat. 7. As
for other who are brutish, and sin presumptuously on hope of mercy, God has
already acquainted them with his mind, Deuteronomy. 29.19, 20. Isa. 27.11. Pro. 1.27,
28, 29, 30.

But if it be so great a blessing, and haveable likewise; It may be you will
ask me about the means that must be used for the obtaining of it. If so, I
answer

First, bring thy soul to a true sight and sense of sin, this is that which
prepares a man, and makes him capiable of a pardon. The whole have no need of
the Physician, but the sick, Mat. 9.12. nor are any called to be eased, but
such as find themselves to be wearied with the load, Mat. 11. verse 28. The
widow said to the Prophet, O thou man of God why come thou to call my sin
to remembrance, and to slay my son; but thus to bring sin to our remembrance
is not to slay us, but to save us.

Secondly, Judge your selves for them, confess them humbly before the Lord,
Luke 15.18, 19. and 18.13. 1 John Chap. 1. verse 9. Pro. 28.13. This course
David took and found it speeding, Psalm. 32. God is well pleased to have
himself cleared, and our selves (as is meet) charged.

Thirdly, Pray earnestly to the Lord in the Name of Christ for pardon and
forgiveness, Hos. 14.3. Dan. 9.18, 19. Mat. 18.32. I forgave thee all that thy
debt, because thou desiredst me: there is no pardon granted, but where it is
desired; no obtaining Remission but by humble supplication, and the prayers of
the faithful are very availeable for this purpose, James 5.16.

Fourthly, carefully use the means which God has left to his Church for the
obtaining of this grace; attend on the Ministers of the Word, it is the
Ministry of Reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5. By it God is pleased to work Faith in
our hearts, whreby remission of sins is received. These are the means which
being conscionably used, Acts 10.43.
Remission may be obtained, and our debts discharged. And so much of the
Benefit bestowed, come we now to the manner of it. The Text says

He frankely forgave them both]
Vtrisque debitum (...), ex gratia condonavit: Both these were forgiven by God,
no part of the debt was retained to either of them; and this God did Gratis,
frankly and freely; first observe,

God in forgiving sin, fully forgives it, no part of the debt is reserved to
be exacted of us.

To forgive imports as much; for where any recompense is made or punishment
suffered; there is a kind of satisfaction, and that is contrary to Remission.

I will forgive their iniquity (says the Lord, Ier. 31.34.) and I will
remember their sins no more; He will so forgive as to forget; and if he
forget them, then certainly he will never punish a man for them, (for in
Scripture phrase God is then said to remember sin, when he punishes for sin,
as Ier. 14.10. Hos. 8.13.)

Hereto tend those Metaphors in Scripture used when forgiveness of sin is
spoken of, considered in several Relations. Sometimes it is considered as
having relation to the Fault committed, so it is expressed under the phrases of
Purging, as Ezekiel. 22.24 Psalm. 51.7. Not laying it to the charge, Acts 17.19.
taking it away, Ioh. 1.29.

As it has relation to the Book wherein it is recorded, so it is expressed by
the phrase of blotting out, Acts 3.19. of hiding and covering so as it cannot
be read, Psalm. 32.1. Mich. 7.19.

As it has relation to God, who is wronged in point of honor, so it is
expressed by the phrase of passing by the offense, Mich. 7.18. Not seeing and
beholding it. Numb. 23.21. Casting it behind the back, Isa. 38.17.

As it has relation to the Punishment contracted by it, so it is expressed by
the phrase of putting away sin, 2 Samuel 12.13. Isa 44.22. Not imputing it,
Psalm. 32.2. Romans 4.8.

These are all significant Phrases according to their several Relations, and
betoken as much as has been delivered, viz. an absolute riddance and final
discharge thereof; so that as the Prophet speaks of it, Ier. 50.20. It shall
be sought for, and there shall be none.

Satisfaction or Satispassion defended by the Papists; Sicut Christus Passione
sua satisfecit pro peccatis, ita nos satisfaciendo patiamur pro peccatis.
Council. Trid.
who though they acknowledge such a matter as Pardon of sin, yet they maintain
forgiveness to be such a thing, in which God remitteth but in part; The fault
(they say) he does discharge, but not the Penalty, that is (say they) reserved
to be satisfied for, in part here, and part in Purgatory; and indeed for the
foundation of Purgatory and maintaining of that fire, was this distinction of
theirs invented; for it was never known in Christ's time.

An opinion that cannot stand with the Nature of forgiveness, as it is
described in Scripture. If all be pardoned, what is behind to be satisfied for?
If there be some satisfaction on our part expected, how then is the
forgiveness absolute?

Sundry arguments we have in Scripture against this error.

First, Romans 8.1. the Apostle expressly teaches, that there is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ, nihil damnationis, (as the Vulgar
Translation (which they themselves so highly magnify) has it,) not one jot of
condemnation, now what is Condemnation, but the adjudging of a man to
punishment? So in Scripture it is every where used, Mat. 20.18. Mark. 14 64. If
then no condemnation be reserved for the true Believer, there is no punishment
due to his sin by him to be suffered.

Secondly, our Redemption by Christ was from the whole curse of the Law due to
us for sin; now Temporal punishments due to us for sin, are part of that
curse, Deuteronomy. 28.16-22. Therefore from them also are we freed.

Object. Wherefore then does the living man complain (you will say)? does not
man suffer for sin? Lament. 3 39. And why did God after he had pardoned David
for his Adultery and Murder, reserve for him Temporal punishment? The child
borne to him must surely die, 2 Samuel 12.13.

Resp. This was Castigatio not damnatio; medicina, non paena, a chastisement,
not a condemnation; a medicine, not a punishment, (as speaks S. Chrysostom)
And betwixt these, we must learn to distinguish: It is true, God lays many
things on his dearest children in this life, notwithstanding he has forgiven
them their sins; but such sufferings of theirs, are neither expiatorie nor
satisfactorie, nor yet vindictive for sin; nor can they properly be called
punishments, but Fatherly chastisements and corrections only, Psalm. 94.12.
Heb. 12.6. Revel. 3.19. 1 Cor. 11.32. God sends them in love, and offers
himself therein to his as unto children, Heb. 12.7. He inflicts them as
furtherances to Sanctification, not as means of Satisfaction.

Thirdly, the Lord does so, (and much more) fully forgive the sins of the
Faithful, as he would have them forgive one another; and he makes his
forgiveness the very pattern we should work by, Ephesians. 4 32. But in our
forgiving he requires that both the fault and punishment be forgiven, 1 Pet.
3.9. And therefore we must needs conclude, that whom God forgives, to them are
forgiven both.

As for satisfaction to our Brethren for wrongs to them done, by
acknowledgement, restitution, Mulct, with asking forgiveness, etc. we both
teach and practice, but they shall not be able to satisfy us in this point,
that any thing we can do or suffer can satisfy Gods Justice.

I spare any further wading in this point; Thus much I thought needful to say
on it, for that this Popish opinion of Satisfaction cleaves (as one says well)
very close unto our natures, and there is an aptness in us to think by some
act of ours to make amends for the things we have done amiss. This we are not
able to do, for when we have done all we can, we are unprofitable servants,
Luke 17.

Comfort to all those that are in Christ and made partakers of this benefit of
Remission.

It is storyed of Caesar to his renown and praise, that after the defeat of
Pompey he had in his custody a Casket, wherein he found diverse letters written
by many of the Nobles under their own hands, (sufficient evidence to condemn
them) but he burnt them al, that no monument might remain of a future grudge.
Thus does God cancel and annihilate the sins of his Elect ones; and causes an
act of Oblivion to be made, that there may be no quarrel against them in
Heaven.

And (to be short) being thus fully pardoned, whatsoever happens to us or is
inflicted on us, we may rest assured comes in Love, it is mingled with Love,
and shall through Love be turned to our good, Romans 8.28. Let our Afflictions
smart never so much, yet the curse is removed; they are but medicinable
potions, and shall further our salvation in the end.

Are the Consolations of God small with thee, (as Eliphaz said to Job)? Job
15.11.
do not these things affect thee to rejoicing? surely then we are are as yet
Dead Births; Gods children have rejoiced in this mercy more then in great
spoils, Let the heart of them rejoice that seek the Lord.

And (to conclude) be careful that we lay up safe our discharge and pardon
having once obtained it. How careful men are to lock up a General discharge
from some pecuniarie debts, we know well enough; but no discharge to this, so
lay it up, that you may not have it to seek in the hour of Temptations and
Trial. Such times you must expect, and then your Acquittance sealed with
Christ's blood will stand you in much stead. Our carelessness this way, often
causes God to hide from us the comfort of it, to the end that we may seek it
up, and keep it better. Thus we lay some piece of plate aside for a while to
teach a careless child, or servant, to be more careful of it after it is
returned. And thus much of the Fulness of Gods pardoning. Come we now to the
Freeness of it. He Frankly forgave them both. Whence observe we

Remission is of free grace and mercy; whom God forgives he forgives gratis.
The Pope indeed sells Pardons; God sells none, what God does this way he does
freely.

This Truth is abundantly confirmed and strengthened in the holy Scriptures. I,
even I am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for my own sake, etc. Isa.
43 25. Not for your sakes, but for mine own sake will I purge you and wash
away your sins, O you house of Israel, Ezekiel. 36.25, 32. Thus Ephesians. 1.7. The
Apostle speaking of this benefit, tells us that he gives it (...), according to
the riches of his grace. And Romans 3.24. he says, we are justified, (...),
gratis, or freely by his grace through the Redemption that is in Jesus Christ.

the Redemption that is in Jesus Christ, how then is it free? that which we get
upon a price paid, and ransom tendered, is from Justice due to us, and not of
free grace given us: But so was this obtained, as the Apostle likewise
elsewhere sh^weth 1 Cor. 6.20 1 Timothy ^.6.

Active Obedience paid the Principal that was owing, fulfilling all
Righteousness, Mat. 3.15. And by his Passive Obedience paid the Forfeiture, in
which respect the Prophet says, We have received at the Lords hand ( viz. in
our Surety) double for all our sins, Isa. 40 2. So that ex par^e Christi, on
Christ's part it was not free, and yet ex part hominum, on man's behalf, it is
every way ingenuous and free. And that

First, in regard of God the Father, who was pleased out of the love he bore to
mankind to send his only begotten Son to discharge that debt was owing. Isa
9.6. John 4.10. And out of the like love and mercy he was pleased to accept of
the satisfaction and payment by him made on our behalf; for nothing bound God
to this way, but that wherewith he did voluntarily bind himself, Heb 6.7.

Secondly, in respect of Christ who satisfied for us, it was to us free. He
freely and willingly assented to the work of our Redemption, in which respect
it is said, He laid down his life and took it up again. John 10.15.
As likewise in that we are no way able to gratify Christ for what he did in
any measure, Psalm. 116.12.

Thirdly, in respect of our selves who receive this mercy, it is free
forgiveness; we confer no merit to it, nor did we add any thing toward that
great purchase of his, Romans 11.6. Thus then, in speaking of Gods free grace in
pardoning sin, Christ is not to be excluded, he is (...), the end or Tribute,
and we by his payment are (...), Tribute-free. And so we stand discharged
through his ransom before God Almighty.

etc.) How then is it freely given?

without these, yet it is not conferred for these. They are not Causes but
Conditions, Signs and Proofs to settle our hearts in this comfortable
Assurance that we have found mercy with God, and that our sins are pardoned,
(as we shall hear hereafter in the Application of this Parable.)

Papists, who with a like Pride cry up their Actions to be Meritorious; as they
do their Passions and Sufferings to be satisfactory to Gods Justice.

They make a double merit; A merit of Congruity, which (they say) goes before
Conversion, and obtains Justification and Remission of sins: And a merit of
Condignity which follows after Conversion, and furthereth our Reward when
this life is ended.

Neither of these can stand with Free Grace: Grace and Merit fight ex diametro,
Romans 3.28. If by Grace we are saved, then merit is no merit, if by merit, Grace
is no Grace.

Which doctrine of the Church of Rome, (had she no more alike unsound) may
justly fasten upon her the ill name of Meretrix Babylonica, Dr. Featly.
Meretrixa merendo, nam mercede suam exercet malitiam etc. Calepin. Tit.
meretrix. Bem Sermon. 52 Fateor non sum digum ego, n^^ proprijs possum merit is
regnum obtinere c loru^ caeterum duplici jure illud obtinens Dominus meus,
Faeredita te scilitet Patri^ and meri o passionis; al^^o ipse contencus,
alteru^ mihi donat, ex cujus dono ju^e illu^ mihi vendica^^ non consua
lorauthor vit. kern l. c. ^2. Bellar de ^u^^i^. c. ^6.6 and ^5. c. 7
the Whore of Babylon (says one) For Meretrix a merendo sie dicta est, a whore
has her name from meriting Her standing upon terms with God, and pleading
merit, marres all her merit, Sufficie ad meritum scire quod non sufficiant
merita (says S. Bernard) If there be any merit, it is in denying all merit.
And thus that Father merited, for I find in his life that seeming to be before
Gods Tribunal and S^tan opposing him, (S. Bernard) there seemed thus to reply:
I confess I am not worthy, neither can I by my own deserts obtain the
Kingdom of Heaven. But my Lord obtaining it by a double right, by his Father
Inheritance, and the merit of his Passion, being content with one himself
gives me the other; of whose gift challenging it by right, I am not confounded.

And of this mind are the Papists when they come to the point indeed. So
Bellarmine (out of Bernard) because (says he) of the uncertainty of our
Righteousness and the danger of Vainglory, Tutissimumest filucians totam in
sola Dei misericordia and benignitate reponere, It is safest to put our whole
trust in the sole mercy and goodness of God. Here he plays Penelope, texit
telam and retexit, he sews and ravells; after much written and great pa^^es,
taken in defense of merit, he dasheth all with his Pell, telling us what is
the safest way. And in a case so nearly concerning our Salvation, he that will
not take the safest way is much too blame.

Mercy of God in begging Pardon, use no other plea, but the freeness of his
Grace in Christ. Thus did David seek, Psalm. 6.2, 4. and 25.6.7. and 55.1 So
Daniel, Cap. 9 9.18. and the poor Publican, Luke 18.13. So the woman of
Canaan. Mat. 15.22. So the two blind men, M^t. 9.27. and 20.30. So do thou.

Had a man any other Plea for pardon; it must be from something in himself, or
for something in some other creature; but from neither of these.

From a man's self there is no ground to hope for Pardon, there is nothing in
man, in regard whereof he may look for respect from God: For, 1. There are many
stains and blemishes in our best works (as before we have heard) Isa. 64.6. 1
Ioh. 1.8. In respect whereof S. Paul that chosen Vessel professes, That he
was nothing 2 Cor. 2 11.

2. Though a man did know no evil by himself, nor were conscious of any
blemish in his righteous Actions, yet God who is a God of pure Eyes knows much
and sees much in us; In which respect Saint Paul says, I know nothing by my
self, yet I am not thereby Justified. He that judges me is the LORD,
Quisquis tibi enumerat vera meritasua, quid tibi enumerat nisi munera tua. Aug.
l. 1. Confess. Si de ^uo retriouis, peccatum retribu^; omnia enim quae habes ab
illo habes, tuum^olum pe^^atum habes, Aug. in Psa. 102.
1 Cor. 4.4.

3. If in case that there should be no Imperfection at all in it, yet there is
no pleading of our works to the Almighty by way of merit, for these Reasons.

1. They are not our own, but Gods, Isa. 26.12. 1 Cor. 4.7. and. 15.10. 2 Cor.
3.5. Phil. 2.13. If thou renderest any thing (says S. Austen) to God of thy
own, thou renderest Sin: For all the good thou have, thou have received from
God: thou have nothing, which thou may call thine own, but sin. And
elsewhere he strongly infers against all Plea of man's Merit thus. Si
bonasunt, etc. If thy works are good, they are Gods gifts; if they are evil
God crowns them not: Si hona sunt, Dei dona sunt, si Dei dona sunt, non
coronat ta^quam merita tua, sed tanqua^ dona sua, Aug. de lib. Arbit. c. 7
Quicquid guess. ^is parum est: quicquid feceris minus est, Chrysostom. Hom. 70. E^si
millies moriamur, et si omnes virtutes animae expleamus nihil dignum gerimes
adea, quae ipsi a Deo percepimus, Chrysostom. l. de compuactione cordis.
If therefore God crowns thy works, he crowns them not as they are Merits,
but as his own Gifts. Certainly that which is not our work is not our Merit.
Can we oblige a man to us by paying him his own.

2. We do no more then we stand engaged to do, when we have done the best we
can, Luke 17.10. How then can we challenge any thing from God by way of Merit?
Is any man engaged to us for discharging of a Bond, which they are bound under
a great penalty by a precise day to satisfy.

3. There is no Proportion betwixt that goodness which is in us, and that we
expect to receive from God for it. What is all the money we can make; all that
we can do or suffer toward the payment of a debt of ten thousand Talents? and
such a debt is sin, Math. 18.24. Hear the Apostle speaking to this, Romans 8.18.
2 Cor. 4.17. And yet Suffering for the Gospel is a work of the best sort,
which God most especially does regard. Thus then there is nothing in our selves
whereon to ground any Plea for pardon.

Nor is there any other Plea to use to God for pardon in respect of any other
creature. We read, Math. 25. that the foolish Virgins hoping to borrow oil of
the wise, were denied, and plainly told, that they had not to spare, that they
had not enough to lend and spend both. No trusting to any other men's Merits
(whatsoever Papists say) Resolve we therefore to fly to the throne of Mercy (as
from Common Law we fly to Chancerie for relief.) Put we up our Petitions
into the Court of Requests, after this form and no other, LORD be merciful
to me a Sinner.

And as we are to beg all of Mercy, so learn we here to ascribe all to Mercy;
we are called Vessels of Mercy, Romans 9.23. Now the Vessel sents of the liquor
that is in it. The whole work of our Salvation can be a^^^ib^d to no other
thing then to Mercy. Election, that is of Grace, Romans 11.5. Vocation according
to Grace, 2 Timothy 1.9. Justification by Grace, Romans 3.24 Glorification a gift of
Grace, Romans 6.23. Why blessed be God, which according to his abundant Mercy
has begotten us again to a lively Hope, etc. 1 Pet. 1.3. Say we of all
spiritual things as Jacob of his wealth, God has had Mercy on me and
therefore I have all these, Genesis 33.11. And with the Church let us still
acknowledge, Lord thou have wrought all our works for us. Isae. 20.12. As for
those who take from God, and ascribe unto themselves, they do that in earnest,
which we see boys do in jest: They stand upon their heads and shake their
heels toward Heaven.

Thankefullnesse to God for this free Mercy of his in our Salvation, let us
show mercy to our poor distressed Brethren, who stand in need of it; and be
merciful to them even as our Father is merciful unto us.

Mercy in God is as it were his Face; Now we are said to resemble others when
we are like them in the Face, rather then in the hands and feet. In nothing can
we better resemble God, or show our selves his children, then in following his
example, forgiving those who have done us wrong, Even as he has forgiven us.
Be the Party who he will be, if he say, It does repent me, pardon him: For so
God pardons the unworthiest of us.

Be the Fault what it will be, God forgives us, Iniquity, Transgression and
Sin, Exodus 34. Yea, although we have forgiven him many times already; I say
not until seven times, but until seventy times seven times, Math. 18.12. So
does God by us. And so forgive as not to impute the wrong unto him, count the
wrong and injury, as if it were not; So did S. Paul forgive the Galathians,
Cap. 4.12. Yea have not injured me at all. Still look upon the pattern God
has set us to work by, Ephesians. 4.32. Colos. 3.13. Remembering God has so far
tied his Mercy to this Condition of our Forgiving others, that unless we do
so, we can have no comfortable assurance that our sins are pardoned, Mat. 6.14,
15. and 18.32, 33.

Look as David said of unthankful Nabal. In vain have I kept all that this
fellow had, 1 Samuel 25.21, 22. So will God say of such as will not forgive, In
vain have I done all this for him, given my Son, promised pardon, etc. seeing
he is so unthankful as not for my sake to pass by such small wrongs and
injuries.

Freeness of GODS Mercy may a poor Sinner gather Comfort.

It is that that troubles many a soul, they have nothing of worth within them:
They cannot see why GOD should pardon such as they are. But though there be
nothing in thee, yet there is something in himself; Bowels of Mercy, and a
Nature inclined to show Mercy. Where nothing is to pay, there he frankely
forgives all. Besides Christ has paid for thee that which thou were not able
to discharge. Nomon Jesus a pud Hebraeos a litera loath, apud Graecos a Iota
incipit, quae utraque in sua gente denarij numeri est nota: dece^ obolos in
precium animae suae offerunt, qui in Iesum Christum credentes signii no minis
ejus, quod a denario numero incipit, in front and professione proferu^t Bed-de
tab. Solomon.
The first Letter of his Name yields Comfort (if you consider it well) much
more the whole.

You know the Mercy-Seate was upon the Arc, and within the Arc the Law was
put, and over the Arc and Mercy-Seat were Cherubins covering one another: What
signified all this, but that by Christ our Arc, the curses of the Law are
covered, and God become gracious and favorable, into which things the Angels
desire to pry, as S. Peter says. Look then from off thy self, and fix thy
eye on Christ, and when ever thou come to God for pardon, look toward the
Mercy-Seat, (as they who prayed in the Temple did) desire him to show thee
Mercy, and to forgive thee for his Christ's sake, and doubt not of Audience.
Thus much of the Benefit bestowed. Next of the Persons who were made partakers
of this Benefit.

Them both.]
And here we see wherein the Condition of these two Debtors was Alike. There was
difference in respect of the Debt owing, one ought a greater Sum then the
other; but no difference in respect of the Discharge: Both are forgiven the one
as well as the other. Hence observe,

Forgiveness and Pardon is general to all that cast themselves on Gods free
mercy for it.

Ezekiel. 18.27. Isay. 55.1. John 3.16. Acts 2.38, 39. Revel. 22.17.

The Ground of this is, The Love of God to Mankind, out of which he was moved
to send Christ into the world, Christus tametsi non esset omnes lucraturus,
nihilo minus pro omnibus mortuus est, quod suum erat adimplens, etc. Chrysostom in
Ro^. 14
and offer to them life and Salvation upon terms possible.

2. The price paid by Christ (whereby Justice was satisfied, and a way for mercy
made) was paid for all, and made for all, 1 Timothy 2.6. Isay. 53.6. though it be
not Beneficial to all, but only to such as observe the Condition.

Reconciliation so to tender it: Our Commission is, Preach the Gospel to every
creature, Mark 16.15. which is not to be understood in a Fryer-like sense, of
preaching to Birds, Beasts, Wolves, as they say some have done.

But in our Saviors sense, to every reasonable creature, tendering Salvation
and happiness to all that will receive it upon those terms and conditions,
which are expressed in the Covenant of Grace; which conditions required, are
not impossible to be observed and performed through those gracious helps which
God affords unto them in the Ministry of the Word.

Without this general offer the Elect of Christ (before Conversion) can have
no ground for their Faith to rest upon. A pardon through Christ is offered to a
man, See D. Preston on Faith. p. 10. and M Madens Trea. of Christ's love and
affection toward Jerusalem, p 65 and his Ep^stle to the Reader. M. Harris on
the Beatitudes, p. 25.
in the state of Unregeneracy, how shall this man know it belongs to him,
seeing no man's name is particularly mentioned in the pardon? There is no other
way then by reasoning after this manner. Pardon and Forgiveness belongs to
every man that repents and believes the Gospel: But I am of that number, I
repent and believe: Therefore pardon and forgive nesse is mine, it belongs to me
as well as to any other whosoever.

Thus far the Doctrine of universal Grace is to be taught, and was taught by
our blessed Savior and his Disciples, John 7.37. Tit. 2.11. Indeed all are not
Elected, but it is not for us to judge who are, and who are not. There is no
particular Person, who lives within the bosom of the Church, but we in
Judgment of Charity are to think him to be one of the number for whom Christ
died, 1 Cor. 8.11.

Nor do all Profit by the means of Grace. They will not apply themselves to
God, nor serve his Providence in that way, and course which he has laid forth
for their good, yet may not Gods Ministers be wanting to them, though they be
wanting to themselves: We must do our duties, knowing we have to deal with a
Nature capable of Salvation and Happiness without any varying of his Species:
And with such as may lay claim to Remission, and Happiness upon their
acceptance of the conditions. Upon which conditions it is necessary we should
make a general Offer without any exception of sins or sinners, Act. 13.46.

To prevent al mistakes, that Distinction which Aquinas has out of the
Fathers, of Sufficienter and Efficienter, that there is sufficient done by
Christ for the Salvation of Mankind, though it shall not be efficient to all,
(for that all apply it not) is of good use. Saint Austin made it his Buckler
against those who charged him to hold that Christ suffered not for all men. S.
Chrysostom likewise (and out of him his Epitomist Theophilact) with diverse
others, both ancient and modern, make use of this distinction in this Question.

I will conclude the Point with a Relation of what I have read concerning that
blessed Mar^yr of Christ M. Bilney (whom Father Latimer called S. Bilney,
blessing God for the day that ever he knew him) He coming into a Church and
there hearing a very eloquent Preacher to say thus in his Sermon: Behold thou
have lain rotting in thy lusts for these threescore years like a Beast in his
^ung; and will thou presume in one year to go forward to Heaven (and that in
thine old age) as much as thou weniest forward toward Hell in sixty years
before? He was much offended with the Preacher, and said: Is not this a goodly
Argument? Is this preaching of Repentance in the name of Jesus Christ? Surely
it is (said he) as much as to say that Christ has died in vain: Had I heard
such preaching in times past I had utterly despaired of Mercy. It is a high
point of wisdom for Gods Ministers so to preach Christ and Remission of
sins in his Name, that a poor distressed soul may have some twig to hang
on; and some bottom to rest upon to save himself from sinking.

The Standard is set up for all Nations and Conditions to fly unto: Isa 49.22.
Cant. 2. Jude v. 3.
He preaches Christ best who holds him up highest: He is the Rose of the
field, and the Flower of the Valleys: Salvation by him is no enclosure, it is a
common Salvation, reaching to all Ages, Heb. 11. To all Nations, Act. 2.5, 10,
34. And to all Conditions of men, Acts 10.12. And to all sorts of sins (that
against the Holy Ghost excepted) He that owes most as well as he who ows least
may obtain a discharge. So you see in the Text, which says, He forgave them
both.

Them both.
Not him only who owed the fifty pence, but him likewise who was indebted in
the sum of five hundred. You see then

God forgiveth great debts as well as small, hundreds as well as tens.

We read, Math. 18.24. of a debt (not only of five hundred (as here) but) often
thousand, and those not pence but Tallents, a mighty Sum arising (says
Melancton) to three tuns of gold, yet that remitted.

David, Psalm. 103.2, 3. blesses God for forgiving all his Iniquities, and
healing all his diseases. Yet (you know) some of them were very foul ones: And
Psalm. 130.7. he wills Israel to hope in the LORD, for that with him There is
Mercy and plenteous Redemption to be had.

With him is Mercy, Exodus 34.6. Mich. 7.18, 19.
The Lord, the Lord merciful and gracious, slow to anger, etc. And who is a
God like unto him that pardons Iniquity and passes by the transgression of
the remnant of his heritage. God is every way Infinite; man is a finite
Creature: And what proportion can there be betwixt the sin of a Creature and
the Mercy of an Infinite Creator.

(...) (says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 1.25.) The weakness of God is stronger then
men: Were there any sin greater then could be remitted, the weakness of man
(for thence comes sin) should be stronger then GOD, which neither Religion,
nor Reason will admit of.

With him (likewise) is plenteous Redemption. Copiosa dicit ne quisquam despa.
raret de venia, arbitrans non se posse pervenire usque ad rede^ptionis precium,
Aug. in Ps. 130
The Redemption that Christ made, the Ransom that he paid was not scanty, but
plenteous, enough and enough again, for all the sins of his people, how many
and how heinous soever, so that none need to despair of pardon! There is
Redemption to be had for Them, as well as for any other. A full Satisfaction is
made to Divine Justice through the price of Christ's blood, as well for
Tallents as for farthing tokens; for the greatest as well as for the smallest
debt, who then can doubt ( Justice being satisfied) but to find God as ready
to forgive a thousand Pounds, as well as one Penny.

Gods mercy and Christ's merit, as cry out with Caine, their sins are more then
can be pardoned. S. Peter calls on those who murdered the Son of God, and
killed the Prince of life, that they would Repent and Convert, that so their
sins might be forgiven them. Acts 3.15, 19.
Now if their sin was not greater then might be forgiven, who slew the Son of
God, may we think that his was greater then could be forgiven who slew his
Brother? Was not the betraying and murdering of Jesus a greater sin then that
of Abels killing? No marvel then though S. Austin in this case gives Caine the
lie.

I spare to speak of those ancient Heretics the Novatians, or Catharists,
who did mainetaine that some sins were irremissible, as those committed after
Baptism, etc. Those excluded mercy: One sin (indeed) we read of to be
unpardonable, Mat. 12.31, 32. but that is not simply in regard of the
greatness and heynousnesse thereof (as if it exceeded Gods mercy or Christ's
Sacrifice) but in respect of man's malice, he either maliciously despising the
Spirit of grace, or wilfully rejecting the offer of Pardon. In order of
Redemption God has made man's fin pardonable; but man by his impenitencie makes
it unpardonable.

Deus non est desperantium Pater sed Index, such shall not find God a Father,
but a Judge. It is a provoking sin to limit the holy one of Israel in his Mercy
as well as to limit him in his Power: To say, thus far he will go in
pardoning and no further. He has taught us to forgive until seventy times
seven times, and can we think that he wills us to be more merciful then
himself will be? That number amounts to ten Jubilees of Pardons: for so many
sins then may we (upon Repentance) expect pardon at h^s hands; yea for as many,
and as many more; for his mercy exceeds man's, Psalm. 35.5.
as the Heavens does the Earth; He can more readily forgive seventy times
seventy, then man seven. Isa. 55.9.
His Thoughts are not as our thoughts in pardoning. We wonder how a man can put
up such wrongs, and pass by such injuries, or do such a kindness for one who
has so much abused them. But He is God and not Man, cease wondering, and fall
to blessing (with David) Psalm. 103.2. My soul bless thou the Lord, and all
that is within me bless his holy name, who forgiveth all thine iniquities and
heals all thy diseases, etc.

Secondly, we may observe hence

He who owes least stands (as well) in need of mercy and forgiveness as he who
owes most.

David desires God to forgive him the error of his life, his secret faults, as
well as his presumptuous sins, Psalm. 19.12, 13. And the sins of his Youth he
begs pardon for, Psalm. 25.7. as well as those of riper years.

Themselves, simply considered, for that they are committed against an Infinite
Majesty, Psalm. 51.4. 1 Ioh. 3.4.
(as before was said) They are against an Infinite Law, and so merit infinite
damnation, Ephesians. 5.6. Gal. 3.10.

many sins need no remission, they are Venial (that is, Rhem. Annot. in Rom
1.32. Azor instit. mor part, 1. l. 4. c. 8, 9. Bonavent. in 2. d 42. Bellar. l.
1. de amissi^^rat c 14 resp. ad 1. obj. Haec venialia non criminalia
reputantur, excepto cum per contemp^um in usum and consuetudine^ vertuntur
Bern. de praecept and dispens c. 14.
pardonable of their own nature) such as a man needs make no confession of;
and for which a man needs not to be called a sinner, they merit not Death, nor
can God in Justice punish those sins with it.

The Distinction between Mortal and Venial we absolutely dislike not. Wisely
and rightly limited, it may safely be admitted.

Two manner of ways are sins termed Venial: Either Comparate, in Comparison
of others, being in themselves of a lighter nature, carrying not in them so
great a repugnancie to Gods Law, nor bringing with them any notorious dishonor
to God or Injury to man, (thus a little excess in mirth, idle words, and such
like,) which though they deserve not Favor and Pardon, yet they less deserve
Punishment then others of a higher nature.

Or else Simpliciter: they are so termed simply, and in themselves, and that
three manner of ways.

1. Ex natura sua, being such as in their own Nature deserve not Death. Either
they merit no punishment at all, or at least, such as is but Temporary. 2. Ex
gratia: by Gods Favor, and through the Churches Indulgence (for so in former
ages they were called, which passed not under the Churches Censure.) Thus those
sins which are indeliberately and ignorantly committed, either through their
smallness, or daily incursion. 3. Ex eventu, in respect of the issue and
event; and thus we acknowledge all the sins of the Elect to be Venial, Romans
8.1.
The Question betwixt Papists and us is, Whether any sin of the Elect or
Reprobate be Venial (ex sua na^ura) of its own Nature and kind. This we deny,
and they affirm.

Four Arguments we bring to prove our Doctrine.

First, our Savior affirms that every lie (not only the pernicious but the
officious which they hold venial) And every vain and petty oath, more then
Yea (in affirming) and Nay (in denying) comes from the wicked one: (...)
that is, from the Devil, for so we find, 1 Ioh. 3.12. the same phrase used.

Secondly, Death is threatened by the Lord for the least transgression of his
righteous Law, Deuteronomy. 27.26. and 30.19. Gal. 3.10. Romans 6.23. 1 Cor. 15.56. Now,
does the Law of God forbid those sins they call venial, yea or no? If not,
then they are no sins, or else the Law is not perfect, in that it meets not
with all enormities, If yea, then they are Transgressions, and deserve Death.

Thirdly, that which has been inflicted by the Lord upon men even for such
transgressions as they call Venial, prove them to be otherwise, read Genesis
9.26. 1 Samuel 6.19. 2 Samuel 6.7. 1 King. 13.24. and 20.36. Acts 5.3.

Fourthly, the Price that was paid for these lesser kind of sins, prove that
they are Mortal and not Venial: Christ shed his blood for the errors or
ignorances of the people, Heb. 9.7. And this was shadowed under the Law, Levit.
5.17, 18. So that we may safely conclude against that Doctrine of theirs, No
sin is in its own Nature Venial, all are Mortal, the least as well as the
greatest, and needs pardon. Were it, (as Papists would have us to bel^eve) that
there are some sins Venial, and pardonable of their own Nature; Let them give
us leave to enquire of them, how it comes to pass that such Delinquents go
into Purgatory for them, where the pain is so intolerable (as they say) that
one having lain a long time there, and it being put to his choice whether he
would lie there one day longer or return to the earth again, and there for
the space of an hundred years to walk upon sharp iron nails, and eat
nothing but bread baked on the Imbers, and drink nothing but Vinegar mingled
with Gall, and wear nothing but haire-cloth about his loins; nor have no
other but the cold earth for his bed, and a hard stone for his pillow; made
choice to endure all this, rather then to abide one day longer in Purgatory.
Can they give us any reason why God should torment any one so grievously in
another world, for that which has made no breach of friendship betwixt him and
them, and wherewith he never was displeased? If they can, let us hear it.

selves and practice, let us not think any sin contemptible so as to make
light of the committing of it, seeing every sin stands in need of mercy and
forgiveness. And further know we,

1. That the Nature of sin stands not in the material part (which often is
little;) but in the form or anomy, which is the Transgression of the Law: And
that may be in an Apple, as well as in a greater matter. You know, the most
poysonfull sin of all* was taken in an Apple.

Queque minu^ laedunt singula multa nocent. Quomodo minuta peccata si
negligantur occidunt? minuta sicut grana arenae sed si multa arena imponatur
premit, etc. Aug Tract 12. in Job. Quid interest ad naufragium i^rum uno grands
fluctu navis operiatur, an paulatim subr^pens aqus in Sentina^: Aug. Epist.
108. Quid interest utru^te plumbum premat an arena? plumbum una massa est,
arena minuta grana sunt. n^nne vides, etc. Aug. Ser. 10. de diverse. Nolite
contemnere venialia quia minima sun^, sed timete quia plura: plerunque enim
bestiae minia (...) multae necant, etc. Timenda est erg^ ruina multitudi^is,
ets^ non magnitudinis. Aug. de december chordis. Si vitari parva negligimus
insensibiliter seducti majora etiam perpetramus. Greg.
2. Small sins, with their Multitude and Number, hurt the soul as much as great
sins do with their weight (so S. Austin teaches us) How do small sins kill
the soul (says he) if they be neglected? The drops which fill whole Brooks
are small, and grains of sand are small, but yet if many of them be put
together they will sink a ship. And again, What matters it whether a ship be
everwhelmed with one great wave or sunk by a leake in the bottom unespied,
wherein the water enters drop by drop, etc. And elsewhere, thus, What eases it
a man to be pressed to death with a heap of sand more then with a sow of lead?
Scest, thou not that by smallest drops the greatest Rivers are filled. They are
small but they are many, And what they loose in Quantity, they get in Number;
See therefore (says he) that you contemn not these sins, because they are
small, but feane them because they are many. You know that many little boys
about the Market Cross, by their noise outcry the Crier.

3. Small sins serve to make way for greater. Huntsmen first ply the Dear with
their little Beagles, till it be heated and blown, and then they put on their
great Buckhounds: Such use the Devil makes of little sins. A long thread of
iniquity he has let in with a small Needle; as we find in David's case and in
Peter's, etc. A great fire has been kindled by a little spark; and a great
blot made with a little hair hanging in the Pen. If we stick not at small sins
(says Gregory) ere we be aware, we shall swallow down the greatest. You may
remember that strong Sampson was led into the room by a little Boy.

4. Small sins are cured with more difficulty then greater: A wound made with a
Steeletto is more dangerous then a wound made with Goliah's sword; here the
wound presently closes up, and so bleeds inwardly in greater abundance. We
watch not so much over those kind of sins, as we do over greater: thence it is
that we fall oftener into them, and being fallen we lie longer in them without
Repentance. In this respect our Savior tells the Pharisees, that Publicans and
sinners shall go into Gods kingdom before them, Mat. 21.31.

5. Forget not what Christ suffered for small sins, even his precious blood,
Heb. 9.7. our great sins were as the Spear in his side, and as the Nails in
his blessed Hands and Feet, and our small sins were as the Thorns up-his
Head, they though small yet put him to pain and grief; How dare we crown the
Son of God (again) with Thorns and put him by our small sins to an after
suffering.

Wherefore as we desire the welfare of our souls, hearken to this word of
Exhortation, and make conscience of committing the smallest sins; and know it
for a truth, No sin is small to him who thinks it so. Thus we have heard the
case related. Now follows the Quere made upon it.

Tell me therefore which of them will love him most?
The Thing Questioned, and the Ground of that Demand, we have considerable in
the words.

That both these forgiven Debtors did love their Creditor, is granted; The
Question is about the Degree of Love, Which of them loved most. Something from
the History many be gathered. As first,

Those who have been beneficial and kind unto us, ought to be affected and
beloved of us.

The kinder any one has been unto us, the more should he be loved and
regarded by us. A word or two of each.

Those who have been any way beneficial to us, ought to be loved and
respected. Sinners love those that love them, much more should Christ's
Disciples; they should go beyond all others in the duties of love, Mat. 5.46.
Luke 6.32.

Hereto tends that, Prove. 18.24. A man that has friends must show himsefe
friendly; Love and Thankfulness must be returned according to what has been
done for us, and received.

The force of the Rule we may see in sundry Examples, 2 Samuel 9.1, etc. 2 Samuel
19 31. 2 Kings 2.7. 2 Samuel 10.1, 2. 2 Chronicles. 24.16. 2 Kings 4.13, etc.

no great thing (according to our Saviors Doctrine) to be loving to the
well-deserving (for that Heathens and Publicans do the like) then it must
needs be worse then Heathenish; yea more then Brutish, Nihil est quod adeo
indignationem provocet altissime sicut ingratitudo, ipsa est maloru^
provocatio, beneficiorum exinanitio, meritorum exterminatio. Pet Raven. in
quad. epist. 1 Samuel 25. Psalm. 35.12, 13 Jer. 18.20, 21. Ingratum dixeris, omnia
dixeris. Minius Publicanus.
to be unkind to those who have showed us kindness.

I might speak much of the vileness of this sin which is odious to God; as
appears by Gods dealing with churlish and unthankful Nabal, 1 Samuel 25.38. And
by his own complaint, Isa. 1.3. And to man, as appears, not only by the
complaint which the Godly. have made thereof; but by that the Heathens
(themselves) have said of it. Yea Nature it self teaches us to abhor this
sin.

I will relate only to you a Story or two, that may be read; one in Gellius,
that is this.

There was a Gentleman of a Noble house, (his name was Androcles) being taken
Prisoner, and made a slave to a Noble man of Rome; through hard and cruel
dealing, ran away from him, and fled into certain desert woods, in Africa;
where he wandering up and down, at last espied a Cave under the ground, which
(unknown to him) was the Den of a Lion, into this he goes to repose himself
that night; by and by comes in the Lion roaring, and halting, and espying
Androcles, lay down by him* putting forth his paw, which was grievously
wounded with a stub; making moan, as though he desired help: The man
(perceiving the Lions meaning) began to pluck up his spirits, and looks into
the Lions foot, plucks out the stub, dresseth the wound, (which was much
festered) and washed it with his Urine. The next day the Lion went out for his
Prey, and soon returns with it in his mouth, which he laid down at the feet
of Androcles, (who had eaten nothing two or three days before) And thus did
the Lion daily for the space of three years. Afterward this Androcles waxing
weary of his solitary life, stoale away in the absence of the Lion and hid
himself not far from the place: The Lion returning after his accustomed
manner with meat for his guest dinner; and not finding him, made pitiful
moan and lamentation: Androcles (when the Lion as he conceived was laid to
rest) departs; and wandering up and down fell by chance into the hands of
those, whom his Master had sent to look him up; and (being brought again by
them unto his Master,) was clapped up in Prison, and condemned to be devoured by
wild Beasts (which they used to take in the Desert for that purpose.) It so
happened that this Lion was shortly after taken by Hunters, and sent to Rome,
and appointed to be the Lion, with which the condemned were to combat; The
Lion was brought into the place, certain Prisoners were cast in unto him,
(which he cruelly rent in pieces,) at length this poor slave was cast in also,
to be devoured with the rest; But as the Lion ran toward him to tear him, he
knew the man, and came fawning on him like a dog, licking his hands and feet:
Androcles perceiving it to be the Lion with whom he lived in the Cave, stroaked
him gently on the Head and Back, (to the admiration of all Beholders.) Titus
the Emperor being then present, demanded of the man the cause of this, who
related to the Emperor the whole business. The Emperor hereupon pardons
Androcles and gave him the Lion which waited on him whithersoever he went; of
whom the people usually said, Hic est Leo hospes hominis, Hic est homo medicus
leonis.

Philarcus tells us of another. There was a young Eagle which a Boy had
nourished and brought up very carefully, and cured him being sick: This Eagle
showed many and strange signs of love unto the Boy. insomuch that the youth
falling sick, the Eagle would continually sit by him, and when the Boy did
sleep, it would sleep; and when the Boy did wake that would wake; and if the
Boy would not eat his meat neither would that eat: and afterward when the
Boy died and was carried forth upon a hearse, the Eagle followed, and when the
body of the Boy was buried in the fire, the Eagle likewise flew into the fire,
and so consumed her self.

Atheneus reports likewise that one Milesius having bought a Dolphin alive, let
him go again into the sea* It so fell out that Milesius afterward was cast
away by shipwreck, and being ready to perish in the midst of the Waves, the
same Dolphin came and got him on his back, and carried him safe to shore and
preserved his life. I am loath the Truth should suffer shipwreck by these
Narrations; let the credit of these stories be upon the Authors: This is most
apparent in experience, that men may learn Love and Thankefullnesse from Bruit
and Savage Creatures: and these I mention, thereby to shame such barbarous and
rough natures, Quidam quo plu^ debent magis oderunt, leve as alienum, debitorem
facit gravem inimicum Senec. Epist. 48. Amicos diligere omnium est; Inimicos
autem solorum Christianerum Tertul ad Scap. in ips^ initio.
as being provoked to this duty of Love, by kindness received, do thereby
take occasion of hatred, and working mischief to them, who have of them so
well deserved.

If we love not our friends, is it like we will ever love enemies? And yet our
Savior has required this of us. Every man (says Tetullian) can do the one,
(and yet that scarce) only a true Christian can do the other. Nature teaches
us to requite Goodness with Goodness; it is Religion that must teach us to
return Good for Evil. A great offense it must needs be to requite Evil with
Evil, but to recompense Good with Evil is most intolerable, and the highest
degree of Ingratitude. I come to the next.

The more kindness we have received from any, the more should they be
endeared to us and beloved of us.

There are three things in Love. First, Benevolence and well-wishing: Secondly,
Beneficence or Actual well-dong: Thirdly, Complacency, or delight-taking. In
all these may be a preferment given to one above another.

In Wellwishing none may be excluded, seem they for the present to be never so
vile, 1 Timothy 2.1. But David must be preferred, 2 Samuel 8.3. The safety and
welfare of public persons is especially to be desired.

In our delight or Contentment-taking, who knows not but though our Enemies
must be prayed for, yet that is so peculiar to the Saints, as that it cannot
(without suspicion of unsoundnesse) be extended to Aliens? Hear David's
protestation, Psalm. 16 3. and 119.63.

For Beneficence and Actual welldoing, the place is plain, Gal. 6. verse 10.
There though the Charge runs generally, yet a specialty therein must be
reserved to the Saints.

David had his Jonathan; S. Paul had his Barnabas; S. Austin his Alypias; S.
Hier^m his Heliodorus; S. Bernard his Gernasius; Eusebius his Pamphilus; and
our Blessed Savior had his beloved Disciple.

It is a general sentence delivered by Solomon, Eccles. 4.12.
A threefold Cord is not easily broken. Where are the most cords to tie us, and
the most bands to join us, there should our love be the stronger and greater.
Grace is a common band of Christian Affection; Nature and Blood makes it
stronger; (for though it has been questioned whether a man may prefer a
gracious Child before a gracious Friend; yet) there is no question but that a
man may love a gracious Friend or Child, before a gracious Stranger. To these
if you add Personal merits, the bond is still strengthened; Thus David loved
Saul, etc. but his soul clave close to Jonathan.

Our Meditations might easily be enlarged in these points; but (they arising
from the Letter of the Text) I content my self to do by them, as the
Disciples did with the ears of Corn they plucked in the field, Rub them
betwixt my fingers, not thresh them. We pass from the History to the Mystery.
And so observe we

God is truly loved of all those whose sins are pardoned. This is a Truth
granted, and unquestioned: If need were, it might be further strengthened from
sundry other Texts, Psalm. 116.1. and 18.1. Cant. 13.2, 5. Phil. 3.8, 9. Psalm.
119.132.

How can it otherwise be? For every Act of Gods special favor begets another
in the heart of the godly like it. He choosing them, they choose him again; He
calls them, Hos. 2.23. Romans 10. 1 John 4.19.
they call on him; He loving them, they must needs again love him. We love him
(says S. John) because be loved us first. The cold stone cannot cast forth
heat, (as you know) till it be warmed by the Sunbeams, being warmed by them,
then it reflecteth back some of the heat which it received; Thus is it with
our cold hearts.

What may be thought then of such as love not God? Can we think them to be of
the number of those debtors whose debt is forgiven?

Ob. But is there any man so wretched? Whosoever loves not Christ, let him be
accursed. 1 Cor. 15.22.

Resp. Every one will be ready to boast of his own righteousness, but where
shall we find a faithful man (says Solomon) so say I in this case. And as
David speaks, Psalm. 36.1. of the fear of God, we may say of loving God;
Wickedness says even in my heart, that there is no love of God in him, many
evident demonstrations there be which may convince every natural man: of the
Truth hereof.

First, they love not God, Probatio amoris exhibitio operis. Greg.
in that they will do nothing for GOD. If a man love me, he will keep my
Commandments (says Christ) John 14.15, 24. And again, He that has my
Commandments and keeps them, he it is that loves me. And John 15 14. You
are my Friends if you do whatsoever I command you; But he that loves me not,
keeps not my Commandments, Ioh. 14 24. And why call you me Lord, Lora, and
do not the things which I command you, Luke 6.46.

Secondly, it appears they love not God, in that they love not to be where God
is; Love is like sire, congregat homogenea, it carries things of a nature one
to another. A lover of God gets himself as near God as he may: he resorts
often to the place where he may meet God, John 17. Bonus Calus tantummodo malus
quod Christianus. Terr. in Apolog Sicut Rex in imagine sua honoratur, sic Deus
in homine diligitur and oditur Chry, in Mat. 22 Quemadmodu^ siqui^ peregre
proficiscens aliquid pignoris ei quem diligit derelinquit; ut, quotiescunque
illud videat, possit ejus beneficia and amicitias memorare: quod ille, si
perfect dilexit, non potest fine ingenti desiderio videre vel fletu, ^c.
Hierom.
Psalm. 42.1, 2. and 26.8. 2 Cor. 5.8. But these cannot endure Gods house nor
presence, they have no love to Gods Sanctuary, where they may see his Face;
much less any longing desire after the day of Judgment to see his Person.
Christ's Prayer is little respected by them, Father, I will that they may be
where I am.

Thirdly, they love not God, as is evident by this; they love not Gods
children. Every one (says S. John) that loves him that begat, loves him also
that is begotten of of him, 1 John 5.1. If I love my Friend, or Father, I love
his Picture; but these hate the godly; they mock them, and nickname them. And
for no other cause (pretend what they will) but for that the Image of God is in
them: As the Picture of a man does enrage the Panther; so does the holiness of
the Saints the wicked of the world.

Fourthly, they love not God in that, they care not for those Monuments and
pledges of his love, which he has left unto his Church until his coming
again. Where we love truly, we love whatsoever may preserve the Monument of
the beloved party. But Gods Word, Gods Sacraments, are nothing set by of many,
which yet God has commended to us to be often used in remembrance of him, Luke
22.19. 1 Cor 11.25.

Fifthly, they love not God, in that it is evident, they love other things more
then God; And this is expressly averred of such, 1 John 2.15. He that truly
loves God, has learned to deny himself, and all things else for his sake His
Affections are carried over hil^s and mountains, through flames, and fire for
love of him, (as anon we shall see further.)

Nemo magis diligit quam qui maxim veretur offendere. Salvianus.
Sixthly and lastly, they love not God as may appear by this; they fear not to
offend him, nor have they care to please him. David loved God, and would not
transgress his Law, he grieved to see his righteous Laws by others broken,
Psalm. 119.138, 139. Lot loved God, and could not but vex from day to day with
the unlawful deeds of the Sodomites, 2 Cor. 5 9.
2 Pet. 2.7, 8. How then can these say they love God, yet hear his name
blasphemed, behold his worship polluted, etc. yet not mourn?

So then; as our Savior said unto the Jews, John 5.42. may we say to these;
I know (by these and such like signs) that you have not the love of God in
you; How then can you believe that you have interest in this great privilege,
which yet you profess you have, the Remission of sins.

And if such as these are debarred of this mercy, so as that they cannot (for
the present) lay claim to it, what think you then of those who hate God, and
are Enemies unto him? that there are such in the Church, appears by diverse
Scriptures, as Exodus 20.5. Deuteronomy. 7.10. Zach. 11.8. Luke 19.14. More particularly
these are charged with this horrid impiety.

First, all Idolaters and Superstitious persons, who worship God after their
own devices, these are said to be haters of God, Exodus 20.5.

Secondly, all Worldlings and Covetous Misers, for so we find, that the love
of the Father is not in them, 1 John 2.15. And that their Friendship with the
world is enmity to God, James 4.4.

Thirdly, all refractory and unruly Christians, who refuse to subeject their
souls to Christ's Scepter, and submit themselves to his Ordinances; what ever
these pretend, yet God takes them for his Enemies, Ioh. 5.42. Luke 19.27.

Fourthly, all natural and unregenerated Persons, these have no love of God in
them, they hate him in their heart; so we find, John 15.18, 23. Nor is this the
state of the Reprobate in the world only, but even of Gods Elect before their
conversion, Coals. 1.21.

Fifthly, all workers of iniquity, such as practice any sin, Mich. 7.3.
and plie it with both hands (to use the Prophets phrase) these are haters of
God, as appears, Psalm. 37.18, 20. and 92.9. Ioh. 15.10.

Quest. But how can God be hated, he being the chief Good? Goodness we know
is the proper object of Love.

Resp. Wicked men hate not God as he is presented and apprehended under the
Notion of Goodness, but as they apprehend something evil in him; as that he
is a Judge, and gives a Law, and punishes for the breach of it, etc. Now thus
under the fancied notion of evil, the chief Good may be hated; as the
greatest evil is loved presenting it self under the notion of Good.

To conclude, let not sinners flatter themselves in thinking that they love God
as well as the best; for however they hold themselves for Gods friends, yet he
will discover them for his enemies in the end, and proceed against the as we
read, Luke 19.27.

Wherefore let my counsel be acceptable unto thee. If upon examination thou
find that the love of God is not yet in thy heart, bewail thy estate, and
think not so well of thy condition as thou have done; Let Gods Patience and
bountifullnesse moove thee to turn unto him: Cry to him who is the God of
Love, 2 Cor. 13.11. 2 Timothy 1 7.
that by that blessed Spirit of his (which is the Spirit of Love) he would
work thy heart to love him. It is a lovely suit, and God will not deny it, if
you truly ask it. Seek to him this way, Mat. 5.44, 45. Vultis a me audire,
quare and quomodo diligendus est Deus? and ego dicam quod causa diligendi Deum.
Deus est, modus, sine modo diligere. Ob duplicem causam, dico, Deu propter
seipsum diligendum vel quia nihil justius, vel quia nihil fructuo sius diligi
potest. Bern. in lib. de dilig. Deo. Rom 13.8. Prior Deus dilexit nos tantus
tantum and gratu tantillos and tales. Bern. de dilig. Deum. Solus est amor ex
omnibus animae motibus, sensibus atque affectibus, in quo potest Creatura,
(etsi non ex aequo) respondere auctori, velde simils mutuam rependere vicom:
e.g. si mihi irascitur Deus, number ^lli ego similiter redirasear? non utique sed
pavebo, sed cotre miscam, sed veniam deprecabor. Jia si me arguat, etc. Nam cum
arnat Deus non a liud vult quam amari, etc. Bern. in Cant. Sermon. 83.
and fear not; He that commands us to love our Enemies, will undoubtedly
love us though his Enemies, if in truth of heart we desire to love him.

I might use many Arguments to put you on upon this Pursuit. There is no duty
has more Reasons to speak for it then this has. I will name only two, which
S. Bernard has, the one is in respect of God, the other in regard of our
selves.

In respect of God, and so nothing is more just and equal then that he should
be loved of us.

For first, this is that he does require both in Law and Gospel, Deuteronomy. 6.5.
Mat. ^2.38. It is the first and great Commandment, (as our Savior shows)
and that on which all other acceptable services are grounded.

Secondly, this is that he does deserve, for has not he placed in us that
affection of Love? Is it not a stream of that living Fountain who is Love it
self? 1 Ioh. 4.8. Now, he that plants a vineyard should drink of the wine
thereof (says the Apostle) 1 Cor. 9.7. And God who has planted this affection
in us, should chiefly taste of it himself.

Again, God has manifested his Love to us in giving his only beloved Son
for us, John 3.16. He has begun to us in the cup of Love, 1 John 4.10. Is it
not fit that we should pledge him? It is an elegant Observation of S. Bernard
upon the Canticles; of all the motions and affections of the soul, none is so
reciprocal as Love. If God be Angry with us we may not be angry with him; If
God Reproove us, we may not reproove him; If he Judge us, we may not judge him
etc. but in Love we may, yea ought to reciprocate with God: he loving us, we
ought to re-love him, and woe to us if we answer him not herein in some measure.

Besides, there is nothing in God but deserves love; I will call upon God
(says David) who is worthy to be praised, Psalm. 18.3. So may we say truly; I
will call upon the Lord, who is worthy to be loved. There is nothing that makes
one fit, or worthy to be loved but is to be found in God; as surpassing
Excellency, Majesty, and glory, high Sovereignty, and supreme Authority, free
Grace, and rich Mercy, etc. Thou art all fair my Love, thou art all fair,
there is no blemish in thee. As then the sons of God seeing the daughters of
men that they were fair made choice of them, Genesis 6.1. So beholding this
beauty and fairness that is in God, make we choice of him.

As it is just in respect of God that we should love him; so it is very
profitable for our selves: no love is lost in so doing.

Nihil est qui nihil amat. Plautus.
Difficile est humanam animam nihil amare (says S. Hierom) It is hard that the
soul of man should love nothing. He is to be esteemed as nothing which loves
nothing; something the soul will love. Now there are variety of Objects for
this Affection, (In which respect (it is well observed) that there is no one
word in the Greek tongue which receives so many Compositions as the word (...)
does) But if in case we set our Love on any other Object then the Lord, we
become loosers and not savers. By loving him we are made better both in Grace
and Glory.

You know Love assimulates the heart to the thing loved; Amor unit amantes.
so love of Honor makes the heart proud; Love of Pleasure makes the heart
vicious, and loose, etc. And the Love of God makes us to conform unto his
Image, and be like him in holiness; thus we become better through our loving
God in Grace.

Non clarescit anima sulgore aeternae pulchritudinis nisi hic arserit in
officina Charitatis. Greg. Mor. in Job. l. 18. Doct.
And for Glory you cannot be ignorant of the promises which God has made to
those, and to those only who love him, Romans 8.28. 2 Timothy 4.8. James 1.12. and
2.5. 1 Cor. 2.9. These particulars might be enlarged, but I desire not to be
tedious.

A second Observation from hence is this,

All that Love God do not love him with the like degree of Love.

Both these debtors loved God, (and so in regard of their Affection they were
alike,) but in respect of the degree there was a difference, One loved more
then the other.

Our Saviors Question to Peter prooves thus much. Ioh. 21.15.
Simon son of Jonas love thou me more then these? As if he should have
said, Simon, thou have showed much fervent affection to me above thy fellows,
in that thou have cast thy self into the Sea to come unto me, and by thy
stour Profession, if all should deny me, yet thou never would. And indeed
thou have reason to love me more then the rest, for that more is remitted to
thee then to the rest.

I do not hence conclude, that Peter loved Christ above the rest: But this I
dare say, that it lay betwixt two, Peter and John. All the Disciples loved
Christ entirely (except that child of perdition) but these two excelled in
their loves. And if we must needs enter into a comparison betwixt them, the
odds seentes to be on S. John's side; for doubtless he whom Christ more loved
then the rest, he either found, or made him more thankful then the rest. The
ground of our Saviors love could be no other then Grace; and he who has the
greatest measure of Grace must needs love him most, who is the fountain of
Grace. Ille in amore Dei major est, qui ad ejus amorem plurimos trabit. Greg.
in Hom. Majer est in amore Dei, qui plures traxerit ad amorem Dei. Bern de
dilig. Deo.
Besides his Works prove it, for he followed him boldly to the Highpriests
hall; he never denied him once, ( Peter did thrice.) He with his mother
attended on him at the cross, and from that day he took the blessed Virgin to
his own home. Nor did ever any of the Twelve breath out so much love, or teach
so much love as S. John did, as appears by the E. pistles which he wrote (made
up of love.) And the last breath which he took, which was this, My little
children love one another.

degree of Love. seeing all do not lay hold with the like degree of Faith
(which is the ground or root of Love) it 1 Timothy 1.5.
is in one degree in one, and in another degree in another; In some it is
weaker, in others stronger, Indeed if we consider Faith, secundam rationem
specificam, in the Essential form, whereby it is specified an differenced
from other habits and virtues; so it is in all Believers alike: But if we
consider it, secundum rationem individualem, as it is inherent in diverse
subjects; so it is in some more, and in others less, and does admit a very
great latitude. In S. Peter may be one degree: In S. Paul another: In S. John
another. Mat. 10.8.
Hence it was that our Savior said to the Centurion. in Caperuaum, Mat 15.28.
Mat. 6.30. and 8.26. and 14.31.
I have not found so great Faith, no not in Israel: And to the woman of Canaan,
O woman great is thy Faith. And to the Disciples, O ye of little Faith. It
being thus with Faith, can we expect to find it otherwise with Love?

strength of Faith, height of Love, even in novices and babes in Christ, as
(they pretend to be) in themselves, and not finding it, presently and
peremptorily conclude, that there is nothing in such a heart savouring of
sincerity

Me thinks such might do well to remember, 1 John 2. Romans 14 3.
First, that there are both Babes and grown men in the Church, both strong and
weak. All are not of a like age in Christ, nor of a like standing in his
School; nor have they had a like experience of Gods Love and goodness. And
will any one expect that from one of yesterday, which he does from a Scholar
of five years standing? Secondly, they might do well to cast back their eyes
to their own estate, at their first entrance into Christian practice: so they
may find, the horned Bull was once a sucking Calfe; and the great Oak that
now spreads so fair, and far, was once a little Acorne.

Thirdly, they do not well to forget that Caesar's Image is not only seen in
his Coin of gold, but in his silver penny; and that this degree of love
(though weak) is also the gift of God, and not to be despised, Zach. 4.10. 1
Cor. 1.11. and 3.1. He that made the Elephant made the Ant; the Fly as well as
the Eagle; the poorest worm which creepes on the earth, as well as the most
glorious Angel, is the work of Gods hands, and he looks to be glorified in
his least works as well as greatest.

Lastly, Mat. 12.20.
They might do well to imitate him, who quenches not the smoking flax, nor
breaks the bruised reed; but gives his children the testimony of their
sincerity, notwithstanding their. infirmities; and so hearken to that advice of
the Apostle, Romans 14.1. Him that is weak in the faith receive, but not to
doubtful disputations.

Give the humble Daysey leave to grow, though it sprout not up to that height
as does the Marigold. And let not him that joyneth the frame, despise him that
heweth the Timber or makes the pins; who so has greatest degree of grace, let
himuse it to Gods glory, but no way despise his weak brother, who comes
far short of his scantling.

sick of Love. God takes in good part a growing and increasing love which may
be attained.

First, by enlarging our Communion with God both in Public and Private duties.
Strangeness you know breeds an overlinesse with men, so with God. The nearer
the fire, the greater the heat; speak often to God by Prayer, hear him
again speaking unto you by his Word and Spirit; Cant. 5.9. and 6.1.
Come frequently to his Table, feast often with him; seek him up in the Company
of his Saints. Such is the loveliness of his Person, as that the oftener we see
him the more shall we love him.

Secondly, by weaning our hearts more and more from this world, you know
superfluous branches draw the sap from the top boughs, and the love of the
world, 1 Ioh. 2.15.
draws the love of God out of our hearts, as we find in Demas, Magna res amor,
fi ad suu^ recurrit principium, si san crigini red litur, fi resusus suo sonti
semper ex eo sumat, unde jugiter fluat. Bern. Sup. Cant. Ser 30.
2 Timothy 4.9.

That is most active which is most elevated and separated form earthly parts.
The Physician distills his simples into waters; thereof he make extraction and
quintissences which are operatively strong; still the more elevated a materia,
the more strong a thing is; Thus is it with our love, the more heavenly it is,
the more lively and full of vigor it is. Hercules cannot conquer Anteus till
he had lifted him up above the Earth his Mother.

Thirdly, carefully observe and call to mind the many and sweet experiences you
have of Gods love and favor; The more plentiful our apprehension is of Gods
love to us, the more will our hearts be enlarged to love him again; Who so is
wise and will observe these things even they shall understand the loving
kindness of the Lord, Psalm. 107.42, 43. Hence it was that David did so gather
upon God when he was to encounter with Goliath, 1 Samuel 17.36. and at other
times, Psalm. 61.2, 3. and 63.7. and 71.5, 6, 20. and 22.21. and 27.9.10.
Experience being so great a prop of faith, it must needs be a special means
to increase Love.

And to encourage us in seeking after the growth of this grace (as well as of
any other,) forget not how exceeding availeable it is to Perseverance. What was
it that carried the Martyrs so comfortably through fire and flames; and made
them to esteem of Tyrants, as gnats and fleas, Chrys^^^om. 2. de laud. Pauli.
and of torments but as fleabitings (as S. Chrysostom shows?) What made them
so ambitious of Martyrdom? What moved so many from all parts to assemble
together in the days of Valencius, though they knew a special command was
given to the Provost to put all to the sword? What spurred on that woman to
make such have, and all unready with her child in her arms to rush in amongst
the Soldiers, fearing least she should come too late (as she told the
Provost) who asked her the reason of her have, Vtinam fruar bestijs quae mihi
praeparatae sunt, quas and oro veloces mihi esse ad interitum, and alliciamal
comedendum me, ne sicut and alioru^ Martyrum non audeant corpus attingere. Quod
si venire nolucrint ego vim faciamut devo. rar. Ignoscite mihi silioli, quid
mihi prosit ego scio, nunc incipio esse Discipulus Christi: nihil de ijs quae
videntur desiderans, ut Jesus Christum inveniam, Ignis, crux bestiae, co^fractio
ossium, membrorumque divisio, and totius corporis contritio and omnia tormenta
Diaboli in me veniant tantum ut Ciristo fruar, etc. Hierom. lib de viris
illustrib.
and acquainted her with his purpose to put all there present to sudden death.

What made Ignatius so bold, and resolute, that when he heard the Lions roar
for hunger, (to whom he was suddenly to be cast as a prey,) he burst forth into
these speeches, O that I were with the Beasts that are prepared for me, whom I
desire quickly to make an end of me; if they refuse to touch my body, (as
through fear they have absteined from the bodies of other Saints) I will urge
and provoke them to fall upon me. Welcome fire, cross, beasts teeth,
breaking of bones, tearing asunder of members, grinding to powder my whole
body; Let all the Torments which the Devil can devise come upon me, so that I
may enjoy Christ my Love. What made Vincentius so slight the Tyrants
threatenings? Thretten these things (says he) unto your Courtiers and
Carpet-Knights; Racks, Strapadoes, torments are but a play to us. When the
Emperor Valens had banished Basil, and the Tribune threatened death; I would
(said S. Basil) I had any thing of worth, I would bestow it on him that should
cut Basils windpipe. Tiburtius found such inward joys and spiritual raptures
in his sufferings, that when he trod upon live coals, he cried out, Mihi hae
prunae rosae videntur, these live coals seem to me no other then red Roses.
Theodore being cruelly beaten by diverse tormentors (as Eusebius shows) even
from morning to night, (so that such cruelty never was seen,) yet all the
while with a smiling countenance he sang Psalms, which caused Salaptus the
Persecutor to tell Julian the Emperor, that if he dealt thus with the
Christians, it would turn to their glory, but to his shame. Time would fail
to tell of diverse others of later times, who despised fire and faggot; and so
willingly offered up themselves a burnt Sacrifice; as that Boner bid a
Vengeance on them, he thought they took delight in burning. Accustio votum est
and paena saelicitas. Text advers. Gent.
And indeed Tertullian says of his times, that to be accused was the wish of
Christians; and punishment for Christ they counted felicity. Whence I say was
all this boldness, and constancy? What put them on to suffer and did drown
all their Tortures, but the Love of God burning in their hearts? Heb. 11.35.
Revel. 12.11. Strength holds out, when weakness faints by the way, 1 Samuel
30.10.

Quest. But how may I know in what degree or measure the Love of God is in me?

Resp. This is no unprofitable question; It is here made by our blessed Savior
unto Simon, (which may be our next Observation.)

Peter, John 12.15. And no wonder, for he has elsewhere told us; That Iniquity
shall abound and the love of many shall wax cold, Mat. 21.12.

more then these? Is my Love kindling, or burning? Is it in the spark or in
the flame? If we never examine our souls about it, how shall we be stirred
up with diligence to endeavor after a higher pitch, or be able to say that in
any answerable measure we are thankful to God for his many mercies received?
Nay this inconvenience follows upon neglect, that whereas there are
distinctions of Christians in the School of Christ; as some Infants, others
Strong men, others Fathers, as we read, I John ^. we in examining our hearts by
marks and signs (through a mistake of our selves) are marvellously
discouraged, whilst we take those signs which belong to the strong and Aged
and apply them to our selves being Infants and but weak. Nihil tam dutum atque
serreu^ quod non amoris igne vincatur. Aug de Mor. eccl cont. Manich.
To lend a little help therefore to you in this case, know.

First, Enflamed or Burning Love will not be easily quenched; much water, many
floods cannot do it, Cant. 8.7. It is firm and invincible, so that neither
force, nor fraud, Promises nor Persecutions, Height nor Depth; things present
nor things to come shall be able to prevail against it.

Thus Paul's Love was a strong Love, and carried him through all conditions, 2
Cor. 4. and 5.14. Acts 21.13. And so the Love of the Martyrs before mentioned.

S. Chrysostom being in banishment by the means of Eudoxia the Empress, in a
letter he wrote to Cyriacus a Bishop, tells him of his resolution before he was
banished. I thought with my self (said he) that if she will banish me, the
earth is the Lords; if she will saw me asunder, I remembered Isaiah; If drown
me, I thought on Jonah; If stone me, Steven came into my mind; If behead me,
I thought on John the Baptist; If take away my goods, why naked came I into the
world, and naked shall I return. Cant. 8.6.
Thus Love well kindled and in the flame, like death devoures all these fears
like stubble.

It is otherwise with a new-kindled Love: That is willing to suffer for Christ;
but yet in time of danger it hides the head, and dares not be seen. So
Nicodemus, who being a Ruler of the Jews came to Jesus by night, John 3.
as being loath to be discovered. And the Disciples fled from Christ, and left
him alone upon his apprehension. It stands more in desiring and wishing then
action: O that I were able, that I could undergo this or that for Christ my
Savior, etc. This is her language.

Secondly, Love enflamed is still ascending; It has earnest and affectionate
longings after God and to enjoy him. The Passions of this Love are so great, as
that it does overcome a man, and make him sick again, Cant. 2.5. Thus was it
with S. Paul, Phil. 1.23. And so with other of the Saints, 2 Cor. 5.2. But
where Love is weak and in the spark only it is otherwise, indeed they
willingly would enjoy God who truly love him; but still they fear they are not
yet prepared, and therefore cry with David, O spare a little, Psalm. 39.
stay a while; (not for that they love not God, but) for that they are not in
that readiness which they do desire to come to God; So the Bride puts of a
while longer, not out of a dislike of the Bridegroomes person, nor for want of
true Love unto him, but because this lace is not yet set on, nor that garment
finished.

Thirdly, Enflamed Love gives great light. It is like a fired Beacon on a hill,
all the Country take notice of it. Such cannot forbear but they must be
speaking in Gods praise, and admiring every thing that is in him. Cant. 5.9.
The tongue is the Pen of a ready writer. Psalm. 31.23.
It runs over with Gods praises, Psalm. 45.2 and 34. Yea this Love will shine in
all the actions of a man's life as well as sayings, Mat. 5.16. It may be said of
such as have it, in respect of Christ, as it was said of Christ, in respect of
Lazarus, when he wept at his grave; Behold how he loved him! But a weak Love
is like fire raked up in the ashes, it has some heat, but gives little light:
as you may see in Nicodemus and Joseph of Arimathea, who loved Christ yet kept
close till his death. Such imprison the Love of God in their hearts and
mouths, in their course and Calling too too much, which argues their Love to
be (as Lot said of Zoar) but a little one.

And thus much of the Quaere, next follows the Quare, or ground of the Demand
made, [Tell me therefore.]

Therefore
Jewish Rabbis have a saying, that great mountains hang upon the smallest
Iods in the Bible. And S. Chrysostom will not that a Christian shall let go
any syllable in the Scripture, no nor prick nor point without observation. This
little particle (...), questionless will afford us something for our
learning, let it be this, viz.

Love is Loves Lodestone. Doct. Magnes amoris amor.
Therefore (says Christ) seeing both were forgiven, and one forgiven a greater
debt then the other, both loved, but one more then the other.

man and man as you see in Jonathan and David. And it is thus betwixt God and
man, Psalm. 18.1. and 116.1, 8. So says S. John, 1 Epist. 4.9. We love God
because he loved us first.

Learn here the way how to make others Love us, Ego tibi monstrabo amatorium
sine medicamento, sine herba, si amari vis, ama. Sen. Epist 9. Arist. Rhet. l.
2. Nulla major est ad amorem invitatio, quam prevenire ama^tem, and nimis durus
est animus, qui si dilectionem nolebat impendere nolit rependere. Iug. de cat.
without any Love-potion, Spell, or Witchcraft (as Seneca says) Love others
sincerely and entirely; so advises the Poet, ut ameris amabilis esto; of all
men they are most lovely (says Aristotle) that are most loving. He must needs
be of an ill dispo^^tion, who if he will not begin love, and provoke this
affection in another, will not yet repay and answer Love with Love. Yet such
there are as before was noted, and for this the Corinthians are blamed, 2 Cor.
12.15.

Gods kindness has an operative virtue in it, and much affects those who
set their minds upon it. Naturally we have no heat of Love to God in our
hearts, they are frozen and cold; but as iron put into the fire soon becomes
red hot, so upon a due consideration of Gods mercies toward us, our affections
cannot but glow with heat and be much inflamed.

Quest. But is God to be thus loved for his benefits? Is he not to be loved for
himself only? What is this other then a mercenary Love? Aug. Sup. Job. Ser. 3.
Love not for the rewards sake (says S. Austin) but let God be thy reward.

Resp. S. Bernard thus specifies degrees of Loving God. First, when we Love
him ut bonus sit nobis, that he may do us good. Love of this kind is merely
Concupiscentiall or mercenary; Cant. 1.2.
This is the love of Harlots, not Virgins.

Secondly, when we Love God, quia bonus fuit, because he has done us good, and
heaped his benefits on us. This issues from a thankful heart, and is to be
found in Gods children, Psalm. 116. and Psalm. 18.

Thirdly, when we love God, quia bonus in se, Faelicissimam animam quae Deo sic
in Deo meretur affici, ut per unitatem Spiritus in Deo, nibil amet nisi Deum.
2. q 24 Art. 3.
in respect of his own amiable excellencies; of which kind of love he speaks
thus. O thrice happy soul, which by God and his grace art so affected with
God and his Love, that in God, in whom all things are to be had, thou desire
nothing but God himself.

Thomas answers thus, God is to be loved for himself, although he should give
us nothing, Job 13.15. He is ultimus finis, and we may not serve him for an
other end: For, then we should make ultimum finem but medium. But when it is
said we are to Love God for his benefits, (For) notes not the final cause, but
the motive. Romans 12.1.
Now Gods benefits and mercies (in respect of our infirmities) may be motives
(and in Scriptures are used as motives) to stir us up to love him, They may
be ordine prima, but never quoad dignitatem praecipua, for such love is
reproachful and injurious to God, as was theirs, Ioh. 6.26. The reason is,
Propter quod unumquodque amatur, illud ipsum magis amatur, If we love God for
these we love them more then God, and so cessante beneficio cessat amor, when
Gods benefits cease our love will likewise cease.

As for the wicked of the world, they measure all their Religion by their
profit, Mali utuntur Deo ut fruantur mundo Boni utuntur mu^do ut fruantur Deo.
Aug.
and will do nothing but for gain, they use God that they may enjoy the
world, and this indeed is a base and mercenary Love, like that Love which the
Prodigal found from them upon whom he had spent his Patrimony, Luke 15.30. But
the godly use the world that they may enjoy God, and this is the Love of
Virgins. Genesis 24.22, 30.
Thus Rebeckah by means of the bracelets and earings given, was wrought upon
(by Abraham's servant) to hearken to the motion which he made in the behalf of
his Masters son. And by the benefits we receive from Christ a Christian
soul is first brought to be in love with Christ.

Communia. Specialia. Singularia.
Cast your eyes then upon Gods benefits which daily we are made partakers of;
those common to all creatures with us, special to men, singular and peculiar
to good men. Totum mundum dedit (says one) he has given the whole world to
be used by all. Vnicum filium dedit, he has given his Son to be believed in
by all; Amor amorem illius qui amore tui amoris descendit in uterum Virginis,
and ibi a morem suum amori tuo copulavit, humiliando se, sublimando te,
conjungendo lumen suae aeternitatis limo tu^e mortalitatis. Aug. Text.
Quid majus, quid melius daret? What greater or better gift could he give to
the sons of men then his own Son out of his own bosom? Labor to
comprehend with all Saints, what is the height, depth, and breadth of this
Love, Ephesians. 3.18, 19.

Love stands not upon a Quare: why shall I love, what good shall I have by
Christ (as Job 21.15.) such a mercenary baseness cannot enter into so noble a
spirit as a child of God has in him; yet it is his Dilexit me, that sets me
on fire, and whereby our Love is inflamed toward him.

Tell me therefore] q.d. I have acquainted thee with the Motive both had to
love their Creditor: Now having laid down the Case so plain, tell me
[Therefore] thy Opinion. Learn one thing more hence,

After the Judgment is rightly informed, sentence in the case may be passed,
and not before.

Read Deuteronomy. 1.16. In that solemn charge which Moses gives to Judges, (his
designed Deputies) how he advises; first to hear the Controversies of their
Brethren, and have them debated before they be decided. So Judge. 19.30.
Consider of it, take advice and then speak your mind.

Job 12.11. The Ears are the souls Taster, they try words as the mouth
tastes meat: that man can never relish the equity of a cause whose taster is
out of course. Whence it is that Solomon says, The Ear of the wise seeks
information, Pro. 18.15. So did Job's, Job 29.16. And Salomons in hearing the
difference betwixt the two Harlots. S. James wills us to be swift to hear but
slow to speak, James 1.19.

equity of a cause made apparent and evident, before that matters be duly
ripened to the Ear; they are over-suddaine with their lips; Whence it comes to
pass, that they do more hurt with their rashness, (both to themselves and
others) then they can afterward help again by their most mature
deliberation. A wise man concealeth knowledge, but the heart of a fool
utters foolishness.

The Baptist was Vox clamantis, the voice of one crying; He was indeed a most
proper and perfect voice; but before he was borne his Father was dumb and his
Mother hid her self, Pater tacet ex paena, ex verecundia Matter celat,
Chrysologus.
O quanto silentio vox nascitur (says one) The Father holds his peace by
punishment, the Mother hides her self for modesty, O with how great silence
was the Voice borne! It is from silence that knowledge is borne in the mouth,
and from silence that learning is bred in the lips.

In Nature, you know the Tongue is hedged in with doors, and shut, as David
shows, Psalm. 141.3. And the Ears are always open, and yet (I know not how
but) so it is, the Tongue gets out to answer, before the Ear has received
that to which an answer should be given. And hence it comes to pass, that like
those young women, who through overhasty marriages, instead of replenishing
the world with living children, they fill graves with Abortives and untimely
births; So do these Macedonian Judges, who answer hastily before the Tale be
ended; Out of over quick apprehension they run into many errors, showing
folly and procuring shame unto themselves, Prove. 18.15. Stay till the time come
and then tell on.

answered and said, I suppose that he to whom he forgave most; And he said
unto him, thou have rightly judged.

Here we have the case resolved: where first the Sentence passed by Simon, and
then Ratified by our Savior.

answered and said] Had our Savior in plain terms asked Simon whether he or
that sinner did love him most? The Pharisee could not for shame but have stood
upon his reputation; and in scorn of the comparison have protested his
exceeding respects to Christ. Now ere he be aware by this convictive way of
Parable, he is brought to pass sentence against himself on her side, whom
before he had condemned. You see then

A discreet and wise reproof is not in vain to an honest heart, it causes a
self condemning.

Job 6.25. 2 Kings 5.11. and 2 Samuel 12.1.4.

There is an excellent Parable tending to this purpose, Pro. 25.11. A word
fitly spoken, Sermo est imago animi.
etc.] Words are the Pictures of the mind, and speaking is the drawing of them
with that Pensil the Tongue; now as in Pictures the beauty of them is the
comely proportion of the parts, and the graceful fitting of the colors to the
parts, the artificial placing both of colors and parts: so in words, the
praise of them is the due proportion of them to the persons; the fit coloring
of them to the matter to be delivered; the right ordering them to Time and
Place wherein they are spoken. If these be observed in speech, then (as the
Original is) the words go upon their wheels, and pass along like a
Triumphant Chariot: whereas if these circumstances be omitted, they pass, as
Pharaohs Chariots when the wheels were off, dull, and heavily. Then verse. 12.
As an earing] An earing is fastened to the ear, and that it may be fastened it
pierces the ear, and being so fastened, it is an ornament to the whole face,
So likewise is a Reproof to an obedient ear. First, it pierces it, and is
received willingly into it. Secondly, it is fastened upon it, so that it stays
with it. Thirdly, it is an ornament to a man's whole life, which is reformed by
it. But then it must be a wise Reproover, such a one as can fit his Reproof to
the Ear of him that is faulty, and hang it on hansomely with due consideration
of circumstances; as Nathan did on David's, 2 Samuel 12. Otherwise it is no
earering of gold, but brass, which cankers the ear, and either makes it to be
worse in wilful naughtiness then before it was; or else if it be acknowledged
to be of gold and the Reproof true, yet it displeases, and is not accepted
with thanks, which hinders the operation of it. Such a brass earing was
Shemeis railing, it could not be kindly taken; The best ear that is, will
scarce receive a Reproof foolishly given.

The sinners of Sion are not afraid (as speaks the Prophet:) They walk with a
haughty neck, and will not be reprooved; And yet we need not despair
(altogether) of good success, if we perform this work aright, and furnish
our rebukes with cunning Arguments Rhetoric is useful, but that may not enter
the Lists, without some weapons borrowed from the Arsenall of Logic. That
Maxim in Philosophy would be remembered, The will wills no more then the
understanding understands. Checks (as one speaks) have a kind of signiorie
over the outward members; they may fetter the legs, or manacle the hands from
some outward performances: but to toil the Will, and control the Affections,
Reason it self must chide, and the Intellectual Faculties must be satisfied.

It is not always the sweetness and enticement of sin it self delighting us,
that causes man's nature to be so froward and repiningly to receive
Instruction; but many times for that Reproof proceeding from some private and
sinister respects, is not done with that discretion that it might be. The
Preacher seeks not out acceptable words, he sets not in order his Parables and
Proverbs: whence it is that they are not as goades and nails fastened by the
Masters of Assemblies, (as Solomon shows, Eccles. 12.9, 10, 11.) though they
be the words of Truth.

That the words of wind then may have an end, which young indiscretion often
powers out in greater number then in weight. Job 16.3.
And that we may keep the true pattern of wholesome words, 1 Timothy 1.13. 2
Cor. 12.16.
whereby we may do good; Pray we to God for skill, and wisdom, that we may
(as S. Paul speaks of himself, though in another sense) take the sinner by a
holy craft and guile.

God has made us Fishers of men, and we should learn of him, so to bait our
hooks, that they may be most likely to take. To fish without a bait, is but
to entangle all in the weeds, to fish with an unpleasing bait, is to fish with
Peter all night and take nothing; but to fish with a proper bait, under which
we hide the hook, and so stand close undiscerned is the way to take, as Paul
took his keeper.

God has made us Stewards of his household, and provided victuals for his
Family, and appointed us to dress it; If we do not so Cook it, as to fit
the palates of those for whom it is intended, we loose our Cost and Labor.

We are Physicians, and must so wrap up our pills, that they may kindly work
in the bottom of the belly.

Wormwood is an herb of it self wondrous bitter, and yet (as some say) being
well distilled, the water thereof does not only loose the sent of the herb,
but also the bitterness in taste: Correction and Reproof is like Wormwood,
bitter of it self to nature, it does no whit please the palate; but when the
gentle fire of discretion has ordered it aright, it becomes sweet and
wholesome, like the bitter waters of Jericho after Elisha had cast salt into
them. 2 King 2.21.
Yea Discretion is that salt which does season and preserve the Sacrifice of
our Lips. And therefore (as in another sense it was commanded, Levit. 2.13.)
Let not any oblation be made without it.

Next it serves to admonish you our Hearers, that you profit by our Reproves,
so as to lay your hands upon your mouths (as speaks the Prophet) and be
convinced. Conscience will convince you first or last, it is better to have a
saving conviction in this life, then a desperate conviction in hell hereafter.

Our words are like the Arrows which Ioash shot; and Gods Spirit is like the
Prophets hand to guide the Arrow, which oftentimes pierces the soul of
sinners, and wounds them with grief unto the heart. But what was said of Ioash
his Arrows may be said of ours, The Arrow of the Lords deliverance: And
therefore it were good if Hearers would open their breasts, Orig. Homil. 2. in
^ant, Greg. Nyssen in Hom. 4. in Cant.
and (as Origin speaks) Transfigendum praeberent hujusmodi jaculis, offer
themselves to be pierced with these Arrows. The wounds which they make are
praeclara vulnera, excellent wounds, by which, not Death but Life enters into
the soul. It is your Vices that we shoot at, not your selves.

It is storyed of one Achon the Cretian, that when a Dragon had taken away his
son, he with his Arrow killed the Dragon, but did not hurt his son, his
natural affection putting that Art into him, (in which respect it was said of
him, Ars erat esse Patrem) so shall we study to show our selves to be Fathers
to you in our Love, whilst we kill the brood of the red Dragon. your vices in
you, no way hurting you through any ill Affection. And so I pass from this
general to another Observation which may be made from the Nature of Simons
Answer, which was in sincerity and according to the Truth, (as our Savior
testifies) though to his own conviction. Whence we may be taught to do the
like

When we tell, then the Truth must be told, though it make against our selves.
When we Answer we must Answer truly.

These are the things you shall do, speak every man Truth unto his neighbor,
(says God, Zach. 8.16.) And again, Cast off lying, and speak every man.
Truth unto his neighbor, Reason, For we are members one of another, Ephesians.
4.25. You know in the Body of man, one member will not lie unto another.
Theodor. in Ephesians 4.14.
The Hand will not he in telling what it touches; The Tongue will not lie in
telling what it tastes: The Eye will not lie in telling what it sees, but
every member is a true witness to his neighbor: So should it be in the
Politic body of Government and Society, and in the Mystical body of the
Church and Christianity, seeing we are members of the same.

It was a worthy speech of Justin Martyr (speaking of the persecuted
Christians. In nostra est potestate, ut cum inqui^imur, negemus: sed vivere
nolumus me^daciter quicquam loquentes. Just Martyr. Apol. 2. pro Christ.
) It is in our power, (says he) when we are sought for and examined, to deny
what we are, and what we believe, but we will not live to speak any thing
untruly.

Quest. But am I always bound, when I speak, to tell the Truth? may not a man
sometimes conceal or tell contrary to the Truth, if I see my self or
neighbor may thereby be profited and helped?

Resp. This we answer in these three Conclusions.

Affirmatio veritatis obligat semper, sed non ad semper, sed pro loco and
tempore.
First, The Truth is never to be denied by us. It was Peter's sin which he
so bitterly bewailed, Mat. 26.70.

Secondly, An Untruth is never to be affirmed. The Reasons we shall give anon
in the Application.

Thirdly, The Truth is not always necessarily to be professed and told. Vno
eodemque silent^o firmat errorem, qui lo quendo non astruit veritate^ Fulgen.
Qui veritatem occultat, and qui medaciu^ profert, uterque reus est. Ille, quia
prodesse non vult; iste quia nocere desiderat Anselm. in Epist a ^oro^^h. Non
solum prod^^or est veritatis, qui me^dacium pro verit^te loquitur, sect qui non
libere pronuncia^ veritatem, quam pronunctare oporte^, aut non libere defendit
veritatem, quam defend^re oportet, Chrysostom. in Mat. Use.


Sometimes (indeed) it is necessary, as when Gods glory, our neighbors good,
or our own duty requires it at our hands; in such also he that hides the
Truth, and he that tells Lies are both alike culpable before God. Thus in
Cases spiritual, as when we are called to an account of our Faith and
Religion, we are bound to a constant profession of the Faith we hold, 1 Pet.
3.15. Mat. 10.32, 33. And in Cases civil, when a man is called in place of
Judgment as a witness to the Truth, Exodus 20. Truth must be spoken.

Sometimes it may be unseasonable, as when there being no necessity of uttering
it, (neither in respect of Gods glory, our neighbors good, or our own duty)
it is joined with our own or our neighbors damage. In this case the Truth
may, yea ought to be concealed in whole, as Mat. 26 63. Mark 14.61. and 15.5.
Luke 23.9. John 19.9. Or in part, as 1 Samuel 16.2. Ier. 38.26, 27.

This makes nothing for the defense of such as are enemies to Truth, crossing
it by flat denialls, or Jesuitical Aequivocations. Both which are defended and
practiced by Papists, and too much in use amongst our selves.

Concerning Lying. Three sorts of Lies the Schoolmen make.

First, such as are hurtful and pernicious, Perniciosum. Genesis 34.16.
Officiosum. Exodus 1.18. Iocosum. Hosea 7.3. Finis perniciosi est laedere,
officiosi prodesse jocosi delectare Quomodo Deus Pater genuit Filiu^ veritate^.
sic Diabolus lap^us genuit quasi filium me^dacium. Aug. in Joan.
told of spite to hurt others either in Body Goods, or Good-name. So did
Simeon and Levi lie to the Sichemites.

Secondly, Helpful and officious, told for the gain and profit of others, as
were the Lies of the Hebrew Midwives, Exodus 1.18. and of Rahab the Harlot,
Josh. 2.4.

Thirdly, Such as are delightful and merry, told for sport, pastime, and the
pleasure of others. Of such we read, Hos. 7.3. Now the Pernicious Lie they
only condemn, but the Officious and the Merry Lie they hold either to be no
sin at all, or else but Venial, not Mortal.

But first, No Lie is of the Truth (says S. John, 1 Epist. 2.21.) How shall we
answer him if that be true.

Secondly, Every Lie is a transgression of the Law, Levit. 19.11. And therefore
sin.

Thirdly, Every Lie proceeds from the Devil, who is a Lier, and the Father
of Lies, Ioh. 8.44.

Fourthly, Lying (of what sort soever) God abhorres, Pro. 6.17, 19 and 12.22.
And does severely punish, both here, Psalm. 5.7. Pro. 19.5. Acts 5.5, 10. And
hereafter, Revel. 21.27. and 22.15.

Besides it is against Christianity, Civil society, and overthrows the use
of speech; In which respect, Heathens themselves have abhorred it. Wherefore we
make hold to conclude with S. Austin, No Lies are just, all are sins, yet we
deny not but the pernicious Lie is the worst of them all.

Concerning Aequivocation; A^g. Enchir ad Laurent. ca. 18. and 22. and in lib
de mendac. c 14. Genesis 3.5. 1 Samuel 28.19.
(first taught by the Devil to hide his Ignorance, in what he could not
reveal, and since studied by Jesuits to hide their knowledge in that they can
and ought to reveal,) this they teach, that a man framing to himself a true
proposition, when he is asked a Question, may conceal thereof as much as he
sees good. As for Example, If this Question should be put unto a Papist, If the
Pope should come to invade this Realm, Whether would you take part with the
King or with the Pope. He framing this Answer in his mind, I will take the
Kings part, If the Pope will command me so to do; may answer, I will take the
Kings part, concealing the other part [If the Pope will command mee], thereby
to delude the Examiner. In like manner, if a man have a horse or money, Navar.
in Manual. c 12. Nunb. 18. Et Peter Gin nar in Compend. Navar. c. 12. Numb. 18.
and is importuned by a neighbor to lend, or give either. He framing this
proposition in his mind, that he has neither horse nor money to give or
lend, may safely say, yea swear, that he has neither horse nor money,
reserving the other part [To give or lend] in his own mind.

This (they say) is no Lying, for that the Aequivocator speaks a Truth in his
own meaning, and in the sight of God, (which always (say they) he must do,
when he uses this evasion; otherwise he should lie, if he had not some true
sense reserved in his mind.) And therefore Parsons advises, Mitigat. cap. 10
Numb. 22.
Let him that would use this benefit of Aequivocation, be wary and careful
that he mentally reserveth some secret clause, which being added to the words
spoken do make the whole compound to be true, he may deny what Truth he
pleases; either alone, or before company; either being asked, or of his own
accord, Sanchez. op Moral. l. 3. c. 6. Numb. 15. In verbis hune in modum
prolatis merum and nudum mendacium continetur. Nam. 1. Si rem qui hoc aut illud
fecit, diceret se secisse, test imonium ejus esset verum: ergo si negat se
secisse lestimoniam ejus est falsum, id est mentitur. 2. Hoc pacto reus ille
dicit and testatur non tantum quod falsum est sed etiam qu^d ille sentit and
novit esse falsum, quod est tam ormaliter quam materialiter, id est complete
mentiri. Ames. de Cons.
(says Sanchez.) A man may swear that he did not do something, which indeed
he did do; understanding within himself some other thing then that he did do,
or some other day then that in which he did do it, or any other addition that
is true. And in so doing, a man does neither Lie nor forswear,

But indeed these Aequivocall Propositions are but Lying Assertions; For if we
sever what is expressed from that which is reserved in the mind, it is a
formal Lie.

2. The Devil himself acknowledges it to be lying, 1 King. 22.6. when (in
his Prophets) he was demanded by Ahab concerning his going to war against
Ramoth-Gilead and the success thereof, 1 King. 22, 6.
he answered, Go the Lord will deliver it into the hands of the King: But into
the hands of what King he told not, 1 King. 22 22.
that he reserved to himself; and yet he confessed that he was a lying spirit
in the mouths of those Prophets in so saying.

3. This overthrowes all commerce and humane society one with another. Dicere
(non feci) quod tamen feci, licet cum hac mentis limitations (ut tibi
significem) non est aequivocatio sed mendacium. Sotus de just. and jure. l. 5.
q. 6. a. 2.
What reservation is in a man's mind when he speaks, or swears, I know not,
and therefore cannot tell how I may believe him; nay what lie is ordinarily
told without some mental reservation.

4. They should not forget how their Vulgar Latins read that place, Eccles.
37.23. Qui sophistice loquitur odibilis est; he that speaks aequivocally or
Sophistically, i.e. Lyingly, is worthy to hated, and also what some of their
own side think of it.

Object. We find that Saint^ and holy men have used it, Si verba qui bus utimur
significatione sua and communi hominum usu ambigua non sunt nec habent nisi
unicum ta^tummodo sen sum, ca usurpare debemus eo sensu quem reddunt, nec licet
vobi^ etiamfi contra jus fasque omne int^rogemur aliquid mentis cogitatione in
aliud detorquere, nunquam enim sas est mentiri: at is mentitur qui verba aliter
accipit atque ipsa significant. Nihil tam falsum esse potest, quod non queat ab
omni mendacio liberari si aliquid arbitratu nostro tacitum retineam^s. Azor
lib. 11. cap 4.
as Abraham in saying of his wife, she is my Sister, Genesis 20.2. Jacob in
saying, I am Esau thy firstborn, Genesis 27.19. Samuel in saying, I come to
offer Sacrifice, 1 Samuel 16.1. So Ier. 38.26. And to be short, we have the
Example of Christ himself, whose example is without exception, Luke 24.28.
Mark 13.32. Ioh. 7.8.

Resp. There are two sorts of Aequivocation. First Logical; Secondly, Mental
or Iesuiricall.

Logical is, when a speech is figurative, and does carry a double sense,
Quicquid figurate sit aut dicitur non est mendacium. Aug in Cant.
and may be construed two ways; either in regard of the words signification,
as Luke 9.60. Let the dead bury the dead, that is, those who are spiritually
dead bury those who are naturally dead. Or else in regard of their Plating in
the saying or sentence whereby they may yield diverse meanings.

Now this kind of Aequivocation may be used; First, by way of Conviction, To
convince a senseless sinner who will not believe the truth when it is plainly
told him. So 2 King. 8.10. Elisha said unto Hazaell, Go and say unto him, thou
may certainly recover, howbeit the Lord has showed me, thou shall
certainly die.

Secondly, Aliud est men. tiri, aliud est verum ^ccultare; ficut aliud est
falsum ^icere, atiud est verum tacere. Vt si quis non velit al mortem hominem
prodere, paratus esse.
For the concealing of some part of the Truth, which the Hearer should not
know. So 1 Samuel 16.1, 2. but here nothing said untrue; that was a Truth which
Samuel spoke though not all the Truth.

Thirdly, For the discovery of some further truth, as Mat. 9.24. and Ioh.
11.11. Our friend Lazarus sleeps, which ambiguous speech was used for the
profit of the Hearer, that they might know Death was but a sleep; debet verum
occultare, non falsum dicere, ut neque, prodeat, neque mentiatur, neque occidat
animam suam pro corpore alterius. Aug super Psalm. 5.
nor are these sayings Lies, for as much as that which a man conceives in his
mind agrees with one of the significations of the word, though he that
hears it conceives it to be otherwise. But if in case such Logical
Aequivocation tends to the perverting of Religion or Justice it is not lawful
to be used.

Gods Saints have used Logical Aequivocations, so has Christ, and so do the
Scriptures, but never Jesuitical aequivocation. For in all their speeches
(without any mental reservation) there was Truth. So was there in the saying
of Abraham, Samuel, Jeremiah and the rest, take them as they are spoken by
them, and they are true.

The like may be said of our Saviors speeches, he knew not as he was man of
the day of judgment. And for his seeming to go forward and leave his
Disciples going to Emaus; he would so have done if he had not been
overimportuned: And for that of John 7.8. His time was not yet come to go up.
As for those reservations which God himself uses, Isah 38.1. Jonah 3.8. etc.
(likewise objected by them) God has expressed himself in Scriptures, that he
would have his threatenings conditionally understood, as Ier. 18.7, 8, Ezekiel.
33.13. So that these exceptions are not secret reservations, nor kept in Gods
breast from the Hearers, as they would have us believe.

Object. But if God should not allow us some aequivocating tricks and
reservedwiles (says Parsons) he should deal worse with men then he has done
with beasts; he has granted unto the Hare and Fox their leaps and turnings,
their winding and returnings into the same path to deceive the dogs, etc.

Resp This Objection has more with then wait, God allows us as much of the
Serpent as of the Dove, Prudentia sine simplicitate malitia, simplicitas sine
prudentia, siultitia.
Mat. 10.16. But not severed from the innocence of the Dove; United they are
Commodious, Parted dangerous. Wit without innocence will offend others;
innocence without wit will not defend our selves. A large and full discovery of
this new art of Lying, who so please may read D. Mortons Confutation of
Aequivocation, M. Henry Masons Treatise of the same subject. Ames. de Cons. l.
5. cap. 53. M. John Weems his divine Exercit. on Command. 9. Exercit. 3. Let me
add only a word or two of Exhoration.

cast of all Lying (wherein the world says, that our Nation and people exceed
the very Cretians) And learn to speak the truth in our hearts, which is the
note of him that shall dwell in Gods holy hill. Psalm. 15.
That we may be graced with Christ's Ecce, as was Nathaniel, Ioh. 1.47. Behold a
true Israelite in whom there is no guile. And have comfortable testimony, that
we shall be numbered amongst those hundred forty and four thousand, which will
follow the Lamb whethersoever he goes, being redeemed from amongst men, in
whose mouth no guile was found. For this end consider.

Truth is a debt we owe to God. 1. By the Band of Creation; For he made our
speech and framed in us a Tongue to speak, requiring Truth to be the guider of
our speech.

2. By the Band of Filiation; that God whom we call Father is the God of Truth:
Psalm. 31.5.
And he that is of God will speak the Truth.

3. By the Band of Redemption. For he that has redeemed us is Via, Ioh. 14.6.
Vita, Veritas, The Way, Truth, and Life; and who so looks to have life by
him, must follow the way of Truth, Ephesians. 4.15.

4. By the Band of Sanctification; For the holy Spirit, that sanctifies us is
the Spirit of Truth, and requires in our sanctification that we should have
our Loins girt about with Truth, Ephesians. 6.14 In these respects we should have
great care that we make no forfeiture of the Truth in any case whatever. God
loves it in the inward parts, Psalm. 51.

S. Gregory expounding these words of Job, Greg. Mer. in Job. cap. 27.
My Lips shall surely speak no wickedness, and my Tongue shall utter no
deceit, observes thus much; that a holy man, Pejus est men dacium meditari quam
loqui; nam loqui plerumque praecipi tationis est, med^tari vero studiosae
pravita tu. Mor. 8.
to the end he may prefectly cleave unto the Truth, suffers not himself
either of purpose or of rashness to lie; for every Lie is greatly to be
avoided, though there be some greater then other, as that which is studied and
meditated on (as is aequivocating.)

I spare to tell you what the Heathens have thought of this sin of Lying, and
how they have punished it. Plutarch acquaints us with a Law that Artaxerxes
made. The Liers Tongue should be pierced, triplici clavo, with three nails.
And Aelian ( lib. 4. cap. 1.) tells us that amongst the Indians, he that was
thrice convicted of a Lie was enjoined perpetual silence, and barred from all
office. De mulier. Septies.
I conclude this point with that which S. Hierom writes of a young man and
woman, who were suspected of Adultery, and examined by Torments to confess it.
The young man (being grievously tortured) confesses against himself to be
freed from further pain, and so was put to death. But the woman being
innocent, could not be forced by all those Torments used to tell a lie, but in
the midst of all her sufferings thus spoke, Non ideo me negare velle, ne
peream, sed ideo mentiri nolle ne peccem; mori and ego cupio, sed non tanquam
Adultera, That she did not deny least she should die, but she refused to
Lie, least she should sin; she was willing to die, but she would not die
as an Adulteress.

Thus abide were firm and resolute, still to say the Truth; holding that for a
firm Principle in Divinity; we may not do evil that good may come of it. As
for those who say we may, their damnation is just, Romans 3.8.

Thus much by occasion of the honest and sincere Answer made by Simon, though
to his own Conviction; now for the Sentence which was given by him.

I suppose that he to whom he forgave most.] You see then

The more mercy in the forgiver, the greater Love (may be supposed) is in the
forgiven.

We read what S. Paul was, (by his own confession) before Conversion. A
Blasphemer, a Persecutor, and injurious, etc. 1 Timothy 1.13. But (as he says)
he obtained mercy, and the grace of God was exceeding abundant to him, with
Faith and Love in Christ, this put him on, to labor more abundantly then the
rest, as is showed, 1 Cor. 15.10. so that the grace bestowed on him was not in
vain. If you ask the Reason, why should S. Paul take more pains then all the
rest? the Answer is, The Love of Christ constrained him. And why should Love be
stronger in him then in the rest? the Answer is at hand, for that he did thus
judge that he received greater mercy in the pardoning of his debt then the
rest. This is showed likewise by our Savior in the Application of this
Parable, verse 47. Where we shall speak more fully of this point, which yet
here I could not let pass without some useful Observation.

Simon could not but suppose that he must needs love most, who had most
remitted him. But these speak by hearsay, as strangers do, of that they
never knew, nor had experience of themselves. Assuredly the sense of Gods mercy
in the pardoning and forgiveness of sin, has that force to restrain a man
from looseness of life, and to knit the heart in all true Love and Obedience
unto God, as nothing more in the world has. Thy loving kindness is before
mine eyes, (says David, Psalm. 26.3.) therefore I have walked in thy Truth.

The very scope of S. John's Epistle is to further our Assurance of Gods Love,
as appears, 1 Epist. 1.4, 5. and 5.13. And how far this is from opening a
way to looseness of life and liberty, the Apostle shows, Chap. 2.1. These
things (says he) I write to you that you sin not; and if in case you do
sin, the Assurance of Gods Love is the readiest way to recover you. For it
follows, If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father; and then,
Chap. 3.3. is added, He that has this hope, and knows what manner of Love the
Father bears him, purifieth himself as he is pure: So then, that man that is
careless of purifying himself, has no true hope that he is made partaker of
this special Love.

Common, Ordinary, and Superficial. And the unsoundnesse of that kind of Love
so wrought may appear in these particulars.

First, in that it is but Mercenary, for when God gives over giving them, they
give over loving him. This is that love of Harlots, which I have before
mentioned.

Secondly, the Love so wrought has no force to restrain from sin, nor put
on to obedience; For all this kind of Love that many so much boast of: They
bless themselves in their hearts (as Moses speaks) saying, I shall have
peace though I walk in my own imaginations and stubbornness, etc. Deuteronomy. 28.19.

But the Love wrought in our hearts through the Apprehension of this special
mercy is of another kind: It does cause a man to love God for his own
goodness and excellencies, Psalm. 73.25. Phil. 3.8.
and makes a man to give God the highest seat in his heart, it puts a man
on to keep Gods Commandments (as before we heard) and makes those
Commandments easy, which were, and are cross to our natures; Wherefore we
may not ground our Comfort, or Love on outward and Temporal blessings, but on
this special and particular Love, which God shows to his Elect in the
discharging of that debt of sin owing.

I deny not but these Temporal and Common favors are to those that are in
Christ, Signs and Pledges of his special Love, and that by them the godly are
confirmed in the Assurance of Gods eternal Love toward them, Genesis 33.10.
Psalm. 41.11. and 18.19. And elsewhere David gathers upon God from his common
goodness that he showed to all Creatures, Psalm. 36.6, 7. And our Savior
wills his Disciples to grow assured and confident of Gods special Love unto
them from the Observation of his general goodness and providence toward the
Fowls of the air and Lillies of the field, Mat. 6.26. But yet the Observation
of Gods goodness to us in spiritual things; as in the pardon and forgiveness
of our many and foul sins, will do it much better; and therefore if thou will love God as thou ought to love him, pray with David, Psalm. 17.7. Show
me thy mavelous loving kindness, and make me able to see and know that thou
love me with thy mavelous Love. And Psalm. 106.4. Remember me O Lord with
the Favor thou bear unto thy people, O visit more with thy salvation. As if
he should say, it is not the love thou bear to strangers or hired servants
in thy house can content my heart, It is the special Love thou bear to
thine own dear children, that I seek after.

Know that the Church desires to be kissed with the kisses of Christ's mouth,
Cant. 1.1. A kiss is a natural Symbol of Love, and yet it must be a kiss of
Christ's Mouth, not Hands that the Church desires. In outward Benefits God
gives us his Hands to kiss; but the breath of his Word and Spirit which
assures us of the forgiveness of our sins is the kiss of Christ's mouth: This
the Spouse desired, and this Mary obtained at parting, as you may find in the
latter end of this Parable, which made her love so much, as appears, verse 47.
To which place I refer the prosecution of this point: And now come to our
Saviors Approbation of this Sentence.

And he said unto him, Thou have rightly Judged.
Simon (as we know) was a Pharisee, so says the Text, verse 36. One of the
Pharisees desired him to eat, etc. And how corrupt the Pharisees were in their
Doctrines and Tenants, appears by that our Savior says, Mat. 5. and 15.4, 5,
6. and Chap 23. Yet here our Savior approves of this Pharisees Opinion, and
commends his Judgment. Whence learn we,

To receive the Truth who-ever brings it, and to take it up from whose mouth so
ere it fall. See Mat. 23.2, 3. Phil. 1.17, 18. Tit. 1.13.

Truth is Gods, not Man's. The penny with Caesar's stamp is his, though it be in
the kennell, or be found in a foul clout.

Secondly, God has thought good to send unto his Church men as well
unsanctified, as Sanctified: Balaam was a Prophet and is sent with a Message to
Baalack: Saul is amongst the Prophets. Judas sent forth with the rest of the
Disciples; were not these to be heard, how can we think they should ever have
been sent?

Thirdly, The Word (in whose mouth soever) shall not return in vain, but
accomplish that work whereunto God has sent it, Isa. 55.10, 11. It is out of
a wicked man's mouth a savor of death to some, and why not of life to others?

Fourthly, God is offended when his Ordinances are contemned, though it be
through the profane lives of Priests. See an Instance most remarkable, 1 Samuel
2.17. compared with Chap. 4 10.

Bearer. Do we like the Sun ere the worse because it breaks forth of a dark
cloud? or distaste the fruit that is served in a wooden dish? Will a child
refuse a letter or token because a durtie Carrier was the bringer? or any
beggar contemn an Alms because a lame Steward gives it out of the purse of
his rich Master? Sampson did not disdain the honey-combe, because he found it
uncleanly laid in the Lions Carcass: and though he, (being a Nazarite) might
not eat of any thing that savoured of Legal impurity, yet he ventures on the
honey-combe in the belly of the Beast. And so to Elijah it was all one, whether
an Angel or a Raven brings him his dinner. Who so disdaines Gods graces
because they find them in ill vessels, or refuse his mercies because brought
them by unclean livers are more nice then wise.

Quest. But are scandalous Ministers able to do any good? How can we expect a
blessing on their labors being wicked?

Resp. First, consider what excellent works God has effected by bad Agents:
What Divine Parables did God utter by Balaams mouth? And what curious works did
God make about his Temple by the hands of Tyrians? It makes for the praise (you
know) of a good Limmer to draw a curious line with a bad Pensil: The worser the
Instrument, the greater Gods glory.

Secondly, Nisi Spiritus Sanctus adsit cordi audientis otiosus est sermo
doctoris, nemo ergo do centi homini tribuat, quod ex ore docentis intelligit,
quia, nisi intus sit qui doceat, doctoris li^gua ex^erius in vacuum laborat.
Greg. Hom 30. in Evang. and Mor. 27.
the whole work of a Minister about the salvation of man's soul is External:
He can only preach to the Ear, God (whose Chair is in Heaven) speaks to the
Heart: The Grace which is given them for the work of the Ministry, is not
gratia Iustificantis, a grace of Justification (as some conceive, who think
their Teachers can give the Holy Ghost) (as Simon Magus thought by Simon
Peter,) but it is gratia aedificationis, the grace of edification, as the
Apostle shows, Ephesians. 4.12. nor is it gratia gratum faciens, (as the
Schoolmen speak) a peculiar grace given them for the salvation of themselves;
but gratia gratis data, a grace given them for the good of others. So that in
this Outward work a bad man may go as far, and do as much; bring as many
powerful and prevailing Arguments as the best, and be a means to save others
yet themselves perish.

You know how it was with the Builders of the Arc, though they built that
which saved others, yet themselves were drowned: And as it happens to many an
unfortunate sinner, who saves his endeared fellow, yet perishes himself in
the stream, so may it be in this case. S. Gregory aptly compares a bad
Minister to the Water in Baptism, which is (in the right use) a means to
convey grace, but it self, out of the use runs down into the hole: So may
they sink to Hell, who yet may be a means to bring thy soul to Heaven: Of
them thou may say as the people of Cicilia did write upon the Tomb of a dead
Viceroy of theirs, (who had been a cruel Oppressor of them) Hic jacet, etc.
qui propter nos homines nostramque salutem descendit ad inferos. Believe it
(what ere you think) it is not the Garment but the Perfume in it, which
diffuseth the sent: The Word borrows not its excellency from any humane
virtue, but from the heart which ponders, and the Spirit which sanctifies.
Quicquid toquimur in Dei nomine imber Dei est: videtis vos qualis terra sitis.
Aug in Psalm. 98.
See (says S. Augustine) what kind of soil you are, the Word is the shower.

Thirdly, were it so that an Unsanctified Minister could not profit the Hearer,
how could we hear any one with comfort? For as much as the Heart is unknown
to us; and in outward shows of sanctity a vile Hypocrite may go as far as
the sincerest Christian: Yea it is an absurdity that lets in Popery the back
way; The goodness of the Priest does bless the Word and the Sacraments (say
the Papists,) I cannot be saved by Hearing, unless the Minister I hear be
also saved (says the overcurious and impatient Protestant) both shake hands in
the same opinion. Doctrina cum omni imperio docetur, quando prius agitur quam
dicatur. Nam doctrinae subtrahit fiduciam, quando conscientia prepedit linguam.
Greg. in Mor.


To say the Truth; he preaches best and with greatest power, whose life and
doctrine preach: Nor is there a Figure in Rhetoric more potent then the good
opinion conceived of the Speaker; Our Hearers conceive of us rather by our
Lives then Doctrine, (as Iovinian did say to the Orthodoxe and Arrian Bishops
contending about the Faith; Of your Learning I cannot so well judge, nor of
your subtle Disputations, but I can observe which of you have the better
behavior.) We loathe (you know) the light of some Candles, in regard of the
stink of the Tallow; and (as Poets feign) Jupiters Adultery did even amongst
his own children discredit his Thunder: But this argues not the Truth uttered
by a profane or wicked person of imperfection; but the stomachs of most
hearers to be of weak digestion, who cannot eat any Cake, but what is of
Thamars baking; no Instruction is availeable or of force with them, but what
proceeds from those of whose inward calling they are persuaded.

Si hene vixerint, eorum est lucrum; si been do^uerint, vestrum; accipite
igitur quod vestrum est, nolite discutere quod alienum est. Chrysostom super illud
Mat. 23. Quaecunque dixer. at vobis.
But let us remember what the blind man recovered said, whether this man be a
sinner or no I know not, one thing I know, he has restored me to my sight:
So, whether this man be converted or no, I know not; this I know, It is the
Truth he brings, and that is mine and for my good, his life is his own. A
leaden pipe may convey water into the garden of God; an Iron Clock acquaint me
how the time goes, and a Crooke-back't Tailor fit my body with a handsome
garment.

In a word, Gods Messengers are his Heralds, their Trade is Honor, they may
help others to Arms and so make Gentlemen, yet themselves be none. Receive
therefore the Truth they bring; and if it should so happen, that any one which
is placed over you should stand in the Pulpit, Numb 27.12.
as Moses stood on Mount Abarim, and show you the way to Canaan; though
themselves enter not, yet bless you God for this direction, and follow it.
What matter is it unto thee, though God puts the key of the prison door into
the hand of a prisoner, so long as it opens the Wicket for thee and sets thee
free?

Next, in that our blessed Savior does not only receive the Answer, but
likewise Commends his Judgment, though in other points he might be very
corrupt, and is here blamed for his defect of Love. Observe,

There is a place for praise and Commendations, as well as for Reproof. Simon
had his faults, for which he was rebuked; and he has some good in him, for
which he is praised.

Saul was a very wicked man, 2 Samuel 1.23.
yet David praises many good things in him. That Steward we read of in the
Gospel, was very unjust, Luke 16. Quia licet Do mini substantiam vacuabat,
subditos augebat. Bern.
yet in that he wrought wisely for himself, or (as S. Bernard gives the
Reason) for that he increased his Lords subjects, though he diminished his
Lords estate, he is commended by his Lord. Gross errors were amongst the
Corinthians, and in this (says S. Paul) I praise you not, 1 Cor. 11.17. but
wherein they did well he commends them; 1 Cor. 11.17. Revel. 2.2, 3.
I praise you Brethren that you remember me in all things, etc. The great
shepherd of the sheep, and Archbishop of the Church, he omits not the due
praises of those Churches, which he reprooves most sharply.

withold the due from the owner thereof, (contrary to Salomons advice,) not
giving praise to whom it does belong; at least not in that manner they ought to
give it.

Some give it not at all, a strong Argument of a proud and sullen disposition;
they can find place for Reproof, but none for commendation; these are like
the Fly, they care for fastening no where, but on the Gall or Soar, a little
blemish in their Brethren so over-clouds their good parts and properties as
that they cannot be seen.

Others do it, but in such a manner, as that the good in others (which they
would be thought to commend,) seems either ill or less commendable, to those
that hear it. They bring their diminutions and come with their [ Buts] he
has done this and that [ But, etc.] They will read the Text, and then
Pharisaically mar it with their Gloss. To speak thus of a man's praise and
mar it with a [ But] is like some unskillfull Farrier, who never shoes a
horse, but pricks him to the quick, that bitter root mars the whole pot of
pottage.

Abijah the son of Jeroboam, to commend and recompense it.

And as our Savior leads in the ensuing Reproof of Simon with this his
Commendation; so it shall be our wisdom to observe the like method. You know
that iron is first heat and then beaten; and the Nurse takes up the child
being fallen, and first speaks it fair, and chides or corrects it afterward;
so should we; This would be as a good preparative for the bitter pill, and make
it more kindly work in the bowels of the belly. This is a course of singular
use to be held not only in our Ministry, but also in civil Societies and
Families.

Romans 12.3. 1 Pet. 2.14. Pro. 15 30. Aug de Civ. Dei l. 5. c. 13. Precipuum be
nesicium est in rebas honest is laudari, laus enim parit aemlationem, aemulatio
virtutem, virtus faelicitatem, etc. Nazian. Pro. 25.6. Potest hoc in loco non
incongrue mellis nomine favor humanae laud^s intelligi, etc. Bern. Sermon 47. ex
parvis.
Lastly, It may be a good encouragement to well-doing. Nature is led with
nothing more kindly then with Commendation and praise. Nulla suavior est
auditio quam laudis, it is an allurement tempered to our inclination; and
therefore God carefully provides for it; and the godly themselves have taken
great delight in it, it causes emulation, (as speaks Nazianzen,) and
emulation brings forth virtue, and virtue happiness.

Only here give me leave to add two Caveats; First, that praise be not too
much affected by us. Secondly, that we seek it in no other way then the way of
well-doing.

For the first, it is (you know) Salomons advice, Have thou sound honey, eat
so much as is sufficient for thee, least thou be filled therewith and vomit
it. By Honey in which place (says S. Bernard) may not unfitly be understood
the favor of humane praise, of which we may eat, so that we eat not too
much: he eats moderately, who as he sees the good will of his friend in it,
so he does give glory unto God for it. He eats too much, who has his heart
set upon it, and in his ways aims at that alone. Pro. 27.21.
Praise is as a fining pot to a man, it will discover what he is, whether
light or solid. Those metals which have least solidity, are soonest melted;
and the lightest matter is blown away into smoke and vapor; so a light heart
is vainly transported by it; when he that has true worth in him, is with
gold and silver made the finer and purer by this furnace. The more he is
praised, the more he will endeavor to deserve it, and finding what is dross
in him, will purge it out, and cast it from him: He that does thus, Greg Mor.
l. 32 c. 5.
what is he but gold (says Gregory) increasing to a greater measure of
brightness by the fire of purgation.

Virtus matter gloriae est, sola enim est cui gloria jure debetur, etc, Quae
autem est sine virtute gloria, pro^ecto indebite gloria venit, propere
affectatur, periculose captatur. Famam extena^^e sactis hoc virtutis opus.
Secondly, it should be in the way of well-doing that we seek it; for it is due
only to that (as S. Bernard shows) Virtue is the mother of it, (if it be
legitimate,) It is but a poor praise, and perilous, that men raise to
themselves from other things then well-doing: Wit, Beauty, Birth, Wealth, etc.
may cause a great Fame, only this causes a good Fame, Deuteronomy. 4.6. Pro. 21.21.
Romans 2.10. Ruth 4.11. Pro. 31.31. Heb. 11. Fame got some other way, may hang on
a while, like a beggars Cloak, but in the end it will fall of full of filth.
But praise and credit obtained by well-doing shall last after our bodies are
rotten in the grave, The memorial of the just shall be blessed, Pro. 10.7.

Wherefore hearken to S. Paul's counsel, Phil 4.8.
Brethren whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever
things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely,
whatsoever things are of good report, If there be any virtue, if there be any
praise, think on these things to do them. A good name says Solomon is a good
ointment, and these are the ingredients that must go to make up that pretio us
ointment which must cheer our spirits we are much deceived if we think there
lies any other way to the Temple of Honor then through virtues Temple; we
must pass through the one to come to the other.

As for that praise which the world gives to such as best like it, it is not to
be valued nor esteemed of. Christ commanded those Devils to hold their peace,
who yet (seemingly) spoke well of him. Heathens did fear themselves when they
were extolled by the vicious; I pass little to be judged of you, (says S.
Paul) so say we, we pass little to be praised by you. Let us do well and our
praise will be from God, not men. And so much for the Propounding part of this
Parable, The Applying part follows.

And he turned unto the woman, Text. Verse 44, 45, etc.
and said unto Simon, see thou this woeman? I entered into thine house, thou
gave me no water for my Feet; but she has washed my Feet with tears, and
wiped them with the hairs of her Head, etc.
In these words and those following, we have considerable. First, our Saviors
Posture. Secondly, his Speech: His Posture in those words, And he turned to the
woman; his Speech in the rest. Of Christ's Posture a word or two.

(...)
It is said before verse. 38. That this woeman stood at his Feet behind him
weeping. (Bash fulness and shame arising from the Conscience of her former
wickedness did there place her) Christ's Back was then upon her: Now upon her
Repentance, and true turning our blessed Savior Turns unto the woeman.
Teaching us this lesson,

pon our turning unto God, God will turn to us, and cast upon us the eyes of
his Grace and Favor.

Turn you unto me says the Lord of Hoasts, and I will return unto you says
the LORD of Hoasts, Zach. 1.3.

Turn unto the Lord your God (says Joel) For who knows if he will return and
repent and leave a blessing behind him, etc. Joel 2.13, 14.

sins only that make the separation; would we but put them away, God would be
reconciled with us again. If we hate them which are our Creatures, Isa. 59.1,
2.
and the works of our hands; God cannot but love us, who are his Creatures,
the work of his own hands.

Face is from them, his back is on them. And what greater Judgment can befall
a man? Ier. 18.17. and 21.10. and 44.11. Ezekiel. 14.8. So long what can comfort
them? You know the reflexe of the glass presently vanishes, when the Face is
turned away; so when Gods Face is turned from us, all comfort in the creatures
fails us. This seriously considered cannot but be motive strong enough, to
take out the lesson here commended to us, of turning to him by true Repentance,
that he may turn to us in love.

for good and not for evil: It is his own command that we should seek his
Face: And great need we have: Psalm. 36.9.
In thy favor is life (says David) and in thy light we see light, no light to
be had but from his countenance, and that enlightens all.

When the Sun shines we say it is Day, though no other Star be seen: And
we say it is Night, though we see a thousand Stars, when the Sun is absent:
So here; Let Gods Face shine on us, let him but cast upon us a loving
countenance, though no other outward comfort be to be had, yet it will be a
happy day with us: All wants shall be supplied by it; it will bring all comfort
with it.

It is said of Manna that it had the taste of every good thing that a man
desired, Wisd. 16, 22.
and served to the appetite of him that took it: This may be said more truly
of Gods Favor: If a man be sick, that is health unto his bones: if poor, that
is wealth, Psalm. 4.
etc. Let there be what want there will, yet Gods favor supplies all: So that
as Elkanah said to Hannah, it may say to him that has it be he never so poor;
Am not I better to thee then ten sons? Am not I to be preferred before corn
and wine, houses, friends, etc.

If then it be (as Solomon tells us) That every man seeks after the face of the
Ruler, because his favor is as the latter rain and promises a fruitful
Harvest? Prove. 16.15.
Let us seek after the Face of God by timely turning to him: It is Repentance
that must bring us into favor with Christ; that is the John Baptist which must
prepare the way before his Face: A polluted glass can receive no impression of
Images and visages (says S. Basil) No more a polluted soul the light of Gods
countenance. The Benefits that flow unto us from Gods favor I have showed on
Luke 15.22.

The Speech follows, and it is directed both to Simon, and to the Woman. First
to Simon.

See thou this woman? I entered into thine house, thou gave me no water for
my Feet,
In this Speech of our Savior to Simon. We have, First, the Interrogation or
Question, put to him. Secondly the Expostulation that our blessed Savior made
with him. Of the Question, first in those words, (...), See thou this woman?

Object. What need this Question be made? Simon saw her well enough and beheld
her carriage: Whereupon he questioned, whither Christ were a Prophet, in that
he suffered her to come so near him: And yet our Savior demands: See thou
this woman.

Resp. Indeed, Simon saw her outside, and (judging by appearance) judged her to
be a Sinner: Our blessed Savior now calls him to a stricter sight; and by her
deportment and good disposition, shows her to be a Saint, discovering by her
open and public tears, Simons secret and hidden soars; making them serve as
a medicine for his malady; which was the reason, that whilst his Eye was turned
to this Penitent, his Speech was turned to the Pharisee, as being desirous to
cure him who had least seeling of his sickness.

Two things in the Question let us observe: First the duty, secondly the Person
on whom it is imposed.

The Duty enjoined is to See or behold the carriage and behavior of that
woman. Where first an Act, and that is seeing. 2. The Object. With the Act we
begin, (...) See thou?

Not hear thou; for not a word (that we read of) did she say. (And yet her
whole action was a loud confession: All her carriage was Vocal. Her Eyes
spoke, her Hands spoke, her Hair spoke, her Cesture spoke, and yet she could
not speak what she did speak) her tongue is silent. Thus

Deep sorrow is many times silent. Lesser Repentance speaks when greater wants
a tongue. Take an instance or two; one in the Shulamite, 2 King. 4 27. See how
sparing of words deep sorrow is. Extremity of grief made her somewhat
unmannerly; down she falls passionately at the Prophets feet, and lays fast
hold on them, not saying a word. By which posture the Prophet perceived her
soul to be vexed within her. And when her grief finds vent at her mouth; how
sparing is she of her Speech, and how abrupt; Did I desire a Son of my LORD;
did not I say do not deceive me.

A cracked Pipe or Bell gives a harsh or uncertain found: So a broken heart
when it speaks for the most part utters broken speeches.

Whither the Prophet or the Mother were more afflicted, is hard to say: The
Prophet for the Mother, or the Mother for the Child; without doubt the Prophet
was marvellously struck with grief. Nor does he in his sorrow reply one word,
but applies himself to the remedy, spending his breath in Prayer, which was
likewise passionate, ver. 33, 34, 35.

The other instance, I bring to confirm this Truth is that of Saint Peter,
Math, ^6 75. We read of him that after his Fall, He went out and wept bitterly;
but we read not of his speaking anything. Invenio quod fleve rit, non invenio
quid dixerit (says S. Ambrose) I find that he wept, Sermon. 45. de pae. nit
Petri.
but I find not what he said. And the like Observation has Isidor. de munere.
2. Thus, Curae leves loquuntur, ingentes stupent. The point is prooved, That
deep sorrow often is silent, when lesser finds a tongue. Now for Use to our
selves.

Repentance lies in the Tongue are much deceived. Indeed many a man's Repentance
lies wholly there, for their hands refuse to work; and such a Repentance is but
wind, as words are. True Repentance is both seen and heard: But (if in case,
one be wanting) it is rather seen then heard. The sinner is loud and clamarous
(says Solomon, Pro. 7.11.) The Saint is silent, he smothers his mouth in the
dust (as Job speaks.) In the day of their sorrow they are often like a Chest,
having a rich Jewel in it, but the key lost: Such a Chest was Origin, who
after his Fall coming to preach unto his people, and lighting on that Text,
Psalm. 50.16. But to the wicked, says God, what have thou to do to declare mine
Ordinances, etc. Upon the reading thereof burst forth into tears, and could
say no more. As for dissemblers and hollow hearted Hypocrites; who like empty
vessels make a great noise upon the least knock; being like Stony-pots tipped
with silver (having silver lips but stony hearts.) Or like Demades the Orator,
who would talk much and eat hard. Of whom Antipater was wont to say, that he
was like a Sacrifice, nothing left of him but the Tongue and Paunch. I must
tell them that albeit their talk of Repentance be like Benjamins Mess five
times more then the rest; Genesis 43.34.
yet that noise which their Tongue makes in a formality of Profession, shall in
the Silence of their hands condemn them for Hypocrites.

See Thou.]
Not only with the bodily Eye, for with that he saw, and mistook: But with
Consideration and Observation.

The Deportment of a true Penitent is worth our seeing; Their Carriage and
Conversation is worthy Observation.

Those good effects which S. Paul's letters wrought in the Corinthians are
graced with an Ecce, we are willed to Behold and consider them well, 2 Cor.
8.11. Behold this self same thing that you sorrowed after a godly sorrow, etc.

Many Penitents are brought upon the State of Christianity in holy Scriptures,
Mat 9.9. Luke 19.1-10 Joh 9.36. Luke 17.11. Luke 23.9.
acting their parts before a world of Spectators: As Matthew, Zacheus, the
Blind man, and Lepers, the Thief on the Cross, etc. to what purpose if they
be not seen? In a full Theater you would think you see so many lines drawn
from the Circumference of so many Eyes and Ears, whilst a good Actor is the
Center: What one does fainedly there, the true Penitent does really here: he
weeps in good earnest, fights in good earnest, forgives in good earnest, etc.
And none so Acts to the life, as does the Penitent. The Character that is given
of a good Actor (by some wits) may truly be applied to him. The Actor does not
strive to make Nature monstrous: nor the Penitent Grace: It is seen in the
same Scene with him, S. Thomas O. verburyes Charact.
but neither on Stilts nor Crutches. The voice of the one is not lower then the
Prompter, nor louder then the Foil and Target; not is the voice of the other,
but as the Spirit shall give utterance; groaning with the Turtle, not Screaming
with the Peacocke; the one by his Action fortifies moral Precepts with
Examples; so does the other Divine: In his general Carriage we see the force
of the Rule: the one adds grace to the Poets labors; so does the other to the
Preachers: For what in the one is but Ditty, in the other is both Ditty and
Music, yet what is averred of the one, that all men have been of his
Occupation, and are (for who plays not his part on the worlds Theater?) cannot
be affirmed of the other, few there are that truly act Repentance. How ever, of
all men living (say some) a worthy Actor in one kind is the strongest motive of
Affection, Penitent, affect much more. S. Gregory being to speak of the
Repentance of this Mary begins thus. Flere magis libet quam dicere. He was full
and could rather desire to shed tears then use words; we have all sinned, we
have not all lamented. To help us in it, Behold this woman. And you that are
here present with your Bodies, be present with your minds. It is an Example
deserves pondering, we were summoned by the sound of a Trumpet before, verse
37. and therefore all both high and low Behold: the Sun has shined upon this
Dial; who can now but look on the Shadow, And behold the Strokes?

And as this woman is commended to our Observation in Particular: So the
Deportment and Behavior of every good Penitent in general should be regarded:
God has ser them up as a Light-house by the Seaside, whereby the Mariners
both fail aright and avoid danger: their unfeigned Humiliation and gracious
acceptance is propounded for our Imitation and encouragement, Ps. 32.6. Which
if we observe not, we shall loofe the Comfort, and God much of his Glory.

All the works of the Lord are great (says David) and to be sought out of all
them that have pleasure therein. Psalm. 111.2.
In his Creation, he is wonderful to astonishment; In his Providence past
finding out, etc. Psalm. 8.1.139.14. Romans 11.
But when we look upon the work of Conversion, we must cry, O the height,
etc! his way herein is beyond admiration. Let his goings be observed; and his
exceeding greatness of grace and power be for ever magnified, Ephesians. 1.19.

Penitent calls for our regard, it will not be unseasonable yo admonish all, who
profess themselves to be such, that they be very careful of their carriage:
you may make or mar Gods markets. Much lies on your hands to bring others on,
or keep them off from God. If your works beseem Repentances, your light is
like that of the Sun, It will cause the Beasts of prey to lie down in their
Denns, Ps. 104 The benefit of good examples and danger of bad. See in the good
Samaritan page 226.
and draw men out unto their labor, be a means to win others (as our
Savior shows,) Math. 5.16. 1. Pet. 2. v. 12, 15. and Chap. 3.1. But if you
counterfeit and dissemble you are like a false light or lantern by the Seaside
which Shipwracks those that trust it, and are guided by it.

Remember, all Eyes are called on to Behold you; before your Conversion no
regard was had, you were then (like an Actor) within the Tyring-house, where
you were Rampant and swoare oaths that you never cond: But now you are upon
the Stage and none had more need be wary of words and actions.

You know that no ordinary blemish, scratch nor spot is regarded in a Table,
before an Image be drawn upon it; But after the Image or Effigies is
portraited, every little spot is observed in it: Such is the difference of
spots in Christians before Conversion and after, and no less regarded.
Therefore have a care that your well ordered life shows a well ordered heart.
For as it is in a Clock, when the Hammer strikes well, and the hand of the
Dyall points well, it is a sign that the Wheels are right set: So a good life
and Conversation argues a true Penitent, and good Christian. And thus much of
the Act, now for the Object.

This woman.]
It is lawful to see a woeman, and to observe their Carriage and behavior.

Otherwise how comes it to pass that they are advised concerning their
Carriage, that it be such as becomes Holiness, Tit. 2.3. And so winning,
that those who obey not the Word may thereby be wone, 1 Pet. 3.2.

Jobs practice; Job 31.1.
(He made a Covenant with his eyes, why then should he think after a woman)
is soon answered.

Job is not so to be understood, as if he would not at all cast his Eye upon a
woman; but his meaning is, that he would not look on her in any unchaste way, so
as to be ensnared by them.

Object. But Solomon tells us, That the heart of a woman is snares and nets and
her hands are bands, etc.

Resp. True, Illa Foemina, the lascivious woman, that shame of women, of such
does Solomon speak only: And therefore S. Hierome advises us not to be too
rash in taking that sentence to be pronounced of all kind of women. Non putemus
temere hanc Solomonem de omni genere mulierum protulisse sententiam. Hier. in
loc.
The Wicked woman indeed is not to be looked on, Pro. 5.8, 9. But as for
virtuous and good women they have the Image of God shining on them (as well as
men) which attracts the Eyes of all.

Object. But who can find a virtuous woman (says the mother of Solomon
speaking of her own sex) her price is far above Rubies. Pro. 31.10.


Resp. S. Ambrose speaking of these words, says thus. Quis? Amb. in Pro. c. 3.
Quia unus, non quia nec unus: Who? because one has found her, not because not
one has found her: there is difficulty in finding of her, that is very true:
And it cannot be denied, but that the Holy Ghost has some special intent, in
that describing of a virtuous woman (which begins at the 10. v. of the
Chapter) he follows (in the Original) the order of the letters of the
Alphabet; the first word in every verse beginning with a several letter as in
the Alphabet they are placed; but to conceive that the Holy Ghost would thereby
give us to understand, that all the letters in the Alphabet are not able to
spell the woman's name, which is there described, or that none virtuous is to be
found may be thought to be a mere conceit.

good words nor looks: There are who esteem over meanly of them, and speak too
contemptibly of womenkind.

Origin upon these words of the Evangelist, Mat. 12.21, 22. Orig. in Math.
(And Jesus departing into the Coasts of Tire and Sidon, behold a woman of
Canaan) has these words, Mira res Evangelista, etc. A strange thing O
Evangelist, Behold a woman: She who was the Author of transgression, the mother
of sin, the weapon of the Devil, etc. And yet, Behold a woman.

S. Chrysostom likewise is very bitter in speaking of women. Chrysostom. Homil. 6.
ex imperfect. in Math.
Quid est aliud mulier (says he) nisi ineffugabilis poena, necessarium malum,
etc. What is a woman, but a punishment that cannot be driven away, a necessary
evil, a natural temptation, a desirable calamity, a domestike danger, one
beloved for a color of good? Homil. 15. ex varijs in Math
But he tells us else where, Sermo est de muliere mala, Homil. 15. ex varijs in
Math
non de bona: Novi enim multas ad omne opus bonum promptas. My speech is of a
bad woman, not of a good, for I have known many ready to every good Work.

It may not be denied, but Satan (who blasted Paradise) has much blemished the
honor of that sex; he made choice of a woman to be his first engine, and he
sped so well then that ever since he is well pleased to make use of such
instruments. Dalilah is a snare for Sampson, Iesabell for Ahab, Pharaohs
daughter for Solomon; and all Heresies (in a manner) though fathered by men,
yet they have bin furthered and nursed by women's wit: Montanus had his Prisca,
Donatus his Lucilla, Priscillinus his Galla, Simon Magus his Hellena, Arius
shall have Constantines sister to assist him. Eccl. 7.26.
In which respect the hearts of such women are said to be the snares of hunters
(as the Septuagint and S. Hierom do read) and these Hunters are the Devils,
says Lyra.

Notwithstanding this, God has highly honored that Sex, not only in that he
lay in the womb of one of them, but in every passage of his life, he has had
some women to attend him: Elizabeth prophesies of him in the house; Anna in
the Temple; Martha entertaines him; Ioanna and Susanna (with others do)
minister unto him: the Daughters of Jerusalem weep for him, and at the
Cross, stand by him, and after his death came to embalme him.

To women Christ first appeared after his Resurrection, Bern. in Cant. Ser. 75.
and so far honored them as to make them (as S. Bernard speaks) to be
Apostolos Apostolorum, Apostles to preach his Resurrection to the Apostles.

In all ages (especially under the Gospel) there have bin women of special
note, both in their own lives (which have like lamps given great light to
others) as likewise in Governing of their Families, instructing of their
Children, etc. (as was Bathsheba, Loys, Eunice, Monicha the mother of S.
Austin, Helena the mother of Constantine with others.) S. Paul writes to his
beloved Apphiah, S. John to an Elect Lady: Time would fail to speak of all
their excellencies: To be short, and come home unto my Text, as in the days of
Iabin, a woman named Iaell had renown above Barak by slaying Sisera the
Captain of the Host of the Alients: Judge. 4.21.
So we have here a woman, who by her penitent life and unfeigned love has
obtained not only to be compared in Scriptures with the best followers of
Christ, Hec breviter perstrinxi, ut nee te paeniteat sexas, nec virii nomen
suum erigeret, in quorum condemnatione^ sa minarum in Scripturis sanctis vita
laudatur. Hier. Epist. ad Principiam, Virg.
but to be commended above them all, as having done more honor to CHRIST, them
all the twelve Disciples did.

S Hierom, having reckoned up diverse good women, in an Epistle which he wrote
to a Virgin, concludes thus; These I have briefly passe^ over, that neither
thou might repent of thy sex; Neither might men be lifted up in regard of
their sex, to whose condemnation the life of women is commended in sacred
Scripture; and this is our scope and drift in this Observation. We pass on to
some other.

Woman]
Her Sex is only mentioned (you see) her Name is not here annexed by our
Savior. And hereof a double Reason is rendered: First, for her honor: Christ
would have her name concealed as her sins were by him covered.

2. For her dishonor: As if a sinner were not worth the naming. So we find in
that real Parable of the condemned Churl, his title is but, Homo quidam
Dives, Luke 16.19.
A certain rich man; but what his name was is not said: God will not foul his
leaves with sinners names; they shall not stand in his books, as I have on
that Parable showed; and therefore it shall be enough in this place to say it.

These are the Reasons rendered why she is not named: I conceive the first the
best. Sure I am our Savior makes mention of her very favorably and tenderly:
It may easily be gathered both who the woman was and what was her sin, from
that which before was said by the Evangelist, ver. 36. She was a degenerate
woman, unwomaned, and pudore and pudicitia, both of Modesty and Chastity, but
now upon her Repentance, her woman-hood is restored to her again, she has
recovered her credit, and is called by our Savior,

Woman]
Observe we hence,

Not only the guilt, but the stain of sin is done away with the tears of
true Repentance. This is that which takes away Rebuke from all faces, Isa. 1.26.

De hac igitur dixisse Prophetam puto, ejusmodi est in qua via mulieris etc
Pro. 30.20. etc. Haec enim virtus Christi est Domini, ut qua^ vis peccator sit,
qui ejus unda ablatus fuerit, denno in virginem reparatus, non meminerit ante
quod fecerit -- Fitque virgo fide Christi, qui fuerat Adulter corruptione
peccati. Ambros. Ser. 30
S. Ambrose in a Sermon speaking of the woman of Samaria's conversion (who was
an Harlot) yet now by Christ converted and washed from her sins, conceives
this to be the meaning of that Proverb, Such is the way of an adulterous
woman, she eats and wipeth her mouth, and says, I have done no wickedness,
and adds further, that such is the virtue of Christ our Lord, that although
he be a sinner who is washed in his water, yet thereby he is restored to be a
Virgin, etc. and so made a Virgin by the Faith of Christ, who was an adulterer
by the corruption of Sin.

This way the unchastest woman may so wipe her mouth, as to say I have done no
wickedness: By a penitent Confession of her fault, her Virginity shall be
restored: so was this woman's in my Text. And so was David's, whose Palme-branch
of Virginity through the plentiful tears of his Repentance, did so flourish
again, that though he was taken in Adultery in his younger years, yet in his
Old Age a virgin was found by him in his Bed

Direct us how to judge, and what to think of those, who have repented them of
former sins; think not worse of them for what they have bin, but think the
better of them for what they are. Object not to David his Murder and Adultery:
To Peter his Denying of his Master: To Matthew that he was a Publican: To Mary
that she was an Harlot, etc. But magnify the riches of Gods grace, who has
forgiven such great Offenders: Where God has remitted, take we heed how we
dare object, I know the day when you were thus or thus: This is to fling the
filth of sin into that face which God has washed, a thing God cannot endure.

Encourage us to take this course to regaine that credit which has bin lost by
sinful courses. At the birth of Iehabod away went Glory: And credit once lost
is like water spilt upon the ground, which if recollected, yet it has lost the
purity, and is ever after full of soil: Ezekiel. 18.21, 22 Jer. 31.34.
Notwithstanding Reformation will do much with God, and bring us so far into
his Favor, as that he will remember what we have bin no more, nor once mention
our former faylings: Look as the Father of the Prodigal dealt with him, so
will God deal with thee, he gives kisses not stripes to his offending son.
Peccanti filio dat oscula non flagella; vis amoris non videt delicta, sic curat
filij vulnera, ne forto cicatrice^, ne forte filio naevum relinqueret, Chrysostom.
Ser. 3.
The force of Love would see no faults, he so heals his sons wounds, as that
he might not by chance leave a scarre, or the least freckle in his son (as
one observes) And he received him with greater tokens of favor then his elder
Brother, who never brake out into that Riot. So will God deal with thee; he
will be so far from upbraiding thee with thy former loose life, as that he
will honor thee the more, if thou be truly Penitent. To whom did our
Savior ever more honor then to Zacheus (that converted Publican) to whose
house he came uninvited, and brought with him the best news that ever came to
that converts care? Who had more favor from Christ then this Penitent Citizen
spoken of in our Text, Out of whom he had cast seven Devils? Her spikenard he
has so mingled with the ointment of the Gospel, Mat. 26.13.
that whosoever smells the savor of life from the Doctrine of it, shall have
a sent also of those sweet Perfumes which she spent upon her Savior.

Yea so hearty and cordial is this Physic of Repentance as that it restores
(as you have heard) your Virginity and Chastity, yea your strength and youth:
You shall be fresher and livelier (with the snake) after the casting off your
old Skin: And (as Livie writes of Scipio) he never looked so fresh, not seemed
so beautiful in the Eyes of his soldiers, as after his recovery from a
dangerous sickness, which he took in the Camp: So shall it be with you, you
shall I look most lovely in the Eyes of God and his Church upon your true
Repentance and Confessions. But if otherwise you will still persist in an evil
course the guilt of sin you shall carry with you, but the stain of sin you
shall leave behind you; as we read of those, Ioh. 10.8. who though they were
long since dead and rotten, yet our Savior says, They (are) thieves and
robbers: Not (were so) but still are so. For, though they were dead, yet their
sin abided, and their names shall for ever be branded with it.

This woman.
Other women might be seen of Simon, but this woman in a special manner he
must observe,

The best women are best worthy seeing.

The like observation to this we have made on the Parable of the Good
Samaritane, page 223.

Modesty, Meekness, Sobriety, etc. that they may be worthy of imitation.

Eyes on Sarah, Rebecka, Anna, Deborah, Abigaile, and such like as these,
Pudore vilis, a mictu dives, genas picta. Etenim quia verum decorem naturae
habere non potest, adulterinis fucis affectatae pulchritudinis lenocinatur
speciem, non veritatem, Amb. de abel and Cain cap. 4.
who in Scripture are proposed as best patterns for their imitation.

There is a woman described by Solomon ( Prove. 7.) First, by her Attire, verse.
10. It was the attire of an Harlot, which S. Ambrose thus sets forth: She is
base in shamelessness, glorious in her clothes, painted in her cheeks; for
because she cannot have the true comeliness of nature, by false dawbings she
borrowes the show (not the truth) of an affected beauty. And for the attire of
her inward man, she is subtle of heart, her heart is snares and nets, as we
showed before out of Eccles. 7.26.

Next she is set forth, by her Behavior and Carriage, verse. 11. and 12. Her
Tongue is as loud, as herself is lewd: It is ready for all Ears, and is as
common as her self. Her will that is stiff and stubborn as her body is
loose: Her Feet cannot abide in her own house: She is given to gadding as fast
as her tongue to going: Now she is without, now in the streets: Discovering by
her often remooving, her unstable mind; and in every corner she lies in wait
to do some mischief, and surprise a booty. This woman is to be Beheld (for so
the Wise man advises) [Behold] there met him, etc. What he himself had seen
and observed, he wills others to observe too; yet not to imitate and follow,
but to avoid and shun: Who so shall otherwise observe such an one as this, they
are like the old Egyptians, who passed by the beauty of the world, as the
Sun, Moon, and Stars without observation, but if they met with a Cat or
Crocodile, they would fall down and adore. And thus much of the duty here
required. Now for the Person enjoined with it.

Thou.
Simon is the Person on whom the Duty is imposed. He was a learned Pharisee,
one of those who were noted for wise and learned men, yet he is put to school
to learn of this silly woman, who was weak, unlearned, and (as yet) untutored
in the School of Christ, she becomes (as it were) a Doctor and Master in
Israel to teach him Repentance. Which tells us.

That God by weak and silly instruments makes the wisdom of the world to
appear foolishness. (According to that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 1.20) Where is
the wise, and learned Pharisee, where is the Scribe, where is the disputer of
this world? The deep Philosopher? All seem great knowers and deep Scholars;
has not God made foolish the wisdom of this world? in respect of divine
Mysteries, and Verse 27, 28. More positively and peremptorily, God has chosen
the foolish things of the world to confound the wise, and God has chosen the
weak things of the world to confound the things that are mighty, and base
things of the world, and things which are despised has God chosen, yea and
things which are not, to bring to naught things that are: Reason is added by
the Apostle, Verse. 29. That no flesh should glory in his presence, (i. e.) That
no man (being no better then base and contemptible flesh) should arrogat ought
to himself or boast of his Parts and Privileges before the Almighty.

means God uses for our good in respect of their outward meandness and
baseness: It is a thing that flesh and blood is apt to stomach, and yet a way
that GOD delights to take. By the mouth of Babes and Sucklings he perfects his
own praise, Psalm. 8.2.
and stils the enemy and the avenger.

It was a poor Israelitish captive maid that he chose to teach Naaman that
mighty man; 2 King. 5.2.
through that little chink did God let in light, whereby Naaman came to know
there was a Prophet in Israel which could cure him of his Leprosy. Judge. 6.15.
It was a poor man's son in Manasse, and he the least in all his Fathers
house, whom God chose to conquer Midian a great and a mighty army. It was a
poor sinful woeman going to fetch water at Iaakobs well that he made choice
off to go to the Samaritans and acquiant them of the Messiah. Ioh. 4.
There were a company of poor Fishermen, tent-makers, tole-gatherers, and such
like; Men of mean condition and estate whom he called to follow him, and whom
he sent abroad to convert the world: And here you see he makes choice of a
weak and sinful vessel to teach the Grave; the Rich, and learned of the
world a Lesson which a world of wits (out of flesh and blood) were never able
to comprehend.

You may read that when the lot was cast for an Apostle to supply Judas his
room, Act. 1.23.
two were appointed; Joseph and Matthias, Joseph was Frater Domini, the Brother
of our Lord, Math. 13.55. And he was trinominis, of three Appellations, Joseph,
Barsabas and Iustus. Matthias is but twice named in the Scriptures (both times
in that one Chap. Act. 1.) and signifies a little one; who would not imagine,
but Joseph would carry it from Matthias, and yet for all Joseph's privileges
and great titles the lot falls on Matthias the little one.

Thus the great God (who by Birth made himself little) delights much to make
little things great. So went his Mothers Song, Luke 1.48. He has regarded the
low estate of his Handmaid, and 51, 53. He has exalted them of low degree,
Judge 13.9.22, 23. 2 King. 4.8, 9.
and filled the hungry with good things, but sent the rich empty away. The
weaker vessel many times holds the liquor, as Manoahs wife had more Knowledge,
Faith, and Resolution then himself (though he likewise was a good and holy
man) And that noble Shunamite had more Zeal then her husband: Priscilla may
teach Apollos: Act. 18.26. Mat. 15.28. Luke 24.8, 9, 11
And the Apostles themselves must be content to hear Mary and other women,
whose Faith was stronger in them, then in any men we read off.

Let us not dare to despise the day of small things; it scarce will down with
proud flesh and blood to be taught by a mean Minister, advised by a simple
woman; and yet the Kingdom of Heaven is like a woman laying leaven, Math. 13.

You know we are sent to the Ant and Pismire to learn Providence; to the Ox
and Ass to learn Thankfulness: Pro. 6.6. Isa. 1.3. Jer. 8.7. 1 Cor. 14.34,
35.
to the Swallow, Crane, etc. to observe our appointed Seasons: And are not
these much better then they? Women indeed are not permitted to speak in the
Church but let them ask at home (says the Apostle) yet by their reverend
behavior and carriage in Gods-house they may teach as well at Church as at
home. See Exodus 38.8. Luke 8.3 and 10.39. Act. 16.13.

So far should we be from taking offense at Gods proceedings in this kind,
that we should rather be stirred up to a holy emulation (as S. Paul speaks in
another kind of the Jews, Romans 11.11.
who should be provoked to jealousy by the Gentiles forwardness. Eu quomodo
maxima cum laud vobis licet emulari, etc. Beza in 1 Cor. 12.31.
) This is, (...) (says Hesiod) a holy and good contention; you may contend
with praise and comfort who shall lead the best life, give best Examples,
express most holiness in your conversations, etc.

Plutarch reports of Themistocles, that when he heard how Miltiades had got
great honor in the Marathenian battle, he was not able to sleep because he
came so far short of him in honor: It should be thus with us in spiritual
things: To hear Christ say to a Canaanite, I have not found so great Faith in
Israel: And to a Simon, See thou this woman, etc. should fill the faces of
men with shame, and spur us on after a greater measure of Grace. Other Uses
of this Doctrine, see on the good Samaritane, page 81, 82. This shall serve for
the Interrogation or Question made to Simon, we now come to Christ's
expostulation with him.

I entered into thine house, thou gave me no water for my Feet; but she has
washed my Feet with tears, and wiped them with the hairs of her head, etc.

In which Contestation had or Expostulation made with Simon, we have
considerable. First, a Preference (For comparing Simon and the Woman, he
preferres the Woman before Simon) In these words read to verse. 47. Secondly, an
Inference, Wherefore I say unto thee, etc. verse. 47.

In the Preference, there is, First, a Reprehension of Simon for his Defects;
and they were threefold: First, ex defectu Civilitatis, of the want of
Civility, in that he gave him No water for his Feet (which was the use and
custom of the Country:) Secondly, Ex defectu charitatis; of the want of Love
and Charity, Thou gave me no kiss. ver. 45. this was wont to be given as a
pledge of the guests welcome. Thirdly, Ex defectu Hilaritatis, of the want of
Hilarity and Chearefullnesse, Mine head with oil thou did not annoint, verse.
46. As was the use of those times to do, thereby to cheer up the spirits of
their guests; all these were failings against a good hospitable entertainment.

Secondly, We have a Commendation of the Woman for her Respects and
Performances (which are laid down Antithetically and by way of Opposition to
the other) Simon failed in not bringing water to wash Christ's Feet, this Defect
she supplies with her Tears; She has washed my Feet with Tears, and wiped
them with the hairs of her head, verse. 44. Simon failed in giving him no
kiss, this Defect she abundantly supplies; Since the time I came in she has
not ceased to kiss my Feet, verse 45. Simon failed in that he anointed not
Christ's head with oil; this Defect was supplied by this Penitent creature; She
has anointed my Feet with ointment, ver. 46. And thus as they are laid down
by way of Opposition one to the other, I shall crave leave to handle them.
First, something in General would be noted from Simons failing in his
entertainment, viz.

Circumstantiall omissions in the entertainment of our friends may forfeit much
of our thanks.

Hence it is that true Hospital Friends have bin careful always of a full
supply: I will content my self with two instances (amongst many which might be
brought.) One is that, 2 King. 4 8. 2 King. 4.8.
Where we find the Prophet Elisha to be invited by that noble Shunamite to her
house to eat bread; who (after his first entertainment) perceiving his
occasions to call him to a frequent passage that way, mooves her husband to
build him a Chamber on the Wall apart (least the tumult of her large Family
might disturb the quiet Meditations of the Prophet) which accordingly is done:
Nor will she bring him to bare walls, Verse 10.
she furnishes his lodging and sets ready for him a Bed, a Table, a Stool and
a Candlestick, and other necessary Utensills fit for his entertainment: This
lodging, Gehezi with a treaty of Retribution (by way of thankfulness,)
Behold thou have bin careful for us (with all this care) What is to be done
for thee? Would thou be spoken for to the King or to the Captain of the
Host? Retribution, Probabile est aliquem suisse exconsanguineis Christi, qui
uxorem duxerit; Jesus enim matri tanquam comes additur, Call. in Job. 2.2. Non
est nobis hoc loco quaerendum, fueritne tanta sponsi tenuitas, ut vini copiam
convivis exhibere nequiverit, vel usque adeo intemperanter initio biberint
convivae, etc. Mascul. in loc.
especially where is such a fulness.

The other instance I bring for the Confirmation of this truth delivered, is
that we read, John 2. At a marriage in Cana of Galilee, whereunto Christ and
his Disciples were invited, whereat also was Mary the mother of Jesus (and as
it is very likely, the Feast was made by some of her consanguinity.) It so
happened that there was a Defect of Wine (whither occasioned through the
poverty of the couple married) or the Intemperancie of the guests invited, or
by reason of the multitude who came uncalled, is needless at this time for us
to discuss) Mary perceiving this want, was much troubled thereat, being moved
(says Calvin) as is likely with the disgrace or offense that might be taken by
the Guests (though it were but for the lack of superfluity) She tells Christ
of this want, who to manifest his glory (especially) and also to remoove
offense turns as much water into wine, as would suffice one hundred and fifty
folk had they bin but newly sat, Largam vini copiam suppeditavit Christus,
nempe quae plus centum and quinquaginta hominibus sufficeret ad hilare
convivium, etc. Call. in loc.
and that at a Feast. Had Omissions of this nature, and at such a time bin of
small Consequence, I cannot see why Mary needed so much to have perplexed her
self (All having well drunk before) Nor our Savior needed to have converted
so much; for had he turned but one of those Vessels of Water into Wine, it
had been a sufficient Proof of his Power.

Ceremonies of Courtesy: Though in themselves they be slight and arbitrary;
yet the neglect of them may in some cases undergo a dangerous construction.

That Passage we find in 1 of King. 1.9. would not be forgotten; Adonijah
laying claim of Succession to the (not yet vacant) seat of his Father David,
and intending to under-worke Solomon. He made a Feast for all the Kings sons
and all the men of Judah, 1 King. 19.10
the Kings Servants that were of his party: But Nathan the Prophet and Benajah
and the mighty men and Solomon his Brother (says the Text) he called not: We
do not read that he sent any threatening message to any of them, only he
invited them not to his Feast (says the Text) with the rest of the Kings
sons and servants; that very omission was a menace and threatening and so
apprehended by them: Therefore Nathan takes special notice of it, and
acquaints King David with it; He is gone this day, Verse 25, 26.
and has slain Oxen and fat cattle and sheep in abundance, and has called
all the Kings sons and Captains of the Host, and Abiathar the Priest, and
behold they eat and drink before him: (there is nothing vvanting for so royal
an entertainment) But me even me thy Servant and Zadock the Priest and Benajah
the son of Iehojada and thy son Solomon has he not called. They could not but
conclude that since they were not called as Guests, they were counted as
enemies.

Absoloms perfidious dealing was worse then Adonijahs Omission, that Story you
have, 2 Samuel 13.23.
2 Samuel 13. A great Feast he makes for his Sheepe-shearers, to which he invites
the King his Father, out of no other intent think some, but that his Eyes
should bear witness of that bloody execution, which he intended upon his
brother Ammon, for that he had defiled his Sister Thamar, as we read before in
the Story; David (being loath to be chargeable to that Son (as one says
Divinely) who yet cared not to overcharge his Fathers Stomach with a Feast of
blood) excuses himself: Ver. 25, 26, 27.
Request is made in special for Ammon that he might go unto the Feast, which
through Importunity it is obtained. And now whilst Ammon is feasting in that
house (where Thamar is mourning for that folly which before she had committed)
and when his heart was merry with Wine, Verse 28, 29.
he is suddenly (upon a watch word given by Absalom to his servants) struck
dead; as if this execution had bin no less intended to his Soul, than to his
Body, which though it were just with God, yet by Absalom treacherously and
bloodily committed, and not out of any Care of Justice, but in a desire of
Revenge. If bare Omissions in entertainment of our Friends loses much of our
thanks, what think you do such treacherous plots against those whom we invite
to our Tables?

Less to the greater) If rituall Observances are requisite for the full
welcome of Friends; D. Hall B. of Exceter Cont. on this passage of Scripture.
think it not enough in entertaining your Savior that you give him the
Substance of good usage neglecting the Complements. Simon (you see) here gave
him both Meat and Welcome, yet the neglect of Washing, Kissing and Annoynting
is not well taken. When we come to his House, and to his Ordinances, as to the
Word, Sacraments, Prayer, we make him good cheer: he esteems himself then
feasted; but if we perform not these things with the decency of outward
carriages, we give him neither Water, Kiss, nor Oil.

Believe it, our best actions receive either life or bane from their
Circumstances; the Substance or matter of a work may be good and yet the
work cannot be so called, unless it be done, modo and forma. Volvet is good
Matter to make a Garment; Timber good matter to build a House; and yet the one
may be so marred in the cutting and the other in the framing; as that neither
the one nor the other shall attain the name of Good. What is good in the
Substance may be sin in the circumstance, and for want of care about the
Manner, the best work may be done thanklesly. Now to the Particulars.

Thou gave me no water for my Feet.
Aquam pedibus Christi non dedit, quod tamen suadebat publicus mos, uti hodie
convivis aquam dare manibus abluendis non habet superstitionem sed
consuetudinem, and civilitatem laudabilem, imo necessariam, Aret. in loc. Mirum
ergo hominem al^as superstitiosum hanc civilit ate^ neglexisse, Aret
This is the first Defect in Simons entertainment (he is twice twitted for it)
and it was against Civility. The common use and custom of the Country required
it from him as a common courtesy; it was as ordinary to bring water for the
Feet, as it is with us to bring water for to wash the hands. And how ever
washing was superstitiously abused by the Pharisees, wherein they were
abundant, as we find, Math. 15.2 Mark. 7.3, 4. (washing their Cups, Basins,
Vessels, and their dining beds (which they used in stead of Tables, as Drusius
shows, l. 2. c. 14) (in which respect Simons Omission of this Ceremony is the
more to be wondered at) yet this Ceremony was so far from Superstition, as
that it was both honest and necessary, Genesis 18. 1 Timothy 5.10.

First, observe we,

Christianity is no enemy to courtesy.

The Scripture is a School of good manners, it checketh such as be rude and
uncivil in their carriage, Psalm. 129.8. 2 Samuel 13.22. And requires civil
courtesy, a^ a Grace to our Profession, Ephesians. 4.32.

And hence are those many Precepts which we find of greeting and saluting one
another, Math. 10.12. Luk 10.1^. 1 These. 5.26. 1 Pet. 5.14.2 Cor. 13.12. And
such has bin the Saints Practice, Ruth 2.4. Romans 16. 1 Cor. 16. etc.

And this is necessary for the maintaining of the bond of Christian Peace and
Amity, yea it avails much for the nourishing and increasing of the Communion
of Saints and Society with Gods people, whence it is that the Apostle takes
such care that salutations and greetings be not forgotten, Romans 16.

Works so good manners would do well to attend your Faith; for (except
Charity and Liberality) Courtesy is most regarded of men, it paies a great
deal of debt and is never the poorer; it satisfies every man, and yet lessons
not the stock. Small Ceremonious matters win great commendations, for that
they are in continual use and note; whereas other virtues are put to use, but
seldom (in comparison.) If you observe it, you shall find that few have risen
to great and high preferments in this world, who have not been Courteous. We
use to stroke a Dog upon the head, that fawnes on us.

Absalom did steal away the hearts of his Fathers subjects by his courteous
carriage, 2 Samuel 15.5.
though his courtesy was but a cover for his treachery (like a Bullet spit out
of the mouth of a Cannon) he grazed low to mount the higher. I know not why any
one should say, that Religion makes men rude or rusticall; unless it be for
this, that some out of a fiery Zeal against Ceremonies in Religion, hate
likewise all Ceremony in civil conversation; and will not endure so much by
way of Salutation, as God be with you, or God bless you.

Object. 2 John 10.
Saint John will not allow us to vouchsafe so much as a (...) unto some you will
say. But I must tell you.

Resp. Saint John forbids not Courtesy and Civility, which is due to all
men, (...).
though not unto their manners (as Aristotle answered one who reprooved him for
giving an alms to a lewd and wicked man) but salute them not so familiarly as
you do the Saints of God and Brethren of Christ.

2. We must consider what those were who Saint John speaks; namely, Open and
notorious adversaries of Christ: If we know any to be such, bid him not God
speed. Mareion asked S. John if he did not know him (in that he did not speak
to him) S. John replied, Eusebius. l 4 c. 14. and l. 7. c. 3.
Agnosco te primogenitum Satanae, I know thee to be the first borne of Satan:
Nor would Dyonisius Bishop of Alexandria vouchsafe (...) to Samosatenus the
Heretic. Such as these are, Salute not.

Secondly, in that our Savior blames him for not bringing water to wash
withal (though that Ceremony had been and still was superstitiously abused by
the Pharisees in their Lotions.) We may observe thus much,

Things in themselves lawful, superstitiously abused are not through such
abuse made unlawful to be used.

Christ did utterly dislike the foolish, yea superstitious Ceremony which the
Jews had of often purifying and washing themselves; and yet at the marriage
Feast in Cana of Galilee, where he saw six great water pots, Ioh. 2.6.
containing two or three firkins a piece set for that purpose, he made use both
of the Pots and Element to his great Glory, and the comfort of the Guests: Yea
and made Water (how ever by the Pharisees abused) to be the material Element
of Baptism, D. White late Bishop of Ely in his Epist. Ded. before his Treat.
of the Sabbath.
as he did Bread and Wine profaned by the Gentiles in their Idol service the
material Elements of the holy Eucharist.

Meat offered to Idols might be eaten at any. Feast save in the Idols Temple,
when it comes out from thence it is pronounced to be clean by the Apostle, 1
Cor. 10.
and might be eaten at their Love Feasts, which were made when they met to
receive the Supper of the Lord.

Lying along on Beds and Feasting in that manner was much abused by the Romans
in their public Idolatry, called Lectisternia (as Stukius shows at large) yet
it was the gesture our blessed Savior conformed unto and used with his
Disciples in eating of the Passover, Antiq. Com. Fol. 269.
which appears not only by the signification of the word used in the Story,
but by that Speech, Ioh. 13.21. There was leaning on Jesus bosom one of his
Disciples, and verse. 25. He then lying on Jesus breast, etc. Which Posture
could not be, had they used to sit upright as we do. Many instances might be
produced for further Confirmation of this Truth. As Numb. 16.38. there we find
that the Censors of those Conspirators were employed to make Coverings for the
Altar. And in Joshua 6.24. We find that the silver and gold of Idolaters was by
Gods Commandment put into his own Treasury.

And Judge. 6.26. Pet. Mart com in Judge. 6.24.
The Bullock that fed seven years for Baal was sacrificed to the Lord. And
the Wood growing in the Idols grove was by Gods own appointment made Fuel
for Sacrifice. We may find this point fully and largely handled by D. Burges in
his defense of D. Morton. Chap. 4. Sect. 23. And by M. Nicholas Bysield in the
second Chap. of the 1. Epist. of S. Peter, verse. 13. page 593.

Hill on which St. Paul stood and preached to the men of Athens, Act. 17. 22.
Or the sign of that Ship of Alexandria wherein he departed, Act. 28.11. The
days of the week must not be called, Monday, Tuesday, etc. as ordinarily they
are named and known, that is (with them) superstitious: But they will thus
number them, the First, Second, Third day of the week, etc. The glorious
company of the Saints and Apostles, because too much honored or rather
dishonored by Papists shall be by them Unsainted; Their Days must be called
Peter's, Paul's, John Baptists, the Saint must be left out; and so for Churches.
The Feast of Michael the Arch-Angell, the Purification of the Virgin Mary, and
that of our blessed Saviors nativity, may not be sounded with the Mass, they
will turn it to the Tide, Candletide, Christide, Michletide, etc. Bay leaves
may not be admitted in Church or House, for the Heathens so used them. I know
not whither they durst ride upon a Mule (though it were King David's own, 1
King. 1.30.) for that Anah first found them, Genesis 36.24.

I blame not any simply for tenderness of Conscience, but wish that men in
weightier matters were more wise, and less scrupulous in things of this
nature. It is not good to be over Just, nor make more Commandments then ever
God has made. Tertullian disputing professedly this Question, Tertull de
corona militis, p. 347
Whither a thing dedicated to Idolatry or abused by it may not lawfully be
used, resolves that it may, tam in Dei rebus quam in nostris, both in Religious
and civil use, If the things themselves be not otherwise evil; but may be of
any necessary or commodious use, as he shows in sundry instances; were it not
so, we must pull down our Churches, melt our Bells, change our Fonts, etc.

Object. But God commands that the graven Images of the Heathens should be
broken down and burnt with fire, Deuteronomy. 7.25. and 12.2, 3.
and all those places wherein the Nations served their gods should be destroyed,
and forbids his people to meddle with any of their silver and gold least they
be thereby ensnared.

Resp. It is first answered thus, Wemze Exercit on the Mor. Law, l. 1. Exercit.
15.
Things belonging to Idolaters were of three sorts: First, such as pertained to
Idolaters, but were not Idolatrous: Th^se were not forbidden to be used, David
took the Crown from of the head of the King of the Ammonites, and put it upon
his own, 2 Samuel 12.3. And the Sword of Goliath, he took and hung it up in the
house of the Lord, 1 Samuel 21.9.

Secondly, Such things as were Idolatrous, but not Idolatrous in state. So the
Fountains out of which the Heathens drew water for the service of their Idols;
which Fountains might be converted by Christians to a civil or spiritual
use. M. Paget his arrow against Seperatists page 281.
So Judge. 6.26. Look as in the Law of Shalowes some things polluted might be
cleansed and used again, as Levit. 21.8. So may it be in this case; Those
things which were not Idolatrous in State might be cleansed and converted to
other Uses.

Thirdly, such things as were Idolatrous in State, and had an immediate
dependence upon the Idol, carrying the mark and badge of the Idol still upon
it; as their Images of gold and silver and their Ornaments. These were those
things that were to be cast away by Gods special command, and might not be
converted to any other use, either spiritual or civil, Esaias. 30.22.

Secondly, M Will. Whatlyes Carecloth, page 18.
we answer again, that Moses Judicial Laws do not bind us as they did the
Jews; the strict and precise Commandment, whereby God did injoyne the Jews to
shun all the customs of the Gentiles, even in things otherwise lawful,
because by them abused was proper to the times of the Law, as being part of
that partition Wall, which Christ has broken down, that he might make of both
one. True it is, the equity of this Law holds, teaching us to detest
Idolatry, yet it binds not in such a manner to detest Idolatry, as it did
them, God commanded them to destroy Idolatrous places, to burn the Cattle,
spoil the Goods, but we are not bound to follow them in the same manner: So
God forbad his people to marry with the Heathen; and if in case they had
married such wives and begot Children of them, yet they were to put them away
again, Ezra 10.11. Now a greater liberty is given. The unbeleeving wife is
sanctified to the believing husband, 2 Cor. 12.13, 14. And so much for the
Answer to this Objection.

For my Feet.
The Feet are the lowest part of the body, the meanest for account and
homeliest for employment: And being nearest the Earth are most apt of all other
parts to gather soil and filth. In which respect they stand in most need of
washing, as our Savior shows by that speech of his to Peter after he had
washed the Disciples Feet (whereby he taught them both Holiness and Humility)
Ioh. 13.10. He that is washed needs not save to wash his Feet. In which
saying, our Savior either alludes to this common practice amongst the Jews,
whose first office to Guests and Strangers was, (...), especially after
travel; or else to bathing from whence none comes without some gravel sticking
betwixt their Toes, in which respect they use to wash them last of all: but to
the first he alludes (most likely.) Thus much we note from hence,

The lowest and meanest member of the body is not to be despised.

The Feet are to be washed, as well as face or hands: literally this is true,
1 Cor. 12.21, 22, 23, 24. So we find that there were widows appointed of
purpose for this end, 1 Timothy 5.10.

And Mystically it is true, Pedes nostri affectus nostri, Aug. in Ps. 64.
Ioh. 13.10. where by Feet we must needs understand the Affections of the
soul, on which it stands, or falls, as the body does by the Feet of it; and is
moved and carried too and fro by them; as the Body is with those strong-men (as
Solomon calls them, Eccles. 12.3.) Those have (in a special manner) need of
washing, for that they are next the Earth, having to do with earthly things, as
Honors, Profits, Pleasures: As likewise for that they do follow naturally the
Disposition and Temperature of the Body; in which respect they are called,
earthly members by the Apostle, Col. 3.5.

Now though the soul be washed in the Bath of Justification, yet in regard of
Corruption remaining there is an use of daily washing in the Bath of
Sanctification. The former is the Kings bath and serves for the Guilt of sin,
the other is the Peoples has, and serves to do away the filth or stain of sin.

Quest. But why did not some of our Saviors Apostles wash his Feet after he
had washed theirs?

Resp. Two Reasons are rendered why they did not.

First, Amb. de Virg. lib. 3.
for that Mary had already washed them (as here you find) and it was not Christ's
mind that the luster which was given to his Feet by Mary's tears should be
washed off again with ordinary and common water.

Secondly, The washing of the Apostles Feet was Mystical, and signified the
cleansing and sanctifying of their souls, and the affections of the same: Now
this could not suit with our Savior who was free from the least filth of
sin, there was not the least tainture in him.



See that we be careful of our Bodies, In hoc mundo cum nostris tentationibus
nascimur, and caro nobis aliquando adjutrix est in bono opere, aliquando autem
seductrix in ma lo. Siigiturei plus, quam debemus, tribuimus, hostem nutrimus;
Et si necessitati ejus, quae debemus no^ reddimus, civem necamus. Satianda est
itaque caro, sed ad hoc usque, ut in hono opere nobis sussiciat; nam qui quis
ci tantum tribuit, ut superbiat, satiari penitus ignorant. Ars itaque magna est
sattari, ne unusquisque per satietatem carnis ad iniquitatem prorumpat
turpitudinis, Greg. Mor. l. 12
yea of the lowest and meanest member (for that it is also a Member of Christ,
1 Cor. 6.15.) In which respect there is an honor due unto them; as also for
that the Body and overy part of it, is a servant to the soul, and an
instrument whereby it works; so that the neglect of it, will greatly disable
the soul and hinder the actions, and functions thereof. You know the Carpenter
lays by his Axe when the edge is blunted, and the Musician his Lute when the
strings are broken; and an Inbabitant soon forsakes his house when the walls
fall down: So does the Soul the body, as you find, Eccles. 12.1, 2, 3. etc.
And therefore it is our Duty to keep it in the best repair we can, that we may
do God the better and the longer service.

Notwithstanding our chiefest care must be for our Souls, and in looking unto
that care must be had in a special manner to our Feet, that we keep them
clean, for as much as it is Satan's special drift to foul them.

Our Affections are the Eves which the Devil makes use of to betray our
souls. These are the Iaels he uses to seduce us: They are the Dalilah's he
imployes to betray us and lull us a sleep whilst the Philistines be upon us.
God has placed Affections in the soul, as the Sentinel upon a City wall, to
give the watchword when danger is near, and to keep the rest from sleeping
and idleness: Now if Satan can but prevail with them, he will soon enter and
overcome all, Ephesians. 4.27. 1 Timothy 6.10. Tertullian tells us it was the fetch of
Heretics in his time, prius suadere, first to persuade and then teach: After
they had wound into the Affections of Hearers they did corrupt their Judgments.

The more to be pitied is the practice of such as bestow all their pains in
washing other parts, whilst their Feet are too much neglected.

Some men's care is only for the Face, that it be clean: So those Hypocrites we
read of, Math. 6.16. All they do is to be seen of men: Their Devotion is a
Stage Devotion, it begins not till the Spectators be all ready, and the
Galleries filled.

Some bestow most pains about their Hands, with Pilat them they wash profesting
themselves to be free from the blood of all men. Their whole care is about the
Duties of the second Table to keep their hands from picking and stealing, and
give every man their due, whilst in the mean time God is forgotten: And these
are boasting Pharisees and mere civil men. But the care of a Christian should
be, not only to wash away the Iniquity of his hands, as Psalm. 26.6. but also
the iniquity of his heels, as Psalm. 49.5. And the rather for that (as you have
heard) Satan in that part especially desires to bruise the Christian, Genesis
3.15.

And as this care must be had of our own Feet, so likewise of Christ's (I mean
the meanest and lowest member of his Mystical body) small omissions toward
them are observed and taken special notice off, Math. 10 42. Mark. 9.41. and
Math. 25.40, 45. Withold not any thing from the poorest member of Christ
Jesus, that may make for his comfort or refreshing, when it is in our Power to
do it. Thus much of Simons first Defect: How this was supplied by this Woman
follows,

But she has washed my Feet with tears, and wiped them with the hairs of her
head.
Two things may here be noted. First, this Penitents Contrition, She has
washed my Feet with tears.

Secondly, Her Humiliation or Abjection. And wiped them with the Hairs of her
Head. First of Her Contrition.

She has washed my Feet with tears.
Tears are the Juice of the mind, pressed with grief, or a little water
distilled by the heat of our tender brain through our Eyes.

The Understanding first conceives cause of grief upon the heart: After which
the Heart sends up matter of grief into the brain, and the brain does distill
it down into tears, so that if Grief be sharp and piercing, tears follow for
the most part.

They are tokens of Repentance, and therefore placed in the Eye, for that it is
now the most sinful sense; It is Proxeneta peccati, the Broaker that goes
between the heart and the object to make up a sinful bargain: As sin is let
in that way, God would have it turned out again by weeping: For properly that
witnesses sorrow. Sometimes we weep for Joy, but that is by accident, and as
it is accompanied with remembrance of sorrow.

There are two sorts of Tears (as shows S. Austin) Some are Commendable;
others are Discommendable. Aug de sanctis Ser. 4.


Commendable Tears, are Natural or Spiritual: Natural Tears, as Ier.
31.15. These discover natural Affection, and being well bounded are not to be
blamed. Our blessed Savior wills the Daughters of Jerusalem to weep for
Themselves, Luke 23.28.

Spiritual Tears, are either Tears of Passion and Contrition, as Math.
26.75. or of Compassion and Devotion, as Ier. 9.1, 2. Luke 19. Thus of
Commendable Tears.

Tears culpable or discommendable are likewise of two sorts, Temporal or
Infernal.

Temporal, are those shed in this life by wicked ones. And they are of two
Sorts, Worldly or Hypocritical.

Worldly Tears are those which are occasioned merely for worldly losses. Of
these we read, Ezekiel 8.14. Hos. 7.14 Heb. 12.

Hypocritical Tears are those which are produced from Dissimulation and
Deceit. Of these we read, Vt flerent oculos erudiere suos, Ovid. See Brights
Melancholy. part. 3. Sect. 2. Memb. 2. Subs. 4. p. 502.
Ier. 41. 5, 6. These be Crocodiles tears, some call them women's weapons, who
are said to have tears at will to deceive others, as he spak who had too much
Experience of them; but these are bad women, not such as Mary at this time was.

Infernal tears are those shed by the damned in Hell; whose tears shall be
but as oil to increase the flame. Of these tears we read, Luke 13.28. Mat.
24.51. and 25.30. These says, S. Gregory are more to be feared then expressed.

They are Commendable tears that we are to speak off, especially; and those
not natural but spiritual; and they are tears of Contrition shed out of
Passion in respect of her own sins, not so much out of Compassion in the
behalf of others. Our Observation from that she wept for sin is this.

Where sin is repented there it is lamented and bewailed. See 1 Samuel 7.6.
Judge. 2.4. 2 Chro. 34.27. Psa. 6.6. Math. 26. Still observe and you shall find
the greatest Penitents have been the chiefest Mourners.

It cannot otherwise be; for where sin is repented there it is mortified; now
that cannot be without pain and crying; a tooth is not drawn without a groan;
a Member cannot be cut off without a tear; a Woman is not delivered of the
burden which she has carried in her womb but nine Months without many Throes
and Pains. And can it be expected that any one should be delivered of a man,
that old man, the man of sin, which has lain so long within him without sorrow
and tears. S. Paul was a man of a stout spirit, yet I hear him crying out,
Romans 7.24. O wretched man that I am who shall deliver me from this body of
Death! And yet these pains of his were but after pains.

And as this Part of Repentance cannot be without tears and cryings, no more
can that other of living unto God. Our Lawyers define life by weeping: If a
child be heard to cry it is a lawful proof of his living. If he be dead we
say he is Still-borne. Whilst the Infant lies in the dark prison of the
Mothers womb, it weepeth not, but as soon as ever it comes out of the
womb into the light, it knits the brows and wrings the eyes and cries: Thus
whilst a man lives in an unregenerate estate he weepeth not for sin, nor cries
he to God for Grace, but as soon as the light shines on him, he bewaileth his
misery and never thinks that he has filled his cup full enough of tears.

And as it is in a diseased body or with some old soar, if in the dressing of
the wound no pain be felt, we conclude the flesh is dead, but when the Patient
begins to complain of the pain and is sensible of the smart, then it is taken
for a good sign that the cure is in a good forwardness. So we find it was
with S. Peter's Auditors, Act. 2.37. They were so sensible of the prick that the
Apostle gave them at the heart, that they cried out, What shall we do? And
thus you see that neither part of Repentance can be without pain: Therefore we
conclude the Point, Who have repented truly have lamented unfeinedly.

Sorrow and Contrition be Repentances Companions and trickling tears Griefs
chief Testimony (as s. Austin says) why then we have cause to grieve for the
want of grief, and mourn for that men mourn no more for sin: For, Comes
paenitentiae dolor est, and testes doloris su^t lachrymae defluentes, Aug. Tom
2. Sermon. 18.
no greater cause of weeping (says Seneca) is ministered then where Tears are
abolished, as (may be feared) they are amongst us.

Baronius in an old Manuscript says, he found that this Penitent Mary came
with Lazarus and her sister Martha into Britain. If it were so, her Example
is the more proper for us of great Britain; but sure she came not hither, we
dwell in a thirsty and dry Land, where no water is: We are dry eyed by Nature
(as the Heathen sometime spoke of their kin) and cannot weep. Quis dabit
capiti meo aquam and oculis meis fo^te^ lachrymaru^ ut praveniam fletibus
fletum, and stridorem dentium, Bern. in Cont.


O for a Moses to fetch waters from our dry Rocks, Tears from the Eyes of
sinners; that God would be pleased to turn the Rock into a water-poole, and
the flint into a river of waters; that the stony heart of man after so long
obduring and hardening would give, yea melt into tears, there is cause enough.

If we look Upward there is a God offended: If Downwards, there is a Hell
deserved: Lachrymae nobi^ deerunt antequa^ causae dolendi. Senec de brevit
vitae.
If Backward many horrid sins (we may behold) which we have committed: If
Forward the dreadful sentence of Judgment to be feared: If without us, the
wicked world we have loved: If within us our consciences polluted and defiled.
Which way soever we turn the Eyes of our soul, there is matter enough of
Lamentation: So that were Jeremiah again alive, and lived amongst us, he would
once more fall a wishing, O that my head were a well of water, and mine Eyes a
Fountain of Tears, that I might weep day and night for the slain of the
daughter of my people, yet we mourn not.

Compunction of heart be the true not of a Penitent; Compunctio est humilitas
mentis cum lachrymis, veniens de recordatione peccati, and timore Iudicij;,
Isidor in verb, compunct.
and that Dejection of the mind (with tears) caused by the rememberance of sin,
and fear of Judgment, (which was found in this Penitent) be that compunction
(as Isidore) defines it) then let the Eye of the soul look into our hearts,
and see whither we find it there; the Eye of Mary glazed thus with Tears
should be our Looking-glass: If we find it, we have cause to take Comfort in
it: If we find it not, how can we think we are true Penitents.

Case But must every one that repents of sin do as this Penitent here did? Is
shedding of tears absolutely necessary in godly Sorrow? May not the heart be
drowned, and yet the Eyes dry?

Resp. Tears and Additions and necessary Appendences of true Repentance, but
not always necessary and true tokens of it: Some have repented truly, who have
not wept, and some have wept bitterly, who have not repented truly.

All who shed tears are not strait way Penitents; Pet. Martyr. loc com. clas
10. ca. 10. Jer. 15.18. Addidit and lachrymas tanqua^ mandasset and illas, Ovid
Metam. l 6. Lachryma nibil citius arescit, Erasm. Adag.
the hardest Marble against some weather may weep. And how often do we see the
Dew to stand on the blasted Corn or Grass: There are Eying waters spoken of
by Jeremiah, as well as Clouds without Water spoken of by S. Jude. It is an
easy matter to give you instances. Genesis 27.3, 4. 1 Samuel 24.17. Mala. 2.13.
Tears are deceitful things, nothing sooner dried up that a Tear, and
therefore not to be trusted too far: For a man may as well go to his Graves-end
by water as by Land.

Nor are all those who weep not, straight ways to be judged impenitent. There
may be true Sorrow never to be repented off, where no Tears are shed. As was
in the poor Publicane, Luke 18. and in the Thief upon the Cross, neither of
them shed a tear (for any thing we read) yet who dares condemn their
Repentance.

Two Reasons may be rendered for this. First, the Constitution of some men's
bodies makes them more unapt to weep then others are; they cannot weep for
any worldly thing, or very hardly: In such a case tears are not shed for sin.

2. Extremity of Grief may sometimes so oppress and overwhelme the heart, as
that it can ease it self no more by Tears than Words. Thus, 1 Samuel 30.4. It
is said of David and his company, They had no power to weep, and Psalm. 143.4.
David says of himself, that his Spirit was overwhelmed within him, his heart
within him was desolate; as if he had neither a Prayer nor a tear to accompany
it. So we do read of one that did mourn much for the loss of a Servant, when
hearing of the loss of his Son whom he dearly loved, he was so struck, as
that he could neither Speak nor Weep.

In a deep or fresh wound in the body, there is not first that pain felt, nor
so much blood seen, as is in a little cut of the finger, because the part is
astonished for the time; so is sometimes with the soul. The wine Vessel (you
know) without vent runs not, though it be ready to burst.

Notwithstanding this, he that can weep for other things and does not at one
time or other weep for sin (if God let him live any time in the world after
his conversion) that man may conclude with himself that his estate is not good
nor his Repentance sound.

I do not say that all that do weep for sin, do weep in their first
Conversion. God ^a^h respect to the temper of his children, and does not
represent at first the odiousness of sin to all alike. Nor do I say that all
the godly are humbled alike in their first Conversion, nor do they shed tears
in the like measure. You know how it was with Lydia and with the Eunuch
mentioned in the Acts, their Conversion was with much Joy, nor do I think that
they ever attained to David's, Peter's, or Mary Magdaiens scantling in weeping.

Case. But seeing Tears are not always signs of true Repentance, how may a
man take comfort in them or discover them to be sound?

Resp. Thus: First, by looking to the Fountain from whence they flow. Sanguis
vulnerati cordis, Aug Epist. 199.
Vulnerum animi tanquam sanguis lachrymae sunt (says a Greek Father) Tears
are as it were the blood of the wounds of the soul, or (as S. Austin has it)
they are the blood of a wounded heart: If then thy heart weeps as fast as
thine Eye, they are right. When Tears come from the Teates of a broken heart,
than as Milk is to the Infant, so are tears to a Penitent.

2. Lachrymae lavant faciem co^scientiae, clarificant intellectum humectant cor
devotione, etc. Savanor. in Psa. 80.5.
The Effects of Tears discover their soundness or unsoundnesse. There are
diverse qualities in the tears of the Body, and sundry effects in the tears of
the Soul.

The tears of the Body are hot and moist; and so the tears of the Soul: For
they comfort the cold Conscience, as David found: And they mollify the
hardness of the heart.

The tears of the Body are Salt and Wet; so the tears of the Soul. For they
both season it and wash it clean from the filth of Iniquity. Isa. 1.16.

The tears of the Body are (in a sort) bitter and sweet. So the other: For
they weane the godly from the love of the world, (as Wormwood does the Infant
from the Dug) And turn our Sorrows into Joys in the end. Bitter they are for
the absence of good, Sweet for the assurance of finding it. For they that sow
in tears shall reap in joy. Those tears which produce these Effects we need
not doubt.

tears have ever bin shed by us? (if any ever were shed at all) Labor than to
bring thy heart unto it: Nunc locus est flendi, locus and peccata luendi. Qui
modo non flebit, flendicum tempus babeb it. Aeterno luctu lugebit, sed sine
fructu, Beda. Ploret hic, ne ploret in aeternum, condol^at hic, ne doleat in
aeternum. Si nolet plorare, ploret. Si nolet dolere, doleat. Si velit salvari,
suspiret. Si velit delectari, ingemiscat, Bed in Exhort*
Now is the Time to wash away thy sins with the floods of Repentance: If here
thou will not sail to Heaven in the river of Contrition. thou may fear to
be drowned (which thou would not) in the Ocean of Perdition. Grieve here
(says Beda) that thou may not grieve hereafter; sigh for thy sin that
thou may be saved. If thou desire celestial benediction, shun not thou
this terrestrial affliction; for who ever heard or read of any that went from
mirth to mirth, from joy to joy.

The Preaching and Proclamation of John the Baptist in the Wilderness of
Iudaea, was of a strange kind of Baptism (not so much in the Waters of Jordan,
as in these waters of our Eyes) the Baptism of Repentance.

It was a Sermon first preached in Paradise, and continued till the almost
discontinued generations of all the sons of men by the Flood: Nor ceasing there
(but like the Rainbow in the Firmament, then commanded to remain, as an
everlasting Covenant between GOD and the sons of men: For, that former
world, which through sin was drowned in a Flood of Waters, Genesis 7.
has ever since preached to the succeeding and this latter world, that it
cannot be saved but in a flood of tears.

And if it be true, that the Hebrews have no word for eyes but what serves for
springs; it seems that all the eyes the holy language speaks off should be like
springs, wherewith they should bewail their sins.

Object. But it is womanish and childish to fall a weeping: Who does it besides
a Mary?

Resp. Even those who have had greatest magnanimity, as Jacob, Joseph, David,
Paul, etc.

S. Chrysostom seldom preached, but he washed his Cushion in his Pulpit with
his tears.

Bradford seldom eat his Meat, but the tears fell from his Eyes in an abundant
manner.

Yea our blessed Savior wept, and wept, and wept again: As we read, Luke 19,
41. Ioh. 11.35. Heb. 5.7. To say than no more to these Objectors but this; it
is a temper well befitting any one, who has to do with an Almighty God: A
carriage not unbeseeming the greatest King. And if it be Childishness to Weep
for sin, unless we become such children, we shall scarce ever enter into
Heaven* For he that has gone on in the ways of pleasure and delight, bringing
naught else, but the blasted sheaves of sin with him, must return back by
another way, even the way of Weeping bearing forth better seed.

To stir you up the better to labor for a Weeping Heart, even a heart that
can rain down tears as Maryes did, and that in time too: Consider, first the
Fruit and Profit that does accrue unto us by them. Secondly, the great danger
our selves are in through the neglect of them.

For the first, Romans 3.1, 2.
As Saint Paul speaks of the Profit of Circumcision: So I of these, It is much
every way. Evil is remooved by them, and much good obtained.

The Evil, that they do remoove, is first, that of sin. The heads of Dragons
are broken in these Waters, Psalm. 74.13. The tears of the Vine (says Pliny)
cure the Leprosy of the skin: So the tears of true Repentance do the
Leprosy of sin. The Guilt of sin is remooved by them, Isa. 1.16. Every tear
shed dasheth as it were one out of the score. D Balcanqual tus Sermon at S Mary's
Spittle, (...) Ps. 126.5.


And (as is well observed by a Judicious Divine) comes it self in the place of
it: So shows the Psalmist, Psalm. 56.8. Thou tellest my wanderings, put thou my
tears into thy bottle, are they not in thy Book? Before we mourn for sin,
our wanderings are upon record, they stand registered in Gods book: But after
our sighs and tears dash them out and stand in their place; as one color laid
upon another does away the former and remains it self.

In this respect our tears are called by the Fathers our second Baptism, and
compared to the Waters of the red Sea, in which Pharaoh and his Host were
drowned, and to the waters of Jordan in which Naaman was purified, and to the
poole of Siloam wherein the blind man was cured, John 9.7. But understand this
delivered rightly: do not think that all this is done for the worth or dignity
of our tears, but through the blood of Christ, wherein our tears are washed,
and through whom they are accepted.

As the Evil of sin is remooved by them, so likewise the Evil of
Punishment. This we read, Sepe per has flecti Principis trasolet.
2 Chronicles. 32.26. Hezekiah humbling himself for the pride of his heart, he kept
back the wrath of the Lord, so that it came not upon Jerusalem* in the days
of Hezekiah; God sets a mark upon such to keep them from destruction even in a
common overthrow, Ezekiel. 9.4. Where wealth, wit, strength, and all other helps
fail a man, tears do not fail.

And to assure us what true tears will do you may remember what Scriptures
tell us counterfeit tears have done: When Rehoboam humbled himself, the wrath
of the Lord was turned from him, 2 Chronicles. 12.12. And Ahah (a worse King than
he) humbling himself with tears before the Lord, God said he would not bring
that evil which he intended on him in his days, 1 King. 21.19. Thus you see
(as Alexander said to Antipater complaining of his mother Olympias) one true
tear will blot out many complaints, and prevent many Judgments.

As Tears remoove Evil from us, so they procure Good unto us; Lachrymae taci
tae queadam preces sunt, non posiulant, sed merentur, causam non dicunt, sed
consequuntur Amb. in loc. Vincunt invincibilem, ligunt omnipotentem, and
inclinant filium virginis, Hieron.
by the means of them we obtain much at Gods hands, both for our selves and
others. These were the weapons Jacob used, He wept and made Supplication, and
so had power over the Angel and prevailed, Hos. 12.4. His Prayer did much, but
his tears did more the one did Moove, the other did Compel. Hold not thy
peace at the voice of my Tears (says David, Psalm. 6.8.)

Tears have a voice with them, nay they are not only vocal, but importunate:
What do you Weeping and breaking my heart (says S. Paul, Act. 21.13) You may
remember how the Tears of Moses (whilst he was floating in an Arc of
Bulrushes on the water) prevailed with Pharaohs Daughter. The Babe wept (says
the Text) and she had compassion on him, Exodus 2.6. Yea a rogue at the door
moves us when he begs weeping, much more do they move the Lord.

Thus Hezekiah obtained a lease of life for fifteen years longer: I have
heard thy Prayers and seen thy Tears (says God) Behold I will add unto thy
Days fifteen years, Isaias 38.5. And the Prayers of Monicha St. Austins
Mother saved him from loosing.

In short, Tears further us in Grace here, and in Glory hereafter. By the
help of Tears we become more gracious, for that corruption is thereby
subdued, and Grace quickened.

When the Amalekites had spoiled Ziglag and taken all their wives and children
Prisoners, They wept (says the Text) till they could weep no more. Then David
asked counsel of the Lord, and upon Gods direction followed them, and smote
them from the twilight till the Evening of the next morrow, so that there
escaped none save 400. young men that fled upon Camells. Conceive our Lusts to
be these Amalekites, they spoil our Ziglag, sack our City, captivate our
wives and children (our senses and Affections) Let us weep till we can weep
no more, and then pursue these Amalekites, so shall we conquer and recover our
wives and children; some young men (some unbrideled words and untamed thoughts)
will remain, but for the old Amalekites (gross and foul faults) those we
shall subdue to our comfort.

De interioribus fontibus egrediuntur torrentes, and super omnes de licias
lachrymis nectareis anima delectatur: Non illos imbres procellosae tempestates
deponunt, ros matutinus est de caelestibus stillans, and quasi unctio spiritus
mentem delmiens, and post affecto se abluit and lachrymis baptizat Chrysostom (...),
Pind od. 1.
By Tears likewise Grace is quickened: They are not like Well-water springing
out of the bowels of the Earth, nor like Rain distilling from the Clouds,
which clear the air, but they are as the Dew. of Hermon, which makes all
herbs to flourish. Such as mourn for sin, Grow up as the Lilly, and fasten
themselves in Grace like the Trees of Lebanon: They are like the former and the
latter Rain, they make the heart fruitful in all good works, as you see here
in Mary; it is a Sovereign Water and will fetch the sinner again to the life
of Grace though never so far gone.

As for Glory hereafter: It is concluded by the Psalmist, Psalm. 126.5. They
that sow in Tears shall reap in Joy, such a seed-time, such a Harvest: after
we have bin married to a blear-eyed Leah, beautiful Rachell shall be given us.

Thus as the Sun draws up vapors from the Earth, not for it self, but to
restore them back again: So does God our Tears: The Bag God has is for the
sinner, in that he seals up their transgressions against the Day of Judgment,
Job 14.17. But the Bottle spoken of, Psalm. 56.8. and the Violl, Revel. 5.8. are
for the Saints both: In them he preserves both their Tears and Prayers: Not a
drop of their Eye-water will he suffer to run in waste, Sic paucis lachrymis
gaudia magna dabit.
He catches every Tear before it comes to the ground, and till death close up
those two Fountains Ior and Dan (flowing from mount Lebanon) they shall never
fail running, but then shall our fowls be wafted in them from Grace to Glory,
as they were first transported by them here from Sin to Grace.

If in case what has bin said of the Good which our Tears procure for us,
prevail not, then give me leave to add a word of the great danger which
follows upon the neglect of them, and it shall be only by way of Allusion to
that we read, 2 Samuel 12.27. Ioab having taken the City of waters, he sent to
David and willed him to come quickly to take the City it self, well knowing
that it could not hold out, the City of waters being cut off before: Thus when
Satan has taken the Eyes and cut off the Pipes: Can you think your soul can
long hold out against his temptations, I say no more, Chrysostom. in Hom. sap Math.
but yet S. Chrysostom would be heard, Non dolere quia peccaveris magis
indignari atque irasci facit Deum quam idipsum quod ante peccaveris. Not to
grieve that thou have sinned does more provoke GOD to be angry with thee, than
the sin which thou have committed. Wherefore as under the Law they who could
not offer a Lamb, were to offer unto God two young Turtles at their
Purification: So seeing the Lamb has bin wanting, an innocent and holy life,
let us now bring a pair of Turtles, two mournful Eyes; and so send out sin
that way we let it in; which is the Reason (as some conceive) why God has
placed Tears in the Eyes, rather than in any other sense or part of the body.
(As before I noted.)

A second thing we must take notice of in this part of Mary's Repentance is the
greatness of her sorrow, both for Measure and Continuance. She did not only
shed Tears, but she did rigare lachrymis, shower down tears, and that so
abundantly, as she made a bath of them for her Lord: Her heart was so deeply
pierced, as that it afforded tears enough to wash the Feet of our blessed
Savior. And for the continuance of this her sorrow; when she began we read,
when she made an end we read not. She began (says the Evangelist before, ver.
38.) She has not ceased, says our Savior here. Her Example teaches us,

To answer the greatness of our sin with the greatness of our sorrow. According
to the proportion of the one, should the other be proportioned. Look how
grievously we have sinned, so greatly should our sins be bewailed and lamented.
A deep wound must have a large plaster, and our Repentance (as shows S.
Cyprian) must not be less than our fault. Quam magna deliquimus, tam granditer
defleamus, alto vulneri diligens and longa medicina non desit, paenitentia
crimine minor non sit, Cypr. Sermon. 5. de lapsis.
Secundum peccatorum proportionem sint tibi lachrymae, nam si magnus est lapsus
tuus major lachrymarum tuarum torrens esse debet (says S. Chrysostom) which
may be construed in the words of David, One deep calls upon another, Psalm.
40.7. And in these deepes was he: I am come into deep waters, and the streams
run over me, Psalm. 69.1, 2. Out of the deepes have I called unto thee O Lord,
Psalm. 130.1. He grieved and wept for his smaller sins, his heart smote him for
cutting off Saul's skirt, and he condemned himself exceedingly for numbering of
the people, but these were but shallowes in comparison of the Deepes which his
great transgressions brought him into. Those Billows that followed upon his
murder and adultery were breaking Billows. All the night (says he) I caused
my bed to swim with my tears, yea I watered my pallat: Psalm. 6.6.
In which words though there be an Hyperbolicall excess of Speech, yet it
argues an Hyperbolicall and excessive sorrow. I caused my bed to swim, and not
only so, but my Palate that lies beneath my Bed (as some understand it)
Implying that if his Head could contain so much water, the grief of his heart
could furnish it.

Thus we find it was with Manasses; 2 Chronicles. 32.
he was a great sinner (as the Text shows) and he humbled himself greatly,
says the Text. And such was S. Peter's sorrow, Mat. 26.75. Luke 22.62.
he sinned greatly in denying of his Lord and Master, and he wept bitterly for
it, says the Evangelist.

Great nor Proportionable to the sins they have committed: Of all Sorrows,
Si quem de iuis charis mortalitatu exitu perdidisses, ingemisceres dolenter,
and fleres, sacie in^ulta, vest muta^a, neg. lecto capillo ore dejecto,
indicta maeroiis ostenderes: animam tuam miser perdidisti spiritualiter mortu^
es, superv^v re hic tibe, and ipse am bu^ans fu^us tuum portare caepisti and
non acriter plangis, non sugiter ingemiscis, Cypr. de laps.
sorrow for sin should be the greatest, these be waters of Mara, which flow
from the Eyes of Repentance, bitter waters, like those which are shed for the
loss of a Son, yea for the loss of a firstborne. Zach. 12.10. But their
Sorrow for sin is the least and sleightest: For worldly losses they howl and
cry (and express sorrow in all her Postures, says S Cyprian) but a sigh and
away shall serve in this case. And whereas Sorrow should be proportioned to sin,
they have but one degree for every sin; let it be Blasphemy Murder, Whoredom,
or any such like heinous crime that they stand guilty off before the Lord: Or
sins of a less Nature, all is o^e with them; a blow on the breast, or a God
forgive shall serve the turn: But let such tell me, whither he who falls into
the middle of a Pond must not labor more for his life than he who falls in at
the very brink.

Where Sins are great, think it not enough that your Sorrow be slight: If thy
sins be small and little, thy sorrow may be the less, but if great thy grief
must be suitable. A Garment that is deeply soyled cannot without much rubbing
and many Lavers become clean: Where there is a deep pollution, and of a skarlet
tincture, there must be not only, Ablutio, but Balneatio, a soaking and bathing
in the Tears of contrition, as is required, Isa. 1.16.

Quest. But may not a man exceed in sorrow, may he not grieve over much?

Resp. A man cannot exceed in the displeasure of his will against sin, yet he
may in the Testification of his displeasure by weeping and macerating of his
body. Too much moystning choakes a P^ant, when moderate moystning quickens it:
Too much Rain gulls the Earth, and standing Waters on low grounds breed
nothing but flags and rushes: So it is with our hearts when they prove standing
Pooles.

The Israelites could not hearken to the good news Exodus 6.9.
which Moses brought them, because of the anguish of their spirits: In which
respect S. Paul takes order for the i^cestuous Person that he might not be
swallowed up of too much heaviness, 2 Cor. 2.7, 8, 11. That weeping is not
good which blinds the Eye of our Faith, but that which quickens it. The end of
our Sorrow is not matter of Merit, but to make us value the Grace and Mercy of
God in Christ: which where it is found, we may know that grief for sin has
enough possessed the soul. See the Souls Conflict by D. Sibs, p. 478.
If our grief has brought us to the Foot of Christ, as it brought this
Penitent, and caused us with her to lay hold on him, we have cause to rejoice
in it, and dry our Eyes.

Quest But what shall we think of those, who weep more for worldly things than
for their sins? are these to be condemned for Hypocrites?

Resp It is S. Austins rule, that we should judge of things not so much by
number as by weight: More Tears may be shed for worldly things, then for our
sins, and yet our grief be greater for sin than for worldly losses. For,
first

Greatness of Grief is to be measured either by the violentnesse of the
intention, or by the constant Continuance and Duration. A child of God may for
the time be more violently perplexed and afflicted for outward crosses then for
his sins, but what is wanting in his grief for sin this way is made up the
other. David cried out for Absalom very vehemently, O my son Absalom, my
son Absalom, my son, my son; he cried not out after that manner for
Vriah, and yet his grief for Vriahs death was more than for Absolom^; for that
it was more settled and constant and a continual grief, that sin of his was
ever before him. A Torrent may run faster for the present than a continual
Current, Psalm. 51.
but the Current is to be preferred and has more water in it than the Torrent:
One keeps open house at Christmas, but all the year after the Gates are shut,
he has taken up a Cities Refuge: Another keeps a constant and full Table all
the year, though at that time he may not be compared with the other for
abundance, which of these two now would you count the best Hous-keeper? I
suppose you will grant the latter; so is it here.

Secondly, In worldly grief there is both Sense and Nature to further, which
(when they meet with the Spirit) carry all before like a strong stream; as
when the Windows both of Heaven above were opened and the foundations below
were broken up, Genesis 7.11.
there followed a great and mighty flood. But in grieving for sin the grounds
are merely spiritual, and therefore it cannot be expected it should be so
violent as the other.

And wiped them with the hairs of her head.
A strange Act never done to any but our Savior, nor never by any but by this
Woman; who as she made her Eyes the Ewre out of which she powered water to wash
the Feet of her Savior, so she made the hair of her head the Towell to wipe
them with.

Numquid deerat isti mulieri sudarium vel linteolum aliquod (says S. Hierom)
Was she poor that she could not bring a napkin or cloth with her, and yet her
Ointment so precious? Or was there any want of linen for such a purpose in the
house where Christ was feasted? No doubtless. But she to manifest the Humility
of heart, and her hearts Devotion to her Savior thus imployes the best
ornament she has. Nihil dignius capillis, nihil proprium magis. What more
dainty? What more worthy? Christ is said to have a Head of gold, but hairs as
black as a Raven: She who was a Raven for the blackness of her soul, yet had
hair like gold, which she had many times curled and cunningly broydered,
gently combed and plated against the Glass, and than spread as a bet to catch
her amarous companions, but now consecrates it to this glorious office.

In true Repentance there is a converting of those things which have bin abused
to the service of sin to the service of God.

Thus dealt those Israelitish women, Exodus 38.8. Acts 19.19.
offering up their looking Glasses to the service of the Tabernacle, Exodus
^8.8. So those Converts with their curious books of Witcheraft, Act. 19 19.
And every true Christian with their members, Rem. 6.19. As did this Penitent
creature, employing her Eyes, Mouth, Hair to the honor of her Savior; of
whom S Gregory thus speaks, Quot commisit delicta, tot invenit
holocaustomata, For so many sins as she committed, so many burnt Offerings she
offered.

Revenge which the godly take of themselves, whereof the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor.
7.11. without which there can be no true Repentance. Est paenitentia quaedam
dolentis vindicta puniens in se, quod dolet commisisse, Aug de vera and falls.
paenit. cap. 8*
And therefore S. Augustine thus describes Repentance, to be A certain kind of
Revenge, whereby a sorrowful man does punish that in himself, which it
grieveth him to have committed.

Solomon knew the right mother of the child by her yearning heart, 1 King. 3.27.
and tender bowels toward it, which could not endure to see the Babe divided
by the sword: So when men cannot endure that the Sword of Revenge should be
drawn out against their sins, it is a sign they bear a strong Affection to
them: Did we forsake sin, as we should, we would give it, a whores mark; we
would execute the Lords quarrel upon it, and upon the Instruments which were
employed in the service of it.

Quest. Does not this make for Popish Penance?

Resp. No, for first, they use that roughness which takes away the health and
shortens the life of the body: we may humble it, not destroy it.

2. They judge what they do in this kind, as meritorious, and have an opinion
of meriting by the same (which is derogatory to the blood of Christ) God
requires this of us as a means to imbitter sin, and the pleasures of it, and
by that means to bring us to a right Judgment of our selves, and of the
Creatures, as also to testify our Repentance, and so prevent both sin and
Judgment.

Again observe, in that she wiped the Feet of Christ (which were the lowest
Members of his Body, and meanest for account) with the Hair of her Head (which
was a chief outward Ornament of womanhood)

That the best Ornament of the Body (in the Judgment of a Penitent) is not
too good to be employed about the meanest piece of service which concerns
CHRIST.

Moses despised all the glory of Pharaohs Court, and refused to be called the
Son of Pharaohs daughter, choosing rather to suffer Affliction with the
people of God then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season. Heb. 11.24, 25
Plentiful proof we have of this in the Christians of the Primitive Times.

Constantine thought not his lips too good to kiss the empty holes where
Paphnutius Eyes were plucked out. And Placilla the wife of Theodosius thought
not her hands too good to be employed in dressing and binding up the wounds of
poor distressed Christians. We can never debase our selves low enough for his
sake, who for our sakes debased himself so low, as to become a worm rather
then a man.

Eye or Hand or Hair to be too good for the Feet, nay Face of Christ? These
over-valew their own worth. Now I know (said God to Abraham) that thou love
me, in that thou have not withheld thine only Son, thine Isaac from me:
God may say to us I know thou carest not for me, in that thou with-holdest, not
thy son but sin, not thy ornaments, but thy very excrements, and wilt not
part with them for my sake.

The Egyptians thought not their Earerings too good for a misdevotion; the
riches and pride of their outward habit, they are willing to part with to their
molten god: We take a pride in many things, whose rejection is not worthy to do
Christ honor, which yet he calls for to have offered up and parted with, but
we stick at it: When true Repentance would carry us to the abjection of our
whole sinful selves, then were every hair a life we would deny it for him:
And as Ahashuerosh did hang up his Favorite for Hesters sake, so (were we as
we should be) we would part with all that God requires should be parted with,
for Christ's sake.

Thou gave me no kiss,
second defect of Simon which is held to be against Charity, whereof a Kiss
was a Symboll and Expression: And used first, betwixt men and men, as Genesis
45.15. Exodus 4.27. 2 Samuel 19.39. 2. Betwixt women and women, as Ruth 19.14. 3.
Betwixt men and women, as Genesis 29.11.

There are two sorts of Kisses, holy and unholy, according to the Apostles
distinction, 1 These. 5.26. 1 Cor. 16.20. 2 Cor. 13.12.

Of holy Kisses there were three sorts, first, Osculum pacis, a kiss of peace,
which was used at the meeting and parting of Friends. Such was that, Genesis
29.11, 13. and 31.28. and 33.4. Exodus 18.7.

2 Osculum Reconciliationis, a kiss of Reconciliation, of which nature was
that, Genesis 27.41 and 33.4. 2 Samuel 14.33. Luke 15.20.

3 Osculum Religionis, a religious Kiss: Such are those spoken of, Cant. 1.2.
Psalm. 2.11. And this civil Ceremony came to be somewhat Religious in the
Eastern Churches, in customary use before the receiving of the Supper of the
Lord, continued till the days of Justin Martyr, Just Martyr Apol. 2.
whereby they manifested their Communion and consent in the same Religion.

Unholy Kisses are of four sorts. First, an Idolatrous Kiss, of which we
read, 1 King. 19.18. Hos. 13.2. Job 31.26, 27.

Secondly, The Flattering Kiss; of which kind was that Absalom gave to those
which came to him, 2 Samuel 15.5.

Thirdly, The Treacherous Kiss; Such was that which Ioab gave Abner, and Judas
Christ, 2 Samuel 20.9. Luke 22.48.

Fourthly, The Unchaste Kiss, which is that the Harlot gave unto the Young
man, as we read, Prove. 7.13.

A Kiss noted two things, Affection and Subjection: Affection. Look as giving
our Hand one to another at our meeting argues the delivery of our Hearts: So
kissing of all other complements or Gestures has the most evident and express
representation of that which is within. Life we know consists in Respiration,
and our breathing is by our mouth. Kissing is a sign that a man is ready to
communicate, and (as it were) to infuse his own proper soul into another. It
would be thought on by those who use to give this sign of Affection unto Dogs
and such like Creatures.

A Kiss was also an expression of Loyalty and Obedience; So Samuel kissed
Saul, 1 Samuel 15.10, 11. And it is the manner of Subjects at this day to kiss
the hand of their Sovereign: The kissing that Mary here used did manifest
especially her Affection, for want of that was Simon blamed. So then we learn

The Signs and Testimonies of Affection may not be forgotten.

It is not enough that the Heart be kindly affected, unless we give due
testimony outwardly of that Affection which we bear.

What S. James speaks of Faith, Jam. 2.18.
Show me thy Faith by thy works, may be applied to Love, show me thy love by
thy works. To thy friends (says Solomon) show thy self friendly, Pro. 18.24.

And were not the signs of true Affection to be regarded, I see not why the
Apostle should give such a special charge about them in his Letters, Romans 16.
wishing that his Salutations might be remembered to diverse in particular
mentioned, as we find at large, Romans 16. and that they would greet one another
with an holy Kiss, Romans 16.16. 1 These. 5.26.

I Will give you Reason for it; Manifestation of Affection breeds Affection,
nothing more.

Again, By this the Truth of Affection may be discovered: Our Love will be
found hereby to be without Dissimulation, which (if true) like fire will
discover it self, either by its Smoke or Flame.



There is a kind of Love indeed which Solomon calls Secret, Beda in Pro. 27.5.
Prove. 27.5. but he preferres open Rebuke before it. When Love is Chambered and
keeps close, we may fear it is unclean or sick. And such a Love it is that
Solomon speaks of (as Beda understands it) A good and sound love will be seen
abroad, and take the air, else it should not be Faiths Daughter.

Affliction? then mourn with them, pray for them, minister Counsel, Comfort,
Help to them. Are they in Prosperity? Rejoice with them, and endeavor the
continuance of their welfare, what lies in you. Be not wanting in any one duty
of kindness and courtesy; entertain and salute one another with
chearfullnesse; (if present) Visit or send some tokens of Love one unto another
(if absent.) And to quicken us somewhat more in the performance of this duty;
forget not how willing the wicked of the world are, that others should take
notice of their Brotherhood in evil. Why then should the godly live like
strangers one with an other?

But this woman since the time I came in has not ceased to kiss my Feet.
Simons defect is here abundantly (by this Penitent) supplied. Not his Face,
but his very Feet she kisseth; and might it have bin any service to him, the
very dust under those feet of his should have bin licked by her: So great was
the affection which she bare unto our Savior. Our Collection shall be this,

Who so loves Christ will be content to kiss even the very Feet of Christ.

Object. But Christ is in Heaven, you will say, who can ascend on high to kiss
him?

Resp. Yet we must kiss him, as the Prophet David shows spiritually, though
corporally we cannot, Ps. 2.11, 12. More particularly

To kiss is put, first, for Reverence and high estimation Pro. 24.26. And thus
we must kiss him, Phil. 2.10.2. It is put for Love and Affection, Ier. 29.13.
And thus we must kiss him, Ioh. 21.15. 1 Cor. 16.22.3. For Obedience and
Subjection, Genesis 41.40. And this kiss may not be wanting Romans 14.11. Mat. 17.

S. Bernard makes a whole Sermon of kissing Christ, of which he might say as
Lipsius did, when he wrote a Chapter de osculis, beginning thus, Abi Venus,
fallem ego te, quae ipsa multos; and de osculis caput scribam and inscribam, in
quo tamen nihil tibi loci autju ris. Venus has no place therein nor right, and
therefore may be gone, it is chaste enough: He tells us of a threefold Kiss,
which is owing to him. The first is, Osculum pedis, Bern sup. Cant. Sermon. 3.
the Kiss of his Feet: And this we kiss when the soul does lie prostrate
before him in Humility and Devotion, as we see here Mary's did.

The second is, Osculum manus, the Kiss of the hand: And his Hand we kiss
when the soul is taken up by him, so as to exercise the works of Charity and
the deeds of Mercy: Of this Kiss our Savior speaks, Mat. 25.35.

The third is, Osculum oris, A Kiss of the lips: And thus we kiss Christ,
when the soul does enjoy the sweetness of his presence, by the inspiration of
his Love and the contemplation of his Glory. Of which kiss the Spouse speaks
Cant. 1.2.

And great Reason there is, why Christ should thus be kissed by us. For, first,
he is wholly delectable, there is nothing in him, but is amiable, Cant. 5.2. He
came into the world and kissed us, First, with the Kiss of Peace, and that at
the first meeting: So sang the Angelical Quire, Glory be to God on high, and
on Earth Peace, etc. And then at his parting, My Peace I leave with you, my
Peace I give to you.

2. He kissed us with the Kiss of Reconciliation: Before we had the Kiss of
his lips, all things were at variance and disordered, but He made all one,
Colos. 1.20. Ioh. 17.11.

3. With the Kiss of Religion he has kissed us: All those holy Doctrines
which dropped from his lips like sweet smelling Myrrh, Cant. 5.13. were as so
many kisses. Come unto me all you that are weary and heavy laden; Learn of me
for I am meek and lowly, etc. Matthew. 11.28, 29. that was a sweet Kiss (says
Melancton) Who so is a thirst, let him come hither, Melanc. in Ps. 2
and I will give him to drink freely, that was another Kiss of his Lips, John
7.37. So Matthew. 5.1. etc. Every Beatitude is a Kiss, that whole Sermon of his
is like the Book of Canticles, it begins with kissing and ends in Spices.

We read in the French History, History of Iewis 11. l. 1. p 26.
that a Queen of France passing by a Chamber in the Court, where the
Chancellor of the Kingdom lay a sleep (which she espying) (says the Story)
went and kissed him, saying thus to her Ladies (who began to marvel at it) I
kiss not the man, but I kiss that mouth from whence have passed out so many
excellent Discourses: Let us kiss both man and mouth: If we do not, it will
not be well taken, for so we find, Psalm. 7.12. Kiss the Son least he be
angry, that [He] is God the Father, whom in the ver. before we are willed to
serve in Fear, verse. 11. God the Father is provoked to wrath when his Son is
not kissed, which may be another Reason to put us on upon the Duty.

There is a memorable Story in Theodoret, Theod. l. 5. c. 15.
which may serve well for the Illustration and Amplification of this point, it
is worth the hearing. Theodosius the Emperor being earnestly solicited by his
Bishops to remove the Arrians from their Churches (but all in vain)
Amphilochius Bishop of Iconium used at length this stratagem: He came into the
Court and saluted the Emperor, but did not salute Arcadius the eldest son of
Theodosius who was newly created Emperor, and then sitting with his Father:
Theodosius thinking he had not seen his Son, showed him to the Bishop and
willed him to salute and kiss him: Amphilochius answered, that it was enough
to honor the Father, and what he had done to the Father was sufficient for
both. Theodosius interpreting this as a contempt of his son, and so a
dishonor to himself, grevv very angry, vvhereupon Amphilochius discovering
himself said, Art thou offended O Emperor that I reverence not thy Son and
so much out of patience with those that reproach him, assure then thy self
that Almighty God hates the Blasphemers of his Son, and is offended with
thee for countenancing these Arrians who are ungrateful wretches against their
Savior and Redeemer. The Emperor overcome with these words, legem scribit,
made a Law presently, forbidding the Assemblies of the Arrians.

God counts the honor that is given to his Son, as given to himself, Gloria
Filio, abates not ought of Gloria Patri. He counts himself served when his
Son is kissed, Ioh. 5 23. 1 John 2, 22, 23. It would do well to be thought on
by those who scruple to give the Son the Kiss of Reverence and Subjection
which is required, Phil. 2.10, 11. Fearing least they should thereby make an
inequality amongst the Persons in the blessed Trinity.

kiss the very Feet of Christ; see we manifest our Love by this sign, and
symbol of it. It is no slight omission (what ere we think) Saul took notice
of those children of Belial who brought him no presents after he was anointed
King, 1 Samuel 10.27.
though he held his peace for a while; and Christ does no less observe those
who refuse to kiss him not giving him that homage of Love and Duty which is
owing him.

But withal look that our kisses be holy and chaste kisses, not Idolatrous, as
are those kisses given him by Papists. They say they love Christ; how prove
they that? Why, by an Argument drawn from kissing; they kiss his Picture,
they kiss the Pax, they kiss the Altar. But might not the Israelites under
Jeroboam prove their Love to God by the like Argument, for they kissed the
Calves, Hos. 13.2. Little love they show him whilst they rob him of his
dignities and offices which God gave him.

Nor may it be a flattering Kiss, such as that is which Hypocrites give him,
Ezekiel. 33.31. Psalm. 5.9. and 12. 2, 3. and 78.36. Why call you me Lord, Lord
(said Christ) and do not do what what I command you Such kisses Christ has
many. The Arrians thus kissed him in the days of Constantine, whilst they
professed him to be true God, but did it deceitfully.

Nor may it be a treacherous kiss, as is that which Apostates and Backesliders
bestow upon him, 2 Pet. 2.1, 20. Heb. 10.25, 26. Judas you know kissed his
Master, yet delivered him up into the hands of Sinners. I would it were not so
with many; but thus it is, whilst men kiss Religion and betray the Truth,
kiss it at Church and betray it at Home.

Nor may we give him an Unchaste kiss, as do all Profane ones, who cry out,
Let us sin that Grace may abound and good may come, Romans 3.8. Turning the
Grace of GOD into lasciviousness. Iud. 4.
Because Christ has shed his blood, they will commit sin more greedily. Such
kissers likewise were the Nicholaitans, who being called to the Knowledge of
the Gospel did teach most licentious Doctrine. With those the Church of
Ephesus was troubled, Revel. 2.6. And (as it may be feared) we may find of that
stamp lurking in Corners more then were to be wished.

To Conclude, as Saint Ambrose answered Valentine the Arrian when he came and
kissed him, Quid oscularis eum quem non ignoveris? Why do thou kiss him
whom thou carest not for? So will CHRIST one Day reproove all such as these
are, And when his wrath is kindled though but a little, blessed are all they
that put their trust in him, Psalm 2.12.

VERSE 46. Mine Head with Oil thou did not annoint:
Palest inis mos erat in Festis caput u^gendi, Lyra.
Here Simon failed against Hospitality. For the use in those Countries was to
annoint their Guests heads at Banqu^ts, thereby to cheer and refresh their
spirits: To which custom our Savi^ur does allude, Mat. 6.17 In this Simon was
wanting, for which he is checked by our Savior. We note hence,

That God allows us not only for necessity, but likewise for delight and
pleasure: Not only alimonta, nourishment for our emptiness, but de lectamenia,
that which is delicious to the sense and Pallat, as shows the Psalmist, Psalm.
104 14, ^5. Thus he gave the Israelites Manna for their need, and Quails for
their lust, Psalm. 78.29. And to the Prodigal he gave not only Indumenta,
convering for his nakedness, but Ornamenta, clothing for his Comeliness, as
J have showed more largely in that my Exposition on the Prodigal, Luke 15.22.

O man what does God require for this rich bounty of his? Surely no more but
that thou would rejoice in him, who so many ways has given thee great
cause of rejoicing; and be encouraged to serve him with chearfullnesse of
heart, whereof this annoynting at Feasts was a sign; which is the next thing I
mean to speak off, laying down this as a Conclusion from my Text,

Mirth and chearfullnesse at Feasts is a thing commendable and allowable.

Had it not bin so, I see not why Simon should be blamed for this neglect. But
without Question it is a Truth, as may appear by that we read, Deuteronomy. 14.26.
and 16 15. Three times in the year did the Lord command his people to meet,
and then to keep a Feast for seven days together; at which Feast they must
eat of the best and drink of the best, and in a special manner it was required
of them that they should be cheerful and rejoice before the Lord; and why
should Feasting be required of them if they might not be chearful^? Solomon
tells us that there is nothing better for a man, then that he should eat and
drink and that he should make his soul enjoy good in his labor, Eccles.
2.24. Chapt. 8.15. He commends mirth and chearefullnesse, because a man has
no better thing under the Sun then to eat and drink and to be merry; yea
although it be the bread of sorrow that a man eats, or the cup of affliction
that he drinks, yet it shall be a man's wisdom to eat and drink it
chearefully.

That shall abide with him of his labor, the days of his life which God has
given him under the Sun, that is, it shall make him to abide and continue
though troubles assault him never so much, or it shall abide with him and keep
him company in his labor (as Arrius Montanus expounds it) and make him better
able to abide his labor, which without chearefullnesse he will soon sink
under, and his spirit become broken (as Solomon shows else where, Prove. 15.13.)
For such is our frailty that if we were not strengthened and refreshed with
baits in the way our minds would grow dull and sluggish, Democrit.
and our bodies be tired out: The Heathen of old could say that the life of a
man without some delight was like a long way without an Inn, in which all is
travel and toil, but no comfort or refreshing; The soul of such an one would
be like a Flower that grows always in the shade which is nothing so sweet,
Quis dabit hortulo meo hancaqua^? quis dabit, ut tota hortuli mei facies
irrigua sit laetitia, et lucis rivulus nihil in eo sterile
nor lovely, as that which grows in the sight of the Sun.

Hereupon one vvriting of Chearfullnesse, says thus: Who will give into my
little Garden this water? Who will cause that the whole face or plot of my
Garden may be watered with chearefullnesse, so that by the Rivers of
lightsomnesse, sit, aut quadam indevotione triste Vicina sterilitati videtur
operatio tristis and spirituali^ gaudij carens irrigatione Gilbert Sermon. 34. in
Cant.
there may be nothing in it either barren or else sad by a kind of indevotion:
For a sad working, wanting the watering of a spiritual chearfullnesse, seems
to be near unto barrenness.

etc. This is but an illusion of Satan wherewith he disheartens comers on from
a Christian course: For Religion is no enemy to honest mirth and delights; nor
are there any merrier people in the World then those that truly fear the Lord:
And God allows them to be thus merry at meat, and merry at work, even in his
presence. Thou shall rejoice [before me] says God, Deuteronomy. 14.26, Servants use
to be most merry amongst themselves; the presence of Master or Mistres damps
their mirth, but the servants of Christ be as merry in his presence, as behind
his back; yea they are more merry when he is with them, then when he is absent
from them, Mat. 9.15. And it is a great fault in any to condemn them for this
Christian liberty which God gives them (it being rightly used) as we find by
that answer, which our Savior there makes to the Pharisees in this very case.

Preacher, Go thy way eat thy bread with Joy and drink thy wine with a merry
heart; for God now accepts thy works: Let thy garments always be white and
let thine head lack no ointment. Live joyfully with the wife, which thou
love all the days of the life of thy vanity, which he has given thee under
the Sun; for that is thy portion in this life, and in thy labor which thou
take under the Sun, Eccles. 9.7, 8, 9. Hieron. in loc.
Which words S. Hierom tells us are in a spiritual sense the voice of that
Preacher, who in the Gospel says, If any man thirst let him come unto me and
drink. But whoever be the Preacher we shall do well to consider, what is
said, and to whom it is spoken: It is not an eating to beget Joy; nor a
drinking of wine to breed a merry heart, that is spoken off by the Preacher,
for as S. Hierom well observes, Non habeat veram laetitiam and cor bonum, qui
creaturis supra moaum abutitur, He has not true Joy, nor a good merry heart,
who by excess abuses the Creatures. That that is here spoken of is an eating
with Joy and drinking of Wine with a merry heart, so that the Joy and the mirth
do as it were prepare the stomach, thereby to make the nourishment to do the
more good, and to make him that receives it the more forward and hearty in
praising God for it.

Nor is this counsel given to every one, the words are spoken to the righteous
man, to such whose works God accepts, vade Just, says Lyra, Go thou
righteous man, eat thy bread with Joy, etc. that is, vive in jucunditate
mentis ex testimonio bonae conscientiae procedente; live in chearfullnesse of
mind proceeding from the testimony of a good Conscience, knowing thy self to
be reconciled to God in Christ, and having a comfortable evidence of the pardon
of thy sins, and that God accepts of thy labors and endeavors, be thou
merry and cheerful (as David speaks, Psalm. 32.11.) and let not any thing
cause thee to eat thy bread with sadness or drink thy wine with heaviness. A
healthful and sound body is fittest for mirth and freest in mirth; wherefore
seeing God accepts thy works, there is health and soundness; let there be
also freeness of Joy; let thy Garments be white and thy head want no ointment;
see thy Disposition be cheerful, and let no comfortable thoughts be wanting to
thy mind.

As for sinners they lie under the curse and guilt of sin, and are like
condemned Persons going to execution, and a man would think they have little
cause to be merry, and if they be, yet the end of that mirth will be but
heaviness, Prove. 14.13. Gaudet in prima sessione (says Gregory) hilarescit in
primo re^ubitu, inslatur in primae salutatione: Sed hoc gaudium quid crit,
Greg. Moral. l. 15 c. 2.
quando irruente mortis articulo it a consumitur ac si omnino non fuerit? At
the first sitting down at the Feast of sin, the wicked man is pleasant, at the
first lying down in the bed of sin, he is merry, at the first meeting with
his sinful companions, he is blown up with Joy: But what will this joy be
when the point of death rushing upon him, all his joy shall be destroyed, as if
it never had bin.

And to conclude this Point, seeing it is easy for a man to surfeit with
eating honey, Pro. 25.16. and that we are never more apt to forget our selves
than when we are most merry. Let us in the midst of our rejoicing beware that
we riot not upon his abundance: We are sullen guests if we scant our selves,
where he has bin liberal, and depart away from his full Table hungry: We are
unworthy guests if we turn his plenty into wantonness; be not so merry as to
forget God, nor so sorrowful as to forget your selves. The Philistines in the
Feast called for Sampson to make them sport. Let not us do so: In the midst of
our mirth remember we Jerusalem. It is a fault to forget her, but horrible
impiety to remember her with a sacrilegious frump. We come now to the Penitents
supply of that wherein Simon was defective.

But this woeman has anointed my Feet with Ointment.
Our blessed Savior had no other Gifts given (that we read off) but Gold,
Spices and Ointments. The Wise men offered him Gold, as to a King: And Spices
for Incense, as to a God. And this woman's Ointment, which was powered once on
his head, as Math. 26.7 and another time on his Feet, as in our Text, and this
she did as to a man. Royalty is noted by the Gold, Divinity by the Incense,
Mortality by the Ointment: So our blessed Savior himself applies it, Matthew.
26.12. John 12.7. (i. e.) it should serve in the room of that which they used
to bestow on the body after it was dead, and which the woman intended and
prepared for, as we read, Luke 23.56. but came too late, He was risen before.

It is a Question amongst Expositors, first, whither or no it was one and the
same Mary that this Evangelist S. Luke here speaks off, who anointed our
Saviors feet and that the other Evangelists mention, who anointed his head.

2. Whether it was one and the same annoynting or done at several times. Of
both briefly.

Some are of opinion that our Savior was thrice anointed and that by three
several women. Once here, of which annoynting this our Evangelist only speaks
performed by this sinner at which was no murmuring. Another time in the house
of Simon the Leper, of which annoynting S. Matthew and S. Mark speak, at which
the Disciples murmured, and that was two days before the Passover. A third
time he was anointed in the presence (not of Simon, but) of Lazarus (not two
days, but) six days before the Passover, of which S. John speaks, John 12.
Judas then only murmuring, thus Origin, Tract. 35. in Matthew. But this Opinion
is refuted by Roffensis.

Others conceive that there were but two annoyntings and done by two several
Mary's, the one by this woman who was called an Harlot, the other by Mary the
sister of Lazarus, who was never so called (say they) Thus Chrysostom in his
81. Hom. in Mat. And Hierom on Mat. 26.4.

Others conceive that it was the same Mary who did all, and that at two
several times, the act of one time related by three Evangelists, Ego quidem
nihil aliud intelligendu^ arbitror, nisi qu^d non aliam fuisse mulierem, quae
peecatrix tum accessit ad pedes Jesus, sed eande^ Mariam bis hoc fecisse,
Albert. in Luc. 7. Aquin in Ioh. 12.
and the act of the other time by S. Luke only; and this Reffensis proves by
many strong Arguments.

And of this Opinion is S. Austin de Cons. Evang. lib. 2. cap. 70.

So S. Ambrose on this place, and Gregory in his Mor. Beda, Leo, and all the
Schoolmen, especially Albertus and Aquinas are herein most confident.

That which may resolve this doubt in question and confirm this Opinion (me
thinks) is that, Ioh. 11.2. Where the Act of annoynting Christ, and the name
of her Person is mentioned, This Mary was ever known by the name of Mary
Magdalen
It was that Mary which anointed the Lord with ointment and wiped his Feet
with her hairs, whose Brother Lazarus was dead: There is mention of one
annoynting, and Chap. 12.3. there is speech of a second annoynting, Then took
Mary a pound of Ointment of Spiknard very costly and anointed the Feet of
Jesus, and wiped his Feet with her hair. Nor is it enough to say as Taber does
that it is spoken by Anticipation: For in all S. John's Gospel (as Roffensis
answers) there is not one Anticipation, nothing related by the Tence of the
time past, that was to be future, and at that time not finished.

As for those seeming differences in the Evangelist about the last annoynting,
they may thus be reconciled: Whereas in one place all the Disciples are said to
murmur, and in S. John Judas alone is charged with it, that Judas persuaded
them to it. And indeed they spoke out of a care of the poor, but Judas out of
a theevish intention: So S. Augustine de Cons. Evang. lib. 2. Cap. 77.

And for the annoynting of his Feet in one place, and in another place it is
said his Head: these are reconciled (says S. Austin) if we say she anointed
both Head and Feet, first, she began at his feet and so breaking the box
diffused the residue upon his head.

For the time in that one says it was six days before the Passover, the
other but two, let no man be troubled at this (says S. Austin) For St. Matthew
speaks by way of Recapitulation, and having spoken of the Passover to come
within two days does not say (After these things Jesus being in the house of
Simon the Leper) but only makes relation of a thing already done, not setting
down the time.

To say no more of this confused and perplexed Question, which has in it more
subtilty than use or profit, as Erasmus speaks.

This Ointment the woman brought was choice: Every Evangelist has an Attribute
to honor it withal. St. Matthew calls it sumptuous. St. John honorable: And
our Evangelist says it was an Alablaster box, verse 37. As if it were a silect
parcel picked and chosen out from the best she had, with this she annoynts
Christ's Feet, and supplies the defect of ordinary oil for his head. Let us
observe from hence.

Love is liberal (if not Prodigal) of the best it has to bestow on Christ:
It thinks nothing too good not too costly to be given to him, or bestowed on
him, that is within our power.

The Apostle tells us that Love is bountiful and seeks not its own things, 1
Cor. 18.4. And you may find it true.

Abraham loved GOD, and he is not backward to offer up his dearest Isaac unto
GOD, if GOD requires it.

David's heart was inflamed with a Love to GOD, and he will be content to be at
any cost for GOD: He will not offer unto him that which cost him nothing, 2 Samuel 24.24. He prepares with all his might for the house of the Lord, bringing
Gold, Silver, Brass, Iron, Wood, Onix-stones, and glistering Stones of diverse
colors, and all manner of precious Stones, and marble Stones in abundance,
etc. 1 Chronicles. 22.14. and 29.2.

The Converts in the Apostles time how bountiful were they! For the Gospel of
Christ they sold their lands and brought the prices of the things sold, and
laid them at the Apostles Feet, Act. 4.32, 34. They were content for the love
they bare to Christ to suffer the spoiling of their goods with Joy, Heb. 10.34.
Nay they loved not their lives unto death, Revel. 12.1^. Act. 20.24. No nor
their Salvation in comparison of Gods Glory, Exodus 32.12, 32. Romans 9.3.

Cost, we go away with the Young Man in the Gospel, very sorrowful, they part
with their silver, with their pleasure, etc. as the Devil in the Gospel
parted with the possessed party, even with much rending and tearing, all
possible signs of unwillingnesse.

Had we tasted with this Convert how sweet the Lord is, or were our souls
truly touched with a sense of our own wretchedness and misery, and of the
riches of Gods Grace and Mercy in the pardoning thereof, we would study with
David what to render, we would readily bring our daintiest and costliest
perfumes, and spend them upon the Feet of our Savior: Yea if so much of our
blood as this woman brought ointment might be useful or pleasing to our
Savior, we would cheerfully consecrate it to his Name.

But alas for us, this Penitent gave for Quality what was precious, we offer
unto God what is vile and base and with blemish. And for Quantity she gave by
the pound, John 12.3. we by the ounce and scarce weight too, as Leonides
Alexanders Steward told him he bestowed too much Frankincense on his gods: So
our worldly and impenitent hearts tell us that every thing is too much that is
laid out for God on his House and for his Gospel; yea we grudge our Master
that unction which is bestowed on him though at another cost, and cry out with
Judas, Ad quid perditi^ hac, why is this waste?

Let not such tell ne that they honor God with their hearts as well as the
best, for where the heart is enlarged, the hand cannot be straightened; where
the bowels are opened, the Purse will not be shut, as you see it in Parents
toward their children, and in one true friend unto another.

I am as thou art, said Iehoshaphat to Ahab, and my people are as thy people,
and my horses are as thy horses, etc. 2 Chronicles. 18.3. Jonathan loves David as
his soul, and he will strip himself even to his Sword and Bow, for the
supporting and helping of David when need requires, 1 Samuel 18.3, 4. And can you
think that he who gave Gold and Jewels toward making of the Arc would deny
Goates-Haire? Had a man given his heart to God, he would never grudge him the
offall of the things of this world: Romans 8.32.
It is the Apostles argument of Gods liberality to us: He that spared not his
only son, but gave him for us, how shall he not also with him freely give us
all things? So had thou given thy self to God, thou would never grudge
him thy Purse nor Praise.

Object. But Christ has now no need of our Alablaster-Boxes, he is in Heaven
and stands not in need of our Ointments?

Opus bonum quod fecimus propter Deum, et secundu Deu, and ad gloriam Dei est
unguentum super caput Christi effusum Orig.
Resp. And yet he is in the midst of us, and with us to the end of the world,
Matthew. 18.20. and 28.20. And so long there is use of our Ointments. His Glory
is his Head, and the Poor that are amongst us are his Feet; by works of Mercy
we annoint his Feet, and by yielding him due Glory we annoint his Head: So
(says S. Chrysostom) Caput Christi ungua^ si omnia in Christi gloriam
referas: Nor may we be without this Box of Ointment: In all places we come we
must be pouring out, Colos. 3.17. 1 Cor. 10.31. And from thence it must run
down to the skirts of his Garment; His Feet must savor of our Spikenard,
which they shall do when by our works of Mercy showed to the poor and needy,
we cause them also to glorify our Father which is in Heaven, and bless his
Name for us. Of which more hereafter on the Penitents Dismission. And thus much
of the Preference, the Inference made by our Savior follows.

Wherefore I say unto thee her sins which are many are forgiven,
Here our Savior concludes the Doctrine before delivered and recalls Simon
from the Hypothesis to the Thesis. Wherein we have to be considered, first, the
Doctrine, Her sins which are many, etc. 2. The Confirmation, Wherefore I say
unto thee.

In the Doctrins we have, first a Position, Her sins which are many are
forgiven, for she loved much. 2. An Opposition. But to whom little is forgiven
the same loves little.

We will begin with the Confirmation, which we will briefly dispatch and come
to the Doctrine.

Wherefore I say unto thee] (...),
Hence may be observed,

That Doctrines delivered should be well grounded and aptly inferred, there
must be, (...), a propter quod, or cujus gratia, a ground or cause; a Wherefore
upon which we build, Ioh. 3.11. We speak that we know, says Christ, so should
we do. Our Doctrine, says S. Paul was with much assurance, 1 These. 1.5. So
should ours be. We should be able to prove what we say. This is to build Gold,
Silver, precious Stones upon the Foundation, and not wood, hay or stubble, 1
Cor. 3.12.

conjectures in stead of truth of Scripture, blundering out at all adventures
the follies of their own brain, Modo dicunt, quo dicunt modo, vil pensi
habent, as Scaliger says of the Grecians: So they say somewhat, after what
manner they say it, they do not greatly pass. Their pace is a full Career
wildly over hills and dales, they run till the Clock and Time stop them; De
reatly in his Clavis Mist p 135.
aptly are they compared by a learned and judicious Divine to Squibs or small
Fireworkes, which as soon as they take fire, never leave popping and shooting
and making a hideous noise till all the powder be spent, their best provision
being like that which the Apostles had in the Wilderness after Christ's
miraculous Feast, a few Baskets full of broken meat. Mat. 14.20.


A good Minister should be able to say with John, 1 Ioh. 1.1. That which we
have heard sitting at the Feet of our learned Gamaliels, and that which we
have seen with our Eyes and looked on, found out by reading and searching of
the holy Scriptures, and good Authors; yea that which we have handled and
felt the Power of in our own hearts, declare we unto you; such an
experimental Preacher is the best Preacher.

The second thing we observe hence is,

CHRIST'S word is sufficient Confirmation of Doctrine.

You see our Savior propounds his Doctrine in his own name, he would be
known to be the Doctor of the Chair, whose voice alone must be heard both of
Pastors and people.

Pythageras his (...) svvayed his Scholars; so should Christ his (...) bear
sway with us: Scipio's Soldiers in Obedience to his command would leap
down from the battlements of a Tower. If his command could prevail so much
with his men, what should Gods ( Ego dico, I say) do with us? Resolve with thy
self to give credit to what God does say, though a thousand devils should
gainsay it. This Point we have handled more largely, on Luke 15.7-10. We leave
the Confirmation, and come now to the Doctrine.

Her Sins which are many are forgiven her,
This is the Position, wherein we must take notice, first of the Point,
secondly, Of the Proof.

The Point is this, Her sins which are many are forgiven her.

The Proof, in the other clause, For she loved much, q. d. Were it not thus,
she could not manifest such love unto me, for it arises from a Sense she has
of my Mercy in the Forgiveness of her so many and great sins.

First of the Point, which has two Branches. First, Mary's sins were many.
Secondly. Those many sins whereof she was guilty, were remitted and forgiven
her. Of the first.

Mary's sins were many
In the 37. verse. of this Chapter, she was called Peccatrix, 1 King. 1.21.
Psalm. 26.9. Mat. 9.10, 13. and 11.12. Luke 5.30. and 19.7. Joh. 9.16, 31. 1
Cor. 15.17.
a Sinner. They are called Sinners usually in Scripture, who make a trade and
custom of sin, and are so viciously given as that they are reputed, and that
justly vile, living and lying in sin, and obdured in a notorious trade of
evil. Sin indeed is in all, but all are not in their sin, i. e. drowned,
captivated, dungeon'd under it. We say such a man is indrinke; drink may be in
him yet he sober, but when we say he is in drink, it implies that he is
exceedingly overcome with it and drunken. Sin is in the Godly, it dwells in
me (says S. Paul, Psalm. 3^.11. Job 1.1. Mat. 1.19.
Romans 7.20.) It was an Inmate to him (and that sore against his will too) but
he says not that he dwelt in sin, for than that should be his Lord and he an
Inmate to it. A man that has sin in him may be said to be godly and perfect,
as they are said to be in Scriptures; but he that is in his sins cannot be said
to be so. The one may have a grain of Ungodliness in him (yea many) but the
Ungodliness of the other is in grain: And such was this Woman, She was sinful
for her life, hateful for her lust, a notorious, enormious, public Publican;
one who by custom in her sin became so inveterate, that she took her name
from thence, a Sinner, yea a City-Sinner, one in whose heart the Devil
occupied a large room, and found good entertainment, else he would never have
taken six other inmates with him to dwell and lodge there, as we read he did,
Luke 8.2. Mark. 16.9. Which (whither (with S. Ambrose) we understand seven
real Devils, as generally it is understood, or the manifoldnesse of her
sins and filthy life (according to that in the Parable, Luke 11.26.) (as St.
Gregory conceives to be the meaning) discovers that she was a vicious Woman and
lived incontinently: She had an unclean spirit in her, which brought in others
with him, and had got the Mastery of her heart, and gives us thus much to
understand,

Incontinency of life is enough to give the denomination, and is a sin that is
accompanied with many other sins besides it self.

A brood of sins are hatched out of this one Egg. Instance we but in David's
case (we need go no further) The Devil having prevailed with him in the sin
of Adultery, draws him on to other sins, whereby he might hide his wickedness
from the world, so that they might not espy it. First, He sends speedily for
Vriah the husband of Bathsheba (whom he had defiled) and calls him from the
Field under a color of desiring to be made acquainted by his Report with the
state of the Camp and the success of the service, when all was but merus
pretextus, a mere pretense: For David intended no other thing then by his
being at home and companying with his wife, 1 Samuel 11.8, 10
that adulterous conception might be (if not altogether secured, yet) the less
suspected. And thus he sought to cloak the matter by a false Imputation. In
which plot David did not only sin against God and his own soul, but intended
three other notorious Injuries: The first was against the Conception, that
child which was begotten of his body he would have disclaimed and renounced
before it was borne. The second was against Vriah on whom he would have
obtruded a child by fraud and imposture. The third against Vriah his Family and
Posterity, Intrudit filium suum in agros Vriae, Pet. Mar.
which by his means might have bin (if not defrauded, yet) in all likelihood
wronged much in their Inheritance.

David hated drunkenness in his heart, and it is like he did punish it in
others, and yet to hide his own shame, he is not ashamed to draw Vriah into
this wickedness. But all this took no place; for though Vriah with the royal
wine was overcome, yet (as God would have it) not so far as to be deprived
of his senses, he still remembers the Ark of the LORD, the danger of the
Host of Israel, and will not go home to his Wife, so that still David's sin
is like to come to light.

David did not thus give over, now he devises how to take away Vriahs life,
and to practice the death of an innocent man, and one of his worthies, hoping
by that means a free way might be made for this matching with the widow, and
so the child might be thought to be begotten in wedlock. But how shall this be
done? Why Ioab the General of the Camp must be wrought unto the place Vriah
in the forefront of the battle, and then suddenly to retire from him; that so
Vriah being left in danger, he might be smitten and die by the sword of the
children of Ammon. O! What a notorious treachery was this! Surpassing that
which Ahab used against Naboth: For He coveted but his Vineyard, David Vriahs
wife, Ahab was put on to that through the provocation of Iesabell, David to
this through the lust of his own heart; in that Naboath died alone, in this
diverse of the people of the servants of David fell, Ioabs Commission extended
no further than to the smiting of Vriah, yet that could not be done without the
loss of more. And thus you see how he stood not out against this temptation to
Adultery, but gave way to it, is at length become a man of blood, a sin that
usually follows the sin of Uncleanness, Hoc solum inter omnia malum nihil
habet cui comparari possit Basil Epist. ad Orig lapsum.
as is confirmed and justified by too much experience. No marvel then S. Basil
speaking of Adultery averreth, That this evil amongst all has nothing to
which it may be compared.

Rogo quantum crimen est ubi stuprum and Adulterium parvum est? Hiero^; Epist.
48.
(says St. Hierom) I pray you how great is the wickedness where Whoredom and
Adultery is thought to be small? There is no sin that does more enlarge Hell or
endanger the soul of man than this.

I have read a Story of a Hermet that led a devout and solitary life, one day
talking with the Devil, he demanded of him which were the greatest sins, he
answered him Covetousness and Lust: The other demanded again whether
Blasphemy and Perjury were not greater; the Reply of Satan was that in the
Schools of Divinity they were the greatersins, but for the increase of his
Revenews the other were far the greater. And therefore Beda styles Lust,
filiam Diaboli, Bada in Pro. 30
the daughter of the Devil, which brings forth many children to him daily.
Nor does any one such special service to the Devil, as an Harlot. By her the
wisest man, by her the strongest man, by her an whole army of men have bin
ensnared, as we read, Numb. 31.16. For when Balaac the King and Balaam the
Prophet had practiced against Gods people to bring them out of Gods Favor and
by no means could: This course was taken through the advice of Balaam that
witch: A Squadron of the fairest women that the country could afford were sent
amongst the Israelites (says Lyra) who did bear in their Banner for their
device the Image of Belphegor, which was the Idol of the Moabites and
Midianites, and in this Pit-fall was 24 thousand taken who rendered themselves
captives to those Moabitish women, committed whoredom with them and adored
their god, Numb. 25.12.

Nor need the Soul any other conveyance to the pit of Hell then this; Pro. 5.5.
Her feet got down to death and her steps take hold on Hell(says Solomon of
the whorish woman.) It is down Hill and they go apace unto it, yea are very
near it, at the pits brinke, they take possession of it, as one does by
holding the ring of a door, there is no more to be done, but to set up their
abode in it, and unto that they make great speed, if timely Repentance prevent
not.

There be those who flatter themselves in the indifferency or sleightnesse of
this sin, conceiting it is but a trick of Youth, etc. but that is an unhappy
trick that endangereth a man's soul. Let them take heed they loose not Heaven
by this trick they have, and plunge themselves into the pit of Perdition before
they be a ware. It is truly said, A whore is the high way to Hell, he that
looks on her with lust, begins his journey; he that stays to talk with her is
half his way; he that enjoyes her is at his journeyes end. And who so has
thus fallen must go the price of many a tear and heavy groan of a broken
heart to recover himself; no way but by unfeigned Repentance to help
themselves, which was the course this Penitent took in my Text. And so though
they have admitten such a. Prostitution of their bodies as she did, they shall
obtain such a Restitution of their Honors as she had, who of a grievous
Sinner became a rare Saint, and had Her sins forgiven, which is the next Branch
of the Point I am to speak.

The many sins whereof Mary was guilty, upon her Repentance were forgiven her;
so then this is an undoubted Truth,

That greevous Sinners upon Repentance shall find Mercy.

See more of this Point in my Expos. on the Parable of the Prodigal. Ezekiel.
18.22, 23
And for further Proof, read, 2 Chronicles. 33.12. 1 Cor. 6.11. 1 Timothy 1.12, 13.
Acts 2.138, 39. Luke 15.20.

What should hinder? Such are Subjects capeable of Mercy being sensible of
their vileness and Misery.

And God is both able and willing to show them mercy, their debt is already
paid, as before has bin noted. So that he can do it, and he is as willing as
able, for mercy pleases him.

Sinner and led a vicious life, defiling thy foul with many sins, yet suffer
not thy self through Satan's malice to be plunged into the pit of despair;
thou have provoked Gods Justice grievously heretofore by thy Presumption, wrong
not his Mercy through Desperation. Read and regard what thou read, Ezekiel.
18.27. There thou shall find that if in case any has defiled his Neighbors
wife, oppressed the poor and Fatherless or taken by Violence from them, or
lift up his Eyes to Idols, or given out to ^^su^y; all foul and notorious
crimes, yet if that man return from his wickedness that he has commi^^ed he
shall save his soul alive, he shall live and not die as we find, v. 28.

If you ^^sire to see the force of the rule in some Examples, you have many, Si
impius es cogita Publicanum, etc. (says S. Chrysostom) If thou b^^st wicked,
think on the Publican; If unclean, forget not Rahab; If a manslayer, look
upon the Thief; If unjust, think on the Blasphemer; If an Idolater, remember
Abraham; If a Persecutor, remember Paul: And amongst all other Examples have
this in our Text in thy mind: God forbid that any one Devil should get the
possession of thy heart, as he had of hers, and yet though it had, nay though
seven, though a Legion of Devils were in thee, thy Confession and Tears would
cast them out.

We read, Hosea 2.15. that God promises to give to the Children of Israel the
valley of Achor for the door of Hope, alluding to that we read, Josh. 7.5, 25,
26. This Valley of Achor, was the place where Achan and his Family were stoned
to death, for taking of the accursed thing: Which Valley was afterward by
Joshua named the Valley of Achor, because the people of Israel being there
overcome by the men of Ai, were exceedingly troubled so that their hearts
melted like water, and little hope they had of entering into the Land of
Promise, the which reason of that name Joshua himself gives, Verse 25, 26.
But afterward this Valley was unto them a place of great Joy and C^mfort, both
because they there obtained a great victory against their Enemies, and also
because they enjoyed this Valley which was exceeding fertile and fruitful of
Vines and other Trees, which served as pledges to confirm their hope and
assurance of enjoying that good I and which God had promised to give them,
notwithstanding the malice of their enemies. Thus the former Doctrine delivered
of the vileness and danger of that sin of Uncleanness and Incontinency is
like to the Valley of Achor, full of trouble and grief to all such as are
guilty. But this Valley of Achor is given for a door of hope; this Mary's
Repentance is of purpose recorded to raise up the hopes of dejected spirits;
for God is still the same, and as ready to receive Penitents as he ever was.

At the presence of the Sun all the other lights withdraw themselves, and
hide their heads in a cowardly kind of fashion; but when the Moon begins to
shine, they recover their former boldness, and liberty. Had we no other to
cast our Eyes you, but such as John Baptist, and that Mary who was blessed
above women, the mother of our Lord where were our hopes? But where we have the
Examples of such Sinners as these before mentioned shining to us, we cannot but
hold up our heads and come abroad expecting to be made partakers upon
Repentance of the like Mercy: Wherefore let not the Eunuch say, I am a dry Tree;
let none say J have been an Adulterer, a Murderer and can have no place in
Heaven: For who so confesses and forsakes sin shall find Mercy assuredly.

Noli dicere nu^ quid ecce talem hominem Deus correcturus est ^am malum ta^
perversum? noli desperare, que^ rogas attend, non pro quo rogas, magnitudinom
mo^bi vi de^, potentia^n nedici non vides, Aug in Ps. 55.
As we may not despair of our selves, neither may we despair of others, say
not (says S. Austin) what will God ever amend such a man so wicked, so
perverse? Do not despair, look on him to whom thou prayest, and not on him for
whom thou prayest: Thou see the greatness of the disease, thou see not the
power of the Physician. Thou see such an one to run on in the race of
wickedness, led captive of the Devil to do his will, a branch of the wild
Olive, etc. yet let all rash Judgment of his future estate be restreyned, how
desperate soever his present estate may seem to thee to be, Qui fecit,
reficere potest, he that made him can mend him, God is able to graft him in,
Romans 11.23. And who knows what his will is, Whose ways are past finding out.
Shoot not th^n your Fools bolt so rashly, as with the Barbarians to say,
surely this man or woman is a Reprobate; notorious Sinners may be called, when
glorious Hypocrites shall be condemned, Publicans and Harlots saved, when
conceited Scribes and Pharisees shall be rejected. Mat. 21.


Was not this woman as unlikely to have prooved a holy liver as any thou
know? Had not the Devil as strong Possession of her, whilst she was under
the guard of seven unclean spirits? Was not Paul as unlikely to have prooved
so able a Minister of the Gospel of Christ, whilst he was a Persecutor of the
Saints, a Blasphemer of God, Act. 9.1.2.
etc. Had thou seen him with the High Priest, when his Commission was a
sealing for the apprehending and punishing of all those who professed Christ,
whither they were men or women, and met him in the way trudging to Damascus for
that end and purpose, little would thou have thought, that this man would
ever have sealed the Gospel with his blood, and have bin so zealous as
afterward he was, in that way which he now persecuted. As the wind blows
where it will, so the Spirit beats where it pleases him. Nec quantitas
crianinis, Cypr Sermon de cana Domini.
nec brevitas temporis, nec horae extremitas, nec v^tae enormitas excludit a
venia (says St. Cyprian) Neither does the greatness of the Crime, not the
shor^^^sse of the Time, neither the extremity of the last hour, nor the
Enormitie of the whole life exclude from pardon.

In the 2 Samuel 1. We read of an Amalekite, who brought news to David the King,
of the Death of Saul; and to assure David thereof he told him that he himself
stood upon him and slew him, because he was sure he could not live being fore
wounded, verse 9, 10. Upon which Relation David presently commanded that this
Amalekite should be put to Death, as one condemned by his own mouth, verse 15,
16. Why what was his offense? Wherein had he deserved Death? Alas, Saul was
fallen before upon his own Spear; it was but mercy to kill him out right who
was half dead already, etc. Yea but Saul said (by his own Confession) my life
is yet whole in me, he was not dead yet, he was alive, and whilst there is life
there is hope, therefore did David slay him, Q^um percussum ab host desperasset
esse victurum, and eum sublata spei filucia jugulasset, D^^erm. ^om. in Eccl.
c. 2. v. 20
because that being wounded of the Enemy he despaired of life, and having no
confidence of hope, he had killed the anointed of the Lord: He should have
used his best diligence to have preserved Saul, and done what lay in him to
have bound up his wounds, and not by despair of help to say he could not
live. And thus is it in the case of sin. If we see any desperately wounded,
yet whilst life remains there is hope of Mercy to be had; fall not upon him
with thy Sword, slay him not out right by thy rash censure, but follow thou the
Apostles Direction, 2 Timothy 2.25. Instruct them who are contrary minded, use all
good means to reclaim them, prooving if at any time GOD will give them
Repentance and bring them out of the snares of the Devil, who are taken
Captive by him to do his Will.

Are forgiven] In Graeco non est (...), se^ (...), quod pr^eterit^ temporis
nota, peccata jam ipsi remissa suisse osten lit, Mathes. in loc.

Something may be noted from the Tence; They are, not shall be hereafter, nor
are now to be at this present, but already it is done. No sooner did she
believe in Christ her Savior, but her sins were remitted and forgiven her,
even before she washed and anointed him. It is noted against the Papists, who
would have works to share half with Faith in man's Justification, and therefore
urge the Text, as speaking of the time present, we hold that works follow
Instification, Non precedunt (as speaks St. Austin: Aug. de fide and oper: c.
14.
) But more of this in that which follows. We come now to the Proof of the
Point, (...).

For she loved much.]
The Rhemists note upon this is, Not only Faith (as you may perceive, say they)
but Love or Charity obtains Remission of Sin in the first act of
Justification.

But how may we perceive this? Why the Particle (...) proves it and shows that
Love was the cause why her many sins were forgiven her. (...) idem valet (...),
Aret. in loc.


But are they ignorant of this the For is oftentimes a note of Inference or
Consequence, and as well an argument of the Effect from the Cause, as of the
Cause from the Effect: We say it is Springtime; Why so? For, or Because the
Fig Tree puts forth and buds: The putting forth of the Fig Tree argues the
Springtime, Dilectio hic no^ dicitur esse venia causa, sed posterius signum
Calv.
but the budding and putting forth of the Fig Tree is not the Cause of
Springtime. I say this child is alive, because it cries, or this man lives,
because he mooves; will any so understand me as if I meant the crying of the
one and the mooving of the other is the Cause of life and motion in the one or
in the other? Our Savior himself uses this kind of arguing, as we find John
15.15. I have called you Friends, for all things I have heard of my Father, I
have made known unto you, where declaring of those things to them is the
Effect not cause of his Love.

And that our Savior here reasons from the Effect to the Cause is evident
enough from the whole discourse, the scope whereof is to show that the
forgiveness of the debt of sin is a just cause of Love according to the
measure and rate of the sins forgiven as is evident in such debtors from whom
the similitude is taken, who bear no special love unto their creditours,
until they know how they shall be dealt withal.

Now if it should be as the Papists would have it, that Love and the Fruits
thereof should be a cause of Remission, our Saviors Application should be
directly contrary to that which in this Parable he had propounded, for then the
greater Sinner should have somewhat to satisfy, when the Parable says that
not so much as the lesser can do it: And that which in the Parable he had
made the Cause of the Love of the Forgiven Person, here he should make the
Effect of it.

Besides, the other clause immediately following does evidence it sufficiently
that our Savior argues from the Effect: For to whom little is forgiven, says
our Savior, the same loves little; so that according to the proportion of
Forgiveness, the proportion of Love follows.

S. Ambrose thus understands the plate, Bellar. depaenit lib. 2. c 14. resp. ad
object.
and Bellarmine himself says, that these words of Christ, Many sins are
forgiven her, Confirmant absolutionem invisibiliter datam, do confirm the
Absolution invisibly before given: So then the Absolution which was given
before was confirmed by her Love, and by it she might know and rest assured
that her sins were remitted, according to that of St. John 1 Epist. 3.14. We
know that we have passed from death to life, because we love the Brethren.

This Collection then of theirs you see is but grating upon a word and contrary
to the sense of the place, a mere (...): A folly it is to follow them too far;
we come to such as the Text will naturally afford, as first

A Proof (a posteriore) from the Effect is a strong Proof, and very
Demonstrative. Thus the Truth of our Faith is to be prooved, James 2.18. And of
Repentance, 2 Cor. 7.11. And of Charity, 1 John 3.14 And so Saint James prooves
Wisdom from above by the Effects, James 3.17. Still Scripture puts us upon
the Trial of our Graces, by these kind of Proofs.

Grace is invisible in its Nature, it cannot be seen in habitu: Therefore as
GOD was seen to Moses, so is Grace to men, by its Backe-parts; and as the wind
which no man can see in its proper Essence, by the full sails of the Ship is
perceived which way it stands.

Direction to us in our Examination and trial of our selves. I deny not but a
Proof or Demonstration, a priori, from the Cause to the Effect is better and
more excellent in its own nature then the other: But for us in the trial of
our spiritual estates it is safer and more demonstrative to proceed from the
Effect to the Cause. Would I know if the Sun shines? there is no climbing up to
the Sky to be resolved, nor examining what matter it is made off; I look upon
the beams shining on the Earth, I perceive it is up and shines by the light
and heat it gives. Would I know if GOD has elected me to life and to
salvation? There is no climbing up into Heaven to know his Decrees and hidden
Counsel (as too many would most audaciously) but study well the marks of it
from the Effects. The head of Nilus cannot be found, but the sweet Springs
issuing from thence are well known. No surer way to the Sea, then by taking a
River by the hand. Our Vocation and Sanctification will carry us to Election,
Romans 8.30. 2 Pet. 1.5-10.

These are the means whereby our Election and Salvation is made certain, not
the efficient Causes whereby it comes to be decreed. The Sun not the shadow
makes the Day, yet we know not how the Day goes by the Sun, but by the
shadow. In a word, as the Planets are known by their Influence, the Diamond by
his Luster, and the Soul by her Vital Operations, so Grace is most sensibly
known to us by the Effects thereof.



That a true and unfeined love of Christ is a sure sign that our sins are
remitted.

David thus reasons, Psalm 18.1, 2. I will love thee O Lord my strength, he got
that lesson by heart, yea in his heart; now presently he takes forth, The Lord
is my Rock and my Fortress and my deliverer, my God, my strength in whom I
will trust, my Buckler and the horn of my Salvation.

This Argument our Savior uses to raise up and comfort Peter after his fall,
who questionless was much cast down under the sight and sense of his sin.
Simon thou son of Jonah love thou me? Ioh. 21.15. q. d. If this be in thee,
be of good comfort, know thy sins are remitted, and God reconciled to thee: So
1 John 4.16. He that dwells in Love dwells in GOD and GOD in him: Now as
the Prophet speaks, Can two walk together except they be agreed? Questionless
God is reconciled to them who truly love him; else he would not be an
Inhabitant within them. So, 1 Pet. 1.3, 4, 8.

Peter before noted, 1 Timothy 1.5.
after he said they loved the Lord, he infers presently they also believed
in him. Which (as we shall after see, verse. 50.) is the isntrumental Cause of
our Justification. It is Faith that brings the holy Fire of Love into our
frozen hearts, Gal. 5.6.
or they would never be warmed with it. In Nature we see nothing can moove in
desire to this or that till first it has apprehended it lovely; whilst the
debtor thinks of the rigor of his Creditour he does fear him not affect him
truly, so our affections cannot in love and desire move to God, and unite
themselves with God till by Faith we discern him as reconciled to us, and an
amiable object for us sinners to embrace: But when once it comes to see Gods
love forgiving it many sins, then it cannot but love much again.

Assurance of Pardon of Sin cannot in this life be attained unto. If the
Assurance of our Love to God may be had, then may the Assurance of the Pardon
of our Sins be attaind unto: but the former may be had, therefore the latter.

That the Assurance of our Love to God may be had is clear. S. Peter was
undoubtedly assured of it (and that even in the time of the great dejectedness
of his spirit) else he would never have said as he did, Joh. 21.17.
Lord thou know all things, thou know that I love thee; So the faithful
in whose name the Apostle speaks, 1 John. 3.14. were undoubtedly assured that
they loved the children of GOD, by which Love likewise they were assured that
they were translated from Death to Life, for that none can truly love the
Children of God, but they must love the Father also.

Ob. But every Grace has its counterfit, and the heart is deceitful above all
things?

Resp. This Grace can the hardliest be counterfetted of any other Grace: There
is scarce any thing else that we can instance in, says one, but a Hypocrite may
go cheek by jowle with a good Christian: He may do all outward services, D.
Preston his Treat. of Love p. 151. and on Effectual faith page 72.
he may abstain from sins, a great change may be wrought in him, we know how
far the third ground went, Matthew. 13. And those, Hebr. 6. But this they
cannot counterfeit to love the LORD. A Hypocrite may hear the Word, Pray, give
Alms, but to do these out of Love, that is a thing which no Hypocrite is able
to reach unto.

Secondly, though saving Graces have their Counterfets, yet a man may be
assured by the Word that he has this and other Graces in him in Sincerity so
as that he cannot be deceived in them: For as God gave Moses in the Mount a
Pattern, according to which he would have all things made in the Tabernacle,
Hebr. 8.5. So that when he viewed the work and saw all was done according to
that Pattern, he was sure he had done right, and blessed them, as we read,
Exodus 39.43. So has God given us a Pattern in his Word, according to which he
would have every thing in his spiritual Tabernacle (as Faith, Repentance,
Love, Obedience, etc) to be wrought: And if a man can find that the Grace he
has be according to the Pattern, as (if he take pains with himself to view
the work, as Moses did) he may, then he may be sure it is right, and shall have
cause of rejoicing, as the Apostle says Gal. 6.4.

the Assurance of the pardon of Sin. Thou need not climb up into Heaven
to search Gods Books whither they be crossed or no, there to behold the Face of
God whither he smile or frown; but dive into thine own soul, and there find
out what love thou bear to thy Maker and blessed Savior; if thou find
that thou love him unfainedly, that is, that thou love him more than these,
love him for himself, for those beauties and excellencies that are in him:
It is the greatest Comfort that thou can have in this life, for that thou
may rest assured hereupon that God is reconciled to thee, and that thy sins
(be they never so great or many) are forgiven thee. Finding this in thee, thou
may be sure, and never till than can thou be assured of it. For, we may
easier carry Coals in our bosom without burning, than by Faith apprehend
truly this Love of God in the pardoning of sin without finding our hearts burn
in Love to him answerably. But in finding that we have the giving hand of Love,
giving to God as Mary here did, those duties that are owing, we may assure our
selves that we have likewise the receiving hand of Faith, whereby we have
apprehended and laid hold of those mercies which are peculiar to Gods elect in
Christ, though for the present it may be thou may have no feeling of it.

Only see that our Love be rightly qualified, that it has these requisites
which Gods Word speaks off that it be with all our hearts, with all our souls,
with all our might, Deuteronomy. 6.5. Mark, 10.30. By which variety of words God would
teach us that he must be loved with all whatsoever is in us and in our powers
both intensively and extensively, as far as is possible. All the affections
and powers of the soul must be gathered together and united, like the
Sunne-beames in a burning-Glasse to make our Love more hot and fervent. Our
love to him must be greater then to our selves or to any other thing belonging
to us, Plusquam te, plusquam tua, plusquam tuos, as St. Bernard speaks;
otherwise as Simon Peter said to Simon Magus in another case, Thou have neither
part nor portion in this business.

In the third place we do observe,

That loving much argues much mercy received from the beloved party.

When men have bin extraordinarily kind unto us; you know how marvellously it
works with us upon the apprehension of it, so was it here with Marie, and so
with Peter, and so with other of the Saints, still you shall find the deeper
sense they have had of their own sin and wretchedness, the more have their
hearts bin instamed with love to G^^^ upon the apprehension of his Mercy in
their R^^^ssion; the more zealous have they bin for his Glory, the more
thankful for his Mercy, the more desirous to please him, the more fearful
to offend him, and the more ready to turn unto him by Repentance, as has bin
before showed, verse. 43. Now because the next part or member of this verse is
brought in as an Illustration of this Position, we will add only a word or two
for Application.

etc. every other common mercy would be as bellows to blow our Love to a
greater flame, and till we enter upon that thought we shall not love with any
great fervency of spirit, as follows in the opposite clause.

To whom little is forgiven, the same loves little.
As if our blessed Savior should say thus to Simon, thou performest not those
offices of Love that she does, for that thou apprehendest not such mercy in the
forgiveness of so great a debt as she, who is of the number of those who owed
500. pence. Thou amongst those who owe but 50. therefore blame her not though
she manifest so much affection, when thou show so little. So that you see

Proportionable to that assurance we have of the Remission of sin by Faith in
Christ will be that Love we bear to Christ.

When a man conceives that little is forgiven, he will love but little, but
upon the apprehension and persuasion that much is remitted a man cannot but
love much. Look what measure of Love is in any, the like measure of Faith is
in him: For as they are together (as before was showed) so commonly they are
together in the same degree: If no Faith, than no Love; if but a show of Faith,
than but a show of Love; if weak Faith, than there is but a weak Love; if an
interrupted Faith, then an interrupted Love.

Love we may judge of the degree of Faith; there are who boast of the strength
and assurance of their Faith that they are persuaded of the Love of God in
Christ, in the pardon of their many and heinous sins, etc. But is it likely
that by the Eye of Faith they see the height, depth, breadth, and length of the
Love and Favor of God, when they cease not to dishonor him by a lewd and
licentious life; had these men once felt the Love of God shed abroad in their
hearts, and did indeed believe that God had done so much for them (as they say)
they would manifest it, as David did, in pouring out the water that he longed
for before the Lord; when he thought it was displeasing to him, that he should
get it with the jeopardy of the life of those Worthies.

Ethnicks or any other superstitious Persons pretend toward God: St. Paul
grants to the Jews, a zealous Love of God, but (says he) it is not
according to Knowledge (which is the beginning of Faith) Now true Love of God
is the Handmaid of Faith: If then it comes gadding abroad and attends not on
her Mistress, it may well be censured to be base and blind. Look what the
Apostle speaks of Faith without Charity, 1 Cor. 13 1. We may say of Charity
without Faith. If we had all the Love in the World, and yet had no Faith;
assuring us of the Remission of our sins, our Love would be nothing.

Reason, whence it is that GOD is no more beloved in the world; Surely hence
for that there is little or no Faith in the world, they have not a sense of
Mercy, nor do they apprehend the greatness of it in the pardoning of so
great a Debt as they owe to GOD: They think they are but amongst those
penny-men, that they are indebted to GOD but in some small Sums, they are
Sinners as others are, and that is all. Did they but consider seriously what
their sins are, what hearts they have, what lives they have led, they could not
but be marvellously affected with Gods love and favor.

You know how it affected Saul when he fell into the Hands of David, and had
no hurt done by him, considering how he had used David before, and yet now
that David should spare his Life so unexpectedly and undeservedly; Oh! This
melted him into Tears, Levavit vocem suam and fl^vit (says the Text) This
made him confess, Thou art more Righteous than I, my Son David. If a man
would seriously consi^er how we have beehaved our selves toward GOD from time
to time, how we have refused Mercy, contemned Grace, etc. Yet that GOD should
still follow us with a Pardon, be content to blot out all the old Scoare, and
to receive us again into his Favor, this could not but work upon the hardest
heart, and inflame the Love of God in our souls daily.

VERSE 48, 49, 50. etc.
Here we have a comfortable Application made by our blessed Savior unto the
woman, of that which before he had told Simon: Wherein consider we, First, Her
Absolution, verse. 48, 49. Secondly, Her Dismission, verse. 50.

In Her Absolution, we have: First, the Sentence pronounced, verse. 48.
Secondly, an Exception made against it, ver. 49.

In the former, we note. 1. The Person absolving [He said thy sins are
forgiven.] 2. The Person absolved [unto her thy sins, etc.] From the Person
absolving, we learn,


The power of Absolution and Remission of sins is a power belonging unto
Christ: His it is

Isay. 43.12. Luke 5.21, 24. Matthew. 9.6. Revel. 3. and 1.18.

If you ask me, how Christ came by it, seeing none can forgive sin but God, I
answer

First, He had it by Commission from God; it was A Power given him by His
Father, as he himself says.

Secondly, By means of the Union of the Godhead and Manhood into one Person,
he had this Power: As he was God he had it of Himself; as he was Man he had it
by virtue of the Union from God.

Object. But the Apostles had, and the Ministers of the Gospel have this
Power, for so we read, Mat. 16.19 which words, though in that place directed to
S. Peter, because he by that Confession which he made in the verses before,
gave occasion to our Savior of mentioning this Prerogative, and power of the
Church, yet they were intended for all the Apostles (and in them for all
Ministers successively) as appears, Matthew. 18.18. Ioh. 20.23. In both which
places he uses the plural number; and by a solemn Ceremony of brea^hing upon
them (as S. John shows) he inv^sted them all with this Authority.

Resp. They have so, but their Power was not Primitive, but Derivative, not
Absolute, but Delegate; in their own name they do it not, but in the Name of
their Lord and Master, 2 Cor. 5.18. 2 Cor. 2.10. God pardons (...), The
Minister only, (...): In respect of supre ame authority in God, this Power is
authoritative, he pardons in dependenter and ex authoritate primaria. In Christ
this power is said to be excellenter, because he has by his blood set open the
Kingdom of Heaven for all believers; and he pardons ex commissione, by a
second and derived authority. In Man this Power is ministerialiter, he pardons
by a ministerial publication of the word of Pardon (the power of which we
shall in the next Point show.)

Object. But other men are bound to forgive, as well as Minister, so we find,
Matthew. 18. If you forgive not, says CHRIST, neither will my Father forgive you.

Resp. In one and the same act there may be a Trespass against man, and a
Sin against God (as was in David's Adultery and murder) men may, yea must
forgive the trespass and wrong offered to themselves; But the Sin against
God, they have not to meddle with.

The Rhemists in their annotations upon this place charge us (who are
Heretics in their language) with denying the Church this power of remiting
sins by Christ's Authority. Rhem Annot. in Luc. 7.
Vid. Chem. Exa^ Conc. Trid p. 2. p. 221.


Concerning Absolution both Public and Private, agreeable to the Scriptures,
D. White in his Orthodox way p. 272.
both in the outward Discipline of the Church, and in the Ministry of the Word
and Sacraments, and Remission of sins conferred God therein, we in the Church
of England, with other Protestant Churches do maintain and justify: But for
their Popish Absolution (being dissonant from the Scriptures, and as they use
it, no way thereby warranted) we disavow: For,

First, They say, that their Bishops and Priests, Potestas ligandi and solvendi
non minor est in Ecclesia, quam fuit in Christo? Cusanus Christus Petro vices
suas tradidit, ipsamque cla vem excellentiae, Maldon. Rhem. Annot. in Ioh. 20.
Sect. 3. and 5.
have full right to remit sin, and that not only as Ministers and Dispensers,
but they have full power as Christ had; nor is that Power less in the Church
then it was in Christ: They have the same Power of excellency (they say) with
him. And he that doubts of this (say the Rhemists) may as well doubt, whether
Christ had authority as man to forgive sin.

We teach (as before was said) that the Ministers Power is but Ministerial:
And for any mortal man to challenge to themselves such a Power as they speak
off, is a high presumption against God. And if it be as the Pharisees held it
to be (and as indeed it is) Blasphemy to attribute forgiveness of sins to any
but to God, we may be excused though we should say that with Rabsekah, they
have blasphemed the living God in thus speaking.

Secondly, They say, Suarez. 3. D. 9. Bellar. de paenit. l 3. c. 2.
that their Priests forgive sin by the words of Absolution, in such a manner
as Christ wrought miracles, and forgave sin by his voice, John 11.43. Per
veram and physicam efficientiam, by a true and physical efficiency, reaching
to the very production of Grace, and dissolution and destruction of sin;
including the Power of it within certain words and syllables.

We say, That the Minister does forgive, as he is said to save or to give
Repentance, and Faith, 1 Cor. 9.22. 1 Timothy 4.16. GOD uses their Ministry,
whereby they coapt and prepare sinners that they may be capable of Salvation,
by working in them such dispositions of Faith and Repentance (through the
preaching of the Gospel) as are required in those that shall be saved: Now
this is not done by a bare pronouncing of words and syllables, but by the
effectual working of the Spirit of God. In which respect he is pleased to
account of his Ministers as Co-workers with him. And herein do some of the
Principal Schoolmen join with us, Page 273.
as D. White in his Orthodox has learnedly showed.

Thirdly, In this Point of Absolution they fail, whilst they hold, that at the
will and pleasure of every Priest, exercising the Keys on Earth; men are bound
and loosed in Heaven: This they ground on the generality of the words,
Absolutio ex causa falsa valet, Emman Sa. Aphoris. in ver. Excom.
Ioh. 20.23. Whose-soever sins you remit they are remitted, And Matthew. 18.18.
Whatsoever you bind on Earth shall be bound in Heaven. So that say they let the
cause be false, or Absolution unjust, Absolutio injusta valet. Tolet de
Instruct. Sacer l 1 c. 14. Quomodo Sacer dos mundum leprosum non facit, sic
Episcopus vel Presbiter non alligat eos qui insontes su^t, nec solvit noxi os,
sed pro officio Sacerdotali, cu^peccatoram varietates audierit, scit qui
ligandus, qui solvendus sit. Hiero^
yet it is available.

We say, that the use of the Keys is determined and limited by God (as the
Priests power was in the case of Leprosy) and depends not on the Will and
pleasure of the Minister. No Minister on Earth ever had or shall have power to
open Heaven to him against whom God will have it shut; nor to shut it against
him to whom God will have it opened. No man can open it unto a Caine, or to a
Judas, or to a Julian: Nor shut it against an Abel, or against a Zacheus, or a
Mary, etc. God ratifieth the act of his servants in Heaven, with the proviso of
Clave non errante, if they abuse it not on Earth, but exercise it daily upon
fit persons. He will not partake with the errors of his Ministers, nor regard
their Passions, nor be hindered from doing Justice by their Ignorance: He has
not bereaved himself of this Power in committing it to them (as Bellarmine
seems to imply in that he would have the world believe that the Keys remain
in Christ's hand only at the vacancy of the Popedom) so as that he cannot work
without their means: Bellar. de Romans ^ont.
For he can bestow Absolution when he pleases, and on whom he pleases,
without their means. Pro 17.15. Pro. 26.3. Joh. 9.34.
If a sinner seriously converting and believing in Christ, cannot obtain
Absolution from the Priest (he being either passionate, or misinformed of the
Truth) yet God will certainly pardon him: Or if on the other side, a Priest
should be indulgent, and apt to wink at vices: Or if he be deceived with an
appearance of Repentance, and so shall absolve an Hypocritical Sinner and
receive him into the Communion of the faithful, yet that man so absolved
remains still bound before God, and shall be punished notwithstanding. He
that turns the Key the wrong way (as did the Pharisees and as do the Papists)
will never open the door of Heaven.

Fourthly, They fail whilst they pronounce not Absolution upon the right
condition, Viz. Faith and Repentance, which as you see our blessed Savior here
eyes in Mary's Remission: For according to their Doctrine their Sacrament of
Penance (whereof this is a part) conferreth Grace without any precedent
disposition more than Attrition, Coster enchir. c. de p^enit. Sola attritione,
etc. Vega pro council l. 1. c. 21. and 25 Stapl. Antid. Romans 7.15. Mald sum q.
16 art 1. Homo invitus potest absolvi igrarus and inscius, vid. Azor lib. 1. c.
9. q. 2. Buckler of faith, page 392.
which implies (according to sundry Popish Doctors) no formal purpose of
forsaking sin, nor any sorrow, either sensitive or intellectual for the same;
but a villeity or wishing one were able to be sorry for sin, and could forsake
it. Nay the Pope gives Absolutions (sealed with lead in form of a judicial
Sentence of a Court) although he know not the Repentance of a Sinner, or
whether he will be absolved or not. Peter du Moulin in the Defense of the
Confession of Faith of the reformed Churches, against the Objections of the
Jesuit Arnoux, tells us, that he had seen those who had caused Absolution of
their sins to come from Rome by Bills of Exchange. Yea the Pope takes on him to
discharge men of their Oaths and of that subjection and fidelity which they owe
to their natural Princes, and children of the Obedience which they owe to
their Parents, etc. These we hold and maintain are not the Conditions on which
Absolution should be given.

Fifthly, Sess. 14. c. 6.
They teach that the virtue of absolution depends on the Intent of the Priest:
So the Council of Trent declares that notwithstanding the Faith and Condition
of a Sinner, yet if the Priest at the time of pronouncing Absolution, had no
intent to absolve the Party, he ought not to presume that by this Absolution
his sins are remitted and forgiven him.

We hold and teach that the intent of the Priest hinders not a true Penitent
from receiving comfort: There are many Priests, profane and incredulous; and
there are such as hate those they do absolve. Nor can the intent of any be
certainly known, it is only to be presumed off.

Lastly, They tie these Keys to the Popes girdle (too fast) (whom they say is
Peter's successor) whilst they teach that the Power which other Priests have is
from him: Conc. Trid. 14. Sess.
They indeed have the Keys of Heaven, Sed quodam modo, and with an huc usque
licet. There are some cases with them, which a Priest cannot absolve: They are
reserved to the Bishop, and some cases, wherein the Bishop has not to do, they
are reserved for the Pope himself.

We teach and maintain, Vid. Aret. Prob. p. 194.
that Christ gave his Discipies equal power to pardon all manner of sins
without reserving any cases to St. Peter. The Keys were given to all as well
as to any one (as before was noted) Nor can we yet learn (as the Church of
England says in her Confession) who it was that taught the Pope more cunningly
to turn the Key, See the Harmony of Confess. page 363.
or better to absolve than the rest of his Brethren. Bear with the
enlargement of this Point, and be content that St. Ambrose may make the
reckning: Verbum Dej dimittit peccata; Sacerdos est Iudex, sacerdos officium
exhibet, sed nullius potestatis jura exercet.

Sicut ligat Diabolus qui peccata connectit ita soluit Christus qui dilecta
demittit, Cassi in Psalm.
keeping the way he has laid forth for us to walk in (which the next Point
shall show) nothing doubting but that he who died for us and shed his blood for
our ransom, will not stick to absolve us if we come rightly qualified. And
that you may see his willingness, and readiness herein; I cannot but acquaint
you how our Commission runs: Whose-soever sins you remit they are remitted, and
whose-soever sins you retain they are retained: Where our Savior speaks of
Remitting in the first place, and of Retaining in the last; From which Order
the ready and inclinable disposition of our blessed Savior to this work may be
observed. He comes first to this work, and but secondarily to that other, in
case of wilfulness and disobedience. Come we next to the Person absolved.

He said unto Her.
Her sins were before pardoned (as our Savior told Simon) Now why our
Savior spoke thus unto the woman, and at this time is by some questioned. And
thus answered.

Our Savior now absolves her, for two Reasons; first that the company there
present might be informed of Christ's Office, Chem. Harm.
and that he was indeed the true Messiah of the world, and had power given him
from the Father to forgive sin.

Secondly (and more especially) that he might confirm the Faith of this
Penitent, in the comfortable Assurance that her sins were pardoned. So then
we see,

It is not enough that our sins are pardoned in Heaven, but we are to
endeavor and seek after the particular Assurance of the Pardon of them to our
own Consciences for our further comfort.

God requires this at the hands of his Ministers that they should settle the
Consciences of his people in solid Peace, out of the assurance that their sins
were pardoned, Isa 40.2.

And this was that which David so earnestly sought for at the hands of God,
Psa. 35.3. Say unto my soul that thou art my Salvation, and Ps. 51.8. Make me
to hear of joy and gladness that the bones which thou have broken may rejoice.

And hence it was that our blessed Savior did so often give particular
Absolution (although the Jews were exceedingly offended therewith) which
surely he would not have done if in case it had not bin very necessary to be
had: When the poor man was brought to Christ, that had an incurable Palsy,
the first word that Christ spoke to him was, Soune thy sins are forgiven
thee, Mark. 2.5. Our blessed Savior saw well that his sins troubled him more
then his Palsy did; and therefore ^hus spoke, He said not, be of good Comfort
thy Palsy has left thee, but thy sins be forgiven thee. And thus you see he
speaks here to Mary who was much dejected in mind with the remembrance of her
sins, and all to settle her soul in Peace upon the assurance of his mercy.



standing Ministry. All the work is not done after our Conversion is wrought,
Confirmation is like wise necessary. Ephesians. 4.
The Ministry was not given only to gather in, but likewise to build up unto
perfection: Faith at the first is but weak, there must be a strengthening of
it; After planting must follow watering Say a man does now believe the Rem
ssion of his sins, yet through the weak^es of flesh and vio^^^tnesse of
temptation, he may often question Assurance of Remission. Therefore for the
better healing of those wounds which are daily made, and further strengthening
of weak Grace, and settling of the Conscience in solid Peace, it is very
necessary that the ministry should be established.

particular Assurance of the Remission of sins, as we defire true comfort to
our souls. Let a man know never so much of God and of Christ his Son, yet the
general apprehension of these things will but add a kind of vexation to his
Spirit, till he have Assurance of some special interest he has in Gods
Mercies. What a torment is it for a hunger starved beggar to pass by a
wedding-House and smell good cheer, yet ( Tantalus like) never taste of it?
What a vexation to a poor man to see a great dole given and multitudes
relieved by it, yet he get nothing? So is it certainly in this case, the more
any man knows of Christ, and of the plenteous Redemption that is by him
purchased through his blood. the greater must the horror of his Soul be, when
he finds that he has no part therein.

Content not thy self (then) with this in General to know That God so loved
the world as that he gave his only begotten Son to redeem all that will
believe in him; but endeavor to be assured of this in Particular that he has
loved thee and given his Son for thee (as S. Paul says, Gal. 2.20) Think it
not enough to know that Remission of sins may he had, or to hope well that thou
art amongst the number of those pardoned ones, but make this sure to thy heart
upon good grounds, that thy sins in particular are forgiven. It is a great
Mercy to have fin pardoned, but to have it spoken to our hearts and assured us,
is a greater Mercis.

VERSE 49. Offendutur co^vivae Christi sermon. Ex quo apparet plures Juisse
Pharisaeos: nam hi ubiq, hac Christi potestate offenduntur, quod non solum
corporum sese praebet medicum sed etiam animarum, Aretius in loc. Interrogation
est ex contemptu persona, etc. Marlorat. Improbabile mihi videtur quod nonnulli
Interpreterdicum haec verba hominum esse admiramium, quasi dicant, eportet
magnu^ virum, aus matore^ etiam viro Christa^ esse cum peccata remittat, etc.
Hic nimu been de malu cogi^ant. Facilius credi^^ est de Pharisaeorum ingenio
(plerosque enim eoru^ qui simul accumbebant fuisse Pharisa^^ verisimile est^eos
ista mu^nurando, and blasphemiae Coristum accusando dixisse Mald. in loc.

The Guests that sat at meat with Christ (questionless) were Pharisees (the
Feast-maker was one) And who knows not that these were insolent Justiciaries,
strict Sectaries, and the proud enemies of Christ, looking still a cross at
what our Savior did. So Matthew. 9.2. Mark. 2.7. Luke 5.21. This Power of our
Savior did especially offend them.

Indeed these do not openly charge him with blasphemy, as at other times he
was charged by them. As they were not so Ceremonious, so neither (it may seem)
so Captious as their Fellows, yet they could not but savor of the Leaven of
their Profession. They began to say within themselves, who is this that
forgiveth sins also.

Which words I take not (with Cajetan and some other) as spoken by way of
Admiration, as if Simon and his Company (who before questioned whither or no he
were a Prophet) should in a kind of amazement (observing what had passed) say;
now we see he is a Prophet and more than a Prophet, A great man, nay more then
man to forgive sin.

But by way of Accusation and Exception against our blessed Savior, who is
this that dares be so bold to forgive sin, which is Gods Prerogative solely,
being but a vile and contemptible person. they held him to be but Man, and by
Man sin could not be remitted.

In which Exception or Accusation we will consider.

First, the Persons, who they were that found fault with our Savior, They that
sat at meat.

Secondly, The thing they find fault withal, and took exception against, They
began to say within themselves who is this, etc.

Of the Person first.

They that sat at meat with him.
Our blessed Savior was sociable. We do not find that he ever refused to go
to any Table whereto he was invited, Luke 5.29. and 14.1. Nay sometimes he
invites himself, as he did to Zacheus his house and Table, Luke 19.5. Read
before our Text, Verse 33, 34. They in this respect esteemed Christ a
Winebibber.

Parable. It was not for love of the dishes, but out of a desire to do his
Fathers will, Christus omnibus omnia factus est, pauper pauperibus, dives
divitibus -- cum Maria flet, cum Apostolis epulatur, cum Samaritana sitit, etc.
Amb. sup. Luc. l. 4
(which was meat and drink to Him) in seeking up, and saving what was lost.
In which regard He was content, to become all things to all men, that He might
win some.

Catch not at this, O yea licentious Libertines: Men of all hours (as one
terms you well) that can eat with Gluttons, drink with Drunkards; sing with
Ribaulds; scoff with profane Scorners, and yet talk holely with the
Religious. Our Savior never sinned for any man's sake, though for our sakes he
was thus Sociable, that he might keep us fr^^ sinning. At whose board did he
ever sit, where he made not better cheer than he found? If he sat with
Sinners, he converted them. If with Converts, he confirmed them. If with the
Poor, he fed them: If with the Rich in substance, he made them richer in
Grace; and if Simon will entertain him, his Table shall be honored with the
heavenly Doctrine of Remission and with the public Remission of a Penitent
woman.

Can you thus converse with lewd good-fellowes; as to repress their sins,
redress their exorbitances? win them to God? Then indeed you w^ke in the
stepps of him that stuck not to sit down and eat with Sinners. That which
Politiques and Time-servers do for earthly advantages, we ought to do for
spiritual: Frame our selves to all company, not in evil but in good yea and
in indifferent things.

Luke 15.1, 2.) is animal politicum, a sociable Creature: every man's (...),
carries him to Society, nor are they more perfect, but more extravagant, who
affect lonenesse.

The Papists shall not be able to prove their austere vows of a solitary life,
etc. to be preferred before Communion and Society, unless they will first
prove John better than Christ, and his austere way more winning than our
Saviors sociable carriage. Aves praedaria, flock not together, they love to
fly alone; and in long experience we have sound it true, that those solitaries
of the Romish Church, (and of our own) under pretense of more sanctity and
contempt of the world have but gaped after the prey, and are grown fatter by
not dividing the spoil.

Object. Malorum consortia sugere debemus, quoad privata^ consuetudinem, non
quoad publicam conversatione^; cord, non corpore, Am^ros. offic lib ^c. o. A
malis cord semper disjunginimi ad tem ^us caute corpo. re copulemini, Aug l de
Salat locumentis
You may object the Apostles Canon, 2 These. 3 6. We command you Brethren in the
name of our Lord Jesus Christ that ye withdraw your selves from every Brother
that walks disorderly?

Resp. But th^^^swer's ready, that must be understood of Familiar Conversation,
and with such as are scandalously and contumaciously exorbitant: From the
friendly Familiarity of such withdraw thy self; it cannot be understood of all
kind of conversing with Sinners (in general) for then we must go out of the
World, as the Apostle shows, 1 Cor. 5.10. But in respect of private Fellowship,
and inward Familiarity such as that was betwixt Iehoshaphat and Ahab, 2 Chronicles.
18.1. and 20.35.37. Not so much in our Bodies and outward Actions, as with our
Hearts and Affections.

Thus than conceive, 1. Society in evil, we may not hold (no not with the best
men) Ephesians. 5.7, 11. Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of
darkness, Si cum malis non tamen in malis, against this communicating in evil
David prays, Psalm. 141.4. and Solomon dehorts, Prove. 1.15. and 4.15. and
13.20. This in S. Austins judgment is that, Aug. de verb Dom Sermon. 18 in si^e.
Coming out from amongst them and touching no unclean thing, Isa. 52.11. 1
Cor. 6.

2. Society in good, specially (in sacris) in Goda worship, we are to hold with
the worst meant. For this we have Christ's warrant, Matthew. 23.1, 2. And both his
and the Saints example, frequenting, resorting to the public worship of God in
Jerusalem, when both in Priests, people, and the worship it self great
corruptions were found, Matthew. 21.12, 13. Luke 2.21, 22, 46. and 4.16.

3. Society in things indifferent we may have with all men: As in case of
Negotiation and civil Commerce, so had Abraham with the children of Heth, Genesis
23. And in case of Natural or Civil Obligation. Thus wives, Children,
Servants, Subjects, may not withdraw their attendance and service: So when
humane Society or necessary offices of Humanity do require it. There is no
living amongst men if Rules of Civility be not observed.

St. Paul gives liberty to go to an Infidels house to feast if he be invited,
1 Cor. 10.27. Mensa quasimesa, Varro.
The Fellowship of the Table is a symbol of Love and Friendship, and (like a
mediatrix) conserves humanity, only he makes it so one of those things that are
lawful, as that it must be by Circumstances deliberated off, concerning
Expediency and edification, whether it be safer to avoid a danger and scandal
to stay at home, or whither there may not be hoped for some good fruit, in
going, and that without offense. If by our conversing with the wicked the glory
of God be not advanced, but endangered; and the Gospel evil spoken off, we
must abstain, v. 31. If by admitting their Persons we cannot avoid their
vices, we must deny both.

Still you see a Christian liberty is best, and therefore take heed how we
rashly censure any for Society. It is a fault of these days, presently to
conclude that Person wicked whom we see in company with a wicked man. Thus much
of Christ's sitting with this company. Now in that this company which sat with
CHRIST murmured against him and took exceptions at him for what he did. We may
Observe yet further,

It sometimes happens that those who dip in the same dish with us, are enemies
unto us.

Job found this true, Cap. 19.14. So did David, Ps. 41.9. So did Jeremiah, cap.
20.10. So our blessed Savior himself Mat. 26.23.

Acquaintance and true Friendship: Friendship is a special obligation of
amity, or good will uniting the hearts of men together in a greater nearenesse
and dearnesse then ordinarily is to be found, or is required of all men. This
holds firm and lies fast under greatest pressures.

Acquaintance is another thing; that in ordinary use is but a sharing of talk,
news, meat, complement, etc. It is the first draught of Friendship but is not
it; That is the Herd, Friendship is the Pair chosen out of it; a thing easily
created, once being in company does it; Now here is our mistake (as Guevarra
truly notes) we think we have Friends when we have but Acquaintance. These
fail us and prove deceitful like those water-brookes Job speaks of, and
strait we complain of Friendship. Tuta frequensque via est, etc.


Indeed it is an ordinary way and much beaten under the name and title of a
Friend to deceive, but they are not true Friends who do so whatever they
pretend. And because there are so few faithful ones, it shall be our wisdom
to try before we trust. Nakedness in mind is as well a blemish, as nakedness
in body. Every smooth face is not to be trusted, many a man's ave threatens a
vae; with his Tongue he may say, All-hayle, when his Heart says, Take heed,
wherefore that counsel would be hearkened unto which is given us by the
Prophet Micha 7.5. For we shall find that a truth which our Savior has
delivered, The brother shall betray the brother to death, and a man's worst
enemies shall be they of his own house, Matthew. 10.21, 36.

From the Persons excepting, Come we now to the thing they do except against,
and there we have, first, the Manner, 2. The Matter considerable. For the
first, the Text says.

They began to say within themselves.
Graecus sermo anceps est, intra se, ut cogitarint duntaxat: or inter se, ut
colloquuti sint. Eras. Annot.
They did not break out into open railing: What they said was, (...), is se
ipsis, either mutteringly one unto another, or (rather) in their own hearts
they thus thought and said: Which secret thoughts they began to murmur against
him for this his work of Grace. Let us observe,

Sinners are worse within then they are without.

Their Tongues are bad enough, but their Hearts far worse; they dare think
what sometimes they are afraid to speak.

There is no faithfulness in their mouths (says David) they flatter with
their tongue, Psalm. 5.9.
but their inward parts are very wickedness, in the Abstract, yea wickednesses
in the plural too, mischievous, woeful and banefull evils lodge there.
Solomon speaking of the Heart of a wicked man says, it is little worth, Prove.
10.20. And our blessed Savior speaking of it, prooveth it to be the worst
piece of a wicked man, in as much as it is the Fountain of all Evil: He
instanceth in seven heads of vices: Out of the heart (says He) proceeds
evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, fornication, thefts, false-witnesse
bearing, blasphemies: But under these seven, how many seventy times seven might
be numbered. A sin cannot be named which proceeds not from thence; it first
plots it and frames it, that is the Forge or Anvile on which the Devil
strikes, and from thence are the sparkles sent abroad to the firing of the
world.

Reformation whilst the heart is neglected: What is this but to cut of the tops
of the weeds and leave the roots behind?

When the Prophet Elisha would sweeten the waters, he cast not salt into the
Brooks and Channel, but into the Spring, He cast the Salt in there (says the
Text, 2 King. 2.21.) Our Heart is a well of venomous and poisoned water (as you
have heard) our Actions are the streams; we go against the stream in
beginning our Reformation at our hands, whilst our Hearts are evil, and
therefore David praying for the Grace of Repentance and Reformation, Psalm. 51.
tells the LORD where he would have him to begin, Create in me a new heart
and renew a right spirit within me.

Had Pilat washed his heart when he washed his hands he might have bin as
clean as Naaman coming out of Jordan: Had the Sichemites circumcised their
hearts when they circumcised their flesh, they had saved their souls when they
lost their lives. Sin must be fought against in the heart where it breads,
otherwise it will not be subdued, as Hanniball was wont to say of the Romans
that they could not be overcome but in their own country. But when that is
charged, then as the Psalmist speaks upon the rising of the Sun, Psalm. 104.
the Beasts of the Forest will lay them down in their dens and man goes forth
unto his labor until evening, lust shall be subdued, and man enabled, to work
out his Salvation with fear and trembling.

It is but a kind of labor in vain to cleanse all, and leave that uncleansed.
If god finds our houses clean, our clothes clean, our hands clean, and our
hearts unclean, expect no other usage then such as that which the dainty
Mistres of the house had from the Rheumatick and spawling Cynick who being
desire^ by her to spit in the fowlest place he could find, spat in her Face,
which in his opinion was the fowlest. Thy Heart being the fowlest and worse
piece in thee, God will spit upon it in contempt and scorn.

outward Conversation: My foot stands upright, Psalm. 26 12. Or my hands I
stretch forth toward thy holy Temple, Psalm. 88.9. Or mine eyes are ever
toward the Lord, Psalm. 25.14. Or mine Ears O Lord have thou opened, Psalm.
42.1. Unless we can say with the same Prophet, My heart is prepared, O Lord,
my heart is prepared, Psalm. 57.7, 8. For all that is done outwardly, seven
abominations may lie lurking close within; the Heart is like unto the deep and
wide Sea, wherein (says David) are things creeping innumerable both small and
great beasts. Ps. 104.25, 26.
There are variety of strange creatures the like whereof thou never saw; and
there is that Leviathan also (says David) which plays and sports therein.
Thus in thy Heart are such and so many lusts, that should thou see them thou
would stand aghast: Not the vilest sin that ever was committed but the
spawne of it is there, yea the Devil himself has there his hold. He sports
and plays, and mightily prevails by his temptations having so strong a party
within us as is our own treacherous flesh.

Ob. But it is not for us to judge the Heart? True Charity judges as it
finds outwardly, according to the fruits we may know them.

Resp. True, and yet though I cannot know the heart of others J may know mine
own, 1 Cor. 2.11.

2. As for other, in judgment of Charity, I am to think well of those whose
outward conversation J find fair and blameless; but this Judgment of Charity
is not the Judgment of Infallibility, for it is possible for me to be deceived
in it. Every foul that has the beautifullest feathers has not the sweetest
flesh. Diers can set on their colors the fairest glosses with Logg-wood, but
when a shower comes the gloss is gone: How many have given great hopes for
whose sincerity we durst have ventured our lives, yet in the time of trial
they have fallen away. This has bin, and this may be.

and yet though it be not a good affirmative Argument to say, because the
outside is good the inside is also so. It is a good negative Argument to say
the inside is not good if the outside be not. Is the Tongue, the Eye, the Hand
of this man so full of wickedness, Lord what is his Heart?

A second thing to be observed is,

The thoughts and cogitations of man's heart are not unknown to Christ.

We heard before, verse. 40. there is a tongue in the Heart: here we find, there
is an Ear in it also: As what we think we speak, so what we think God
hears, Luke 11.17. Mat. 12.25.

This appears, First, in that he reproves men for their Thoughts, as Mat. 9.4.

Secondly, In that he publishes the Thoughts of men to others, even to the
world, Luke 12.17. and 16.3. And so were Simons, and the Thoughts of the rest
made known to us, which had not CHRIST known, how should we have bin
acquainted with them?

It is evident then that he does search the reins and hearts, as we have it,
Revel. 2.23. where we have a sound Reason added for further Confirmation, I
will give unto every one according to his works.

Were not Christ a discerner of the heart how should be proceed according to
every man's desert? Did he not know all secrets how could he righteously reward
man, as we find he will, Eccles. 12.14. Romans 2.6.

Let all the Churches know this, as we have it in the same Text, Revel. 2.23.
Simon laid down this for a Position, verse. 39. If this man were a Prophet he
would surely have known what manner of woman this is that touches him: Now
Simon may know and we rest assured of that whereof he doubted, He is a Prophet,
yea and more then a Prophet. Not only Man, but very God, in that he can do that
which is proper and peculiar alone for god to do, discover to him the very
thoughts of his own heart and of his fellows.

That Christ was a Man, few made question of, but whither he was true god that
was the Questioned by diverse sorts of Heretics: They thought him, (...), a
mere and bare man: They turned, (...), into (...), they yielded him Divinity,
but denied him Diety. And do not the cold and almost forgotten ashes of these
Heretics begin again to revive, in other Kingdoms these Arrians and
demy-Arrians, the Photinians and Socinians display their colors, and very
busy they are to get ground; willingly would they deduce their Colonies from
thence to us, were it not that they rightly understand, that Soveraignety and
Prelacie, would disband their forces at the very entry, blessed be God that
has kept our Teachers from the least taint of that Heresy and stirred up the
heart of his anointed to fire out this blasphemy from amongst us (where it
began to peep) which overthrows our Faith and directly undermines the office
of Christ's Mediatorship.

For suppose Christ a mere creature, how can we rest assured that his
Obedience and Passion was satisfactory for us, that the blood of the New
Testament bears any price or is of value for our Redemption; or that our
ghostly Enemies, the Devil, Death and Hell are conquered and overcome by him.
Cursed is the man (says God) who trusts in man, Ier. 17.5. If Christ be not
God as well as Man, We of all men are most miserable, our Faith is vain, and
we are yet in our sins.

Quest. But why then does our Savior so commonly and ordinarily (speaking of
himself) call himself the Son of man, Mat. 8.20 and 9.6. and 10.23. and
11.19. and 12.8.32. and 13.37, 41. and 16.13, 27, 28. and 17.9, 12, 22. and
18.11. and 19.28. and 20.18. and 24.27. and 25.31. and 26.2, 24, 45, 64.

In formam servi transissse no^ est naturam Dei per didisse, Hilar
Rest. Qui dixit hominem, non negavit Deum, when Christ called himself the
Son of Man, he did not deny himself to be the Son of GOD. He thus styled
himself so openly and ordinarily, for two Reasons,

First, In respect of Himself, for that He was true Man, not only a Man, but
the Son of Man: Borne Man, having flesh and blood no where else, but from man.

Secondly, In respect of his Hearers, who commonly esteemed no other of him
then mere Man (though perhaps a great and holy man) Matthew. 13.55. Mark 6.5.

In short, it was partly out of his lowliness and partly out of his Love that
he so styled himself. He that scorned not our Nature, (...) disdained not our
Name: in the work of our Redemption titles were of little or no use: He might
have taken greater Titles on him, than the Son of Man, but going about that
work, He was content with a mean one: This base Title for the time of his
abasement, best pleased him.

Believe it and maintain it (for the God of Heaven will) Christ is, (...),
very God. His Incarnation will rather be a Proof then Disproofe, Deus erat in
Christo (says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.19.) God was in Christ: That Godhead
appeared though covert in the Flesh, yet overt in his Actions. He mightily
declared it, both (...) and (...) (says the Evangelist) both miraculis and
oraculis, by his Doctrine and Miracles (says Tertullian) Never man spoke as He
spoke, John 7.46. Never man did as He did, Matthew 9.33.

Object. But the revealing of Secrets and discovering what was in the Heart,
has bin done by man, 1 Samuel 9.19. 2 King. 5.23, 26. Act. 5.3. So 1 Cor. 12.9.
It appears there were such as had the spirit of discerning.

Resp. True, but this was made known to them by special Revelation; nor did
they know all things: Elisha knew the secrets of the Assyrian King, yet he knew
not the calamity of his worthy Hostess. The finite knowledge of the ablest
Seer reached but so far as it pleased God to extend it. Quid tam altu^ and tam
prosundum quam men's homimis quae quasi in volucro quodam corporis tegitur and
occultatur, ut eam haud facile quisquam introspicere and speculari queat? Amb.
inst it. Virg. 3.
Christ knew of Himself, He had no need that any man should testify of man,
for he knew what was in man, Ioh. 2.24. And he knew exactly, and certaintly,
not conjecturally and by way of ghessing, as men and devils know the thoughts
of us.

Secondly, This should teach us to take heed how we pass sentence upon the
inward intentions and purposes of men, this power is Gods and belong to him,
what have we to do to usurp it? It is a Well too deep for us to draw in. And
yet such is the presumption of some, that they will take upon them infallibly
to know what is in the bottom of that Well, whence arises jealousies and
contentions, many times as causeless as pernicious. Indeed by some discoveries
there may be some conjectures; but let not a small Conjecture make thee a great
Offender. Every Key a man meets with is not the right one for this Lock, every
likelihood thou apprehendest, is not a sure sign of what is within the breast.
Not to let a man be private in his House is a great injury, not to let a man be
private in his Heart is a greater.

upright before the Lord in Thought, as we are just in Dealing before men. It
is not the white Fleece God especially eyes; but the sound Liver. He has
windows into the soul, and there sees that hypocrisy, which lies lurking
close. He is very list of hearing, and well understands what the heart
thinks. And (as before was showed) will answer us accordingly. Thus much for
the manner of their objecting, now to the matter.

Who is this that forgiveth Sins also. In absolving this poor Penitent;
Christ did no other, then what his Office required. For this he is excepted
against by these Pharisees present with him at the Table.

The best may be excepted against, and caviled at for well doing.

There is none so holy, but he may be hardly thought of, for doing that which
yet he is bound to do by virtue of his Calling. Numb. 16.3.
Moses and Aaron shall be censured: neither the one, nor the other shall escape
the strife of tongues: Numb. 12.
Some, (and such as have (it may be) least cause of all) will be charging them
with meddling too much, and taking more upon them then was fit. Some dare charge
them both with Ambition and Instrusion.

John the Baptist a holy man, sanctified from the womb, A great Prophet, none
greater ever borne of a woman, And highly esteemed by all the people: One very
austeere, and retired in his life; whose Doctrine was suitable unto it, The Axe
to the Root; The Fan to the Floor; The Chafe to the Fire. And in all points
walking worthy of his Place and Office, (which required that austerity) and yet
he cannot escape censure. They said he has a Devil.

Christ holier then he, ( whose shoces being latched, (as John confesses) he
was not worthy to unloose,) comes in a milder, and more sociable way; He ^rings
the Olive branch of peace in his mouth; He goes to Feasts; drinks wine, is
affable with all: He heales the sick rayseth the dead; seeks up and saves what
was lost. And for his pains he is charged to be a gluttonous man, a wine
bibber, and a friend to Publicans and sinners.

Read (for further confirmation) Amos. 5 10. Mat. 5.12. Mark 6.4. and 14.5, 6
Luke 19.7. and 15.2. Ioh. 7.20. Gal. 4.16. 2 Timothy 1.12. 1 John. 3.12. etc.

Ignorance, and malice, are the causes of this. In the Better sort, Ignorance
may sometimes be the reason of it. Simon was ignorant of Christ's Calling and
Office. The other Guests ask who is this? had they known they would not have
made the question, nor taken exception at what was done in this poor sinners
case.

In the Worser sort, Malice puts them on to detract, and cavil. There is a
perpetual enmity betwixt the seed of the woman and the seed of the serpent.
David's enemies hate him, for no other cause but for that he followed
goodness, Psalm. 38.20. They hate the truth, as our Savior shows, John. 7.7.
and so oppose it.

this sin of detraction, and leave it: but it is rather to be wished, then
hoped for: however that men may at least be convinced of the vileness, and
sinnefulnesse of this vice, it will not be a nisse to say something of it
(being so common) and as it were the Phaeton of the Earths circle.

Detraction is twofold, 1. Per negationem boni, by lessening the true worth of
any good man. 2. Per adductionem mali, by laying a false aspersion of evil
upon any man. Both ways the Pharisees were Detractors: though our Text may
seem to speak especially of the former.

Against this sin committed either one way or the other: Lipsius makes an
eloquent Oration (well worthy the reading) dissuading from it by a double
argument: The first is taken from the vileness of the sin, the other from
the Persons who are guilty of it.

For the sin; It does appear vile both by the nature of it and the effects.

It is Vile in the Nature of it; being a compound of Lying, Envy, and
Curiosity. Lying is the Father; no Calumniator was ever yet contented with the
naked truth: he doubles things said or done, heard or seen; like some king of
Echo, which returns three for one, yea with the Spider, he will bring forth
threads and cobwebs out of his own bowels, weaving and begetting subtle snares
with his wit and brain.

Sepius ventis agitatur ingens Pinas, and celsae graviore turres decidunt casu,
feriuntque summos Fulmina montes. Horat lib. 2 od. 10.
Envy is the Mother: in her malignant womb is detraction conceived, and by it
brought forth: whence it is that Censurer or Detractor, seldom draws that
Fame-defacing weapon the Tongue, upon the baser sort of people, but only upon
those who excel; in which respect they are well resembled to the winds, which
blow most vehemently upon the highest Towers: and may very well be resembled to
the Red-Dragon, spoken of Rev. 12.15. which pursued the woman: for when they
cannot overreach another, then they open their mouths and throw a flood after
to drown him.

Curiosity is the Nurse of this vile sin, that fosters and seeds this
infant, with the long sought for meat of Reports and Rumors: she e^quires what
was done at Court, what was concluded on last at the Council Board: And will
undertake to discover what Jove discoursed of with Juno; what that was which
the King whispered in the Queens ear: Judge you now what a fair Infant this
must be which is thus bred and fed.

The Effects are both variable and forcible (says Lipsius) Variable, it
reaches to all sorts, 2 Pet. 2.10.
especially Governors. They that pluck down houses, first begin with Pillars,
so these to speak evil of Dignities, whose murmurings, like vapors rising
out of the earth, multiply into the storms of Sedition; Sedition grows into
Mutiny; and Mutiny that ends in Confusion.

And they are dangerous and forcible as well as variable. The Cannon laid
against the wall, does not so much mischief as the Mine made under the wall.
So in the Societies of men, Rebellious drums hurt not so much, nor make so
dangerous a noise, as a few whisperers and secret plotters in private corners,
who yet would be held for the only Angels, if for nothing else, yet for
troubling the waters.

Concerning the Persons who harbor this sin, and stand guilty of it;
Consider 1. Whence they are. 2. What they are.

They are of the Devil; his works they do. He is (...), a Detractor, one
accustomed to calumniate, as you see he did Job: Job. 1. Genesis 3.
yea God himself in the time of man's innocence. And these do the like. And as
there is no Creature to which the Devil is likened so much as unto a Serpent,
so (that we may better by resemblance understand what Detractors are) they are
resembled to Serpents, Eccles 10.11. And that aptly.

For, Serpens and detractor sunt equales: quo ^^do e^im ille ^ecrei^ mord^^^
venenum in^^rit, s^^ ille cl^^ detra^ens vi^rus pecter, sui insuedi^ in fratr^^
Hier in Eccles. 10 11
a Serpent (says St. Hierom) secretly gets in his poison. So the Detractor
closely infu^eth the venom of his breast into his brother.

A Serpent carries his poison in his mouth, and with one bite venoms the whole
body: so the Detractor, his poison lies under his tongue, and with one word or
biting, does wound the Name, Credit, Life, Soul of his bro^her (as shows S.
Augustine.)

The Serpent, is a treacherous creature, It flies from the face of a man, but
bites behind his back. Thus does the Detractor, he bites them behind their
backs, whom before the face he fawnes on, and pretends to love. Such a Serpent
was Doeg of whom we read, I Sam. 22. Ps. 53.1, 2 3.

The Serpent goes not strait on, but windingly and crookedly. Thus the
Detractor begins with a Question aloof off; proceeds with a kind of praise,
and then comes with a [But] at which he shootes all his envenomed arrowed; But
this and this I h^are: I could wish it were amended, etc. His Commendation is
like a Law writ always with a Clause and exception which he make to smooth the
way for scandal.

The Serpent feeds on nothing but Dust: Pessinum genus bom number qui cun maximi
falluat, id a^uat ut viri bom esse videantur. Cicero. Isa. 29.4.
So the Calumniator feeds on ashes like bread. They whisper out of the dust
(says Isaiah) If a Perfume approaches they will stop their noses; but they
can well endure a stinking draft or kennell, and embrace that savor. Like
Swine, they forsake a Garden for a Puddle: and with the Beetle, they fly over
many a sweet flower to light in horse-dung: Or (as Lipsius speaks of them)
they are like Cupping glasses, they draw out with most delight, the most impure
blood of all, approving sometime, the worst things amongst many good, and
condemning that which is judiciously commended by others.

As he is a Serpent, so likewise he is a Murderer (as is the Devil his Father)
Viri detractores fuerint in te ad effundendum sanguinem, says Ezekiel, 22.9. And
Job resembles them to cruel Canniballs, or men-eaters, Job. 19.22.

Yea they deprive a man of what which is better then life. It were better for
me to dye, then that any man should make my rejoicing vain (says the
Apostle.) 1 Cor. 9.15. Cum actum est de nomine, actum est de homine, according
to our English Proverb. An ill name is half hanged.

nay more; Ter homicidia, Luth Loc. com. lit. lingua Bernan Cant. Ser. 24.
etc. (says Luther) Three at one blow are murdered by the Detractor or
Slanderer. The Thief hurts one; The Adulterer two: But a Detractor three:
Himself, the Party to whom, and the Party of whom he speaks; Fnus est qui
loquitur (says S. Bernard) and unum tantum verbum profert, and tamen illud
unum verbum, uno in momento multitudinis audi entium dum aures inficit, animas
interficit. It is but one that speaks, and one word he speaks, yet in one
moment man, by it are destroyed.

Lastly; as the Devil is a Spirit, so is the Detractor, but he is that evil
Spirit mentioned, Judges. 9.23. which God sent betwixt Abimelech and the men of
Sichem: he desjoynes the hearts of men asunder, and raises up strife amongst
Brethren. In which respect God ranketh them amongst those his soul abhorres,
Prove. 6.9.

nor does God only hate such, and curse them himself; but he gives leave to
the Church in general to curse them, as we find, Deuteronomy. 27.24, Cursed be he
that smites his neighbor in secret, that does secretly and slily traduce him,
and underhand seeks to work him out of the good opinion and favor of his
friends and neighbors. And all the People mu^^ say Amen.

Believe it; As a troubled spirit is a Sacr^fice to God, so a troublesome
spirit is a fit sacrifice for Hell: For amongst other sins noted to be in
such as God gave up to a reprobate sense, this is one; as we find, Romans
1.29.30. Never shall you find a true generous spirit blemished with this blot:
It is a vice much of the nature of some poysonfull and stinking weed, which
will grow no where but in the side of a dark well, or over-growne pit, only
black and malign natures have been prone to this vice. I pass to a second
Use.

Sermon. 3. in Natal. Dom
Why then; as S. Bernard speaks, Haec mea sunt, mihi apponuntur, mihi
proponuntur imitanda. Quo putas animum meum dolor afficit fama calumnia
illius, quam mihi offuderunt quidam; non metuentes judicem perditurum omnes
loqu ntes mendacium? Tanto videlicet at prope totam noctem insomnem duxerim:
ita ipsa cordis mei penetralia concepta maestitia occupavit. At necesse est ut
omnia scramus, omnia patienter tolere. mus, ultionem ipsorum Domino
committentes qui non despiciet nos. Basil epist. 86. ad Bosphor. epi. scop.
August. lib. 3. contra literas Petil.
The Disciple is not above his master, if any man will be perfect let him be as
his master.

This kind of suffering has in all ages been grievous to the Saints. S.
Basil speaking of himself under this affliction says thus, in a letter of
his which he wrote unto a Friend: With what grief do thou think did that
Calumny oppress my mind? which some not fearing the Judge (who shall destroy
all them that speak lies) did cast upon me? Even so much that I slept not
almost all night, so had the apprehended sadness possessed the secrets of mine
heart. But it is necessary that we bear all, that we suffer all patiently,
committing the revenge of them to the Lord, who will not despise us.

S. Augustine does well compare a wise man wronged, unto the Ship wherein our
Savior was asleep: He hears himself to be slandered (says he) and is
thereupon much moved with anger: Convitium ventus est, iracundia fluctus: The
Slander is the wind, the anger is the wave, and by them being tossed, he is
in some danger: But when he studieth revenge, and the desire of that oppresses
his mind: Iam navis propinquat naufragio; The Ship is near shipwreck, and all
is, because Christ is asleep in the ship: In cord enim hominis somnus Christi
oblivio fides, For in the heart of man, the sleep of Christ is the
forgetfulness of faith: Let the eye of faith be open, and that will tell us.
Non intuendum esse, quam sit amarum, sed quam falsum sit quod audio. That we
must not look how bitter that is which we hear, but how false it is, and
that Quisquis volen: detrahit famae meae, nolens addit mercedi m^ae And indeed
thus S. Basil kept himself from ship wrack: and so should every wise
Christian, especially Magistrates and Ministers, who are most liable to this
kind of suffering.

Let the Magistrate and Governor never so truly endeavor and seek the weal
of the public; yet evil minds will be buzzing of false rumors into others
ears: Let the Garden he never so fair, yet there will be those who would make
the world bel^eve that there is a Snake under every leaf: Let the intention be
never so sincere: they will predivine and prognosticate some mischievous
effects from it. But God has set these to be like Suns in the Firmament:
rash censures of them are like Clouds in the middle region of the air, which
hurt not the Sun it self, nor hinders its course, though they deprive us
which live below of that light and warmth which otherwise would be derived.

Let the Minister live never so holily; Preach never so painfully; Si pauper
es, vilem and ab jectum te reputat: si dives ambitiosum, avarum and cupidum. Si
affabilis dissolutun, si praedicator vel doctor, honoris and huma ni favoris
quaesitorem: si tacens, inutilem: si jejunus, hypocritam: si comedens
voratore^. Bern. in Sermon.
yet uncharitable censures shall be passed both on his Person and Doctrine. His
Threatenings shall be termed Cruelties; Promises, Flatteries; The Proof of
both, nothing but Sophistry: Mildness shall be charged with dreaming;
Boldness with railing. Affability shall be construed lightness. Austerity,
in the worlds malicious dialect, shall be translated madness.

nor can our Persons escape better then our Doctrine: we are not greater then
John the Baptist, nor better then our Savior. If they have dealt thus with the
green tree, what will they do with the dry?

But in the midst of all these Calumnies, let us hold on our way, in doing
those duties which our callings require of us (imitating those celestial
Planets, which though they are nicknamed and belyed, one being called Saturn,
another Jupiter, another Mercury, another Venus, etc. (as S. Austin does
observe, yet they continue their courses) Putting on that Heroical spirit of
S. Paul, I pass little for man's day* he that judges me is the Lord. As for
other they must stand at the Bar with us, the Lord is Judge himself.

(...) qui ta (...) sancte tam graviter dispo suit vitam sua^, ut de eo
sinistri aliquid ne ^ingi quidem possir, dum adversus obirectatorum libidinem
pugnat meriti magnitudo Paulin Epist. 14. ad Celantiam.
Indeed (as Paulinus speaks) he is happy who orders is life so holily and so
wisely that no wrong can be fained of him; whilst that the greatness of his
worth, withstands the malice of his slanderers: If we cannot be so happy, yet
we should be careful, Ne ex nobis scintilla procedat, etc. that from our
selves a sparkle do not proceed from whence the flame of a wrong report may be
kindled against us: At least* we are so to walk, Vt nemo de nobis male loqui
absque mendacio possit, that none may speak evil of us without giving
himself the lie. But yet live we as innocently as we can we shall not want
such as will censure us. Such as will live Godly, according to the rule of
Christ, must suffer (at least) this kind of Persecution. We may do well, but
let us learn to hear ill, Till men of this world have learned to think well,
it is vain to expect to hear them speak or report well of us.

Caveat will not be amiss, that we be wary how we judge of a good action, by
the entertainment of the doer. The Poss^ssions began at Tamar (as S. Hierom
observes upon the 47. of Ezekiell) and reaches along to the waters of strife,
Semper enim virtutibus contradicitur, virtues are still contradicted and
opposed.

The Bull (says Lipsius) does roar and wax enraged at red or purp^e cloth, 1
Pet. 4.4.
which notwithstanding are the fairest of all colors: So is it with the wicked
their rancor is stirred up by virtue

The Apostle indeed puts the case, 1 Pet. 3.13 Who is he that will harm you if
you be followers of that which is good, and experience teaches that who so
applies himself to well doing is less obnoxious to the injuries of wicked
men. But when Religion is the Quarrel, humanity is laid aside. He must quit
himself well that escapes Ishmaels tongue though he may Caines hand. And thus
much of the Exception made against our Savior for absolving of this Woman.
That which remains is the Woman's Dismission in the last Verse.

And He said unto the woman thy Faith has saved thee, Go in Peace.

In these words we have considerable, First, the Party dismissed, ^. The Manner
of her Dismission. The Party is the same who was absolved before.

He said unto the Woman.
Observe we,

Who so are absolved by CHRIST are dismissed the Court.

There is now no condemnation (says S Paul) to them that are in Christ Jesus.
Romans 8.1.
Condemnation (as we know) is a Sentence given by a competent Judge, concerning
the punishment of an offender, the contrary whereof is Absolution or
Justification: Romans 7.24.24.
There is none [Now] says S. Paul, that is being thus delivered by Christ (as
was showed in the Chapter before, v. 25.) And justified by Faith in him, We are
no more under the Law but under Grace, and thereupon he makes that glorious
triumph, Romans 8.33.34.
Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen; it is God that justifies
who shall condemn? Let the World, Flesh, or Devil object what they can, sue
in what Court they please, yet they shall do no good on it; for God has
acquitted and absolved them, they are dismissed so as there is no place for
Accusation.

foolish as malicious, and play but Satan's part who is styled to be the accuser
of the Brethren: Nor shall they ever be able to repeal or revoke the sentence
passed, or save their charges in the suit: What God said to Peter (in another
case) they might do well to remember, Act. 10 15.
That which God has cleansed do not thou account unclean: So whom God has
acquitted do not dare to charge sin on; For he that justifies the wicked and
he that condemns the Just, they both are abomination to the Lord, Pro. 17.15.

strong Consolation: True it is they shall not want Accusers; the Devil and
the World will sift them as narrowly as the Husbandman does his Corn; and
search their lives as strictly as Laban searched Jacobs stuff, to see if they
can find something whereof to accuse them: Yet they shall find nothing to
condemn them: Do they tell us what we have bin? Let us not think it a shame
to say with the Apostle, I was such a one, but now I am received unto Mercy: Do
they tell us of our corruptions and twit us with our infirmities? We should
remember then that sweet saying of St. Austin, Aug. cont lit. Petil. l. 3. c.
10.
Quantum ille accusat vitium meum, tantum ego laudabo medicum meum. Look how
far he accuses my fault, so far will I praise my Physician who healed me.

The Manner of the Penitents Dismission is next to be considered. She is not
barely sent away, but has a Testimonial, and a Pass given her.

The Testimonial or Certificate in these words, Thy Faith has saved thee. The
Pass in the other, Gee in Peace.

In the Testimonial we may find, First, the Matter effected and wrought for
her, which was Salvation [Hath saved.]

Secondly, the Means whereby it was obtained [Thy Faith.]

In her Pass we have, First, the Course she is enjoined to take [Goe] 2. The
way she is to keep, which is the way of Peace [Goe in Peace] First, of the
woman's Testimonial.

Thy Faith has saved thee.
The Mercy obtained is Salvation. Salvation strictly taken is a preservation
from evil, and so it has respect both to Persons and Things. Thou savest
(says David) both man and beast, Psalm. 36.6. Evil is of two sorts, 1.
Temporal. 2. Eternal, and accordingly in Scripture is Salvation taken.

Sometimes it signifies Safety and protection in this world from bodily and
outward dangers, as Exo. 14.1.3. But that is not the Salvation which our
Savior here speaks of to Mary.

Sometimes it betokens the estate of blessedness in heaven, and this we
commonly term Salvation, and so it is opposed to damnation, by which we
understand the condition of those who are adjudged to hell. Thus is the word
used, Phil 2.12. 1 Pet. 1.5.

So Salvation properly notes the negative part of our Happiness in Heaven, but
with all it implies an advancement to a state of blessedness and immortality
to eternal life, Act. 13.48. The Reason why Happiness is thus called, is
rendered to be this; for that it is easier to tell what shall not be in Heaven,
than what shall be there: And of this kind is the Salvation our Savior speaks
of in this place.

This Salvation is to be considered, Aug de Civ. Dei l. 19. c. 20.27.
either as it is initiall and begun here, or as it is complementall and shall
be perfected hereafter, as it is here begun; so Ephesians. 2.7. By Grace you are
saved. Here it is given us and assured unto us; though that full and absolute
perfection of it (in respect of degree) is reserved for another world; and thus
our Savior says to Mary, Thy Faith [hath] saved thee; It is done already for
Substance, and not now to do. Thence Observe,

The true and believing Penitent even in this life is salved.

The Evidence of this Truth appears by the contrary; for if the wicked and
unbelieving be condemned already, as is evident, Ioh. 3.18. then it will not be
hard to conceive, that the Believer is saved already. But what need we seek
for further proof, when it appears so evidently by Gods own testimony who
frequently affirms of such as are penitent, and believing; and of that estate
of theirs which is only via, even in this their pilgrimage that they are
blessed, saved, etc. Mat. 51. Psalm. 1.1. and 32.1. Ephesians. 2.7. John 17.3.

For, first we have Salvation in the Promises of it, as 2 Cor. 7.1.

Secondly, We have it in those Graces which begin it, John 17.3. Tit. 3.5.
And 2.12. John 3.8.

3. We have it in the Assurance of it, 2 Cor. 1.10. 2 Timothy 2 19. Act. 5.39.
does the Lord say and shall he not do? His Foundation stands sure and has
his seal. And if this Counsel be of God, as Gamaliell (said in another case)
ye cannot destroy it.

outward estate be what it will be, yet their Salvation is certain, Romans 8.38.
Romans 14 8.
they are already saved, and have the beginnings of eternal Life in them; so
that neither Life nor Death shall be able to deprive them of that.

Say we be in as great a strait as were the Israelites betwixt the Red Sea and
Pharaoh's Host: One danger before us ready to ingulfe us; another behind us
ready to destroy us; yet if thou be righteous and truly penitent, I will
speak in the confidence of Moses, Fear not, stand still, behold the Salvation
of the Lord. Thine enemies may interrupt thine Assurance, but they shall never
overthrow thy Salvation. As for outward things resign up thy self wholly to
Gods absolute dispose, whither it be by Life or Death: Say with Eli, 1 Samuel
3.18. It is the Lord let him do what seems him good; and as David, 2 Samuel
15.26. Let him do to me as he pleases. Keep thou the coast of Faith and
Repentance and fear not thy coming to the holy Land.

Salvation here; woe to those: If there be no Salvation here had, expect none
hereafter. The Gate of Heaven is here below: Christ is the Door by which we
must enter into the Paradise of God: Who so lays hold on him with his merits
by the belief of his soul, has gotten Salvation already: But in not
believing and repenting a man is condemned already: Woeful therefore is the
estate of such men who never acquaint themselves with Salvation before the end
of their days and then begin to dream of another condition. Cyp tractat. de
habit. Virgin 1 Samuel 14.13.
Non est facilis ad magna ascensus (says S. Cyprian) things which are great
are not easily climbed unto: What sweat and labor takes a man before he comes
to the top of an Hill, as you find Jonathan and his Armor-bearer took before
they came to the Philistines garrison. And can we think to attain the height
of Mount Sion with a leap? Wherefore let nothing delivered cause Security, but
put us on to a working out our Salvation with fear and trembling.

Thy Faith
Here we have the Isntrumental cause or means of the Justification and
Salvation of this Penitent. Where observe we two things.

First, The Quality. 2. The Propriety. The Quality of the Means is, [Faith] The
Propriety [Thy] Faith. First of the Quality.

We may observe in that Remission of sins was before attributed to this woman's
Charity, and now is said to come of her Faith,

That true Faith is joined with Love, Hope, and other Graces. It is not alone,
where one is there is the other likewise.

Faith, Hope, Charity, and other graces are concomitants; Where one is there is
the other. Her Love was spoken of before, and here Her Faith is mentioned, so
that it is clear enough both were in the same subject.

The frequent Conjunctions of these Graces in the Apostles writings makes this
good, as 1 These. 1.3. and 3.6, 7. Colos. 1.4. Philemon verse 5. 1 Cor. 13.13.

This is a truth, which the Papists seem with their strongest forces to
gainsay: Stiffly maintaining that Faith may be without Love; and indeed we
grant that fides Daemonum, the faith of Devils may, but not, fides
Christianorum, the Faith of Christians. A man may have an Historical Faith
(which is that Faith of the Church of Rome, defined by a Catechism authorized
by the Counsel of Trent) and yet want Charity. Yea he may have a miraculous
Faith, and yet be without true Love, 1 Cor. 13.2. But a Justifying faith (which
is that Faith must save) cannot be separated from it, 1 John 4.7, 16. 1 John
5.1.

And whereas their Schoolmen in resolving of this case, assign to Faith a
double subsistence, Tho 1.^. q 6^ art 4.
one in genere naturae (when it has all the Essentialls of its nature, whereby
it is distinct from other intellectual habits, and is principle of the proper
acts thereof in respect of its proper objects) The other in genere moris (when
it is grown to have a virtuous subsistence in us, that is, Scot in 3. Did. 36.
art. 4.
an acceptablenesse with God (as Scotus interprets it) and becomes to be a
disposition to beatitude) which they confess cannot be without Charity. They
say little herein against us: For we grant that in Nature and Property these
Graces may be distinguished one from another. If we consider them as Habits of
the renewed soul, they be distinct graces: But that in the Use they should be
severed, or that there should be such a kind of faith, as gives interest to
Christ's Righteousness and eternal life without Charity we deny.

Love prove we the truth of our Faith. Our blessed Savior has foretold a
scarcity of Faith on Earth in the last times, Luke 18.18. And yet never were
times fuller of Faith then these times (which yet are the last times) if it be
true that men say. Who professes not a faith as firm as Abraham's? But if we
bring it to this touch, it will be found no better then that Faith which St.
James speaks of, A dead faith, yet this is the touchstone by which it must be
tried, as the same Apostle shows, Iam. 2.18.

nor it is a Verbal Love (like theirs who bids a man warm himself, and fill
his belly, yet gives nothing) that we are to try our Faith by, but a real and
working Love, 1 John 3.18. So shows St. James, when he says, Pure Religion and
undefiled before God is this, to visit the fatherless and widows in their
affliction, Iam. 1.17.

Did Religion consist only in Contemplation, it would be better for many than
it is; but the greater part of it (like the Ma^hematicks) is in D^monstration:
Faith is a Christians Life, Gal. 2.20. But the Brea^h or Pulse whereby it may
be known to live is Charity, without which says S. Paul, I should be nothing
profited though I should give all my goods to the poor or suffer my body to be
burned, etc. Should a man build Churches, repair Bridges, mend high ways, set
up Hospitals, yet, hoc aliquid, hoc multum, hoc totum nihil est, this
something, this much, this all, is nothing at all if love be wanting. Aquin.
Nothing in esse gratiae, how great soever in esse Naturae; want of Love will
both discredit the cause and endanger the reward. But of this more hereafter.

Reason have the Papists (as appears by this) to charge us so deeply and fowly
as they do; Quocunque modo vivu^t, per solam fidem gloriam sibi promittunt, and
neque mandatorum observationem, neque paenitentiam esse necessariam praedicat
Suarez 06 Apolog. 5.10. nu. 11.
as that 06 we are Enemies to good works and teach our people 06 that it is no
matter how men live, promising glory by Faith alone, accounting both the
keeping of Gods Commandments and Repentance unnecessary, etc. Whether we are
indeed as they would make the world believe (we are, we shall hear a^one) In
the mean time I would they would speak out, and deal plainly with us,
whether they are persuaded indeed that we cry down good works and preach as
they say? Disertis verbis docent opera esse ad salutem necessaria Non quidem
necessitate efficientiae sed praesentiae, Bellar. de Iustif 4.
Bellarmine is ashamed of these calumnies, and does ingenuously confess, That
the Protestants do plainly teach that good works are necessary to Salvation:
Not in the Act of Justification, but in the Work of Sanctification without
which there can be no Salvation.

And thus much of the Quality of the Means; now for the Propriety.

[Thy] Faith. ^ac^ ^ua, i^e. (...) a^^ sal^ii (...), ^uliiu^ al^^ri^ ^des ^ui
Char^as ^rumseila in loc

Thine, not another; it seems then by this,

Who so would be justified and saved must have a faith of their own. That Faith
which must save us must be ours and not another.

The Just shall live by [his] own faith, says Habakuk, Chap 2.4. So S. Paul,
Romans 1.17. Where though this Pronoune [His] be not expressed, yet it is in the
nature of the Greek Tongue understood: Hanc hist. resert Georg. Mylius, ex
re^atu filij Lutheri in Ep. ad Lect prefix Com^ent ipsius in epist. ad Rom
Which Text Luther (as yet sticking fast in the mire of Popish darkness)
expounding at Wittenberge was a means of his conversion: For by a certain
divine power the sense was so imprinted in his mind, that whatsoever he did, he
still seemed to himself to hear a voice inculcating these words unto him. The
Just shall live by his own faith. Finding no means to pacify his perplexed
spirit, it happened that having business to Rome, he gladly took the occasion
hoping that by visiting of the holy Places and Relics (as they term them) he
should procure some quietness to his restless mind; thither he went, in his
way still these words were sounding in his ears, The Just shall live by his
own Faith, and the further he went the more did he hear the sound. Coming to
Rome he used all means to pacify that Commotion which was in him: He
celebrated the Mass with greater devotion than ordinary; so that others would
have sung three Masses sooner than he did one. The Italian Monks laughed at
him, crying, Fratello passa, passa, calling on him to make more speed. But in
the midst of this his devotion, he felt the force of these words with
greater-vehemency than ever he did before. He conceiving that God was greatly
offended with him, he resolved to pacify God and purge away his sin by
climbing up certain steps of Pilates ladder (which the Romanists faigne to be
brought from Jerusalem) which he did upon his bare knees, hoping thereby to
obtain that Indulgence which the Pope had granted unto such as should devoutly
perform that action. In the midst of which work he was suddenly astonished,
and stricken (as it were) with a thunderclap, hearing that voice with a kind
of stately and fearful Majesty: The Just shall live by his own Faith: He
returns from Rome to Wittinberg, where considering more earnestly the sense of
the sentence, and argument of the whole Epistle, by Gods gracious instinct, and
the illumination of his blessed Spirit, he understood the meaning of the words,
whereat he was exceedingly comforted, his mind pacified, and at length began
a happy reformation, which through Gods special grace and power was effected.



Papists affirm, that a man may be saved if he say he believes as the Church
believes, Rhem. Annot. on Luke 12.. 3.
though he know not what the Church believes. And indeed this they had need
to teach, for that their Doctrines (for the most part) have no footing in
Scripture, and it must be an implicit Faith wherewith they are believed.

And on Mat. 9.2. the Rhemists have this marginall note, Annot. on Mat. 9.. 2.
that the Faith of one helps to obtain for another. What, Salvation? If that
be their meaning as it seems, we deny it: we may as well see with another
man's eyes, or hear with another ears, or walks with another feet; as be
saved by another Faith. Abraham's Faith could not save his wicked posterity.
Though Noah, Daniel and David, (those three worthies of the world) stood before
me (says the Lord) they shall deliver but their own souls.

Indeed we grant them, another man's Faith may profit the Body or Estate of
others in things Temporal: so the Centurions Faith did profit his Servant,
Mat. 8.13. and the Faith of others, the Palsy man, Mat. 9.2. Yea the Faith of
another may be profitable to the soul of his Brother in things Spiritual, so
far as to pray for him; or be a means to allure him unto Christ; or give him
a right to the outward Covenant, (as the Parents Faith does to the Child 1 Cor.
7.14. Romans 11.16.) But in things Eternal, as to save from everlasting
vengeance, and to the obteyning of eternal life, it is ineffectuall.

Quest. But if every one be saved by his own Faith, what becomes of young
Infants, who by reason of their age have neither knowledge or Faith, and so
depart this life: Are they saved?

Resp. When we thus urge the necessity of a Particular Faith, we are to be
understood to speak of such as are of a reasonable age.

Secondly, Infants have Faith: Christ himself reckons them amongst Believers,
Mat. 18.6. Whosoever offends one of these little ones which believe in me.
In which respect Circumcision was called a seal of Faith.

Gideons Camp every soldier had his own Pitcher: Salomons valiant men had
each one his own sword by his side; and each Virgin is said to have a lamp in
her own hand. So every true Believer professes for himself, I Believe.

But how can it be said to be mine, when it is the Common Faith, Tit. 1.4? And
(as Athanasius in his confession calls it) the Catholic faith; being the
Faith of all Christians, and received and professed by the whole Catholic
Church?

It is called the Common or Catholic Faith, First in respect of the Object of
it, which is Common and belongs to all the Faithful.

Secondly, In respect of the Profession of it, it being the badge of every true
Christian.

Thirdly, In regard of the Common end of it, which is eternal life, and
Salvation: which S. Jude likewise calls the Common Salvation, Jude. v. 3.

But in this one Common or Catholic Faith, every one that is a true member of
the Church, has an interest; and to it lays a particular claim: they have a
peculiar portion in the common stock, as appears, 2 Pet. 1.1. Like precious
Faith with us: Like for kind, not for degree: such Faith, though not so much
Faith. The parallel is not drawn a quantitate, sed a qualitate fidej. In
brief, though Faith be one, ratione objecti, yet it is not one, ratione
subjecti, every one must have a Faith of his own.

Object. 2. But how is Faith ours; when it is the gift of God, for so we
find, Philip. 1.29. John. 6.29?

Resp. If it be given to us, then it is ours: For what is freer then gift?
gifts once bestowed are proper to the possessors.

Secondly, It is so given; as that it is by us also got in part: as the woman
of Tekoah said to David, God does devise means. 2 Samuel 14.14.
So God has ordained means for obteyning Faith, as we find, Romans 10.17. which
who so neglects (I speak of those who are adulti, grown up to a reasonable
age) shall never obtain. Now such is Gods grace and goodness, as that he
accounts those graces ours which are in part obtained through our endeavors,
though he has therein the leading hand, and is the All and in All, And thus
much of the woman's Certificate, we now come to examine her Passport.

Go in Peace. Post quam ei peccati dimifit non sist it in remissione peccati,
set adijcit operationem boni, unde subditur, vade in pace Theoph.
]
In which words we cannot but observe. First, the Course enjoined [Goe.] not
sit still; be idle, etc. Secondly, the way directed, in Peace.

(...) Go.

To the benefit of Remission is added this Injunction, which in Beda's and
Theophilacts opinion is as much as Been vive, or been age. Do well, Live well,
etc. So that you see, Vbi vigilanter collige, divinam clem^ntiam peccata non
dimittere dormitanti, bis, sed coopera^tibus fide, spe, atque dilectione, etc.
Royard.


More is required of a Christian then bare believing.

Though no more be required in the act of Justification, yet more is required
in respect of Conversation, as these places prove, Psalm, 1.1, 2. and 3^.1, 2
and 119.1, 2. Mat. 5.20. Iam. 2.18 2 Pet. 25. -- 10.

And good reason there is for it, for that Gods elect are brought to glory, not
by Justification alone, but by Vocation and Glorification also, Romans 8.30.
Acts. 26.18. we must pass through Sanctification before we come to Glory.

Vox and praeterea nihil.
What shall we think then of the wording Christian, (the tribe of Nepthalie) who
like the Spartons Nighting all, are voice and little else. Surely they are
fitter for the Cage then Church, sing they never so sweetly. These are they who
have brought the stain of Sol fid ans upon us. Hofin. in judicio sup articulo.
4. Confess. Augustanae.
Nor had the Papists stood so stiff against the Doctrine of Justification by
Faith alone (as one amongst themselves professes) but for some men's disgracing
of Good works.

What we write and preach, concerning the necessity of Good works the world
knows: how in your lives you show the power of what you hear and learn, D
Willets Catalogue of charitable works annexed in the end of his Synopsis
Papismi.
we have little cause to glory. And yet with them we will glory (for it ha^h
been proved by a particular induction from an able Pen, that more charitable
works have been performed in the times of the Gospel, then they can show to
have been done in the like time of Popery: And if we look homewards and
consider the works of this nature, that have been done by us within the space
of 80. years, under the happy Reigns of King EDWARD, Queen ELIZABETH, King
JAMES of blesled memory, and now under the Reign of our gracious Sovereign
King CHARLES, it will appear that there has been more works of charity
showed, then was in twice so much time going immediately before) yet we
justify not our selves, for what is this we have done, or do, answerable to
the means we do enjoy, and the profession we make?

Our Church is pestered with a company of Hypocrites, whose Faith is clothed
much after the fashion that John the Baptist was. They put upon it a Coat of
Camels hair, some refuse and cheap outside, which they tie together with the
leathern girdle of dissimulation, and the Food of it is Locusts, 2 Kings. 5.11.
mere speculation, and wildhoney, table talk. We may say of them as Naaman
said of the Prophet, I thought he would have done something, that he would
have come out unto me, and stood and strike his hand over the place, and
recover the leper, etc. so we hearing such a profession of their Faith expect
great matters, but behold no deeds at all, or very few and small.

Yea so confidently do some hope for Salvation by Faith, that there is worse
then naught done; little honesty, or true dealing to be found from them. They
are so far from clothing of their Faith (as I said before) that they strip
it as Joseph's Brethren stripped him, and leave it as naked as Idolatry left
the Israelites.

Alas my beloved are you no farther yet? what all your life long in S. Paul,
and never take forth so far as to come unto S. James. Are Gods Commandments
torn out of your Catechismes, and nothing left in it besides the Creed for you
to learn? How can we think but by such a Faith, you make only a pretense to
protect profaneness with? 1 Kings. 3.16.
Play not the Harlots part to overlay the Infant. A smothered Faith will not
save you, Abraham's Faith was a working Faith; so was Rahabs, so must yours be,
if you would that it should bring you unto Heaven. Where there is no light, I
may say there is no Sun: 2 Kings. 4.31.
and as Elishaes servant said of the Shunamites son, when he saw that there
was neither speech nor sense: The child is not yet awaked. So where works are
not, you must give me leave to tell you your Faith is ghostlesse.

up and be Going. The divine Goodness as here you see discharges the sins,
not of sleepers; but of workers and Goers; Mat. 19.17.
The grace of God that brings salvation has appeared (says S. Paul, Tit
2.11.) And whither does it send us? To the denying of ungodliness and worldly
lusts, to a sober, righteous and godly living. If then thou would enter into
life, keep Gods Commandments.

Quest. But does not this savor of Popery, so earnestly to press good works?

Resp. If it be Popery, we must crave leave to teach it. The times through our
long peace and plenty (so much abused) wax so profane and irreligious, as
that it may be thought good discretion to preach rather for works then Faith,
but I must further tell you, the Papists and we (on both sides) agree, that to
do good works is necessary for every man who expects to be Justified and
saved by Christ. Extra causam justificationis opera satis laudari non possu^t,
ad causam hujus admitti non debent.
The difference consists in this; they say good works are necessary to
Justification as being Causes of it, we say they are necessary to
Justification as being Effects thereof. To Justify thy Person before God they
are fruitless, but to approove thy Justification both to thy self and others,
they are needful.

By these thou may have some assurance of thy Faith and salvation. And
reason a posteriori thus, I have works, therefore I have Faith: I have Faith,
therefore I have Christ. I have Christ, therefore I have Heaven. Tam certus
esse debes (says S. Austin) de requie, Aug. in Ps. 94.
de faelicitate, si mandata ejus custodieris, quam certus es de perditione, si
ea contempseris; By thy keeping of Gods Commandments thou may be as sure of
happiness and* salvation, as through thy despising and contemning of them thou
may be sure of perdition.

Aliud est fiduciam ponere in operibus, aliud est fiduciam oriri ex operibus.
It is one thing to put ones Confidence in works, and another thing to have a
Confidence from ones works. Though we put not the confidence of our salvation
in our works, as the Papists do; yet we hold that a confidence of our
salvation may ar^se unto us from our works, because our works do testify our
Faith whether it be lively or no.

Object. But works may be hypocritical and imperfect.

Resp. True, but being sincere they may assure us of salvation: Moses putting
his hand into his bosom took it out leprose; putting it in again into his
bosom he took it out clean. The hand is the instrument of working, and the
works of men are sometimes leprous and unsound, sometimes healthy and good.
Whence is this? but from the bosom or heart of man. If they proceed from an
honest and good heart, and done by Gods direction; then they are good, the
fruits of Faith, and will yield thee comfort. If they come from a Corrupt
heart, and be done for base and mercinary ends, then they are leprous and
abominable. Thus see thou make thy calling and election sure unto they self
by good works, for that end they are necessary.

Secondly, they are necessary in respect of others, that they may see and
glorify God. By the finger without we know how the Clock goes within, so by our
outward obedience, how Faith stirs. When the Sun shines upon the Dyall, it
reflects a shadow; whereby the passenger perceives how the day passes: So
does Faith reflect the shadow of a good and Christian conversation, whereby
others may perceive, how the day of grace goes with us. And in these respects
we are called on, to call on you to show forth good works, Tit. 3.8.

By this that has been said; it may appear, how easily S. Paul and S. James
may be reconciled. Piscator.
S. Paul calls for Faith without works, S. James calls for works, averring
that Faith is no Faith without them, understand both rightly and there is no
contradiction. These two Apostles did handle two diverse Questions. S. Paul
spends his pains, in proving Quod fides justificat, That Faith does justify.
S. James in showing, Qualis fides justificat, what kind of Faith does justify.
The one speaks of a justice of justification, the other of a justice of
testification. Faith does justify (says S. Paul) he means before God, and
that it does it apprehensive: Works do justify (says S. James) he means
before men, and that they do ^fstensive. Thus of what is enjoined on this
penitent. The next and last thing to speak of, is the way prescribed or set
forth.

In Peace.
Peace is twofold. First, there is Pax apparens, a bad and appearing Pace;
Secondly, Pax vera, a true and sincere Peace.

Bad Peace is threefold. First, Pax inquinata, a defiled and polluted Peace, as
is that we find mentioned, Ps. 2.1, 2. and 9.21. and 83.4, 5* 6. so Ephraim
against Manasses, Manasses against Ephraim; and both against Judah: Herod
against Pilat, Pilat against Herod; and both against Christ. Est Daem^num legio
concors, there is such a peace as this amongst the Devils, seven could agree
well together in Marye's heart, Mark. 5.9.
yea a Legion we read of were in another. If a house be divided against it
self it cannot stand.

Secondly, 2 Samuel 3.27. and 13.28. Mat. 26.49.
Pax simulata, a dissembled and coun^erfetted Peace, when a man pretends Peace,
but intends mischief. So Ioab spoke peaceably to Abner when he stabbed him:
Absalom invited Ammon to a Feast when be intended to murder him. Judas kissed
Christ when he went about to betray him.

Thirdly, Genesis 3.6. and 13.9.
Pax inordinata, an inordinate Peace, which is, when the greater and better
obeyes the less and inferior. So Adam obeyed Eve; Abraham yielded unto Lot,
etc.

None of these kinds of Peace are here meant: That Peace which our Savior
speaks of is, true and sincere Peace, which S. Bernard thus tripleth.

First, External, which some call Pax temporis, this is that Peace we have
with men for the time we live in this world, Romans 12.18. and this is first in
the Church, when it has rest from Heresies, Schism, Tyranny and Persecution,
Acts 2.31. Psalm 122.6.

Secondly, In the Commonwealth, as when we are free from civil wars within;
and foreign enemies without, Ier. 29.7.

Thirdly, In the Family, or special places where we live, of which Peace S.
Peter, 1 Pet. 3.12. and our Savior, Mark. 9.50.

Secondly, Internal, which is Pax pectoris, the Peace of conscience,
proceeding from the assurance we have of Gods favor through Christ. In this S.
Paul places the Kingdom of Heaven, Rom 14.17. Phil. 4.7.
and calls it Peace which passes all understanding, Phil. 4.7.

Thirdly, Eternal, Pax numinis, which is that perfect rest and happiness,
which the Saints shall enjoy in Heaven with God hereafter, Isay. 57.2.

The Peace that our Savior here speaks of to this woman is, that Internal or
Pectorall peace, that stable and comfortable tranquillity of conscience, not
accusing, but excusing, and freeing from the terrors of Hell and death; opposed
to fear, grief or any kind of perturbation, which might break the sweet
consent, and harmony of mind.

Peace of conscience is the fruit of justification by Faith.

Col. 1.20. Ephesians. 2.21. Romans 5 1. These Texts of Scripture make strongly for
the truth delivered.

Nor can it otherwise be; For upon our apprehension of Christ by Faith;
follows his satisfaction for us; upon satisfaction we have remission; upon
remission, reconciliation; upon reconciliation, Peace will certainly follow.

there is no peace to the wicked says my God, Isay. 57.21.

The sentence would not be so grievous, were it not so general. If at any
time; in any place; any wicked man, might have any kind of peace (that good is)
there were some comfort. But the Proposition is an universal Negative: There
is no Peace, in no place, at no time, to no wicked man, to be had.

No Peace, none with God, none with Angels, none with Men, none with the
Creatures. They are like unto Ishmaell, whose hand was against every man, and
every man's hand against him: they may well fear with Cain, every one that
finds me will slay me. All creatures being Gods executioners, and ready
pressed to do his will. Pro. 19.13. 2 King. 7.4. Fugit ab agro ad civitatem, a
publico ad domum, a domo in cubiculum and ecce hostem sun^ invenit, quo
co^sugerat seipsum quo ^ugiturus est, Aug. in Ps. 45.


In no place Peace; what Solomon speaks of an ill wife, may aptly be applied
to an ill conscience, It is a continual dropping: wheresoever a man goes his
conscience accompanies him, and that yells against him, in dom^, in f^^o, in
mensa, in lecto: In all places where he comes. So that as those Lepers spoke
one unto another; If we enter into the city the famine is in the city, and we
shall die there, if we sit still we shall di^ h^re, etc. Sinners may so say
unto themselves, If we go to Gods House there is no Peace: His word threatens
us. If we stay at home, there is no Peace, our Consciences condemn us, what
shall we do?

At no Time Peace. They are like the surging and raging waves of the Sea still
casting up mire and dirt: Or like Euripus which ever boyleth and is in
continual agitation, Job 15.20, 21. and 27.20, 21. There Conscience is like an
aching tooth; he that has it eats in pain, drinks in pain, sleeps in pain.
So is it with a sinner, he is pained with Conscience continually.

nor can any wicked man have Peace: Be he never so great or mighty; let his
coat be made of what cloth it will, Romans 2.
God is no respecter of Persons; He bids defiance to all such as sin against
him of malicious wickedness.

Do you ask your watchmen (then) as Iehoram asked Iehu, Is it peace Iehu, is
it peace? We must answer, what peace when as the witch-crafts and Adulteries of
thy mother Iesabell are yet so many? Art thou a wicked one, a lewd Liver, a
Drunkard, an Adulterer, etc. Come behind, what have thou to do with Peace.

Ob. But who sees not that Sinners have Peace. Read Job 21.9. And there we
shall find that there is a Peace in the Tents of wicked ones; they live at
ease, have what their hearts can wish, their consciences are quiet, and they
die like lambs?

Resp. This Peace in them, is not, Pax conscientiae, but stupor conscientiae,
you may call it rather stupidity than Peace: The habit of sin has taken away
the sense of sin, so that they are become past feeling; their consciences
being seared with a hot iron, 1 Timothy 4.2. Seared may the Conscience be, but not
safe; quiet, but not good.

Job compares this Peace unto a dream and affirms that it is but for a
moment. Job 38.17. Eccles. 7.6 Spinae dum ardent sonant, and ato exurantur, ut
nullus caloris sit effectus, Amb de hortat. ad virginitatem. Dan. 5.5, 6.
Solomon resembles it to the crackling of thorns under the Pot. Now (says S.
Ambrose) thorns when they burn, they make a noise and quickly are consumed;
so that there is no effect of their heat: So sinners make a noise of Peace, but
it is soon gone, and they have little comfort by it. It is in their Face, not
in the Heart (as Solomon shows, Prove. 14.13.) In laughter many times the Heart
is sad, in the midst of their mirth, their thoughts are troubled as were
Belshazzers, the joints of their loins are loosed, and their knees smite one
against another.

This that former resemblance of Thorns under the Pot intimates The flame
lifts up it self in an exulting braving way, yet it is kept down and
suppressed by the Pot over it: So this Peace of Sinners is under many troubles:
That seething Pot spoken of, Ier. 1.13. checks and subdues it: Still there is a
Thorn at the breast of this Nightingale; and as the Prophet speaks, In pace
amaritudo mea amarissima, Isay. 38.17, In peace I had great bitterness, thus
may they say: Sure I am they have just cause; for their peace is like the Sea,
called, Mare mortuum, which (they say) is smooth on the top, but deadly at the
bottom.

Quest. But how does this Seeming or false Peace of sinners differ from that
Peace which arises from Assurance of GODS Favor, through Faith in Christ?

Resp. By what has bin already said, this may be in part discerned, but to
answer you more fully.

First, the Conscience of a sinner is quiet, for that it has no sight nor
sense of sin. He is like that presumptuous Carrier, who traveling in the
night and being told of many dangerous pits in the way which might endanger
both his Horse and Himself, desperately answered, Oculos comprimo and omnia
ubique plana sunt: I shut mine Eyes and all things are to me alike plain. They
are secure through the darkness and senselesnes of their consciences. But a
good Conscience wash d in the blood of Christ is quiet because it so feels
sin, as that it believes all is forgiven, and that the whole debt (whereof it
is very sensible) is discharged through Christ's blood.

Secondly, A benumbed Conscience, though it be quiet yet it comfort not.
There may be indeed, a natural liveliness, and a joy taken in things pleasing
to nature, but spiritual Comfort in the Conscience there is none at all. Now
the true pacified conscience has great joy and refreshing in it; it cheareth
up the Soul of a man, as one that is cheared at a Feast; in which respect it
is said to be a continual Feast.

Thirdly, A dead or benumbed Conscience fears not sin, nor Gods wrath for
sin: But a Good Conscience is very fearful of giving God the least offense:
As it was said of Hezekiah, that he feared God greatly; So is it with the
Godly. And thus you see however there be some agreement and likeness between
the true peace of a good Conscience and the false peace of a bad one in regard
both are quiet, and free from trouble, yet in other respects there is a wide
difference betwixt them; and therefore be not deceived with appearance. You know
the Sea does not always rage and roar: No Conscience makes so rough weather
as at no time to admit a calm. And when a Sinner shall tell you all is well
and quiet at home: If you give him the hearing let that be all. Many a dying
man you may hear to say that he feels no pain: And yet you like him never the
better for it. After the draught of Milk that Sisera took, he was not sensible
of Iaels hammer.

a Believer to whom true Peace belongs as their inheritance, Pax ^areditas
Chris^i avorum Aug de temp. Scr. 200.
they being the Sons of Peace, Luke 10.6. There is much peace (says David)
to them that love thy Law, Psalm. 119.164. To the Sinner there was none; there
is much Peace to these; having Peace with God, we have Peace with his Angels,
Ps 34.7. Heb. 1.14. Peace with men, Luke 2.14. Isay. 11.6, 7. Peace with Gods
ordinances, Isay. 11.4 and 57.19. Peace with our selves, Colos. 3.15. Peace
with the creatures, Hos. 2.18 Peace with our Crosses, Romans 8.28. Thus we have
much Peace.

Ob. But do we not see it evidently that none have less Peace then these? who
are more inwardly afflicted, outwardly molested, 2 Cor. 11.23-30.

Resp. The Church of God is Militant here in this world and so no perfect Peace
may be here expected. In the world (says Christ) you shall have Affliction,
but in me peace. Though we have much Peace (as I said) yet not full and perfect
Peace; for there can be no Peace with the Powers and Principalities of the
world, Ephesians. 6.12. Nor with the Lusts of the world, 1 Pet. 2. Nor with the men
of this world, Pax nostra bellum contra Satanam.
John 15.8. But this war is our Peace, as Tertullian speaks.

2. God does not ever speak peace to his own; but that comes to pass through
their own folly, Psalm. 85.8. David knew this by his own dear bought
experience: But if they be careful to abstain from sin; they cannot be
without inward Peace in all their outward troubles, Act. 5.41. They are like a
Rock in the Sea, than which nothing is more quiet because it is not stirred,
and yet nothing more unquiet, because it is ever assaulted.

3. This Peace is but begun in this world and as yet imperfect (as all other
Graces be) The mind and will is subdued unto Gods mind and will but in part.
And the flesh is subdued but in part to the Spirit; whence arises a combat
within them, but a good Conscience they have which is therefore peaceable,
because it outstandeth corruption, and in some measure subdues it.

Peace, by those ways and means which you have bin acquainted withal in this
Parable from this Penitents practice; which the better to provoke you unto J
might spend time (and that not unprofitably) in discovering unto you the
excellency of this Grace.

First, In that it was the first Congratulation wherewith the holy Angels
saluted the Church at the birth of Christ. Luke 2.14. Joh. 14.27. Psalm. 34.12.
1 These. 3.14. Romans 14.19.
Nor is there any thing, which Christ the Head of men and Angels did more
carefully bequeath to his Church than Peace: It was that blessed Grace which
Christ did leave as a token of his Love to his Church a little before his
death, nor is there any duty that Gods Servants do call on us more to seek
after than Peace.

Secondly, from the great account that has bin and is made of it, both by God
and Man. God takes it into his own holy Title, as Hebr. 13.20. Isay. 9.6. Were
it not an Orient Pearl, or a Diamond of unspeakable worth he would not have it
in his Crown: Yea the very blood of his Son he gave to purchase it: Now how
precious that blood was Saint Peter shows, 1 Pet. 1.19. In which respect it is
called, the Peace of God, Phil. 4.7. Colos. 3.15. 2 These. 3.16.

And as God does thus highly prize it so do all the Godly (who have in them the
spirit of discerning:) How bitterly have they bewailed the want of it? What
sighs and groans have they sent up to Heaven for obtaining it? Psalm. 51.8.
And having procured it, they would not willingly take ten thousand worlds for
it.

Yea the wicked themselves set a high price on it, Genesis 4.13.
when their consciences are awakened: How have they wished any other pain or
torture so they might have peace, what would Caine have given for it, think
you? What would Judas? What Belshazzar? When horrors, fears, terrors have
seized on them, then Peace has bin in request with them.

Thirdly, from the unspeakable Benefits that true Peace brings along with it:
What is it that can make a man happy, but attends on Peace? It comprehends in
the very name of it all Happiness, both of Estate and Disposition. That
Mountain whereon Christ ascended though it abounded with Palms, Pines, and
Mirtles, yet it carried only the name of Olives (an ancient Emblem of Peace)
So though many mercies belong unto a Christian, yet all are comprised under
this one little word which is speld with a few letters, Peace; whence it was
that the Hebrews wished nothing but Peace unto their friends, understanding
thereby all prosperous success, Mat. 10.13. Luke 10.5. John 20.21, 26. Luke
24.36. Phil. 4.7. Colos. 3.
This fills the heart with Patience, Joy, Comfort in believing: It preserves the
Soul, as in a strong Garrison, so that a man is as quiet there, as Elisha in
Dothan, and guards the principal forts from being surprised, as the city of
Damascus was guarded by the King, 2 Cor. 11.32. It passes all understanding,
surpasses all commending. Therefore as S. Austin speaking of the excellency of
this grace, and not being able to set forth the happiness thereof says (so
must I crave leave to speak) Differamus omnes lauds pacis, Aug. in Ps. 48.
ad illam patriam pacis, ibi enim before laudabimus, ubi before habebimus.
Let us defer all the praises of Peace until we come into the proper Country
of Peace; For there we shall praise it more fully, where we shall possess it
more fully.

I have a word or two of advice for you before I end: If in case it be your
happiness to be set into the way of Peace; Heb. 12.13, 14 Duae sunt amice,
justitia and pax, tu forte unam vis and alteram no^ facies. Nemo enim est qui
non velit pacem, sed non omnes volunt operari justitia^. Interroga omnes
homines vis pacem? uno ore respondebit tibi genus bumanu^: opto, cupio, amo,
volo Ama justitiam quia duae amicae sunt justitia and pax, ipsae se osculantur,
si amicam pacis non amaveris non te amabit ipsa pax, nec veniet ad te, Aug. in
Psalm 84.
have a care to keep that way and see that you make straight paths for your
Feet. Let Righteousness be your guide. These are two friends that will not
part (as St. Austin shows excellently) But if Righteousness take one way,
Peace will take another. Let S. Paul's daily exercise be yours; Study in all
things to keep a good Conscience void of offense both toward God and toward
man. I say in all things: For it is with Conscience as with the Ice, break it
in one place, and it will soon break in many. Some deal with their
Consciences, as they deal with a new suit which at first vvearing they are
afraid of soiling, they look where they sit; they look where they lean, etc.
But when the gloss begins to fade and it begins to be a little old, they have
little care where they bestow it: There are who are like some new married
husband; for a while his Love may not be out of his sight, in nothing crossed;
the wind may not blow on her, the Sun must be shaded from her beauty, etc.
But within a while this fond dotard grows weary of his choice: And if he be so
kind, as to give good words and kind looks abroad, yet he can (for a need)
chide his wife at home: Have you not known some upon the sudden turn zealous
Professors who have strained at a Gnat, and shortly after swallowed a Camel?
At the first scrupeld an honest innocent Ceremony, and yet soon after made no
bones of Drunkenness, Adultery, and the like? If you never knew any such, I
pray God you never may.

Ob. But true Peace is everlasting Peace, of that there shall be no end, Isa.
9.7.

Resp. Though true Peace cannot be lost, yet the Counterfeit of Peace may; that
cannot abide.

2. Though the Peace of Justification cannot be lost, yet the peace of
Sanctification may be lost (which is the peace of Conscience and within your
selves) and that either by some gross sin of Commission or Omission, or by
some strong fit of Temptation: Whilst the Tennant pa^es his Rent all is well,
but if that be long neglected then stresse is taken, the ground driven; so is
it here: And in such a case there is no other way but speedily to make our
Peace with our Landlord, R^pentance will do it. Thus you have had the way of
Peace chalked out unto you, with direction how to keep the way. 2 These. 3.16.
Now the God of Peace give you peace always and by all means. The Lord be
with you all, Amen.

FINIS.
AN ALPHABETICALL INDEX OF THE CHIEF Points handled in the foregoing
Exposition, on LVKE 7.40, 41, etc.
A.
ABsolution is a power belonging to Christ, Page 225. Whence Ministers have
their power to Absolve page 226. Difference betwixt us and Papists concerning
it, pa. 224 How God absolves, how Christ and how man, page 224 Particular
Absolution is to be sought after, page 230. Accusation none against the godly,
page 254 Acquaintance is not friendship, page 236. Actual sins of sundry sorts
and kinds, page 51. Adultery a great sin, page 206. Affections are the souls
Sentinel, page 163 They betray us to Satan. Ibid. Signs of Affection to be
shown, page 185 Afflictions come in love to the Godly, page 70. Annoynting how
in use at Feasts, page 191 What was signified by Mary's annoynting Christ, page
196 Whither Christ was once anointed by Mary or oftener. ibid. Arrows Gods
Ministers shoot page 113 Assurance of Salvation in this life is to be had, page
217. It must be sought after, page 231. It tends not to licentious liberty,
pa. 122.
B.
Baptism of Repentance what it is, page 171. Bag God has for a sinner and
the bottle for the Saint, p. 175. Bath twofold, of Justification and
Sanctification, pa. 162 Banquerouts sinners are, pa. 59. Bailiffes are abroad
to attach the Sinner, pa. 48. Body we must be careful of i^, page 162. The
members of the Body are servants to the soul, ibid. Borrowing lawful, p. 36.
It is a fruit of sin, p. 37 We may not needlessly become Borrowers, p. 38. It is
more base not to pay then it is to borrow, page 39.
C.
Censure rash is dangerous, p. 212 Especially of Governors and what it is like
unto, p. 251 None so holy that can escape it, p. 245. Ceremonies of courtesy
may not be slighted, p. 152 Creditor, God is to all, p. 41 Yet denied by many,
p. 42 He is a free and bountiful Creditour, p. 43. There are few Creditors
merciful, p. 61 Credit is by repentance recovered, p. 14^. Christ is true God,
p 241. How he is the Son of man, p. 242 Who holds him up highest preaches him
best, p. 80 Christians there are both strong and weak, page 99. 103.
Circumstantiall omissions are blame worthy, p 151 Our best actions receive
their life or bane from their Circumstances, p. 154 Conscience is like an il
wife, 271 If good it affoordeth joy, p 194. The Peace of it arises from Faith,
page 271. A benumbed and sleepy Conscience how known, p. 274. Company, how and
when to frame our selves to it, p. 234. What Company we are to shun ibid
Community Anabaptisticall unlawful, p. 37 Consideration neglected a cause men
seek not pardon, p. 65. Conversion a greater work than Creation, p. 2.
Conversation outward no sure sign of Conversion, p. 239 Cost bestowed on
Christ we are apt to grudge, p. 199. Curiosity is the nurse of detraction, p.
247. Courtesy is commendable, yea necessary. p. 155. It is much respected by
men, page 156.
D.
David the greatness of his sin, p. 204 Debt owing to God, p. 44. Sin is the
worst Debt and sinners are greatest Debtors, page 8, 45. All are not alike
indebted, p. 5. Yet none able to satisfy, page 55. A Discharge may be had, p.
64. It is speedily to be sought for, p. 48. Being had carefully lay it up p.
70. Debts owing to man may be required, p. 62. It is a grief to an honest mind
to be in Debt, p. 40. 47. No Debt is to be exacted without mercy, p. 62.
Degrees there are of sin, page 52. Degree of Love is answerable to the Degree
of Faith, page 221. Delight God allows as well as for necessity, p. 191.
Despair of any we may not, p. 208, 210. It is a greater sin then other, p. 82.
Devotion of many is a Stage-devotion, p. 163 Detraction, the vileness of it
showed, p. 246 The kinds of Detraction, ibid. The father, mother and nurse of
it, and whence they are, p. 247 Doctrine, it should be well grounded, p. 201.
E.
Ear is the souls taster, page 108. A good Ear described, p. 31. By it
Christ takes possession of the soul, p. 34. To an obedient Ear, reproof is
an Earing. p. 110. Effects are good marks and proofs, p. 215. Elect before
conversion differ not from the wicked, p. 50. Envy the mother of detraction,
pa. 246. Equivocation, the sorts and kinds page 118 Jesuitical Equivocations
are lying assertions, page 17. It was first taught by Satan, page 116. Logical
Equivocation may be used in some cases, page 118. Examples of others should
draw us to Repentance, p. 209, 210 Eye is the most sinful sense, page 164 Our
Eyes are Springs, page 171. They are the two Turtles which we must offer to
God, page 176. Eye-water runs not waste, page 175.
F.
Face of God is against Sinners, page 133 His Face and Favor brings all good
with it, Ibid Repentance brings us into Favor, page 134, 145. Faith, how alike
in all believers and how not, page 99. How it is the common Faith, p. 264. It
has a twofold subsistence, p. 259. It must be every man's own, pa. 261 How the
Faith of another may help us, page 263. It is accompanied with other graces,
page 258. It is obtained by means, page 264. The Faith of many how it is
clothed, page 266 That Faith which saves is a working faith, page 267 It
kindles Love, page 216. According to the degree of Faith is our Love, page 220.
Feasts, mirth and chearfullnesse allowed at them, page 192. Feet of Christ we
must wash and how, page 164. Why the Apostles washed not Christ's Feet, page
162. Our Feet are most apt to gather soil, page 161. They must be washed as
well as our Face or hands, page 161. Fellowship with sinners how farlawfull,
page 235 Forgiveness of sin must be sought for, page 64. It is of free grace
and how, page 65 It belongs to every one that will believe, page 79. Whence it
is that so few seek after it, page 65. How man may forgive, page 224. We must
forgive as God forgives, page 76. Frienas are to be kindly entertained, pa. 152
And not treacherously to be used, page 1^3 Friendship and acquaintance much
differ, page 236.
G.
Grace universal, how far it may be taught, page 79. It is in its nature
invisible, page ^15. And best discovered by the Effects, ibid When it is after
the pattern it is right, page 218. Al Graces may be counterfetted except Love,
pa. 217 Gifts offered by the wise then to Christ what they notified, p 195
Grief the greatness of it how to be judged of, page 179. Guests are to be
cheerfully entertained, page 152.
H.
Harlot does Satan the greatest service, page 207. Hands especially regarded by
the Pharisees, page 163. Hate God many do, and who they are, pa. 94. How God
can be hated, page 95. Hear we must with a^^ open ca^e, pa. 32. Hearing must
be brought into practice, page 33. Heart first to be reformed, page 238. It
has an ear in it, page 240 The Heart of a sinner is his worst piece, page
238. It is like the deep Sea, page 239. How we may judge of the heart and how
no^, p. 240, 243 Honor given to the Son is given to the Father, page 189. Hope
remains for great sinners, page 209. How the valley of Achor is the door of
Hope, page 210.
I.
Idolaters through abuse of things lawful disable not their use page 157.
Things belonging to them were of three sorts, p. 159 What is counted to be
Idolatrous in state, page 160. Ignorance of the people Christ shed his blood
for, page 85. Infants how they are said to have Faith, pa. 263. Ingratitude is
a sin odious to God and man, p. 88. Nature abhors it, ibid. John loved Christ
more than the rest, p. 98. John the Baptist was vox clamantis how p 109. Joy is
to be found in the course of a Christian, p. 193. No true Joy in excess, p.
194.
K.
Kisses the kinds of them, p. 183 It is a symbol of Love, p. 124 184. Holy
Kisses of three sorts, page 183. Unholy Kisses of four sorts, p. 184 A Kiss
noted two things, page 184. What it signified, page 186. The Kiss of Christ's
mouth what, page 187. Christ must be kissed of us, page 186. A threefold Kiss
is owing him page 187. The Father is provoked when the Son is not kissed, p.
188. Many false Kisses are given to him, p. 187. When mercy and truth met and
kissed, p. 63.
L.
Laws judicial bind not us as they did the Jews, page 160. Lend God does to
all, page 42. Liberty greater under the Gospel than under the Law, page 160.
Love hardliest counterfitted of any grace, p. 217. It is the pulse of Faith and
discovers it, pa. 259, 260. Without Love all we do is no. thing, pa. 260. It
must and will be working, p. 259. Three things in Love, page 91. It has
variety of Objects, pa. 97. No affection so reciprocal as it, 96 He is nothing
who loves nothing, page 97. Love rightly qualified how known, page 219. It is
the Handmaid of Faith, page 221. And is bountiful (if not prodigal) page.
198. Love God all do, that are forgiven by him, page 92. Some love God more
then others, page 98. The weakest degree of Love is not to be despised, page
100. How weak Love may be known from strong, page 103. Much Love argues much
mercy, page 220. Whence it is that GOD is noe more Loved, Page 222. Signs that
men Love not God page 93. Reasons why men should Love God. p. 96. No Love is
lost in loving him, p. 97 Difference betwixt true Love and mercenary, p. 107
How God is to be loved for his benefits, p. 106. Love grounded on common
favors unsound, p. 123 Yet they are pledges of Gods Love to those in Christ,
p. 124 Love of God assures us of pardon, p. 218. It is no cause of Remission
but the effect, p. 213. It restraines from licentiousness, p. 122. It carries
us through all difficulties, p 101 It gives great light if well kindled, p.
10^. And is ascending, p. 104 How the Love of God in us may be increased, p.
100. Love is a lovely suit, page 95. No better way to be loved then to Love, p.
106. Love our enemies, only a Christian can, p. 90 Some may be loved above
others, p 91. There is a secret Love which is blameworthy, p 185. Love that is
chambered is sick p. 185 Lust increases the Devils revenewes, p. 207. Lies of
three sorts, p. 115. All sorts unlawful, ibid. Lying is the father of
detraction and sl^nder, p. 246
M.
Manners should attend Faith as well as good works, page 156. Means though
weak, yet not to be despised, page 148 All profit not by the Means, page 77,
79 To sin against Means aggravates it, page 54 Mercy is Gods Face, page 76
It is to be sought for, page 77. All to be ascribed to Mercy, p. 75. Merit
double p. 73 No man can Merit, page 72. Mildness must be used in reprooving,
page 14. Ministers are to be honored, p. 28. The meanest Minister under the
Gospel honorable, page 29. Contempt of their Persons redounds to their
Message, page 30 They must reproove offenders, p. 23. How they must reproove,
page ^11. They may not reproove for every light offense, p. 24. Who are best
Ministers p. 202. They must preach both in life and doctrine, page 127. They
are F^shers, Physicians: n^^ Stewards, pa 1^2. They are Heralds pa. 1 8.
Scandalous Ministers may convert, page 1^6 Ministry, standing is necessary, pa
230. Mirth allowed a Christian, page 193 The wicked have no cause of Mirth, p.
195. Be not so merry as to forget God, page 195. Mourn for those who mourn
not, page 167
N.
Names, a double use of them, p. 16. Men of good Names may miscarry, p. 26.
Good Names should be made good, pa. 25. Sinners are not worthy Naming p 143.
O.
Ointment of Mary was very precious, page 198. Still there is use of our
Ointments, pa 200. Ornament of the body not t^o good for Christ. p. 182.
P.
Parables have both bark and pi^h, page 8. There are as many Parables in the
Scripture, as weeks in the year p. 10 Why Christ affected this Parabolicall way
of teaching, page 9. Great ones are to be spoken unto in Parables, p. 24. The
best of a Parable is the sense mystical, page 36. Pardon is offered to all
without exception, pa. 79 Peace, the sorts and kinds of it, page 269 True Peace
the fruit of Faith, pa. 271 It is the inheritance of the Saints p. 275 The
excellency of it, pa. 276 How to get and keep it, p. 278 All other blessings
attend it, page 277. There is none to the wicked, p. 271. They have a seeming
peace but not true, page 272 The difference betwixt sound and seeming peace, p.
273 How peace may be lost, page 278. Penitent to be well thought off page 144.
His deportment and carriage must be observed, pa. 139 He is an excellent actor,
p. 137. A good life argues a true Penitent, page 139 Penance popish wherein it
is faulty, page 181. Praise must be given to whom it is due, p. 129. It may not
be too much affected, page 130. And is to be sought in the way of well-doing,
page 131. Precepts should be turned into Prayers, page 58. Preachers who are
the best, pa. 202. Propriety of goods established, page 37.
Q.
Question it is who loves God most, pa. 103.
R.
Reformation outward not sufficient, page 238 Redemption plenteous to be had in
Christ, page 81. Remission of sin is attainable, p. 62. Repentance is rather
seen then heard page 136 It restores virginity, youth and credit, page 144,
145 Reproof this age will not endure, pa. 20. How to Reproove aright is
difficult, page 21. It must be wisely given p. 111. It is an careting to the
obedient page 110 Love must be seen in it, page 15. So Reproove as that we do
not blemish, page 18 In some cases it must be auricular, page 17 When to
reproove by name and in what cases, page 16 Sharp Reproof is sometimes to be
used, pa. 14. Reproof is like wormwood, pa. 112. Riches of God are great, page
41. Revenge taken by a Penitent wherein it stands, page 181
S.
Salvation what, page 255 In this life to be had, pa. 256. Nothing can hinder
the Salvation of the godly, page 257. Salvation to be remembered, page 185. How
and whom to Salute, page 156 Satisfaction to God no man can make, page 57, 68
To our Brethren it may and must, page 69. Security dangerous, page 49. Sermons
of some men are like fireworks, page 202. Serpents all Detractors are, page
248. Silence in the presence of sin implies consent, page 21. Sins how
there are both mortal and venial, pa. 52, 83. Parity of Sins an idle dream
page 52. How to distinguish betwixt Sin and Sin, page 53. Greatest Sins
may be pardoned, page 82, 211. Some sins deserve greater punishment then
other, page 83. No sin is so small as to be slighted, page 85. Sin is in
all, but all are not in sin, page 203 How sin is in the godly, page 204.
Sinners who are so to be accounted, page 203 Slander is a kind of, Persecution
the godly suffer, page 250. Magistrates and Ministers especially, page 251.
Sorrow accompanies true Repentance, page 1^6 It must be answerable to the
sin, page 177. If deep, it sometimes wants a tongue, page 135 A man may
exceed in it and when, page 178 Unsound Sorrow how discerned, page 177.
Sociable to be so is commendable, page 233 Nons may be rashly censured for it,
page 236. What Society we may have with Sinners, page 235. Spirit, what kind
of one a slanderer is, page 249. A troublesome spirit is a Sacrifice for Hell,
ibid
T.
Tears what they are and whence, page 164. The several sorts and kinds of
them, page 165. They are necessary appendances of Repentance, page 168. Yet
very deceitful things, page 168. Repentance may be without them, pa. 169 The
trial of true Tears, page 170. Tears of the body and soul compared, ibid.
The benefit and profit of them, page 172 Counterfeit Tears have prevailed,
page 173. Thoughts make conscience of, page 11. The Word discovers them, p 12.
They are known only to God, page 240. How they are discovered by man and
Satan, page 243. Tongue may be too sudden in answering. page 109 Truth must be
spoken, page 114, 120. Sometimes it may be concealed in whole or in part, and
in what cases, page 114. It is Gods whoever brings it, page 125.
U.
Venial no sin in it self is, page 83, 84. Two ways sin may be termed
Venial, page 83. Virginity how restored, page 144. Uncleanness that sin so
called is accompanied with other, p. 216 Usury, difference betwixt it and
Faenory, page 35. What it is and what kind lawful, p. 35
W.
Waters-lying what they are, p. 168. When the city of Waters is taken, the
danger is great, p. 176. Weeping proves life, p. 166. To weep for other things
and not for sin a bad sign, p. 169. Motives to weep, p. 167. It is no
childish Property, page 172. Weakest vessel often holds the liquour, p. 149.
Whoredom is a pit-fall, page 207. Wisdom of the Serpent God allows us, p.
119 Women their carriage to be wisely observed, p. 140 They may not be
spoken contemptibly of, p. 141. God has highly honored that Sex, p. 142.
Women of special note montioned, p. 149 Such should be observed and imitated,
p. 146 A virtuous woman hard to find out, p. 141. Bad women Satan's chief
instruments, p. 141. Such women as are bad should be shunned, p. 147 How a
woman may lawfully speak in the Church, p. 149. How they should provoke men to
jealousy, p. 150. Whether it was one and the same woman that anointed Christ
so often, p. 196. Words of Christ's mouth should prevail with us, p. 202. Words
are the pictures of the mind and how, p. 110. Works, Protestants are no
enemies unto them, p. 260. They must accompany Faith, page 265. They are to be
pressed, p. 267. In what respects they are necessary, pa. 268. The best are
full of imperfection, p. 74. They are not causes but conditions of Remission,
p. 72. How St. Paul and St. James agree concerning them, page 269.
Perlegi tractatum hunc, cui titulus (The Penitent CITIZEN) in quo nihil
reperio, quo minus cum summa utilitate imprimatur.

THO. WYKES.
April 4. 1640.
FINIS.

