A SERMON Preached before the CORPORATION OF Trinity-House IN DEPTFORD STRAND,
At the ELECTION of their MASTER, May XXX. 1681.

By JOHN ROGERS, A. M. and Chaplain to the RIGHT HONORABLE GEORGE Earl of
BERKELEY.

Published by their Appointment.

LONDON, Printed by J. Macock, for Richard Royston, Bookseller to the Kings
most Excellent Majesty. MDCLXXXI.

TO THE Right Honorable GEORGE EARL of BERKELEY, Viscount DURESLEY, Lord
BERKELEY of Berkeley-Castle, etc.
My Lord,
IN humble Obedience to Your Lordships Commands, and due Submission to a
Request made to Your Lordship by the worthy Master and Gentlemen of the
Corporation of Trinity-House, this Discourse which was designed by me only for
the Pulpit, now begs your Lordships and those worthy Gentlemen's Acceptance from
the Press. The Intention of it being to persuade Seafaring men to the Exercise
of Religion and Virtue, upon Motives proper to themselves; if, by God's
Blessing upon it, it shall be a means of turning any one unto Righteousness, it
will be the most ample Return I expect for this bold Adventure abroad.

My Lord, if it were possible that all of your high Rank and Quality would,
after your great Example, resolve to be either Encouragers of Trade, or employ
their Minds in some other way as serviceable to their King, their Country, and
Themselves; we might then hope to see every one of them become, what your
Lordship now is, inflexibly Loyal to his Prince, a Hearty Lover of his Country,
a Great Friend to Business and Trade, and a Professed Enemy to the looseness
and degeneracy of the Age.

MY Lord, I am Your Lordships most humble, and most obedient Servant and
Chaplain, JOHN ROGERS.

A SERMON Preached before the Corporation of TRINITY-HOUSE, in Deptford-Strand,
May XXX. 1681.
JONAH I. 6. So the Ship-master came to him, and said unto him, What meanest
thou, O Sleeper? Arise, call upon thy God, if so be that God will think upon us
that we perish not.
IN this Book, we have a compendious History of the extraordinary mission of
the Prophet Jonah, to preach Repentance to the Ninivites, whose wickedness had
come up before the Lord. Wherein, if we consider the Circumstances that attend
it, they will appear to be of a very strange and extraordinary Nature; so
seemingly opposite to the thing designed, and yet so harmonious and successful
in the Event, that this Instance alone were sufficient to humble our minds,
make us acquiesce under all the Dispensations of Divine Providence, rely upon
God's Ways, though they be never so unlike ours, and walk submissively in his
Paths, how crooked and intricate soever they may seem to be.

That a poor solitary Prophet out of Israel, should enter the Streets of the
great Metropolis of Assyria, Niniveh that great City, (whose compass, say
Historians, was forty eight Miles, and her Towers fifteen hundred) nay so
exceeding great, that the Prophet himself, chap. 3. ver. 3. affirms it to be
three days journey within it self; that he should there denounce woeful judgment
against the Inhabitants thereof, if within forty days they humbled not
themselves before God; what could possibly be expected from so daring an
attempt, but that the Prophet upon the first opening of his mouth, should have
immediately fell a Sacrifice to the fury of the enraged multitude? Yet behold
the contrary! Heb. 4. 12.
his words become quick and powerful, and sharper than a two-edged-sword; he no
sooner enters the City, and lifts up his voice, but the People believe God, and
a Fast is proclaimed by a Decree of King and Nobles, a Fast of rigorous both
for Man and Beast, that the like was never heard of before.

Again, Chap. 1. ver. 1, 2.
The word of the Lord came unto Jonah saying, Arise, go to Niniveh. The speedy
execution of his Commission, one would have thought, should have been much
forwarded by the near approach of the Judgment, Yet forty days, Chap. 3. ver. 4.
and Niniveh shall be destroyed: yet behold, he flies from the Presence of the
Lord, turns away from Assyria, goes on Board at Joppa, and is bound for
Cilicia; nay, so regardless was he of his Commission, that instead of trembling
in the sight of God (for alas, Psalm. 139. 7, 9, 10.
Whither can he flee from his presence? If he take the wings of the morning,
and dwell in the uttermost parts of the Sea, even there shall his right hand
hold him) so regardless was he, I say, of the heavenly voice, and the Judgment
consequent upon so great Disobedience, that he lays himself down in perfect
security, is not to be awakened either by the loudness of the Winds, or the
roaring of the Waters; till at last admonished by a Heathen he is content to be
cast overboard, and takes up an unheard of Lodging in the Belly of a Whale
(which by the way must give occasion for that Story of Hercules mentioned by
Lycophron, Jo. Tzetzes in Lycophr. initio Cassand.
who calls him (...), because he was preserved three nights in the Belly of a
Fish.) Now that all these so seemingly untoward accidents, should be so wisely
managed in the Event, as to mightily advantage that End which they appeared so
much directly to oppose; this plainly shows, that such things are the Lords
doings, Psalm. 118. 23.
and ought to be mavelous in our eyes. Yet upon these strange occurrences,
it is probable, the Mariners could not forbear spreading the report of them,
Vide Bishop Wilkins Beauty of Providence.
which at last reaching Niniveh, might prepare the Prophets way, possess the
people that he could not come to them but by a Miracle, that he was a Person
extraordinarily sent of God, and by this means gain credit and success to his
Preaching.

Now among all the Passages of this History, I have made choice of that which
concerns the Prophet's behavior whilst out at Sea; as being most suitable to
the present Occasion, and most agreeable to my Design, which is to be as
practical as I can:

-- What meanest thou, O Sleeper? Arise, call upon thy God, if so be that God
will think upon us that we perish not.

In speaking to which words, I shall do these following things:

I. Show, That the proper Effect of Dangers by Sea, should be to awaken men's
minds, and raise them up unto Acts of Devotion; What meanest thou, O Sleeper?
Arise, call upon thy God. II. The great Encouragement men have to do this, from
the especial Providence of God over Sea-affairs; If so be that God will think
upon us, that we perish not. And, III. I shall crave leave to answer some
Objections which this Discourse may be thought liable unto.
I. That the proper Effect of Dangers by Sea should be to awaken men's minds,
and raise them up unto acts of Devotion; What meanest thou, O Sleeper? Arise,
call upon thy God. To call upon God in times of Danger and Distress, is natural
to mankind; but no kind of Dangers have such an aptitude in them to rouse the
Spirits of men, and make them think what their condition is toward God, as
those which seafaring men are frequently exposed to. 2 Cor. 11. 25, 26.
St Paul recounting the dangers he had passed through in preaching the Gospel
to the Nations, begins with perils in the deep, and again twice repeats it in
the same verse, in perils of water, in perils in the Sea; as if those alone
were the great afflictions he would most glory in: and the Philosopher
accounted men at Sea to be but a kind of Borderers between the living and the
dead. Psalm. 107. 23, 24.
They that go down to the Sea in Ships, says the Psalmist, they see the works
of the Lord, and his wonders in the deep; i. e. the great and mighty works of
the Creation, and the extraordinary wonders of God's Providence, are so
apparent to these men's eyes that they cannot but consider them, and take
especial notice of the dangers they pass through. And however custom may in
time wear off all Sense of danger, yet can it never lessen it, as will appear
by considering these three things: (1.) The Suddenness of those calamities
which may happen to seafaring men; (2.) The Number of them; and (3.) Their
Frequency.

For their Suddenness, there are no kind of accidents to which the lives of men
are subject, that are so sure and swift Executioners as those which lie in wait
for Mariners. A man may linger out his days under a sore Disease; and though
some fiercer kinds may sooner seize upon his Vitals, yet rarely is Death this
way so swift of foot as not to give some Warning to the Patient, and by
alarming his Conscience make him so to consider his latter end as to apply his
heart to Wisdom and Repentance. But alas! it is far otherwise in the condition I
am now speaking of; 1 Kings 18. 44,
a man may see a Cloud no bigger than his hand, yet in a moment its waters
shall overwhelm him, and the Deep shall swallow him up quick, before he shall
be able to arise, and call upon his God. The consideration of this cannot but
inform you what obligations you have above other men to be always in a
readiness, and diligently to watch, because you know not in what hour this sad
calamity may fall upon you. Watch therefore, Matthew. 24. 42, 43, 44.
for you know not what hour the Lord does come. But know this, That if the good
man of the house had known in what watch the Thief would come, he would have
watched, and would not have suffered his house to be broken up. Therefore be
you also ready, for in such an hour as you think not, the Son of man comes.

For the Number of the dangers, they become yet more terrible, and beyond my
abilities to recount. The dangers of the Waters beneath, the falling of Spouts
from above, the Rocks and Quicksands, the tempestuous Winds and Hurricanes
without, any small Leak within, one Spark in the Gun-room, nay one wry step is
sufficient to dispatch a man, and send him quick into another World. And can
any one in his right senses reflect upon these things, and yet neglect the
working out his salvation with fear and trembling? Philip. 2. 12.
Consider but in what an Amazement must that wretched man be, who passes
immediately with Oaths and Execrations in his mouth, to make his appearance
before the Judgment Seat of Christ; What a surprise must it needs be unto him,
when he awakens in another World, and begins then to call upon his God when he
can expect no other Answer than, I know you not, Matthew. 25. 41.
depart from me you wicked into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and
his Angels! Again,

For the Frequency of the dangers, they are yet more formidable; because this
will certainly convince you that these sad Afflictions are not only possible,
but common unto men, and that for ought any one knows to the contrary his own
turn is next. Now that the dangers which seafaring men are exposed to are
frequent and common, and do ordinarily happen unto them, there needs no other
Argument to convince you than your own experience of them; the many rescues you
have had out of the very Jaws of Death, those many, and even miraculous,
deliverances which you cannot but be sensible of, and which have happened to
you even then when all hopes of escape seemed to be quite taken away. I should
not have mentioned this particular, but that I am afraid it is an opinion too
common amongst you, That since the great improvements of Navigation, and the
daily advancement of Knowledge in Sea-affairs, the Ocean is now rendered so
passable and secure, that the Accidents seem not to exceed those which men in
general are exposed to; and yet out of your own mouths may you be convinced,
since it is hardly possibly to find one seafaring man, who is not able to
recount as many dangers as voyages, and does not after a long and perilous
absence from home, esteem it almost a resurrection from the dead to recover his
native Shore again.

Now if these things were but once thoroughly considered and laid to heart, one
would think it almost impossible there should be any such Monster in the World
as a loose and irreligious Seaman, and that these are they of all men who live
soberly, righteously and godly in this present world, who pray continually, Qui
nescit orare, discat navigare.
and call upon their God, and are least obnoxious to inconsideration and
stupidity; that these are they who live in a perpetual sense of the protecting
Arm of God, and a continual dread of his Majesty, in whom, after an
extraordinary manner, they live and move, and have their being, and that if
this sort of warfare cannot persuade men, neither will they be persuaded though
one should rise to them from the dead; there being nothing in this World which
in its own nature can tend more to the awakening of men's minds, and bring them
over into the ways of Religion and Virtue, than that perilous state they live
in, through the suddenness, the number and frequency of those calamities which
are always incident to seafaring men. I come therefore to show,

II. What great encouragement you have to call upon God, from the consideration
of his especial Providence over Sea-affairs; If so be that God will think upon
us, that we perish not. And whoever considers how full and express the
Scriptures are in the declaration of this truth, he will at the same time be
inclined to think, That though Gods Providence and his mercy are over all his
works, yet the great strokes of his Divine Arm are made most manifest in the
Deep. For he it is who commands and raises the stormy wind, Psalm. 107. 25.
which lifts up the waves of the Sea. Psalm. 33. 7.
He gathers the waters of the Sea together as an heap, and lays up the
depth in his storehouses; Psalm. 65. 7.
he treads upon the waves of the Sea, and stilleth the noise of the Seas,
Psalm. 89. 9.
and the noise of their waves; he rules the raging of the Sea, and when the
waves thereof arise, Jer. 5. 22.
he stilleth them. Fear ye not me, says the Lord? will ye not tremble at my
presence, which have placed the Sand for the Bound of the Sea, by a perpetual
Decree, that it cannot pass it, and though the waves thereof toss themselves,
yet can they not prevail, though they roar, yet can they not pass over it? And
what an encouragement must it needs be to serve and fear that God, who is thus
able to think upon you that you perish not? It cannot but be highly your
concern to engage this Providence on your side, which is only able to deliver
you, unless you can pretend like Xerxes to stop the raging of the Sea,
Herodotus.
by casting Manacles and Fetters into the Hellespont; which he was as able to
perform as thou art to bind the sweet influences of Pleiades, Job 38. 31.
or loose the bands of Orion. Alas! these are the Ordinances of Heaven, and
from hence alone must we expect to be delivered out of our distress. But tell
me, O wretched man, whoever thou art, that art not used to call upon thy God
but in thy Oaths and Blasphemies, which way can thou promise to thy self
security, whilst thou think thus to outface God, and defy the Almighty when
he has got thee fast (if I may so speak) in the very Element of his wrath.
What meanest thou, O Sleeper? Do thou presumptuously go on because thy
misfortunes hitherto have not been worse than other men's? Romans 2. 4, 5. 6.
Despisest thou the riches of God's goodness, and forbearance, and long
suffering; not knowing that the goodness of God should lead thee to repentance?
but after thy hardness and impenitent heart treasurest up unto thy self wrath
against the day of wrath, and revelation of the righteous judgment of God, who
(when the Sea shall give up her dead) will render to every man according to his
deeds. Apoc. 20. 13.
It Is true, how much soever we call upon our God, yet on the other hand may we
still fail of a deliverance, and there is no reason to expect that the event
must punctually answer our desires, unless we were as able to judge for our
selves as infinite wisdom it self is. But although ordinarily it cannot be
supposed that every good man should hear the voice of God (whose he is, and
whom he serves) speaking to him after the same manner as once to the Apostle
Saint Paul; Fear not, Acts 27. 24.
thou must be brought before Caesar, and lo I have given thee all them that
sail with thee; though, I say, it were unjustifiable thus to presume upon
extraordinary acts of Providence, yet does it not at all follow from hence that
good men are not entitled to the mercies and deliverances of God, and the bad
are not sometimes examples of his vengeance. This is plainly acknowledged by
the Philosopher, when he bespoke his wretched Companions after this manner,
(...), etc. Hold your peace (says he) lest the gods knowing that you sail with
us, we all perish for your sakes.

III. I come now to answer some Objections which this Discourse may be thought
liable unto. And the most plausible that I can think of are these that follow:

1. That Religion is apt to inject fear into men's minds, which must needs
render it very improper for seafaring men.

2. It will take up too much of your time, and slacken your endeavors in cases
of imminent danger.

3. That the Knowledge of the Seas is rather apt to draw men off from the
belief of a God and Providence, than to settle and establish them in it.

And if these things be so, I have lost my labor, all my advice is in vain.
But let us see of what force these Objections are, before we and our Religion
so easily part. And,

1. It Is said, That Religion is apt to inject fear into men's minds, which must
needs render it very improper for seafaring men. For, it being already granted
that throughout the whole visible Creation, there is not to be found such
another Scene of astonishing dangers, as men sometimes meet with out at Sea;
when they are on all sides terrified with grim Messengers of death, and, as the
Psalmist well expresses it, Psalm. 107. 27.
they reel to and fro, and stagger like a drunken man, and are at their wits
end: It will then follow, that they of all men in the World have at such time
the greatest need of an undaunted courage, and a bold and resolute mind. But
this cannot otherwise be obtained, than by casting off all apprehensions of
Death and Hell, and a Judgment to come; which will so infeeble men's minds and
prey upon their Spirits, that the effect of dwelling upon such thoughts will
certainly appear to be an heartless and despairing condition; and since it were
the best way to overlook all those terrors which are so visible about us, what
reason is there that we should create new ones which are not seen, and raise a
more formidable enemy within our selves. In answer to this,

First, I yield partly to what the Objection supposes, That bad men when their
lives are in real danger, have the terrors of the Lord upon them, and a
fearful expectation of a Judgment to come: and if men will venture out at Sea
with evil habits about them, and laden with iniquity, there is no help for it
if the fears of Death and a Judgment consequent upon it, shall naturally
accompany and overset them. There is no other possible remedy in this case but
one, and that is, That such men would deal by their sins, as the Mariners in
the Verse before my Text were forced to do by their wares, get rid of them as
speedily as they can, that by so doing they may lighten the Vessel, Heb. 12. 1.
and having laid aside every weight, and the sin which does so easily beset
them, they may run with patience that race which is set before them. But then,

Secondly, On the other hand, it is as certain that nothing inspires men more
with true courage and bravery of resolution than Religion and Virtue. For when
men have got at liberty from their Lusts, and are become Masters of themselves,
and have abandoned the soft Paths of ease and luxury; as in times of the
greatest difficulty and hazard, they will far exceed other men in sagacity and
presence of mind (and consequently in a happy discovery of the best means of
escape) so will they also truly become better enabled to undergo the worst of
hardships, and to weather out the most violent Storms: and whereas the wicked
are full of inward disconsolations and fearful abodings, which so distract
their minds, that they are already sunk in despair; the virtuous man is secure
of God's Providence on his side, and is certainly assured, That whatever the
success of his endeavors be, he shall be still on the victorious Party: for he
well knows that that God whom he serves will either deliver him out of his
present calamities, or will bring him to his last, his best and most desired
Haven. And now what is there that shall be able to dismantle the spirit of a
man thus fortified? or rob him of his resolution and his courage? both which,
like a wise man, he has founded upon a Rock, Matthew. 7. 24, 25.
and let the rain descend, the floods come, and the winds beat upon him, it is
to no purpose, they can never fall, for he has built them upon a Rock. On the
contrary, how does Vice naturally tend to debase men's spirits, and render them
cowardly and effeminate, unfit to sustain those many (and oftentimes lasting)
severities which a sea-warfare does expose them to; either through foulness of
weather, inhumanity of strangers, scarcity and badness of provision,
indisposition of body passing through various Climes, etc. and, what is worse
than all these outward calamities, (to make up the vicious man's condition
completely miserable) he has also a galled Conscience within, and is so
continually tossed with restless and perplexing thoughts, that he becomes like
the troubled Sea before him, Isai. 57. 20.
which cannot rest, and whose waters cast up mire and dirt.

I have the longer insisted upon this Point, because I am sensible I speak to
those who, of all men living, are the most jealous of their courage and
fortitude, and therefore shall not be blamed by you, if I establish them upon
their true foundations. But then,

2. It is urged, That Religion will take up too much of your time, and slacken
your endeavors in cases of imminent danger. In times of fatal concern, when
the unruly Element becomes boisterous and ungovernable, and plays with the
goodliest Vessel as easily as the Leviathan sports with an empty Cask; when all
on a sudden the Ocean becomes a confused Chaos, height and depth, light and
darkness are mingled together; then, when all hands should be at work, and
every pull seems to be the last tug for life; then, I say, for a man to betake
himself to his prayers, or with the Prophet, go down into the sides of the
Ship* there lay himself down to sleep (though perhaps the next moment it may
prove his last) or, what is much the same thing, there fling himself wholly
upon Gods Protection, rely upon his Providence, and rest assured that nothing
but a Divine hand can save and deliver him: what is this but to render men
useless in their Arts, insensible of their danger, and even to betray them out
of their lives? and if this be the effect of calling upon God, it were as good
men should shipwreck their faith as themselves.

In reply to this, St Paul's Rule holds good, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 10.
That if any would not work, neither should they eat. Idleness and sloth, vain
presumption and causeless security are so far from being countenanced by
Religion, that it lays the greatest obligations upon men to the contrary. It
charges diligence and industry upon men's Consciences, and lets them know that
they must one day give a severe account for the misuse of that time which once
lost can never be regained; it tells them, That though they should be careless
of themselves, yet no consideration ought to make them prodigal of the lives of
other men, Eccles. 9. 2.
where all things must happen alike to all, and there will be but one event to
the righteous and to the wicked, to him that swears, and to him that fears
an Oath.

But now what hinders that men cannot reconcile their business and their
devotions together, and let their minds be well employed however their Bodies
are exercised? Sure I am, this would be so far from hindering you in your
labors, how urgent and pressing soever they may be, that it will make you
undergo them with much greater alacrity and cheerfulness of mind and sweet
hopes of success; for to entertain serious thoughts, to put up a prayer to God,
and with the Disciples of our Lord to cry out Lord save us, we perish, Matthew.
8. 25.
will add a great Spur to your endeavors. I come now,

3. To consider, Whether the Knowledge of the Seas is rather apt to draw men
off from the belief of a God and Providence, than to settle and confirm them in
it. This Objection, I confess, is home to the business, and if this be true,
what I have already said may pass for nothing. But let us examine those Reasons
which seem to prop up this Opinion; and they are these that follow:

First, That by the Knowledge of the Seas men discover many useless parts of
the Creation.

Secondly, They get considerable Instances against the universality of the
Notion of God.

First, That by the Knowledge of the Seas are discovered many useless parts of
the Creation. This has been frequent in the mouths of bad men, and is an
opinion which their old Champion Lucretius has so garnished and tricked up
with Poetry, that the gilded Pill has passed very glibly with loose and
inconsidering men. What use of the torrid and frigid Zones? to what purpose
serve the barren Deserts, inaccessible Mountains and craggy Rocks? will not the
Sea willingly resign up her Hurricanes, and Afric spare all her Monsters, etc.
Thus is God's Providence called in question, and his infinite Wisdom arraigned;
nay the bolder sort scoff at the workmanship of his hands, and take up that
blasphemous Speech of the insolent Spaniard, Si Creationi affuissem, Mundum
melius ordinassem: had I been present at the making of the World, I could have
disposed things after a better sort.

Now, besides that the torrid Zone is well known by you to be habitable, and a
considerable part also of the frigid, and that both serve very wise ends and
purposes; besides this, the inclination of the Axis of the Earth is so
admirably proportioned for the making it as habitable as possible, that the
joint wit of mankind is not able to imagine the least circumstance in which it
might have been mended. And for those other things which seem so hurtful to the
World, though it were sufficient to reply in the words of the Son of Sirach,
Ecclus. 39. 28; 29.
That there be Spirits that are created for vengeance, which in their fury lay
on sore strokes, in the time of destruction, they pour out their force and
appease the wrath of him that made them; fire and hail, famine and death, all
these were created for vengeance: though, I say, there needs no other Answer
than this, yet I think it sufficient once for all to know, That things of
admirable use in themselves may to our understandings appear quite otherwise,
and to be of no use at all. Of which take this considerable Instance; There was
a time not many Ages ago, when the World no doubt esteemed of the Magnet no
more than of a despicable Stone, part of the Rubbish of the Creation, or at
best but some of the Ballast of the Globe; but I need not tell you (to borrow
the words of Bishop Ward's Essay of the immortality of the Soul.
a learned Prelate of our Church) how by the application of a Needle to this
Stone you get the mastery of the unruly Ocean, ride securely upon the back of
the dark waters, and make it supply the place of the Stars in Heaven; how by
the help of this you examine all the Chambers of the Sun, and imitate him in
compassing the World; how you go out at the East and teturn again from the
West, return laden with the Treasuries of the World; how by the help of this
you settle a correspondence betwixt the most distant places of the World, and
open a traffic between Nations concealed from the knowledge of one another
almost ever since the floating of the Ark. But what do I speak of these things?
By the assistance of this you display the Banner of Christ in the Regions of
Death and Hell, and shed forth the glorious light of the Gospel to the people
that sit in darkness, Luke 1. 79.
and in the shadow of Death. Now what sensible analogy or correspondence is
there betwixt a Stone and these glorious effects which proceed from it? This
Instance alone might be sufficient to confound the sinful curiosities of men,
and stop the mouth of the most plausible Gainsayer. I come therefore,

Secondly, To consider the remaining part of the Objection, which is, That by
the knowledge of the Seas men get considerable Instances against the
universality of the Notion of a God, and upon that account are inclinable to be
drawn off from the belief of his Being. For it cannot be denied that upon some
Eastern, but especially Western, Discoveries there have been found a sort of
people amongst whom it was difficult, if at all possible, to discern the least
footsteps of Religion, or any notices of a supreme Being; which, say they, is a
plain reason that the Notion of a Deity is not congenite, because not common
and universal to mankind. But granting as much as this Objection supposes, That
there are to be found such rude and barbarous people in the World that just
differ from beasts only by a scanty language and a humane shape, so far
unskilled in Arts, and the most obvious deductions from sense, as to want
Logic sufficient to clothe their nakedness, or but tolerably purvey for their
Stomachs; granting, I say, there are such men to be found, who know nothing in
the World beyond themselves, and are perfectly without God in the World; yet
will it not from hence follow, that amongst people whose minds are used to
consideration, and their faculties duly exercised, any one national Instance of
the like nature can be found: sufficient it is, that as soon as we are able to
approve our selves men by the use and exercise of our reason and understanding,
the Notion of a God becomes so agreeable to us, that our Nature seems to stand
bent that way, and we cannot deny the one without using violence to the other.

And now, having done with what I at first proposed to speak unto, give me
leave to apply this Discourse by offering to your consideration these two
things:

1. The especial Providence of God to this Nation in relation to Sea-affairs.

2. What suitable returns were proper for you to make for so great benefits
which he has done unto you.

1. Consider the especial Providence of God to this Nation in relation to
Sea-affairs. And whether we consider the situation of our Country, the temper
of our Climate, the advantage of our Shipping, or the nature and constitution
of our Trade, we have every where great reason to bless God, and to acknowledge
he has not dealt so with many Nations.

By the situation of our Country we are encompassed with Seas, surrounded
every where with commodious Havens. If we turn our faces to the South, there is
a vast prospect before us, and unknown Regions call upon us; the Northern Parts
are our Neighbors and Acquaintance, and on the one hand we have the old World,
and on the other the new. So that our Island seems by Providence designed to be
the very Center of Navigation and Trade, and that it shall one day be the glory
of our great City what was anciently that of Tire, That the Harvest of the
River is her revenues, Isai. 23. 3.
and She is the Mart of Nations.

The temper of our Climate is so auspicious, that as we are not scorched on the
one hand, so neither are we frozen on the other, but enjoy a seasonable and
moderate revolution of heat and cold; the great advantages of which, you that
are continually passing through several Climes are much more sensible of than I
can be; how by this means you become better enabled to endure extremities of
Zones, and by your happy Constitutions seem to be so equally disposed for all
places, that you may every one challenge upon a natural account, what the
Philosopher did upon a moral, the reputation of being Citizens of the World.
But alas! how would the Russian dissolve under the Line, and a Native of Guinea
grow stiff upon the Coasts of Spitsberge?

In the advantages of our Shipping we so exceedingly surpass all others, that
beside, that the most fundamental and necessary parts thereof are the growth of
our own Forests, we do also for art and workmanship (as God once taught
Bezaleel and Aboliab their Exodus 31. 3.
skill) seem to be instructed from above, and our Axes and Hammers Divinely
taught to do their work.

And when I have given to God the things which are his, the glory and the
praise; it cannot be thought unreasonable to give Caesar his due, under whose
kindly influence and protection Navigation seems to be grown up to its perfect
stature, who not only (after the example of the wisest of Kings) gives order in
our Ezion-geber for a Royal Navy, 1 Kings 9. 26.
but (what the Scriptures mention not of him) is himself also a Master Builder,
and in this Instance is a truer representative of the great Architect of the
World than all the Princes in Christendom beside, who can in the same language
instruct his Artificers with which God appointed the Patriarch to build his
Ark, Genesis 6. 14, 15.
This is the fashion which thou shall make it of, these are the rooms which you
shall make in it, this shall be the length, and breadth, and height thereof,
and thus shall you pitch it within and without.

The nature and constitution of our Trade is such, that it promises a lasting
endurance, and the fairest hopes of a yet further advance, Traffic being
settled with us upon as sure and solid foundations as the encouragement of a
most Gracious Prince, and the best compacted Societies can bestow upon it.

I am not ignorant that this last is so far from being reckoned a privilege by
some, that they account it the great remora of Trade: I presume not to enter
into the merits of the Cause, it being as much beside my business, as it is
beyond my skill; but it is to be feared the great outcry for liberty of Trade
is near of kin to that for liberty of Conscience, which to our sorrows we have
experienced was only a politic fetch of a Party to lay all in common, till
such time as they could get sufficient power and strength to enclose all for
themselves, then change their Note, and much more stiffly oppose that common
benefit for which they themselves were so lately Advocates. But on which side
soever the advantage lies, this is sure, That the ancient Glory of Tire is
become the present condition of this Nation, since our Merchants are Princes,
Isal. 23. 8.
and our Traffickers the Honorable of the Earth.

2. Let us consider, What suitable returns were proper for you to make for all
these benefits which God has done unto you. And I think you cannot give a
greater and more proper demonstration of your thankfulness for these so great
mercies, than the sincere practice of these following Duties:

First, A zealous endeavor after the propagation of true Religion.

Secondly, Walking honestly toward them which are without. And,

Thirdly, A thankful remembrance of the dangers you have escaped.

First, A zealous endeavor after the propagation of true Religion. This is the
noblest end of Navigation, and the most profitable Plantation you can make, to
spread the glorious light of the Gospel, and deliver men from the powers of
Hell and darkness; it will consecrate all your Returns from abroad, Isai. 23.
18.
and render your merchandise holiness unto the Lord; and what more suitable
return can you make unto God for his manifold blessings bestowed upon you, than
to make your selves Instruments of turning men from Idols to serve that living
God. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 9.
And that you may not be unready always to give an answer 1. Pet. 3. 15.
to every man that asks you a reason of the hope that is in you, the
excellent Grotius has furnished you with invincible Arguments against the
Gentile, Jew and Mohammedan; and to make up that Armor complete, you may find
lately added unto it a Shield of the true Faith, wherewith you shall be able to
quench all the fiery Darts of the Church of Rome. Ephesians. 6. 16.
How much more proper a Companion would this be for you, where by Calms and
contrary Winds you are sometimes put to it for diversions, than such unmanly
exercises which tend only to the scandal of your Religion, the corrupting of
your Constitutions, and the eternal perdition of your souls? But,

Secondly, Another proper return to God for his benefits unto you, would be a
walking honestly toward them which are without. To preserve, as the Apostle
speaks, a good Conscience, by having your conversation honest among the
Gentiles; 1 Pet. 2. 12.
that whereas they speak against you as evil Doers, they may by your good works
which they shall behold, glorify God in the day of visitation. For when all is
done a good life is the best Argument in the World* nor can you bring greater
Glory to God, nor remove worse scandal from our most holy Religion, than by
letting your light so shine before men; Matthew. 5. 16.
that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in
Heaven. For, as one out of his own experience has observed, Acosta, lib. 4.
cap. 5.
Quod Barbari fidem nostram de moribus judicant; proclivius quippe est quod
videas credere, quam quod audias, and raro persuadet factis sermo contrarius:
That the barbarous people do always judge of our Faith according to our lives,
it being much easier to give credit to what a man sees, than what he hears, and
rarely will that discourse persuade which is accompanied with contrary actions.

Thirdly, and lastly, A thankful remembrance of the dangers you have escaped is
a most proper return to make to God for all the wonders of his mercy. There are
many of you here, such lasting Monuments of Gods Providence, that in a good old
Age, you can perhaps reckon more dangers you have escaped than you can sum up
years; O therefore praise the Lord for his goodness, Psalm. 107. 8.
and his wonders that he does for the Children of men. Let no miracle of his
love escape your notice, but let every one of them find some room in your
Journals, that you may know how good and gracious the Lord has been unto you.
This is a just Sacrifice of praises and thanksgivings, yet I will have mercy,
Hos. 6. 6.
says the Lord, and not sacrifice, i. e. God is well pleased with the former
when it becomes a means and cause of the latter. And indeed your Alms are the
best memorial that can come up before God, Acts 10. 4.
who for his mercies to us has enjoined us pity and compassion to our
Brethren, Matthew. 25. 40.
for in as much as you have done it unto one of the least of these my Brethren,
you have done it unto me, says our Savior. But what need I animate this
worthy Society, and provoke a Duty so good and acceptable to you, for your
works already praise you, and the prayers of the poor and destitute do light
upon you. May their prayers and your blessings still accompany each other, till
at last you come to hear that joyful Euge, Matthew. 25. 34, 35.
Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the
foundation of the world. For I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat; I was
thirsty, and ye gave me drink, etc. Now to God the Father, God the Son, and God
the Holy Ghost, to the ever blessed and glorious Trinity, three Persons and one
God, be all honor and praise now and for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

