A SERMON PREACHED AUGUST the 19 th, 1684. AT THE CONSECRATION OF THE Lord
VVeymouth's Chapel IN LONG-LEAT.

By RICHARD RODERICK, B. D. Vicar of Blandford-Forum in Dorsetshire.

LONDON, Printed by Miles Flesher, for Henry Clements, Bookseller in Oxford;
And Sold by Walter Davis, in Amen-Corner, in London. 1684.



TO The Right Honorable THOMAS, Lord Thynne, BARON of Warmister, VISCOUNT
Weymouth, etc.
My Lord,
THough Conscious to my self, that the bare Seasonableness of the following
Discourse, and the accidentally-straitned Preparation of him that spoke it,
might, to a Candid Audience, palliate the Faults of the hasty Composure, and
render that acceptable from the Pulpit, which may justly be exploded when
coming from the Press; yet, having broke thorough these and other
Discouragements, I now humbly present to your Lordship this mean Attendant at
the Consecration of your Chapel at Long Leat. That your Lordship should
command me upon so solemn an Occasion to Preach the Sermon, was an amazing
Honor: That the Publication of it should be thought of, was a greater
Astonishment to me. But I perceive, that the Favors of the truly great, and
the Divinely good, have always something of Transcendency in them; like the
Influences of Heaven, are freely and unexpectedly showred down, not poorly
bartered for. While others require them, which are embarked in their
Dependence, to study their Passions, not their Honor, to be more solicitous to
consider their Nature, to feed their Humors, than to do them any real
Advantage; and always rack, and often defeat the most reasonable expectations,
or perhaps at length hardly part with their Kindnesses to those that have
dearly bought them: Your Lordship and your Relations (I speak experimentally)
surprise with your Favors, scorn to have them at all (much less thus basely)
earned, but liberally bestow, before any particular Service has deserved them.
Hence the utmost Performances of your Dependants are already overpaid, sooner
than begun; a^e but the unequal return of a strict Debt, which no future
Endeavors can fully discharge, since the Circumstance of un-engaged, and first
obliging, will ever be only on your Parts.

That God would enable those which share your Bounties, to answer the Designs
of them, to be useful in their Stations; and that he would be pleased both
Temporally and Eternally to bless your Lordship, and your Family, is the Hearty
Prayer of

Your Lordships Most Devoted Servant, Richard Roderick.

A SERMON Preached at LONG-LEAT IN WILT-SHIRE. August 19. 1684.
2. Chron. 7. 16. Now have I chosen and sanctified this House, that my Name may
be there for ever, and mine Eyes and mine Heart shall be there perpetually.
GOD spoke these words in a Vision to Solomon, presently after his building and
Dedication of the Temple at Jerusalem: A mighty work designed by King David;
but the Honor of effecting it was reserved for the greatest and wisest of Men.
Only the chief Ornament of his Father's House is fit, and singled out to lay
the Foundation of the Lord's. 2 Chronicles. 6. 18.


But will God in very deed dwell with Men upon the Earth? Behold, Heaven, and
the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain him; how much less an Earthly Tabernacle?
Acts 7. 48, 49.
The most High dwells not in Temples made with hands, as says the Prophet,
Heaven is my Throne, and Earth is my Footstool: what House will ye build me,
says the Lord? Or what is the Place of my Rest?

It Is true, the Almighty fills all Places, is circumscribed by none: His
Divinity cannot be pent up; yet he vouchsafes to stoop his Glorious Majesty,
and after a peculiar manner to be present in the Congregation of his Saints.
The Godhead cannot be shrunk up within any Dimensions; but his Honor is said
especially to dwell in the Temple, the Place set a part for his more immediate
service; on which is engraven, as Ex. 28. 36.
upon the Plate on the forefront of Aaron's Mitre, Holiness unto the Lord. And
of every such Place separated for God's public Worship, himself speaks, Now
have I chosen and sanctified this House, that my Name may be there for ever,
and mine Eyes and mine Heart shall be there perpetually.

Which words, I humbly conceive, may be thus paraphrased; I accept and approve
of this House, which, according to my will, and by my secret suggestion, is
Chosen and Sanctified, or separated from common Uses to the Honor of my Name,
to be mine for ever; and I promise, that mine Eyes and mine Heart shall be
there perpetually, that I will have a particular regard to the Devotions there
paid, and be affectionately gracious to each Votary that religiously offers
them.

For your present Meditation, be pleased to consider, 1. That through all Ages,
Men out of a sense of Duty have Chosen and Sanctified, that is, separated from
common Uses, and solemnly set apart, Places for the public Worship of God. 2.
That God allows, yea, requires such Places to be Chosen and Sanctified, or
solemnly set apart for his public Worship, to the Honor of his Name. 3. That
if Men will be sincerely devout in such Places (but not otherwise) God
promises, that his Eyes and his Heart shall be there perpetually; He will have
a particular Regard to the Devotions there paid, and be affectionately gracious
to each Votary that religiously offers them.


These Particulars discust, I shall make a very brief Application.

Of the two former, jointly to raise our Devotion, when we come into the Lord's
House;

Of the last, to quicken our Faith, that he will hear and answer the devout
Petitions which we there make.

1. Through all Ages Men out of a sense of Duty have Chosen and Sanctified,
that is, separated from common Uses, and solemnly set apart, Places for the
public Worship of God.

Whoever own the Being of a God, must acknowledge that he ought to be
Worshipped: He that made, sustains, and preserves us, has a Right to the utmost
services we can pay him. And since it is hard for Earthly-minded Men to be
taken off their sensual Delights, and to fix their scattered Thoughts upon
Religious Duties, the best Expedient to dismiss the World for a time, the
Concerns, and Love of it, is to have recourse to Holy Places; which, being
separated from common Uses, will represent nothing to interrupt Acts of Piety,
and, being dedicated to the Almighty's Honor, will in some measure display his
Majesty, stamp in Men lasting Impressions of Reverence, and heighten Devotion.

A Truth this so certain, so clear, that the Light of Nature taught it. The
Notices of a God, and of his being to be thus publicly Worshipped, were imbibed
together.

Men sometimes were not fully persuaded of a great Super-intendent over the
Creation; were pleased with the Fancy, that Chance threw the World into, and
continues it in this curious Order: but the Creature proving the Creator, and
successive, precarious, insufficient Beings inferring a first, independent and
Almighty; as soon as convinced that there was a God, the very Heathens built
Altars, erected Temples (many whereof very famous and magnificent) and by their
Sacrifices, Purgations, and other Rites there used, testified an awful
veneration of the Deity. Reason, though but little improved, instructed them in
that Religious Practice.

And indeed, however they fatally erred concerning the Nature of God, whose
Essence they destroyed by dividing it; and many of their Mysteries were most
profane, greater, more barefaced Impurities being countenanced and practiced
to appease Heavens Wrath, than had been before acted to provoke it: however
their Sacred Offices were always ill directed, often wickedly performed; yet
their beautiful Structures in Honor of false Gods will rise up in judgment
against some slovenly Worshippers of the true One. Those Strangers to the
Commonwealth of Israel, in this the highest outward expression of Reverence, as
far might be acted up suitably to the Circumstances of feeble Manhood, and the
Majesty of the inconceivable Godhead. Nay (which is very remarkable) their
Idolatry did not so far desecrate the Places polluted by it, but that the Lord
of Hosts did sometimes show himself terrible in his vengeance toward those,
which Sacrilegiously destroyed, or rudely defiled them.

Alexander ab Alexandro, and others, give particular accounts of the Heathen
Temples, and the manner of their solemn Consecrations. But leaving them, I
rather proceed to trace the more authentic practice of the Worshippers of the
true God.

Reason and Religion (though the one weakened, the other decayed by Adam's Fall)
gave early Instructions to his Posterity, that they should present their Bodies
also a living Sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God in his Holy Places. Such is
that by learned Men supposed to have been, whither Cain and Abel brought their
Offerings, Genesis 4. The Patriarchs (to whom God miraculously made known his Will
by Visions, Dreams, the Ministry of Angels, and in other extraordinary
Manners) thought it fittest to serve him upon Consecrated Mountains, Altars,
and Groves. Genesis 28.
To Jacob particularly the Stone in Bethel, which himself erected by Divine
Inspiration, was the House of God.

And so all along (...) through the days of emptiness, as the Jews style the
times before the Mosaic Dispensation, the Sons of Men were taught by Laws
natural impressed upon all, positive given to Adam, Noah and Abraham, whereby
they and their Offspring thought themselves obliged with joint Forces to
besiege Heaven, (...) (so St. Basil, and other Greek Fathers speak) with holy
violence to straiten God, that he could not but hear, when they assembled
together, Psalm. 96. 9.
and Worshipped him in the Beauty of Holiness.

Afterward, when out of all the Families of the Earth God had chosen him a
peculiar Inheritance, and led them through the Wilderness with a mighty Hand,
and an outstretched Arm; his Servant Moses, immediately before he went up into
the Mount, where he saw God Face to Face, built an Altar and twelve Pillars
according to the twelve Tribes of Israel, to sacrifice unto the Lord, Ex. 24.
And he took an Offering of all the People to make a Sanctuary, that the Lord
might dwell amongst them, Ex. 25. The Cloud, the Pillar of Fire, the
Thundrings, the Lightnings, the Earthquake, the Mountain smoking, the still
Voice, these and the like at sundry times were occasional Symbols of the Divine
Presence in the midst of them: But the constant Seat of God's Residence was the
Tabernacle of the Congregation, in which the Priests, when Sanctified, were to
give attendance, to Minister in the Holy Place, Ex. 29. This was the Place of
Worship, the Safeguard, and the Glory of Israel, till the building of the
Temple. Before the raising of which Glorious Edifice, the high Places also for
Sacrifice, before and after, the Synagogues for Prayer and hearing the Law
read, were set apart: of the latter many in every City; five hundred in
Jerusalem, say the Rabbis.

So zealous was David for the Holy One of Israel, that he professes ( Ps. 132.)
I will not give sleep to mine Eyes, or slumber to mine Eyelids, until I find
out a place for the Lord, an Habitation for the mighty God of Jacob. He had it
in his Heart to build an House unto the Lord, 1 Chronicles. 22. 5.
exceeding Magnificent, of Fame, and of Glory throughout all Countries; and God
applauded his Design, but, he being a Man of Blood, ordered him to put off the
prosecution of it to his Son: That Son, whose Greatness, and Wisdom, for which
he is renowned in all the World, were most signally evidenced by his carrying
on that glorious Work; which was the Royal Palace of the King of Kings, the
Wonder of the Earth, and the Transcript of Heaven. There was the daily Worship
performed; thither all the Tribes, the Tribes of the Lord went up thrice every
year, to give thanks unto the Name of the Lord. Toward that, at whatever
distance, they offered their constant Devotions; and since the destruction of
it, toward the Holy Land. They heretofore had, and still have, private
Oratories at the top of their Houses, called (...) from ascending to them.

Nay, the very Turks (the Ceremonial part of whose Religion is much according
to the Jewish Platform) at first Worshipped toward the Temple of Jerusalem,
since toward that of Meccha. These Aliens from the Faith, though they deny the
Lord that bought them, build stately Moschs to the Glory of him that made them.
So firmly rooted is it in the Minds of all Men, but a company of proud,
stubborn, factious Zealots, that God accounts the Honor double, which is paid
him in his own House.

Let these things be duly laid to Heart by those, who with a Pharisaical
Haughtiness thank God that they are not as other Men, who are too much
Spiritualized and Seraphick, to sink their Thoughts below the Fellowship of the
Heavenly Quire; and therefore cannot stoop to be charitable to, and hold
Communion with their Brethren, but for their sakes cast off and abhor the
Houses of the Lord, where his Glory is shadowed, and his favor more
plentifully dispensed. Let them remember that the Pharisee and the Publican,
the one a Type of themselves, the other of those they scorn and abominate, went
up together to the Temple to pray. Luke 18.
And let them take notice moreover, that, notwithstanding the Religious Pride
of the former, the latter only went home justified.

To give farther strength to what has been hitherto urged, we may consider the
practice of Christ's Followers: as for his own, I shall speak of it under
another Head. They (when, as to outward Direction, left to themselves) after
our Redeemer's Passion, the time that the Law purely Mosaical ceased, yet did
not forsake the chief Glory of that foregoing Dispensation. The Temple was
still their House of Prayer: They continued daily with one Accord in the
Temple, Acts 2. And being forced to abandon it by the great Persecution at
Jerusalem, Acts 8. when in the Infancy of Christianity God permitted the
Heathen to rage, the Kings of the Earth to set themselves, and the Rulers to
take Counsel together against the Lord, and against his Doctrine; being now
debarred from the public solemn Profession of the Faith, they held it as they
could, set apart for Religious Duties their (...), upper Rooms in their Houses;
and resolved not to serve the Lord as with any thing, so neither in any Place,
that was common or unclean; Those, and the Sepulchers of Saints and Martyrs
were their chosen, however mean, Oratories, neither applied to any other Uses.

But when the Gospel, like it is Author, buried in weakness, had imitated him by
rising again in Glory, and the true Professors breathed freely and plentifully
after their late Oppressions, they presently fell to honoring of God with
their Substance which he increased, and, as their Circumstances would permit,
adorned his Worship. By the Favor of Constantine the Great, and other
Christian Princes, they founded Churches every where costly and magnificent.
Expenses of that Nature deservedly went under the name of Piety. Nor indeed can
any, who have a due sense of Religion, think it fit to put off God cheaply, to
serve him with that which costs them nothing. Devotion ought not to lie
grovelling in a Cottage, while Luxury vaunts it splendidly in a Palace. 'Twas
the Traitor Judas, who bore the Bag, and thought every thing lost which went
beside it, that murmured at the Cost laid out in Honor of our Savior. 'Twas
the Apostate Iulian's Treasurer, who expected to share in the Sacrilegious
Booty of the Churches, that complained the Vessels of them were too rich for
the Carpenters Son. Let such profligate Men tremble, and be horribly afraid how
they pollute the Lord's Altars, or offer the least Indignity to the Habitation
of his Holiness. For, as I am to show secondly,

2. God allows, yea, requires such Places to be Chosen and Sanctified, or
solemnly set apart for his public Worship, to the Honor of his Name.

Among the many gross Conceptions, which the Temptations of Satan suggest, or
the Impulse of a deluded Imagination frames, concerning Almighty God, there is
scarce any which more detracts from him, than that of those, who, to avoid
Superstition, turn unmannerly and profane; lest they should run upon a servile
Dread, refuse to pay the Duty, which becomes a filial Fear. But God will not be
thus mocked. He requires a peculiar Worship, and that in Places religiously set
apart for the solemnizing of it. He will not have his Services to be
prostituted, is jealous of his Honor, and will not share it in common with any
of his Creatures.

Indeed all Places are alike, till sacred Rites have separated some to be the
Lord's Holy Habitation: Holy not essentially, so only himself is; not by
Participation, so are only Angels, Saints, and good Men; but relatively, as
devoted to his especial Service, and Means to quicken the Devotion of them that
repair thither.

Here he challenges an unalienable Propriety, and signalizeth his being
delighted with his Chosen and Sanctified Inheritance by the Judgments that he
executes upon them which defile it; by pouring out his Fury, and accomplishing
his Anger upon those, who, out of a misplaced Abhorrence of Idols, commit
Sacrilege. Sacrilege, that most daring Impiety, which with an affected Frenzy
bids Defyance to an All-knowing, and an Omnipotent God; and, however the
impudently wicked Rage of these latter Times has made it appear slight in some
Neighboring Nations, because common, not only Acted, but Established by a Law,
yet is the unhappy Occasion, which forces a jealous God to become a consuming
Fire, and always bequeaths a Curse, that most detestable Legacy, to the third
and fourth Generation. Nay exemplary Vengeance seldom passes by the immediate
Offender of this kind. Dan. 4.
When Nebuchadnezzar had robbed the Temple, the Invader of God's Honor lost
his own; he, who by Atheistical Profanations affronted the Creator, was
degraded into the condition of the lowest and the most stupid of the Creatures.
Dan. 5.
And while his Son Belshazzer triumphed in the Spoils of the Temple, was
Carouzing in the Consecrated Vessels, the Handwriting out of the Wall did
strike a Palsy into his Joints, trembling into his Knees, Anguish and Horror
into his Soul, and plainly evidenced, that the slaughter of the Sacrilegious
Wretch the night following, was from the direct Appointment of the Lord,
enraged by the Injuries done to the Place where his Honor dwelt.

Some of these Places God expressly commanded to be Built and Sanctified. Such
was the Tabernacle of the Congregation, which, when first set up, he so filled
with his Glory, that Moses himself, the Mediator at that time between the Lord
and his People, was not able to enter into it. Ex. 40. 35.


When for forty years in the Wilderness the Jews had been guided and fed with
frequent Miracles, and were about to enter into the Promised Land, God directly
orders, Deuteronomy. 12. 13, 14.
Take heed to thy self, that thou offer not thy Burnt-Offerings in every Place
that thou see, but in the Place which the Lord shall choose in one of thy
Tribes, there thou shall offer thy Burnt-Offerings, and there thou shall do
all that I command thee. A Text this clear enough, one would think, to beat
down the Humor, and overthrow the Credit of many amongst us, who fly off from
Chosen and Sanctified to common Unhallowed Houses, notwithstanding the United
Obligations of Interest, Reputation, Peace, Loyalty, and Religion to the
contrary; who run away to Field-Conventicles, those Nurseries of Faction and
Schism, where the uncommissioned Bigots presume to make, and endeavor to
obtrude Articles of Apostasy, and Principles of Rebellion.

But to return; when the Ark of God had long dwelt within Curtains, he put it
into the Heart of his Servant David to design, of Solomon to build the glorious
Temple of Jerusalem; which in so eminent a manner became Holy to the Almighty
by his Presence there at the Consecration of it, that the Priests could not
stand to Minister, 2 Chr. 5. 14.
and that the Children of Israel, otherwhiles a stubborn People, then
reverently bowed themselves with their Faces to the ground, 2 Chr. 7. 3.
and Worshipped, and Praised the Lord, saying, for he is good, for his Mercy
endures for ever.

Again, when by Divine Permission for the Sins of the Jews, the Chaldeans had
burnt this Temple, God by his Prophets Haggai and Zachariah stirred up
Zorobabel to build another: which, though not so magnificent as the former,
though not filled with so large a Portion of the Divine Presence; though
wanting the Urim and Thummim, the Ark of the Covenant, and the Sacred Fire that
consumed the Sacrifices; yet the Glory of the second Temple far exceeded that
of the first, because under it the Messiah came. The Messiah, who, being God
blessed for ever, frequently visited, and gave a luster to this Seat of his
Holiness; called, and made it his House of Prayer; and was present at the Feast
of the Dedication. Wisdom become incarnate taught, and disputed in it. He, who
often submitted to our other Infirmities, was never known to be angry, but when
he saw the Profanation of it. The Zeal of his House ate him up; the
unsanctifying, the putting it to common Uses incensed the meek, the gentle
Christ Jesus. Acts 13. 41.
Behold ye Despisers, and wonder, and be afraid: after such an Instance as
this, wonder at the awful Presence, which extorted so warm a Concern from
Dove-like Innocence, and fills the Holy Places; and be afraid of the graceless
stupidity of those that defile, or but slightly regard them.

To countenance their unmannerly Profaneness, who deny the least Honor where
double is due, some plead, that (however it were under the Jewish Economy, when
God dealt with his People according to the hardness of their Hearts, yet) now,
since the Establishment of a purer, and more Spiritual Religion, he enjoins by
his Apostle St. Paul, that men should pray every where; 1 Timothy 2. 8.
and our Savior tells the Samaritan Woman, the Hour was coming, John 4. 21, 23.
when neither in that Mountain (Mount Ephraim at Shiloh, where Anciently the
Tabernacle, and the Ark were) nor yet at Jerusalem, Men should Worship the
Father, but should Worship him in Spirit and in Truth. By way of reply, we may
note here, that St. Paul speaks of private, not of public Prayer: and besides,
if the latter were meant, his appointing it to be made every where, or in every
place, does not forbid a particular separation to Pious Uses, does only extend
the more solemn Worship of God through the whole World, beyond the narrow
compass of Jerusalem, within which it was before circumscribed. This will be an
answer to both the forecited Objections, which do no more prove the common
indifferent Use of Places in the Service of the Lord, than that ( all shall be
Priests of God) does expose the Ministerial Function to every presumptuous
Intruder. The sum of the matter is: Under the Law the Priesthood was confined
to one Tribe, the true Worship to one Nation, but now under the Gospel both are
laid in common, that is, free for all; yet that is not to be invaded by Persons
uncalled, nor this ordinarily to be performed in public in Places
unsanctified, neither to be exercised without preceding Consecrations. After
these have solemnly set apart Places for Divine Service, as in my third
Particular I shall endeavor to make out,

3. If Men will be sincerely devout in such Places (but not otherwise) God
promises that his Eyes and his Heart shall be there perpetually, he will have a
particular regard to the Devotions there paid, and be affectionately gracious
to each Votary that religiously offers them.

The Happiness of the Almighty is essential and immutable, not to be increased
by our imperfect Righteousness, or diminished by our impotent Iniquities. Our
most sincere Devotions delight the Lord indeed, but affect our selves, we only
receive the Benefit. The Sacrifices of a broken Spirit go up as Incense with a
sweet smelling savor to the Lord, but showers of Mercies are returned for
them, especially when offered in Places set apart for his Service: There has
he promised his Blessing, and life for evermore.

If in our Distresses we fly for Refuge to the Altar; if under the
apprehension of Punishment, which our sins most righteously deserve, we take
Sanctuary at the House of God, our Strength, our Redemption will not fail us.
Thither does God oblige us to repair; and he will certainly bless the means,
which himself prescribes.

It Is true, when Men draw nigh to God with their Mouths, and honor him with
their Lips, while their Heart is far from, and does despite unto him, he
rejects such their Hypocritical Addresses, and angrily demands, who has
required these things at your Hands, to tread my Courts? Oblations are vain,
Incense an Abomination to him, when not Sanctified by Affection, Faith, and
Devotion.

Whatever sturdy Conceit some Men entertain, that being once chosen for God's
People, they cannot be forsaken by him, that he is bound by stronger ties to
reside among, and protect them, constrained with more lasting Cords, than those
with which the fond madness of certain Heathens shackled the Images of their
Gods, thereby to secure the charmed Inhabitants: however with the Jews ( Ier.
7.) after notorious Provocations they come and stand before the Lord in the
House, which is called by his Name, and say, we are delivered to do all these
Abominations; yet let them know, that, if not averted, 1 Pet. 4. 17.
Judgment must begin at the House of God, and will be most severely executed
upon them, that profane his Glory by their wicked Approaches.

The repeated Transgressions of unrighteous Worshippers force the Lord to an
abhorrence even of his own Sanctuaries. So, in punishment to the stubborn Jews,
he permitted the Ark, where he had put his Name, and more Majestic Presence,
to be taken Captive: and, notwithstanding their frequent Boasts of the Temple
of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, he gave way for
Antiochus to profane, for Titus totally to destroy it.

Though Jacob were his Portion, and Israel the Lot of his Inheritance, yet
they, the living Temple of the Lord, by unsincere Worship provoked him, after
sundry manners to set himself in array against them, to stir up all his Wrath,
Psalm. 78. 38. -- 50.
and make a Way to his Anger, clear the Passage, that nothing should obstruct
the full course of it. Nay, he proceeded so far, as to laugh at the Calamities
which he brought upon them, to mock when their fear came; and sarcastically bid
them, prepare to meet thy God O Israel. Amos 4. 12.
Alas, what preparation can Dust and Ashes make, wherewith to meet and
withstand an angry God? Lord, what is Man, impotent Man that he should contend
with an Almighty Creator? Wherewithal shall we come before, and meet him,
except as Jacob met Esau (Genesis 32.) with Prayers and Supplications, that we may
find favor in his sight? Thus, only thus, may we imitate that Patriarch,
wrestle with God, and prevail.

Come then, and let us reverently Worship the Lord in the midst of the
Congregation, being assured that for his Goodness sake he will not, for his
Promise sake he cannot, refuse to hear and be gracious to sincere Devotions.
Holiness becomes, Psalm. 93. 5. Psalm. 84. 1. Psalm. 85.9,10.
and Goodness dwells in his House for ever. How amiable are thy Tabernacles O
Lord of Hosts! here Mercy and Truth meet together, when Truth fluorisheth out
of the Earth, Mercy looks down from Heaven.

As a sensible Instance of God's favorable acceptance of supplicatory
Addresses at the Temple, when the Jews went up to Jerusalem to make them, their
Concerns were safe at home, though left without a Guard, neither incident
Calamities befell them, nor the Philistines, or other bitter Enemies could then
molest them; the Lord was a Shield, the God of Jacob a Defense to them, while
employed in his Worship. 1 Samuel 1.
Hannah's Womb was opened, and she delivered of the Child Samuel in return of
her Vow at the yearly Sacrifice in Shiloh; and, by devoting him to the Service
of the Altar, she, that had been called Barren, 1 Samuel 2.
became a joyful Mother of five Children more. The Promise of John Baptist's
Birth was made to Zacharias, Luke 1.
when he gave attendance in the Temple. So certain it is, that God will be
found of those that seek him in his own Ordinances, that he will give a
particular Blessing both Temporal and Eternal to them, which call upon him in
the Place, that he chooses and sanctifies to put his Name there. It will
therefore become us, when we go into the Lord's Courts, to cry out with Jacob
awakened from sleep, Genesis 28. 17.
surely the Lord is in this Place; how dreadful is this Place? This is none
other but the House of God, and this is the Gate of Heaven. Open, be ye open ye
everlasting Doors above, and the Servants of the King of Glory, that reverently
Worship him in his dwelling Places below, after several Earnests of his Favor
here, shall enter in, and enjoy him to all Eternity.

Having spoken to the three Particulars proposed, according to the method laid
down;

I am now to make a very brief Application

Of the two former jointly, to raise our Devotion, when we come into the Lord's
House.

Of the latter to quicken our Faith, that he will hear and answer the devout
Petitions which we there make.

1. Since Men through all Ages have thought it their Duty, and God requires to
Choose and Sanctify Places for his public Worship, where his Honor and
Gracious Presence vouchsafe to dwell, We must draw near with Reverence. The
place where we stand is holy ground. The Majesty of the great Creator fills,
and the lowest Prostrations of his Creatures best suit with our Approaches to
it.

It Is observable, that the Chemist in those who seek his fansied Stone, the
Philosopher in them who search after that better Treasure Truth, and even the
Turks in those who but look on the Alchoran, expect unblameable Holiness. What
awful Piety then should enlarge, transport our Hearts, when we, the animated
Dust of God's Footstool, have not a distant view of, but are admitted boldly
to come up to the Throne of his Grace, and of his Glory?

The weak shadows of which Glory have overwhelmed the Sons of Men with Dread
and Astonishment. When Moses came down from conversing with God, the Glory of
his Countenance was such, that the Children of Israel could not steadfastly
behold his Face. 2 Cor. 3. 7.
When the Glory of the Lord overspread Mount Sinai at the Delivery of the
Commandments, the Israelites, Exodus 19.
though Sanctified, and three Days fitted by Divine Appointment for the sight,
yea, Heb. 12. 21.
and Moses himself exceedingly feared and quaked. Nay, the Obscurities of
mortal Flesh, and the humble Circumstances under which the Son of God was
pleased to take it, did not so far eclipse the brightness of his Glory, the
express Image of his Person, but that, when now near to die as a Malefactor,
John 18. 6.
a gentle Answer in the Garden struck the rough Soldiers into a Trance, and a
mild cast of his Eye at the Bar, Luke 22. 61, 62.
dissolved the treacherous St. Peter into a flood of Tears. These dark distant
Representations being so full of Glory, how great must be that Glory, when more
eminently displayed in the Place of it is Residence? Such the Church will be
taken to be by a true Christian's Faith, who there sees God reconciled,
Principalities, and Powers dethroned, and all the other blessed effects of our
Redeemer's Merits; and, Acts 7. 55.
looking up steadfastly into Heaven with St. Stephen, beholds the Glory of God,
and Jesus standing at the Right Hand of God. With what Humility, Awe, and
Veneration should we then prostrate our Bodies, and elevate our Souls, Psalm.
29. 9
to speak of his Glory in the Temple, Psalm. 22. 22.
to supplicate and praise him in the midst of the great Congregation?

2. Since God has promised particularly to regard, and to be affectionately
gracious to Devout Petitions, which are offered in his own House, We must
approach with Faith. Whatever Doubts of Acceptance former Rebellions, whatever
Discouragements present Difficulties, scatter to obstruct, or stagger a
Christian's Faith, yet is it gloriously built up, and confirmed by, borrows
Life and Vigor from God's Promise of especial favor to them, that diligently
seek him in the place which is called by his Name. From hence it enlivens, and
transports a Pious Soul, wings Devotion, joins with the Heavenly Quire in
singing Praises and Thanksgivings to him that sits upon the Throne, and to
the Lamb; rivals the Ardour of flaming Seraphims; and all this Rapture and
Ecstasie, while with the two Cherubims in the Ark of the Tabernacle ( Ex. 37.)
we surround the Mercy-seat. Let us therefore, in this goodly Seat of his Mercy,
and of his Glory, make our humble Supplications unto him, as Solomon did at the
Consecration of the Temple, O Lord God of Israel, have respect to the Prayers
of thy Servants, that thine Eyes may be open upon this House Day and Night, 2 Chronicles. 6. 19, 20.
which thou have Chosen and Sanctified to the Honor of thy Name.

THE END.

