Sir Thomas Roe HIS SPEECH IN PARLIAMENT. WHEREIN He shows the cause of the
decay of Coin and Trade in this Land, especially of Merchants Trade. And also
propounds a Way to the House, how they may be increased.

Printed in the year, 1641.

SIR THOMAS ROE HIS SPEECH IN PARLIAMENT, 1640.
IT is a general opinion that the Trade of England was never greater, and it
may be true, that if it be so, yet it will not absolutely conclude that the
Kingdom does increase in riches, for the Trade may be very abundant, and yet
by consumption and importance of more then is expected, the stock may waste.

The Balance would be a true solution of the Question, if it could be rightly
had: but by reason it must be made up by a Medium of the Books of Rates, it
will be very uncertain.

Therefore we must seek another rule that is more sensible, upon which we may
all judge, and that may be by the plenty orscarcity of money; for it is a true
rule, if money increase, the Kingdom does gain by Trade; if it be scarce, it
loses.

Let us therefore consider; first, whether our Gold and Silver be not
decreased, and then by what means it is drained; and lastly, how it may be
prevented, and what remedies are appliable to effect it.

It is out of doubt our Gold is gone to travail without License, that is
visible beyond Seas, and every receiver of sums of money must find it
privately; and I fear the same of Silver, for observing the species of late
Coining many half Crowns were stamped, which are no more to be seen, and by
this measure I conclude the Kingdom grows poor.

The causes of this decay of Money may be many, it may be stolen out for
profit, going much higher beyond Seas, especially in France and Holland.

Much has been drawn away by the Stanger upon fears of our Troubles, of
which I have experience by exchanges; and Exchanges are the great mystery,
especially such as are used as a Trade, and governed by Bankers who make many
returns in a year, and gain by every one, more then the interest of a year,
and the greatest danger to a State is, when money is made Merchandise, which
should be but the measure thereof.

And here I will propose a Problem, whether it were profitable to a Kingdom
or not, that the Stranger for many years had a great stock here at interest,
and still has some; I confess it has supplied the necessities of Merchants,
and helped to drive Trade. But my Quaere is this, suppose the first principal
were truly brought in by the Stanger, yet doubling every ten years, what
becomes of the increase; have they not lived by our Trade and the Merchant
adventurers, and soaked the Kingdom of as many times principal, as they have
practiced this Usury many times ten years, and in the end drawn or carried
all away? This is a point to a State very considerable.

Much Coin has been drawn away without doubt by the French, who have brought
in Wares of little Bulk, perhaps without custom, but of dear price, and
having turned it into Gold, have returned without investing any part thereof:
and such petty Merchants cannot be reached by the Statute of employments.

Another cause of scarcity of Coin, may be the over-strict rule of the
uncurrentnes of any good Coin, and that it must be sold here as Bullion; in
that case, what stranger will bring in money? Whereas, if every good species
current, according to this allay, and weight in proportion to our Coin, or
rather a little higher, it will draw, namely money by degrees into England; as
lower grounds do water from higher, though they see not the Channels: and we
see France, Holland and Germany adm^t all good Coins, though foreign, for
and above their in^nsique value.

But I will end this search by proposing some general Remedies; for if I do
now but make Essays, and give occasion to more subtle and particular
disquisition,

1 To the first lea^e of stealing away Coin, I would make it felony ^y an Act:
for if a man may justly suffer death for robbing of a private man, I see no
injustice nor cruelty to inflict the same punishment upon him that robs a
Kingdom.

2 That the neighbor Princes and States do cry up our money, and so entice it
from us. This in my judgment ought to be provided for by our Treaties, which
was the old way, especially of Commerce, by agreeing and publishing of Placarts
according to a true Par: For that Prince that will make a treaty of Commerce,
does it for the use of the commodity, which certainly I would deny any Prince
that would not consent to keep moneys even, by their true values, at least,
that would set a higher price upon our money, then the King has done; and if
our Coin did either keep beyond the Seas the English value, or were Bullion
and uncurrent, the stranger should have as little of our money, as we have of
theirs.

How to recover the strangers money drawn away since our troubles, is a hard
endeavor, and can no ways be brought to pass but by Peace and Trade, and the
resolution of this will fall into the general remedy which I shall propose.

The pedling French Trade must be met with by diligent search at the landing of
these Creamers, what they bring in, and by suffering none of them to pass any
goods by private Warrants; but that according as they shall be valued, they
give bond to invest it in English Commodity, natural or naturalized, and that
with surety: Nay, in this case, not to allow them exchange by bills; for it will
not hurt the Commonwealth, if by any rigor they were beaten out of their
private toyish traffic.

I shall not doubt to offend any but the Mint, which may be recompensed to his
Majesty in his Customs, if money be plentiful; for all goods will follow
money. If I did propose the currentnesse of all goods, and great species of
foreign Coins, for their true intrinsive value, according to the pay with
ours, and if I say a little higher, according to occasions, keeping our own
Coin pure and constant to be cried down as much under according to occasions,
I think it will be a policy both reasonable and profitable, by experience
tried in other States.

But leaving these Empiricall practices, I come now to the great and infallible
Rule and Remedy, which is in plain English, to settle and assure the ground of
Trade upon Staple-commodities; then like the Lady of Whitsonide to her
Pipe-money, will dance after that: for as Merchandise does follow money, so does
money Commodity.

I said at first, it was a general opinion, that Trade never flourished more
then now, and it may be so, but we must consider this be not accidental and
changeable, and depending more upon the iniquity or misery of the times, then
upon our own foundation and industry, and if that be so, then it is no sure
ground for a state to rely upon; for if the causes change, the effects will
follow.

Now it is true, that our great Trade depends upon the troubles of our
neighbors, and we enjoy almost the Trade of Christendom; but if a peace
happen betwixt France, Spain, and the United Provinces, all these will share
what we now possess alone, and therefore we must provide for that day, for
nothing stands secure but upon his own foundation.

To make then our own Trade secure, we must consider our own
Staple-commodities, whereof Wool is the chiefest, and seek the way to both,
to keep up the price at home, and the estimation of all commodity made of
that, and to be vented abroad.

Some other helps we have, as Tynne, Lead, and such like, but I dare
confidently affirm, That nothing exported of our own growth has balanced our
riotous consumption at home, but those foreign commodi ies, which I call
naturalized, that is that surplus of our East India Trade, which being brought
home in greater quantity then are spent, within the Kingdom, are exported
again, and become in value and use as natural commodities, and therefore by
the way, I hold it absolutely necessary to maintain that Trade by a regulation
with the Dutch, of which more reason shall be given, when that particular shall
be tak n into consideration.

We have yet another great help which is our own, and wants only our industry
to gather the harvest, which is our fishing and erecting of Busses, both for
the enriching of our Kingdom, and the breeding of Mariners, and this by
private industry (though to private loss) is beaten out already, and shall be
offered to the Commonwealth, if they please to accept of it, and to give you
one only encouragement. I do avow, that before the Dutch were lately
interrupted by the Dunkerks, by their industry, and our fish, they made at
great Returns between Dansicke and Naples as the value of all our Cloth,
which is one million yearly, and this in a due place I desire should have his
due weight and consideration.

We have one help more, if we knew how to use it, that is, by the new drained
Lands in the Fens, most fit for Flax and Hemp, to make all sorts of Linen for
the body, for the house, and sails for ships; that is a Dutch and French
Trade: but in Holland one Acre of ground is rented at three pounds, which if
the Hollanders may have in the Fens for 10. s. or 12. s. it will be easy to
draw the manufacture into England, which will set infinite people a work, and
we may be able to serve other Nations with that which we buy dear from them,
and then the State and Kingdom will be happy and rich, when the Kings customs
shall depend upon commodities exported, and those able to return all things
which we want, and then our money must stay within our Kingdom, and all the
trade return in money: to encourage you to this, I give you one example.

That if the several sorts of Callicoes made of Cotton woolls in the Moguls
and Dans Dominions, does clothe from head to foot all Asia, a part of Europe,
Egypt, much of Africa, and the Eastern Islands as far as Sumatra, which
makes that Prince without Mines the richest Prince in the world: and by his
Majesty's Grace and Privileges granted to the Dutch, I am confident we may
make and undersell in all Linen cloth in all the Nations in Europe.

But I have now wandered far from my Theme, which was the decay of Trade and of
Woollen commodity.

I must first therefore present to your consideration the causes thereof in my
observations, whereof some are internal, and some external.

The internal have proceeded from her own false making, a stretchning, and
such like practices, whereby indeed our Cloth is discredited; I speak by
experience from Dansick and Holland, northward to Constantinople, as I will
instance in due time.

This false Lucre of our own, and the interruption in the dying and dressing
projected and not overcome, gave the first wound, though could it have been
compassed, had doubled the value of our Commodity.

This has caused the Dutch Silesians and Venetians to attempt the making of
Cloth, and now byy experience (as I am informed) the half is not vented, that
was in the latter Age.

Another internal cause has risen from such Impositions, as has made our
cloth too dear abroad, and consequently taught others to provide for
themselves.

Another internal cause has sprung from pressaries upon tender consciences,
that many of our Clothiers and others have forsaken the Kingdom, and carried
their Arts with them to the unexpressable det^iment of the Commonwealth.

The external causes have been the want of perfection, and countenance to our
Merchants, established abroad in Factories by the State and by the Treaties,
whereby the Capitulations have not been kept nor assured unto them, neither in
Prussia, nor in the ^ound, nor Humburgh, nor Holland, nor in the East: and this
I dare say, that Laban never changed Jacobs wages so often, as the Hollanders
have forced our Merchants to change their residences, and the very course of
this Trade, by Laws and Tricks for their own advantage, of which the Merchant
adventurers will more fully inform you.

Another external cause is lamentable, Report, the increase of the Pirates,
and the insecurity of the Meditirranean Seas; whereby Bristow and the Western
Ports, that cannot have so great shipping as London, are beaten out of Trade
and fishing; and if once those Thieves shall find the way to Bank and
New Foundland, they will undo the West parts of England.

I will trouble you with a Consideration very considerable in our Government,
whether indeed London does not monopolize all Trade: in my opinion it is no
good state of a body to have a fat Head, thin Guts, and lean Members.

But to bring something before you of Remedy, I say thus for my first ground,
that if our Cloth be not vented as in former years, let us embrace some other
way to spend and vent our Wools. Cloth is a heavy and hot wearing, and serves
but one cold corner of the World: But if we embrace the new Draperies, and
encourage the Wallons, and others by Privileges, and Naturalizations, we shall
employ all the wool we have, set more people a work then by Cloth, and a
pound of wool in those stuffes true made, will out-sell two pounds in cloth;
and this we may supply France, Italy, Spain, Barbary, and some parts of Asia,
by such light and fine stuffes as will fit those warmer Regions, and yet have
sufficient for the cold Climates to be spent and adventured in true made cloth,
by the reputation both of our Nation and commodity.

But in this course I must observe, that these strangers so fit to be
nourished, and being Protestants, may have privileges to use their own rights
in Religion, so as they be not scandalous, as the Dutch and French had granted
unto them by Queen Elizabeth, and certainly the settling of religion secure in
England, the fear whereof made many weak minds to waver and abandon this
Country, is, and will be a great means to resettle both the great and lesser
manufactures of woollen commodities.

For the external causes, we must fly to the Sanctuary of his Majesty's
gracious goodness and protection, who, I am confident, when the whole
business shall be prepared for him, and that we have showed him our duty and
love, and settled his customs in such a bountiful way, as he may reap his
part of the fruit of Trade; I am confident, I say, that he will vouchsafe you
all favor fit to be conferred upon good Subjects, and not only to protect you
abroad, by his forces and authority, and by treaties with his neighbors, but
by increasing the privileges of Merchants at home, and confirming all their
Charters, the breach whereof has bin a great discouragement unto them; and
without which duly observed, they cannot regulate their Trade.

There are some particulars in the Spanish Trade, perhaps worthy of
animadversio^, as underselling good commodity to make money, or barter for
Tobacco, to the imbasement of our own Staple for Smoke, which in a due place
ought to be taken into Regulation.

Another consideration for a ground of Trade, ought to be the nature of it,
with whom, and for what we trade, and which Trade is most principally to be
nourished; which out of doubt, are the Northern Trades, which are the root of
all other, because the materials brought from those parts, as from Wx, Muscove,
Norway, Prussia, and Livonia, are fundamental and of absolute necessity; for
from these Trades we get the materials of Shipping, as Pitch, Tar, Cordage,
Masts, and such like, which enable us to all the Southern Trades themselves,
of less use, being only Wine, Fruit, Oranges, and curiosities for Sauces, or
effeminacy; but by these we sail to the East Indies, and may erect a Company
of the West Indies; for the golden-fleece which shall be prepared for you,
whenever you are ready for so great a Consultation.

The right way to nourish these Northern Trades, is by his Majesty's favor,
to press the King of Denmark to Justice, not to come as his intolerable
Taxes newly imposed upon Trade in the passage of the Sound; in Examples
whereof, the Elector of Brandenburgh joined with the King of Poland, has
likewise more then trebled the ancient and capitulated Duties; which if that
they shall continue, I pronounce all the Commerce of the Baltique Sea so
over-burthened, that the East-^and Company cannot subsist, nor without them and
the Muskove Company the Navigation; but that the Materials for shipping will be
doubled, which will eat out all Trades. I have given you but Essays, and
struck little sparks of fire before you; my intention is but to provoke the
wit and ability of ot^ers; I have drawn you a Map, wherein you cannot see
things clearly and distinctly; only I introduce matter before you, and now I
have done, when I have showed you the way how to enlarge and bring every
particular thing into debate.

To which end, my motion and desire is this, that we may send to every several
Company of Merchants trading in Companies, and under Government and
Privileges, and to ask of them, what is their Grievances in their general
Trade (not to take in private complaints) what is the causes of decay or abuses
in their Trades, and of the want of money, which is visible, and of the great
losses, both to the Kingdom, and to every particular, by the late high
exchanges; and to desire every one of these Companies to set down their
judgment in writing to the Committee by a day appointed: and having from them
all the general state of the Complaints severally, we shall make some
judgments of these relations one to another: this done, I desire to require
all the same several Companies upon their own papers to propose to us in
writing the Remedies appliable in their judgment; which materials having
altogether, and comparing one with another, we shall discover that truth which
we seek; that is, Whether Trade and Money decay or not? and how to remedy it.

But I have one request more, and so I will ease you of my loss of your time.
That when from all these Merchants we shall have before us so much matter, and
without such variety, and perhaps not without private and particular ends, that
then you will give me leave to represent to you the names of some general, and
others disinteressed and well experienced in many particulars, who may assist
our judgments in all the premises particularly in moneys and Exchanges, and
give us great light to prepare our result and resolution, to be by the whole
House of Commons represented to his Majesty, and for expedition that a
sub-Committee may be named to direct this Information from the Merchants.

FINIS.

