NAAMAN THE SYRIAN HIS DISEASE AND CVRE.

Discovering lively to the Reader the spiritual Leprosy of Sin and
Self-love: Together with the Remedies, viz. Self-denial and Faith.

Besides sundry other remarkable points of great use: as you may find them
after the Epistle to the Reader.

With an Alphabeticall TABLE, very necessary for the Readers understanding, to
find each several thing contained in this Book.

By Daniel Rogers, B. in Divinity, and Minister of Gods Word at Wethersf. in
Essex.

LONDON, Printed by TH: HARPER for PHILIP NEVIL, and are be sold at his Shop in
Ivy Lane at the Sign of the Gun. MDCXLII.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE Lady CECIL Countess of Winchelsey, late Wife, and
now Widow to the Right Honorable THOMAS Earl of Winchelsey deceased, GRACE
and PEACE.
Right Honorable:
THE graces of Self-denial and Faith, are like those two pillars of Iachin
and Boaz, 2 Chronicles. 3.17.
erected at the beautiful entrance into the Temple for all men to cast their
eyes upon, and that worthily; for most costly and precious was their matter,
and most curious and artificial was their workmanship. For, as those two
Pillars led the way into a glorious Temple, yet made with hands; so do these
two stand in the porch of a better Temple, even that of Grace here, and Glory
eternal in the heavens: And as they so stood near the gate of entrance that
no man could enter in, save by them, although themselves never went in but
always staid without; so these graces though they shall leave the soul in
Heaven, because she should not need them, yet they shall not forsake her while
she abides in the porch, but shut heaven door upon her ere they take their
leave. Moreover as the contriver and erecter of the former was that famous and
cunning Artist, Hyram of Tire: so, 1 King. 7.13.
no less an artificer then Hyram (nay a greater then Hyram is here) I say, the
Spirit of the Lord Jesus is the framer and setter up of these in the Souls of
Gods Elect. And these two graces (good Madam) with the discovery thereof, are
the chief frame of these my ensuing Lectures; in which, both when I preached
them, and now I write them, I aim at this mark, to withdraw the soul from
the life of it own hand, to the life of the Lord Jesus, Esaias 57.9.
and from an empty Religion to be acquainted with the mysteries of the Gospel,
the only manuduction to true godliness. All profession being nothing else,
save a shadow, and bottomless building, which is not grounded and quickened
with Self-denial and Faith.

And indeed (Right Honorable) if ever any age of the Church did, then does
this in which we live, in my judgment, require that the labors of us
Ministers, be improved about the urging of these; whether we look upon the
times, or turn our eyes to God himself in his administration and government;
we shall observe the former excessively overgrowne with an outward and formal
Religion; and for the latter, when did the Lord so estrange himself from us,
and dwell as it were, in the midst of a thick cloud: So that, except by the
lively practice of these two graces, we do not stir up our selves to take hold
of him, how can our lives chuze but be sad and comfortless? Surely, if ever,
we had now need, to prease upon more familiar acquaintance with God in all his
graces, and (as David did) to view his Temple well.

True it is, that the old Jew, had little knowledge of God, save by the name of
Iehova, Alsufficient, and a general aim at the promise of a Messia, the
blessed seed to come. Doubtless, they lived at poor terms: It was enough for
them to cast an eye upon Gods Temple, as Daniel in captivity, and Iona in the
Whales belly might do; Dan. 6.10. Jona 2 7.
Strange and deep was that mercy which would so far off behold such, as so far
off beheld him; but now we, the Church of the New Testament are come nearer to
God, Heb. 12.24.
we are come to mount Sion, to the heavenly Jerusalem, to the Church of the
first born, to Jesus himself the Mediator of the Covenant, and the blood of
sprinkling, which speaks better things then that of Abel. We are come now
beyond the Porch and Sanctuary, even to the Holy of Holies, through his flesh,
that has broken down the veil of separation. So that now we are past viewing
of the Temple well, for we had need become this Temple our selves; 2 Cor. 3.18.
Whose corner stone is precious Jesus, and we precious stones built upon him,
and rising up daily to a more lively and well proportioned building. 2 Pet.
1.4.5.
A little taste of the gift of God, a few good reaches and affections after
holiness are not enough for us, but to be grounded upon these foundations of
Self-denial and Faith, 2 Pet. 11.1.
which promise us an open entrance into that eternal Temple. According
therefore to those talents of Wisdom and Knowledge which the Lord has long
imparted to us by the blessed lights of his Ministers (who sometimes shined in
our Sphere, but now in glory it is expected at our hands, That we comprehend
with all Saints that depth and breadth of love which is in Christ, Ephesians. 3.17 18.
that he may dwell in our hearts by faith, Heb. 6.1.
and that (forgetting our first elements) we strive toward perfection so far as
in this veil of misery its possible to reach to. I know your Honor has long
made this your mark; and that leaving things behind, you have long looked
forward to the prize of the high calling of God, Phil 3.13.
and to that end have I sent you this Book, that it may afford you some
succor and direction hereto in your private condition, and sad widowhood.
These thirty years I have wholly intermitted any converse with your Ladyship
(an error scarce pardonable) except your so far distant dwelling from the
place of your first nativity and education, did plead some pardon for me, being
one whose age and occasions admit no travel to remote places. Yet have I not
wholly been unacquainted with your course and conversation in Gods ways; nay I
know through how many combats and fights of affliction God has brought your
Honor into the condition wherein you stand: And besides, Heb. 10.32.
I may say of you, as the Lord once said of Iehoshua, Zach. 3, 2.
Is not this a brand plucked out of the fire? Has not the Lord taken you as a
dry branch and planted you in the Courts of his own house, to grow wel-liking
and flourishing in goodness? Sometimes the Lord abhorred a female out of that
flecke which had a male. Mal. 1.14.
But now the males of your flock are all gone, the Lord has left you, as a
female hope of recovering the honor of a collapsed family. A great honor: for
to say the truth, who has beheld so deep an eclipse of such as have been
near you, as your eyes have done? ^ew that J know in our Country, for their
estate, had fairer means, nor suffered a greater decay. Yet God has ingrafted
your Honor into another stock, and therein turned the stream of former
prosperity upon your self again, the only remnant of that family: you have
seen upon how weak shoulders the fair neck of all outward welfare stands,
of which the Lord may speak with more reason, then that bloody Emperor to his
wife [O pulcra cervix, sed cum ego voluero, Nero ex Suet.
abscindetur] Oh fair neck, but when I please it shall be cut off: And why
do you survive such as are gone, save to be an instrument of happiness to
your posterity, that from that holy oil of the Spirit which runs down your
head, the skirts of your clothing might be wetted, and your hopeful
offspring consecrated to God.

The great respect which your Grandfather, Father and Mother of worthy memory
showed to that reverend servant of Christ, my Predecessor; the remembrance also
of your first childhood and education, being so near to my dwelling: Your
Honors frequent salutes, and invitations by sundry who have traveled this way
that I would visit you: But, above all, that blessed report of your Grace,
which (as the Panthars breath to all the beasts of the Forest) has made your
name sweet and savoury in the Church of God; all these have emboldned me by so
good an occasion as this is (ere I leave the world) to soder up my errors, and
incivilities, by prefixing your name to this my Dedication.

Plin. Not. hist. Aelian.
There is a creature which the Historians call (...), one days life, dead as
soon as bred. Well may many books claim this name now a days, whose
breeding costs longer time then their life amounts to: For why? Each humor
fancies what he likes, some books of Poetry, some of story and delight, which
humors while they last, books sorting with them are caught up, but when they
are down, books lie by. Novelty takes up, and lays down as she pleases.
Books of practice above all other find least entertainment. From all such, my
appeal is to your protection under God. It has pleased him to exercise my pen
in sundry kinds of Treatises, which have not escaped the hands of the better
and more solid sort of readers, and that with some fruit. I have now thought
fit to make the like trial in publishing some of those my last Lectures which
I preached at my last farewell to public. The perusal whereof, with your
loving acceptance of them, I leave to your Christian diligence, and Gods
blessing: Not doubting (Right Honorable) but that God having made you a real
pattern of those things which here I write, he will also make you a willing
Protector of the Book it self: and no small encouragement to many, both to
peruse and practice what they read: if God shall make them as fruitful in the
reading, as they were in the preaching, I shall have double cause of rejoicing.
In which hope I humbly take my leave, remaining,

Your Honors by due desert much obliged, DANIEL ROGERS.
From my Study Wethersf. this 16. of May. 1641.
TO THE RELIGIOUS AND JUDICIOUS READER.
Christian Reader:
ITs with Books as with Trees: These her opposite Self-denial, that it may the
better appear to thee in what sense its especially handled in the Treatise
following.

Pure Self.
considered in her pure naturals, and in this sense, its nothings else, save
the desire of the whole man in her several faculties, natural, sensible and
reasonable, to maintain and preserve it self in the integrity of her estate.
And thus each creature (not man alone) has an instinct planted in it by God,
to affect and ensue the means of it own safety and support (as that Orator
speaks) in which respect, its styled by this name of Self, not because its
the whole being of the creature, but a faculty nearly touching the sustaining
of her particular being. Plants, Beasts, have this disposition to savor what
is for them, to shun what is against them; much more man. It was a piece of
Adams wisdom and perfection, and still would be in us, as it was in him,
blameless, if somewhat had not come between. Its the same whereof Paul
speaks, No man ever hated his own flesh, but nourished and cherished it: Now
the contrary to this Self, is Self-denial; which although it is of all other
the eminentest grace in other respects, yet in this, is the most eminent vice,
for what is so hideous as for a man to throw off nature, and deny it the due
means of life, health and prosperity? Even an unaturall cruelty, and worse
then to malign or hurt another: yea this Self-love is so good, that its the
standard of all offices of love concerning our neighbor, Do as you would be
done to: Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. And were not this
sinlesse, the holy Ghost should teach us to be mercenaries, by persuading us to
obedience by so many arguments taken from our selves, clothing grace in the
colors of gain, safety, health to our navill, marrow to our bones, good name,
long life, and the like.

second difference, is that which is called corrupt Self. Corrupt Self in
general.
And its no other, save the bad Self, of good Self, an ill quality cleaving
to a good subject. In this sense it is (upon point) no other then old Adam; the
depravednesse and disorder of the appetite before spoken of. As the wildenesse
of an horse, or his lamenesse are accidental to his good metal and good pace:
even so, that faculty whereby I naturally seek mine own welfare and safety is
good: But the disorder thereof, whereby I seek my self corruptly and
impiously is accidental thereto, and separable from it by grace. In Scripture,
this is called flesh, lust, and sometime (by a metonymie of the subject for the
adjunct) Self; to show the inwardnesse and rooted familiarity of corruption to
nature. So Job 42. I abhor my self in dust and ashes. So Paul, 2 Cor. 12. Of
myself I will not boast. And, if I preach my self, that is my corrupt self:
Adam was so created, that God was his appetite, the desire of his soul was to
him only as the chief good, and his own happiness, further or elsewhere he
sought not: Him he trusted to, honored, obeyed and embraced with his whole
man. But after he had deserted God, he justly was deserted of him to seek
after an imaginary happiness, falling down (by the penalty of Self) to a
denied apple, and thereby given over to the creature, to grope therein after a
welfare, ever coveted, never obtained. Still the subject nature remained to
seek himself; but that directive of mind, and freedom of pure will that kept
him before, now being gone, he was changed into a corrupt Self-seeking and
Self-love. As it fares with him that strives to behold the bright body of the
Sun (but by reason of weak eyes) cannot, dazles and flags downward, and
thinks he sees three Suns for one, but in truth sees none: So the soul
sunk down from God by wilful desertion, and not being able any longer to
behold the excellency that is in him, falls down and adores a false Trinity,
the lust of the heart, the lust of the eye, and the pride of life, the vain
cursed creature (that has nothing in it equalling the soul) instead of God.
Self then in this sense is nothing else, save corruption and original sin.
Contrary to this Self is Self-denial in a good sense, which to speak
properly, is nothing else save Regeneration, whereby the soul generally denies
corrupt Self in her frame and stream, bending a contrary way; forsaking the
creature, and returning to God, Esaias 55.8. her first happiness; and making him
really that unto her, which corrupt Self erroneously was; That is herself,
and herself his, to seek his ends and felicity therein, renouncing her own.
In this sense, Divines speak and write, when they treat about the state of
Unregeneracy or Apostasy from God, and to this head, refer all those marks,
signs and degrees, whereby Self may be discovered: Also, to this refer all
that is usually discoursed touching conversion of the soul to God, and turning
herself, Acts 26.18. from her vain Idols and darkness, to the living God.
All is no other in a word, save setting the soul straight to her first object,
renouncing the Self and obliquity thereof: when fleshly wisdom of the mind,
and carnal favor of the heart, is turned to the wisdom of God to salvation,
and the savouring of it freely and sweetly, then is this great cure wrought.
This of the second.

Self in the remedy.
But herein yet, appears not her own venom; while she is let alone, she is
still and quiet, as a snake in her hole, being no whit less herself, I grant,
but yet not apearing in her right colors. 1. In the Law.
Self in the remedy, is the true corrupt Self; when God sends her in a light
to discover all her filth, to convince, to tame her, and fetch her home, then
she shows the metal she is made of, and then it appears, it was hell fire
that kindled this heat in her, and bred this monster of privation and enmity to
God. (Mark well what I say, all you that think original sin a bug-beare)
when the Law came, fire revived, it was dead before; lust was unknown till the
Law said, Thou shall not lust. But as the Toad being pricked spits poison: So
Self encountered with a Law, proves out of measure sinful, and rebelliously
dashes herself against it as a pitcher against a stone wall: to this kind,
refer all that rebellion of Self against the word of conviction; and that
sly-selfe which chooses to scrue herself into the deepest bondage and horror
that may be, rather then she will come to the bent of Gods bow, that is, lose
her life and proud spirit upon the pikes of wrath, which is the only way which
God has appointed, to wit, when she is wholly broken in pieces upon this wheel
and come to an utter strait, then to show her a door of hope: of this, it
shall be sufficient to speak but a word, since I have largely treated of it in
her due place.

But legal Self is not the deepest poison of Self: But especially in the
Gospel.
The work of the Law is but a remote remedy: The Gospel is that near object
which above all other discovers Self in her kind: The closer the Gospel and
Christ come to the soul, the more opposite is Self; and as Faith is the most
eminently spiritual grace above all graces; so is Self the deepest deadliest
enemy to it of all other, yea to whatsoever savours of it, any promise, any
offer of mercy, any work of Christ in the soul, any preparation making that
way: Self was jealous of the Law, lest she be dispossessed: But infinitely
more jealous of Christ, lest he take new possession: Its the most uncouth,
desolate object unto her, to think of giving up herself to Christ, and leaving
her old hold, that can be imagined. Hence come those infinite, many and subtle
and desperate fears, doubts, impossibilities, difficulties, objections against
the promise in the rebellious, those invincible snares of ill conscience
accustomed to sin, that so great a sinner, so unworthy a wretch, should ever
speed of favor from so potent a God, so just and terrible a Judge. And hence
is it also, that not only Self is so obstinate in the wicked: But, when a
soul is got under a condition of mercy, yet then Self wraps such a world of
exceptions against her own particular believing. Hence also it is, that,
rather then she will be cast out, she will put herself upon the promise
oftimes with self-presumption, resting in her false hopes, duties,
performances, affections, preparations, and the like, but all to deceive
herself, and by seeming self-denial, to twine, as the Ivy about the oak, for
her own ends, that by mixing herself with Christ, she might still grow from
her own root, and rest in her bottom, that so not Christ, but Self might be
all in all; contrary to this Self, is Self-denial, the last and surest
preparative of the soul to Christ; for although all be good, yet none so sure
as this; this being added to the rest, argues a spirit of saving grace to be at
work, and making way for Christ to cast out this strong man, and take
possession in the soul. And of this Self, and her opposite denial of Self,
I do chiefly treat in this Treatise following, as thou shall see at thy
leisure, although perhaps I trench upon Self, by the way, in other respects.
And so much for this third sense.

Self in sanctification.
For whether we speak of hypocrites, who deceive themselves in an opinion of
it (when as alas they are far from it!) and in a persuasion of their faith,
because they have some seeming fruits of a change, whereas they never came
within the lists of conversion either by Law or Gospel, and therefore walk in
a covenant of moral works, abstinences and performances: Or whether we speak
of the truly sanctified, even they may mistake the work of sanctification in
themselves when they turn aside, resting upon works, without clasping and
cleaving to their principle in all their course: I say, Self is not so quite
defaced in a believing soul it self, but that abundance of old dregs
unmortified still remain. Touching the former, the hypocrite, how easily is
he mistaken by Self when he imagines himself an holy person, when alas all
he has is drawn from a land-spring of natural parts and gifts, excellent
affections, a conscience only enlightened to see and loath some sin, custom,
observation and example of the good, not to be good, but to be like the good
only, good education, legal restraints, or good Laws of men, and superiors;
here are deep delusions: And yet the wel-spring of Christ is wanting to make
the streams natural, sweet and running, equal and uniforme, lasting and
constant, sincere and entire. And surely who so deceives himself in his
conversion, will easily deceive himself in his sanctification: one Self will
apply it self to all objects, be they never so diverse. But Self-denial will
not satisfy herself in such shreds: A body of death, the pollution and stain
of nature, are real strong principles: It must be a second Adam which expels
the first; pangs and devotions, imitations, affections, external complements
are not able to compass so great a work. So much for this; an argument well
deserving the best service.

To this fourth, Annex to this fourth is, Self in conversation.
I annex the consideration of Self in point of conversation and practice. And
this is nothing else save the expression of it self in the way of common life,
a most endless and infinite object to think of. Self in corrupt nature, Self
in the remedy, Self in sanctification, are three false principles, if she
pass through all these three unmortified and undenied, she will as a stream
overflow all the life. Hence all those usual passages of self in the
conversation of men: The hollow hearts of most men in friendship, especially if
tried: The self-love of men in their contracts, bargains, buyings, sellings:
The cousenages, circumventions, tricks and devices, shifts and equivocations of
men for their own ends; their unfaithfulness, breaking days, promises, yea
oaths and vows; Self is at the end of all. Hence men's endless adoring of the
creature, money is the man, pleasure is our life, preferment and honor is most
men's Idol: Whose God is their belly, whose glory is their shame, who mind
earthly things, Phil. 3.18. and the like we see in men's conversation in other
kinds; as if you cross them in this self of theirs, they are wild: Give me
my will or else I dye; take away my gourd, and I am frantic. So in their
afflictions, whither run men, save to their Idols of good works, their
charity and alms, what good have they done, how moraly they have lived, what
credit they have had. If controversies befall them, how stiff in their own
cause, how inexorable in point of gain, how hard to forgive wrongs, and
injuries, how abounding in their own sense, and stiff in their own conceit.
One River in tract of ground, has diverse names: so one self we see in diverse
objects, puts on a diverse exception: But contrary to all is self-denial. If
any man will be my Disciple, let him deny himself; else self will keep him
far enough from God and Christ, from faith, from sanctification, from duty. And
self-denial in this kind is nothing else, save integrity and uprightness of
a man's way. Prove. 10.27.
And so much be said for thy better light in the distinct understanding of this
Treatise. Other weighty arguments are also treated of herein, as the point of
Faith, obedience of Commands, nature of the Promises; but because they are more
familiar objects, I leave thee to the perusal thereof, as they shall offer
themselves to thy view.

That which I will further add shall be to thee (good Reader) to whose hands
it shall be the lot of this Book to come: To wit, that both thou and I, and
all Christians into whose hands the great depositum of Truth is put, do
contend to our uttermost for the safeguard and indemnity thereof, that as we
have received it entire from our predecessors, so we may keep and transmit it
to them that shall follow us, without impair or blemish. Novelty, profaneness
and lukewarmenesse are the three epidemiall evils, which as cankers, in
several kinds and ways, fret to the heart of our Religion. So long as we can
keep sound Doctrine on wing, we shall hope to kill or weaken all three. As
David to Abiathar, so may Truth say to Religion, Abide by me, he that seeks
thy life, seeks mine, and with me thou shall be in safety. Doublesse if a man
had three cankers in three several parts of his body threatening the heart, he
would think it very much imported him to look to himself. the Holy Ghost
himself has warned us of all three: of novelty, Paul tells us, 1 Timothy 4.1. Now
the Spirit speaks evidently, that in the latter times men shall depart from
the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, speaking lies in hypocrisy, etc.
of profaneness the same Apostle warnes us, 2 Timothy 3.1. In the latter times
shall be hard days, etc. mentioning eighteen of this rabble, all rife and
rank among us. The three our Savior Christ himself foretells to be the
disease of these times; and that as a fruit of the former. Matthew. 24.13. For
there having spoken of novelty, and false Prophets, verse 5. and verse 11. he
subjoines verse 12. That iniquity shall abound; mark, error and profaneness
concur: And what of both these? Surely men beholding diversity in opinions
(through novelty) and profaneness of life, shall grow indifferent in point of
their Religion, not greatly caring which end go forward, yea many zelots shall
quail, for the love of many shall wax cold. We see all come to pass:
Therefore let us all whom God calls by tongue or by pen, look to the
safeguard of Truth, and say as those did to David, so we to Truth, Thou art
worth ten thousand of us, if we dye, we may be supplied, but if thou should
miscarry, all of us must perish. As the life of old Jacob was bound up in
Benjamins; so ours in Truth.

As in some former Treatises I have endeavored to give Moses, we know, might
serve to teach people Truths and Ordinances: But when the great work of
scaring rebels, and convincing the conscience was to be done, God himself was
feign to descend in his likeness with terror and smoke, and all too little:
and questionless, that is the most noble Ordinance which works most upon, and
most prevails with the part of man which is noblest, and whereby we draw
nearest to God, the heart, I mean, and the affections. In Gods sacrifices, we
read not much of the looking upon the brains, or offering them up to God by
fire, but of the heart, liver, and the inward parts, the fat of them, as
choice, was Gods part. The reason no doubt was, that, although the
understanding is the guide of the soul, yet because the object of it is only
truth: But the object of the will and affections is properly good; and by
embracing and affecting of good, we come nearer to God then by mere
understanding of truth; therefore the word preached most affecting the inner
man, by drawing, persuading, convincing, quickening and comforting of it, must
needs have the preeminence of all other Ordinances. There is oftentimes (in the
unregenerate always) a gulf set between the understanding, and the affections,
so that the one never comes at the other; but when once affections are truly
stirred, this gulf vanishes, and an easy pathway is made in the soul to
welcome Gods grace, and to express it in the life, neither seem we in any
other respect to excel those wicked Angels, save in the goodness of our
affections. I speak not this as an enemy to knowledge, without which the heart
is naught, but because the woeful age we live in above all other things is most
empty, and yet most careless of getting good affections. Every one thinks
himself to be happy in that he knows, not in that he affects, believes or
loves, whereas in these latter, our union and communion with God consists. The
heart and spirit of the man, his bent, his frame, that is the man: and I
believe that as they say of the materials of the world, they would soon
dissolve if the soul of it were taken away; so the vast body of Light and
Knowledge of many professors will ruin and oppress herself ere long, for
lack of suitable life, spirit and affections. This notion seemed to me very
forcible to persuade the publishing of these Sermons after some other Treatises
formerly set forth.

But (will some say) we grant all: Sermons are indeed as you say, powerful
instruments to stir the soul; b^^ what is that to printing and writing? You
know no pe^cill can fully reach a living face: The Press cannot comprehend the
Pulpit, and writing of a Book, is but as the picture of a dead man, in
comparison of the lively voice. To whom I answer, Time has been when I have
been so far transported with this thought, that I would have preferred the
preaching of a Sermon to the printing of a Book. But now I must sing another
note, and therefore I answer further, although the objection in part be true,
yet consider God has covered the uncomely parts with greatest honor, and
although the grace of the Spirit in preaching, and giving overtures of lively
impression to the heart, cannot be equalled by printing, yet printing has also
that peculiar use which preaching it self reaches not, that is, constantly to
represent things, which while they were in uttering seemed precious, but yet
are soon forgotten: Luke 1.4.
I say to present them always to the eye, and so to hold them there, as a nail
fastened in a sure place from wanzing and leaking out. And moreover, when the
Preacher shall with diligence and observation, both mark wherein God assisted
him most, and hold himself as near as he can to his expressions, somewhat
more may be compassed in this kind then otherwise. But however, he is a fool
who counts not half a loaf better then no bread, or despises the Moonshine
because the Sun is down: and I hope, that such as were once attentive hearers
of these things, when they read these Lectures, shall in some sort recognize
the savor and grace, which in hearing they seemed to acknowledge.

Wherefore, to conclude, as I for my part think it a favor that I may be the
overseer of mine own Books, which else by audacious and unskilful
adventurers might have been defaced, and also, that I may set my base heart on
work any way to prevent sloth and ease. So I shall desire thee (good Reader) to
apply thy self with thy best care and prayers, to peruse what God has herein
presented thee withal: And if thou pickest any thing out, bless God, and pray
for me, even for

Thine in Christ, D. Rogers.

The list of Contents.
TOuching Gods Sovereignty and Freedom in decreeing. Touching the preventing,
assisting and perfecting grace of God in man's vocation. Touching Self, and
Self love. Touching carnal Reason. How far policy lawful. Touching Gods
way in humbling the soul: or the condition of the Promise. Touching Servants
and their duties with Masters, a full discourse. Touching Faith, a discourse
thereof at large. Touching the due reverence and support of the Minister by the
people. Touching the Promises and Performances of God: Their nature and use.
Touching the effect of Faith and conversion in the Soul.
These are some few of many Doctrines and Points handled in the ensuing
Discourse. A taste is sufficient. Read and find them out.

A Table of the principal things contained in this Book, Alphabetically framed.
A.
ACknowledgement and Revelation of truth is to be sought from God by payer,
page 6 Advantage which God has us at in all respects, should teach us to walk
humbly, page 22 Ascribing too much to the instrument, makes God deprive us of
so many promises. The like effect of proud ascribing too much, to our own
parts, ibid. page 69 Arts and learning must not be pulled down, because God
uses poor helps, page 72 All sorts must beware of carnal reason, page 22
Advices for the well ordering of our course. 3. Faith in God. 2. Righteousness
to Man. 3. Contentation in our selves, page 256 Admonition to all sorts; Beware
lest you claw this itch of Self in any, Ministers and others: take heed of it,
page 260 Assisting grace, wherein it stands: Sundry instances of it mentioned,
p. 282. It is the ground of great consolation to a poor soul by reason of the
privileges issuing thence, ibid. It is a bottom of great confidence and
experience to a poor soul; and how, ibid. It is encouragement to fearful
ones, and how, ibid. To Advise aright in spiritual distresses, is no easy
task. Reasons why, 321. Both in respect of the party counselling and
counseled, and that sundry ways; both for the dispositions and diseases,
ibid. Many particulars about both, ibid. page 326 Anger must be pacified with
meekness, 327. yet with exception, ib. Administrations of God must not be
quarrelled page 352 Assurance cannot be where faith is not; yet faith may be
where assurance is not, page 480 Marks of Assurance, page 513 Aequivocating
with our conscience in point of Commands for the saving of our own skin, is
abominable, page 525 Accord of promises stands in two things, either of
promises to persons, or of persons to them page 569 All sorts may not by and by
believe promises, but such are qualified ibid. Accord of promises to persons
stands in sundry particulars: 1. Promises must be conceived with reference to
the truth in general. 2. according to Gods order, which is first to believe
the promises of being and reconciling, and then of well-being and sanctifying.
3. a promise must be believed according to the intent of the promiser. 4. when
a promise is believed according to the extent thereof. 5. when it is believed
according to the peculiarity and special use thereof. 6. promises made to the
head, belong to the members; promises made to the whole body, belong to each
part: promises belonging to any one member, belong ^o the body, and to any
other member, except there be a restraint to the person. 7 when they are
believed according to the scope. ibid. to page 574 Affectation to turn
Scriptures to allegorical and typical senses, is bold and dangerous, page 593
Admonition to the people of God to nourish the Spirit of grace and conversion,
page 873
B.
The Battery which God lays against the fort of a rebellious soul. page 31
Bodily crosses can reach no further then to bodily ends to abase the outw^rd
man, page 62 Body of death not encountered by a few pangs and desires of
conversion, page 144 To be bottomed and grounded soundly, is a singular favor
of God, page 253 Bad servants must not think it too late to repent, page 312
Bless God for bringing us under the condition of his grace, page 490 Not to
believe a promise according to the intention of it is sinful. How and wherein
it may be instanced, page 581 A question how far Bonds bind in conscience.
The answer to it, and six reasons of the same, ibid. 607 Breakers of covenant
with God, are in a bad condition, page 605. 609
C.
Calling to grace double: unconditionall or conditional, both free, page 10
Conditional call, what, and how free, page 10 Cavillers against the free grace
of God confuted, p. 25. Five or six sorts of them, ibid. 26. 27. Corruption is
subdued in Gods people by peece-meale, page 61 Charity in our judgment of men,
must not draw us to over-foolish credulity, page 64 Corrupt frail nature
cannot bear any great measures of grace without swelling, page 90 Christians
must look for d^ff culties, as well in their progress as in their entrance,
page 94 Corruption how restrained by God, page Civil men in how dangerous a
state, page 106 Carnally wise men scorn the simplicity of Christ, page 107
Carnal worldling full of himself, page 107 Carnality of good parts an enemy
to Christ, page 108 Carnal savor of superiority, or greatness, how
prejudicial to Christ, page 109 Carnal persons admonished, ibid. The Creature
a dangerous object to tickle and inchant a corrupt heart, 10. It has a
peculiarnes of deceit in it, 10. What an enemy it is to Christ, 113. in three
respects: 1. It conceits falsely that God loves it. 2. Nestles it self in her
ease and welfare. 3. Hears the Word preached without due respect, if not with
disdain^, ibid. Remedies against this disease four or five, ibid. Constantines
restoring the Church to her privileges, eclipsed her pureness, page 116
Crosses great means to let out Self out of the soul, as a dropsy by
incision, page 150 Corruption of man's heart how fertile of shifts and tricks to
hurt her self, page 192 Cavils of a b^se heart against Religion and the grace
of God, page 193 Carnal reason a great enemy to faith, 195. What it is, ibid.
Three steps or degrees of it, ibid. What subjects I mean, not profane
persons, but Professors, ibid. Sundry instances of Carnal reason, page 197.
198. 199 Corrupt custom has marred right reason in us, page 202 Carnal
reason justly infatuated by God, page 203 Convincement of Carnal reason in
sundry particulars, page 204 Carnal reason described by the savor thereof,
ibid. and that in three or four particulars, page 205. 206 Carnal policy
causes jealousy among Christians, page 210 Carnal reason eats up grace,
page 211 Christians of all other had need be wisest, Carnal men deal with
God, as they do in common affairs, page 225 Counsels against carnal reason
four, page 229 Carnal reason must come in humbly and yield up her weapons to
God, page 230 Carnal reason wishes old ways in stead of a promise, page 231
Carnal policy unlawful, 239. In what particulars it appears: 1 politic
shifts. 2. politic neutrality. 3. politic and Jesuitical equivocations. 4.
Self love. 5. Formality. 6. Profaneness. 7. Religion. 8 Blanching of evil.
ibid. Choicenesse which men use in things outward, should teach them wisdom
to be well principled in spiritual things, page 256 Cavillers against God, as
if he were in fault that they are no better, convinced, page 272 Close
cleavers to the promise of God, are in a blessed state, page 355 Comfort to all
fearful ones, in that Gods way is sweet and easy, page 377 Common service in
the season of special duty, stinkes in Gods nostrils, page 396 Conversion has
many steps and degrees ere it be fully wrought, though the act of it be at
one time: and why. Sundry instances of the point, 443. And reasons why God
takes this course, ibid. M^rkes by which the soul may know whether conversion
shall be perfected, ibid. to page 452 Censure neither our selves nor others
touching our final estates page 454 Clear and justify God in his delay of
grace, page 457 Consolation to all who have found God in the work of
conversion page 458 Christians of crabbed, peevish and stubborn hearts, wrong
their souls of faith, page 467 All such as are under the condition of mercy,
may and ought to believe 470. Reasons of it five or six, what the condition of
faith is. viz. no procuring, but a sign^fying thing. Why this condition is
requisite. Who is the worker of it. It is a middle thing between mere
corruption and grace, ibid. The steps of it four or five, ibid. To cast the
soul upon the promise, what it is, and wherein it consists, page 504 The
Commands of God are sad and solemn things, 516. explication of it. Reasons of
it sundry: 1. They were first given in a solemn manner: 2. They borrow their
nature from him and his greatness whom they come from: 3. From the proportion of
the Commands of earthly Princes: 4. The rewards which God crowns obedience
withal, are solemn and great: 5. Because whatsoever is in God, is eminently
so, and therefore his sovereignty in commanding: 6. Else the subjects of God
his Kingdom might give him Law, rather then take Law from him: 7. The Lord
has power to disanull and frustrate the strongest Laws; therefore ^lso to
make Laws sad and solemn, ibid. to 521. Christ Jesus, the Lord of the
Sabbath, translated the rest of the creation to the rest of Redemption, page
527 The cunning and colors of hypocrites to shift off commands, 533. Two
instances thereof, ibid.
Christ at his coming will wash off all the colors of hypocrites, page 536
Close obeyers of God in loose times, shall have close comfort in Troubles, page
549 The command of the Gospel to believe in Christ, is to be obeyed above all
commands, 559 All other commands issue from this, page 560 Churches judgment
must guide us, but not principle us in the truths of Scripture, page 576
Charms and spells of good Witches, what to be thought of, page 590 Such as
charge God for breaking of promises which he never made, very sinful, page
610 Claymers of performances of promises, and yet want a promise, sinful,
ibid. How men deceive themselves herein three or four ways, ibid. 1. By Gods
forbearance: 2. Their abstinence from open sins: 3. By outward blessings. 4.
By their Religion, ibid. Christ makes the soil of promises rich, page 617 Each
true Cure has the spirit of the cure attending upon it, 856. What is meant by
the Spirit of the cure. Explication of it, with an illustration historical.
Proofs of it, and reasons, six: 1. For the manifestation of Gods work in the
soul: 2. For their heartning against all future difficulties: 3. To make them
objects of observation in the world: 4. From the irresistible power of grace in
the soul: 5. Because God is the God of Order: 6. For the future convincement
of the soul, if she decline, page 862 Counterfeit cures of soul common in the
world; but true ones rare, page 363 Caveats against declining in sundry
particulars, page 874 Some carriages of an unsound heart discovered, page 883
Consolation to all such as have gotten the spirit of conversion, and stand fast
therein, page 891
D.
Despised and means ones, if godly, may comfort themselves upon good grounds,
page 73 God Delays the perfecting of grace in his people for special causes:
1. To try all which is in their heart: 2. To begin with them as he means to
proceed: 3 To teach them the price of his grace: 4. To discern them from such
as are not of his number, page 88. 89. 90. 91 Difficulties which Gods poor
Novices meet with to their conversion manifold: some eight or ten of them
mentioned, page 92. 93. 95 Degenerate baseness of our nature discovered, page
103 Duties of Devotion and Religion, how prejudicial to Christ, page 116 What
Degrees in Religion a man may attain unto. To how small purpose, 117. Wherein
they fail, seven or eight particulars, ibid. Admonition against it, ibid.
Denial of Self urged, 119. Upon what respects. Many dangerous lets to hinder
it, ibid. and counsels to further it, 162. Exhortation to it in two things: 1.
To do all for God: 2. Suffer all for him, ibid. To dispute for God and the
promise, against seeming objections, is great grace page 194 Despise carnal
reasons double dealing, as fast as she despises the simplicity of grace, page
208 Deny self ease for Gods ease, page 368 Deserters and d^scouragers of such
Ministers of God as they are bound to, are blameable, 389. All partial lovers,
passionate lovers, indirect lovers, vain glorious lovers, false-hearted lovers,
second hand and pinching lovers of the Minister to be taxed. ibid. Such as are
at defiance and hatred of their Ministers, are odious, page 399 Dalliers with
the Gospel, or attenders upon it for a season, reproved, page 489 Delight in
obeying the sad Commands of God, affords solid comfort, page 550 Dispensation
against the power of truths, is a great sin of our times 553. Sundry instances
mentioned, ibid Declining of the temper of our times in zeal to the Gospel
justly to be bewailed, page 884
E.
Earthinesse of our mould and nature, one cause why God fills the Scriptures
with strange and rare wonders, page 2 One error in a weighty business being
admitted, brings on many, 248. Reasons and instances to clear the point, ibid.
One, a pritch taken against the minister: 2 Unquietness in marriage: 3.
Neglect of debts at first: 4. The not curbing of the tongue. Objection against
it and answer thereto ibid. Special errors to be avoided, page 255 The ease
of grace how it is wrought, and to whom it belongs. Vide Obeying the Gospel.
The Ease of the first mercy ought not to beget slighting of it, 370. But rather
to bind the heart to God ibid. The Ease of mercy should for ever make Gods
yoke seem easy, ibid. And teach us experience for time to come, page 372
Esteem of Gods Minister ought to be precious. Reasons of it: 1. It is Gods
charge: 2. Both the message which he brings, and wo^ke he performs: 3.
Because he is the pledge of public peace 379. Wherein this love and esteem
stands, ibid. viz. in honor, se^le of Ministry, service, Maintenance, page
383 Examples of such as having long lain under distress of conscience, yet at
last were comforted, page 459 Evangelicall preparations to faith, of two sorts,
Negative or Positive, Both of them treated of page 478 Exhortation to obey and
consent to the command and promise of God by believing, ibid. Extent of a
command, wherein it stands, in five or six things. page 579 Enlargers of
promises beyond their due bounds, to be reproved, page 581 Exhortation to get
the spirit of true grace and conversion to God, 886 And such as have attained
the same, to stand fast therein, ibid. Urging of it upon all sorts and
conditions, and especially his own congregation, ibid.
F.
Favor of Nature in a civil person, how many ways it may be enl^rged: As by
the Laws of men, education, examples of abstinent and moral persons, page
104. 105 We must be Fools ere we can become wise to salvation, page 232 Faith
the only eye to behold the mysteries of salvation page 234 Faithfulness is
the center whence all the graces of a servant are derived page 296 Faithful
servants may he comforted, 314. four or five particulars of encouragement,
ibid. Faithful ones in greater things, will much more be so in smaller, 427
Reasons of it, ibid. Explications of the point, two or three, page 429 Faith,
what it is not, what it is, how wrought: see the particulars, page 480. It may
be where assurance is not, ibid. Why it is called obedience and consent, page
486
Faith a most precious thing in the nature of it, 495. She has the
prerogative of all other graces of the Spirit, ibid. and that in sundry
respects. ibid. Faith consists of two parts, Selfe-renouncing, and
Selfe-resigning. Read at ^^rge of both, ibid. Fear of God a singular mean to
keep the heart close to God, page 559 Faith in applying of promises how to be
practiced in our several needs and distempers: 1 in the return of old guilt
and accusation after mercy obtained: 2. In some eclipsing of Gods gracious
presence, and walking darkly and deadly: 3. Fear of falling into some scandal
and never persevere: 4. In sickness, poverty, losses and crosses, enemies,
unfaithful friends the prosperity of the bad: 5. Not hearing of thy prayers:
6. Troubles above other men's persecutions, etc. Fear of death. page 584 Faith
in promises and performances, is a most precious jewel, and why. 612 True faith
is performing faith, and how, ibid. yea, when she is at the lowest, ibid.
Faith in performances must be set on work threewayes: 1. To take measure of
the promises: 2. To let upon God for performance: 3. To strengthen it self by
experience, 615. Contrary, misery of unbelief. Vide Unbelief. page 616 False
cures have a false spirit, the remedy whereof is worse then the disease, page
864
G.
Grace is free, proved and discoursed and cleared, 9. 10. Objections answered:
As first, this were to translate a cr^me upon God: 2. Man has liberty left him
to receive grace, or refuse: 3. God will not be wanting to such as are not
wanting to themselves: 4. Grace is universal, as the fall is: 5. Else God
should require obedience of man to that which he never gave him power to do:
6. Christ the second Adam, was fully and in all points, contrary to the first
Adam, and as the offense was, so is grace: 7. How else shall a Minister
dispense the Gospel aright? 8. Else God does unjustly in making the remedy
worse then the disease; or in offering it deceitfully to such as he has
fore-barred: 9. From the instance of a Prince offering pardon, etc. 10. The
d^versitie in men arises from themselves, from page 11. to page 14. God is not
tied to as in outward blessings or protection, 23. Nor yet in like measures of
grace, except we believe and pray, 24. Nor yet in a like administration of his
Church in prosperity, ibid. because of her sins, ibid. Gods courses and
seasons in drawing home men, are diverse and manifold, page 26 Gods will double,
and the difference, ibid. Gods way in converting any, is chiefly to subdue
carnal savor to the obedience of Christ. page 59 God uses silly instruments
to do great things: or, if great, then either he makes them great of mean, or
else mean in their own eyes, page 67 God delights to confound great ones by
small and poor things, page 68 God is jealous of his own glory, ibid. God
uses mean instruments to do his work, and why, ibid. and 71 Gifts and graces
of themselves do no more cause pride in such as have them, then ignorance
causes humility, page 73 Godly Ministers must not only use, but also lay
down and renounce their service for God, if he shall call them to it, page 78
Grace is best accepted by such as are most empty of it, page 154 Gods people
who have shot the gulf of Self in conversion, must also deny themselves in
conversation, 183. Causes why so few deny themselves for Christ, ibid. Gods
people must not be ashamed, or weary of sincerity, because of carnal
worldlings, page 185 Godly Christians must so hate carnal reason, that they
also shun just aspersion of foolishness. page 213 God befooles carnal reason,
page 226 God himself and the Word justify policy. Vide policy. Grounding
upon stable principles of truth, necessary for each Christian, 254. Good
grounds must be laid at first, page 256
Gods people must beware of the boasting of ungrounded hypocrites, page 260
Godly themselves so far as led by Self, when they are defeated, rage. 268.
yet with difference from hypocrites, ib d. Gods hearers will be at Gods
dispose for blessing, page 273 Great men must submit their great spirits meekly
to God, page 274 God has special reason to delay his work in the conversion
of his, page 282 God will never lin with his own, ti^ he have thoroughly tamed
their rebellion, page 291 God stands countable to good servants, page 295 Grace
adds all qualifications to a servant, 295. As first, wisdom ^o behold God the
author of all relations: 2. Subjection of spirit, which consists of two
branches: 1. Self-denial: 2. Serviceablenesse, ibid. It sets faith on work
three ways: 1. Purging out such distempers as possess them: 2. Furnishes it
with special gifts: 3. Puts it into actual exercise, page 301 Grace is easy
to them who are bred for it, page 363 How it is called a burden, and how ease,
ibid. God looks that his servants should do some singular thing for him, page
395 Gods counsels most sincere of all, page 424 Gods faithfulness to us in the
main things, must teach us to trust him in the smaller, page 433 God has a
season, wherein at last he accomplisheth the work of grace in his elect page
439 When as God is that to the soul, which formerly sin and vanity have
been, it is a sign that the soul is resigned up to God, page 500 Gods commands
exceed man's in point of unlimitednesse and sovereignty, page 524 Gods remedies
are perfect, but man's are crazie page 587 God overrules the silly creature, to
work great effects above it self, page 590 Gods performances are always as
good, if not better then his promises. Reasons of it: 1. Because he is Iehova,
the being of all the promises: 2. In respect of his honor: 3. Whatsoever is in
God, is eminently so: 4. For strengthening his servants to clasp closely with
his promises: 5. Because the Lord promises nothing, but what he first
purposed to perform: 6. Because he measures his promises, not according to
our capacity, but his own bounty, from page 595. to 598. Gods performing of
prom^ses to be understood with limitation. What those be. Three in number:
viz. 1. He performs them, yet not in that very kind wherein the soul
expects: 2. In general promises to the Church, the time of performance must
be left to God: 3. God performs to his, but then they must live uprightly,
and keep their covenant, not else, ibid. The Uses: 1. Gods people look more at
the good of a performance, then the bare performance it self: 2. We must not
tax Gods administrations: 3. They who break with God, must look that God
break with them, page 598. 599 God must be left to himself for the performing
of promises, without our mixing of our wits and wills therewith, page 606 Gods
faithfulness in keeping promise with us, must teach us to be faithful to
others in keeping promise, page 607 Gods people ought to be encouraged,
thankful and comforted for the Lords faithful performing of promises: Also
humbled for their provoking of God to the contrary, page 618
H.
Heathen stories fall short of those rarities and wonders of the Scriptures,
page 4 Husbands and wives must abhor c^rnall reason, page 220 Humbleness in
Gods way, a special grace, page 463 Hypocrites who come with their cost and
toil to God, rejected, page 365 Hypocrites and elect ones differ in the issue
of their labors, page 453 True Humility scorns not to learn of the meanest
Teachers, page 460 Humility always goes before grace, page 464 Most Hearers
abide in unbelief, because their hearts were never humbled, page 466 Humbled
souls comforted, page 469 Hypocrites false grounds in breaking of Gods
commands, discovered, 528. The tricks and ways whereby they defend it, ibid.
six or seven of them: The 1. By avoiding their realnesse: 2. By avoiding
conviction: 3. By diminishing the extent: 4. By opposing one command to
another: 5. By false plea of examples: 6. By adding of new commands of their
own: 7. By cavilling against the strictness of Gods, ibid to page 531.
I.
Jews strangely insensible of God in the midst of all his miracles, page 4
The truest Judgment of a man's estate, is, rather what corruption he wants,
then gifts which he has, or graces he seems to have, page 60 Instances of
much folly and indiscretion in the dealings of Christians, page 213
Irresolution in matter of Religion, as dangerous as gross blindness, page 254
Inferiors if gracious, are a great convincement to superiors, page 288
Inferiors being to deal with superiors, must consider what their persons will
bear, page 329 Judge not rashly of Gods administrations, either public; or
personal dispensings of grace with difficulty or ease, page 376 Judgment of
controversall truths to be ascribed to men of most sincerity: who these are,
page 414 Inconstancy and disproportion in men's affections and ^ctions, argues
falsehood, page 435 Inferiors must not withdraw their service from their
superiors, if God call them to it, 461. Persuasions to it, ibid. The
Ingredients of a promise, serving to enable and improve it, 483. five or six of
them, ibid. Judgments of God upon carnal and wilful unbeleevers, page 494
Intention and extension of commands, what. Vide Extent, page 521. 522 Inferiors
must enquire into the lawfulness of their superiors commands, and not obey
implicitly, page 524 Inferiors must not follow the commands of superiors to
break Gods commands, 527. especially the command of the Sabbath, ibid.
Judgment of God upon hollow-hearted dispensers with his commands, page 530
Iordens waters (though no Type) yet a resemblance of Baptism, page 592
Indifferency and neutrality of Spirit, worse then open profaneness, 868. and
usually it grows to it, ibid. Jesuitical equivocation to be abhorred, and
upon what grounds, page 240
L.
Letter of the Scripture not to be wrested against the sense for men's private
ends, page 58 Love and honor of Gods Prophets, appears in this, that we obey
their voice. Reasons of it, page 397 Lovers of the Minister in the general,
yet concealers of their errors, corruptions, to be reproved, page 401 Lets of
faith to be seriously abhorred, five or six of them mentioned, page 502 Lesser
light in faith may yet go with greater assurance page 513 The Law how far it is
strengthened or weakened by the Gospel, page 523 Lets of close walking with God
to be abhorred, 550. eight or nine of them named, ibid. Limiters and
restrainers of promises are to be reproved, 580. Sundry instances, ibid. All
Lets of performing the promises of God, to be studiously shunned, 113. What
these are: 1. Mistaking of performances: 2. Carnality and deadness of heart:
3. Murmuring: 4. Some gross sin: 5. Limiting of God: 6. Error of the
wicked: 7. Vnobservance: 8. Curiosity, or censure with others, ibid.
M.
Miracles serve to convince the soul of the truth of God sealed thereby, page
5 Miracles how far ceased, uncertain to us, and in Gods hand, ibid Ministers
must be jealous of the least aspersion to Gods glory, to their own persons, or
of offense to others by their carriage. page 58 Man very prone to idolize
means, and to set them up in Gods place, page 68 Ministers must not abuse
their parts to case and pampering of the flesh, page 75 Marks of fleshly
wisdom subdued: four or five. See page 81. 82. 83. Ministers must be first
in Self-denial: It is the true Mortmaine, page 164. 165. Ministers of all
others must abandon carnal reason, and that in many things mentioned, page 215
Magistrates must beware of carnal reason, page 220 Marks of Self defeated,
to teach us to avoid it: 1. She is coy and queasie upon reproof: 2. Lazy and
slothful to amend: 3. Always in her extremities: 4. Partial, page 263 Mean
silly persons if godly, need not think themselves contemptible, page 289
Masters must choose their servants by this mark of faithfulness, page 310
Masters must be Fathers to their Servants, 315. Reasons of it: 1. They have
betaken themselves under their protection: 2. They are as children to thee in
point of fidelity, ibid. Wherein this duty stands: 1. In preparation: 2. In
performance. Both in sundry Branches: 1. See and adore Providence in ruling thy
servant for thee: 2. Manage thy servant with thy best skill: 3. Give his soul
her portion as well as his body: 4. Feed his eye by thy example: 5. Command in
the Lord: 6. Impose not violence in lawful things, through excess: 7.
Conceal not his painfulnesse: 8. Defend him from hurt: 9. Carry an equal hand
among servants: 10. Neglect him not at his departure, ibid. 320 Ministers must
not count the work of settling the conscience, a slight work, 332. Helps for
the enabling the Minister to it, ibid. Exhortation to it, both by preparation
and practice. Rules for it in special: 1. Discern mixed sorrow from single,
and separate them; and Diabolical temptations from our own fears, whether
moderate or excessive: whether terrors proceed from sin properly, or some evil
of punishment; whether the heart rebel under conviction, or no: 2. Defer not
the season, search out the special let which holds the soul from the
condition; or being under it, from faith. 4. Upon revolts what to do. Whence
the particular trouble arises, ibid. Ministers must not be distrustful of
God, in the execution of their place, 384. Snare not their consciences;
Dishonor not their persons, or disable themselves in doing good to the people,
ibid. And set himself cheerfully on work to feed and rule them, ibid. 387
Ministers reproach themselves much by ascribing too much to such people as are
unsound, page 407 Ministers must love the people for no sinister ends, but for
obedience to the truth, page 409 Ministers who will purchase interest in their
people, must forgo some of their own right, page 412 Magistrates, Ministers,
and all Governors must be sincere in their censures. 416. See them reckoned up
there. Motives to it, ibid. Popish Mortification discovered to be hypocritical,
page 431 Ministers should gaster lewd people out of those errors that harden
them, page 485 Motives to faith sundry, 505. First faith gives most glory to
God: 2. Christ's last enquiry will be for faith: 3. God will be admired in all,
and only believers: 4. God shall come in vengeance against all unbeleevers: 5.
Faith is a rare Jewel: 6. No riddance of our distempers till we believe,
ibid. 510 Ministers must not prostitute their authority to the backing of such
commands as are against God, page 524 Marks and proofs of the liberty and
dispensations which men take for sin: 1. Their number, 2. Their cunning. 3.
Carnal counsel, 4. Their questions, 5. Their wits, 6. Their malice, 7. Their
partiality, 8. Their baseness, ibid. 554 555 We must mourn for such as have
forsaken their closeness in obeying God, 556. Much more for our own loosnesse
in that kind, ibid. A short form of such a complaint, ibid. Means helping the
soul to close obedience, 562. as first, Faith in Christ our Lawgiver: 2. Due
meditation of the object of obedience: 3. Mark examples of closeness: 4.
Prayer, 5. Humility, 6. Observe Gods judgments 7. And think of his rewards,
8. Self-denial, ibid. Misery of such as rest in false Cures, and an unsound
condition, page 864
N.
Nature of old Adam insensible and unperceivable of holy things, and the more
holy the worse, especially mysteries, page 1 Naamans story, and the p^ssages
thereof, very remark^ble, p^g 7. Particulars of it, ibid. Number of seven very
holy with Papists, but in it self no hol^er then others, page 65 Novices in
grace must know there be many difficulties in getting it, and not be dismayed.
page 92 Novices look not at the troubles for time to come, but only at the
present, page 95 None so bad, but have some good, 105. and what abuse the
civil person makes of it, ibid. Nourish no such dregs in us, as by which
carnal reason might be supported, 210. Sundry of these noted, ibid. And ten
more of abettors to this sin, noted after, ibid Newters, Atheists, etc.
terrified, page 347 Nourish not your fears about the way of God, 374. and
counsels against this disease, ibid.
O.
Obedience to the command of faith is easy, 357. Clearing it by answer to the
objections of hypocrites, by reasons, ibid. As 1. In respect of the difficult
way of the Law: 2. In respect of a further thing aimed at by the Lord, viz. the
recovery of his Image: 3. In respect of the merit and price of it: 4. In
respect of the dispensation of it: 5. In respect of that grace which
accompanies all under the condition, ibid. The particular means by which the
Lord makes faith easy to his people, ibid. Such as have found ease in this
way, must be thankful, page 369 Obedience of love to the Minister urg^d in
sundry instances, 405 Occasional and temporary commands, bind as strongly for
the present, as the moral and perpetual do, page 516
P.
God prevents such by his providence and ministering means, and occasions, whom
he means to save, 41. Both to his Church in general, and each member. Reasons
four or five. The ends are his, therefore the means; else Gods purpose should
hang upon man. The end orders the whole frame of the action, ibid. Gods
preventions, in what kind and manner they lie, page 44 Gods preventions and
man's forecast differ much, ibid. Six preventions of God named: 1. God
overrules, diverts and alters our intents, to sway unto his. ibid. 2.
Overpowers the soul from stumbling at discouragements. 45. 3. Disposes of all
occasions, and antecedents. ibid. 4. Accommodates all things to sort to his
own ends. 46. 5. Removes such things as he foresees would hinder. ibid. 6.
Especially inspires the means, and blesses them to the attaining of their
effect. page 47 To want all Preventing grace, and to live as dead block, very
fearful. page 47. 48 Preventing grace of God deserves adoring and thanks at
our hands. 49. and prayer. ibid. Passages of preventing providence. page 50
Preventions of God should humble us. ibid. 51 Dallying with them causes God to
blast us. page 48. 52 Preventions past should arm us against fear of
corruptions prevailing. page 52, 53 Popish insolency of the Clergy over Gods
people intolerable. page 57 Proud nature of man quickly forgets humiliation
page 63 Popish stately devotion, odious to God. page 79 Proud Hypocrites
disdain to be taught by mean ones. page 80 Privileges of Religion keep
many from being truly Religious, what it is, and how dangerous. page 115
Pharisees terrified. page 148 Professors unsound in peace, will much more be
rotten in trial page 211 People must abhor carnal reason as well as
Ministers, and in what. page 216 Parents and Governors ought to beware of
carnal reason. page 219 Physicians beware of Atheism. page 220 Prejudice an
abettor of carnal reason. page 220 Popery notoriously tainted with carnal
reason, and wherein, three instances. page 222. 223 Practice of carnal reason
reproved in all sorts, twelve of them noted page 227 Policy though it may
appear to some to be sinful, yet may be warrantable, 241. and wherein, six or
seven instances propounded, ibid. upon what term. ibid. Proud pharisees always
most ready to tax others of pride who are innocent. page 261 Preventing Grace
cannot be severed from assisting in such as are saved. 279. The reasons of the
point: wherein this assistance stands. page 281 Papists put us down for
government. page 311 People must take heed lest they turn their ear from
counsel of their Ministers, 335. counsels tending thereto, three or four,
ibid. Putters off of the promise to be reproved. page 352 Preachers who sow
pillowes most odious, and to be abhorred. page 368 Pelagian ease of free will
and selfe-conversion confuted. ibid. Pity such as get to heaven with much
difficulty. page 370 Pray for five things to make Religion sweet: 1. Acceptance
of the will for the deed. 2. Look upon thine own grace, and hide my defects.
3. Betrust me with the principles of sincerity and faith, working by love,
which will make a little go a great way. 4. Make my lusts to be my clogs, as
Saul's armor to David. 5. Make the yoke of hard, dangerous, disgraced, solemn
duties and crosses to be tolerable. page 374 People exhorted to love, honor
and support their Ministers. How that may be, page 392 People that will seem
to love their Minister, that so they may snort in their sins, odious, page
400 Popish Martyrs against the Scriptures not to be regarded, notwithstanding
their pretended self-denial 415. Popish falsehood in all their ways, page 415
People must be sincere and open to receive good counsel, page 425 Poor men
have a privilege above the rich in this, That they may be reproved, page 425
Proud hearts terrified by Gods resisting, page 468 Plead hard for faith, if once
we be under the condition, page 481 Promise must be pleaded for
sanctification as well as pardon. page 511 Perseverance in believing, breeds
assurance. page 513 Promises must be believed according to their nature and
kind. 567. Reasons of it. Popish abusers of promises terrified. page 579
Preposterous appliers of promises, reproved. page 582 Promises must be believed
according to the utmost extent of them: wherein it stands; in three things, 1. A
promise must be sounded to the bottom: 2. We must draw out of the wells of
salvation. 3. The promise must not be given over, though we be long held off,
page 583. 584 Physicians must know themselves to be only instruments of
providence, for such as God will have to recover, page 588 People are very fond
in magnifying the outward instrument, neglecting God, ibid. Popish Miracles and
Cures what they are to be thought of, page 590 Pelagian spirits which cavil at
the freedom of the grace of God, far from the true spirit of cure and
conversion, 869. So are Popish spirits likewise, page 870 Prayer for healing
the numb palsy of the spirit of our times, necessary, page 886
Q.
Quarrellers against the Minister, for not comforting the distressed, sinful,
page 456
R.
Rebellion in all whom God means to save, shall work greater humiliation in
them, page 60 Repentance goes not before faith, page 103 Religious Self how
dangerous. Vide Self. Rational carriage, not simply to be condemned, page
209 Religion stands more in wanting somewhat, then in having, page 237 Religion
is like an harmony, page 250 Religion grounded upon most sound foundations,
page 253 Religious servants yet failing in faithfulness, are to be blamed
306. Their tricks and qualities, ibid. Resigning up of the soul to God, is
one chief work of faith, page 500 Revolters from their first zeal and grace
of conversion, are in a sad case, page 871
S.
Scriptures filled by the holy Ghost, with rarities and wonders, and why: Two
causes, page 2. 3 Sensible and outward objects the means by which God works
upon us, ibid. Scriptures bark and outside not to be rested in, but the scope
and sense, page 6 Sovereignty of Gods will and pleasure, must cause us first to
confess it, 14. 2. To lie humbly and quietly under the conviction of it, 15.
in sundry particulars: 1. By considering the root of this sovereignty, ib. 2.
Be content that God dspence his grace according to his own measures, 16. 3.
Judge not God in the effects of sovereignty, as in the sins, penalties, or
snares of the wicked ibid. 6. Nor for punishing the sins of parents upon
their posterity, 17. 7. Do the uttermost that lies in thee to obey, ibid. 8 Be
charitable to others a far off, ibid. 9. Break thy hard heart hereby, and lay
down thy pride and rebellion 18. Then the ^^use sovereignty is free to save as
well as destroy, 19. Look not at election but at the tree offer, ibid. Assay to
believe, and that upon sound warrant by venturing upon the promise, 20. 21.
Lastly, know this is the greatest honor which thou can do to God, page 22
Straits and extremities are Gods season to pull down a proud heart, 29. In how
many respects. See the reasons, ibid. Straits both public and personal, do
but little humble men in these times, page 36. 37 Straits do make hypocrites
only to counterfeit, 33. Not to be trusted, ibid. Straits are very unpleasing
to flesh, we are l^^th to hear of them lest we should humble our selves and
profit b^ them, page 38 Shun not stra^ts: for first; it is bootlesse; and then,
they c^nnot be m^ssed, 39. Pray for ^n holy use of them, not to awe thee
violently, but change thy heart, page 40 Signs and Sacraments why used by the
Lord in effecting spiritual things, page 85 Sacraments differ from common
signs, ibid. And why. 1. To stop man's bold inventions: 2. To assure weak
faith of his sincerity, ibid. Suspect trials be coming upon us, when our
state is calmest, page 96 The manifold snares in the way of Gods people, should
make them watch and be armed, ibid. Self the main enemy to rob the soul of
grace, when all is done, 98. and why; because most inward and immediate, page
101 Self in the root of it, is nothing but the instinct of old Adam and the
frame or vent of a corrupt heart, ibid. Self of two sorts; either opposite
Self to Christ, or mixing Self with Christ, ibid. Self opposite, what. ibid.
Of how many sorts it is, ibid. Five named, Profane self, Natural self,
Carnal self, Creature self, Religious self, ibid. Self profaneness
described, ibid. Self natural or civil, described, page 164 Carnal self, or
savor of the flesh, what The sorts of it many, ibid. Self sensuality, or in
the Creature, what. page 111 Selfe-religion what. The branches of it three.
page 115 Mixed self, in what particulars it discovers her self 121. Ten or
twelve mentioned, Nature of mixed self discerned in four things, 1.
Familiarnesse, 2. Generalnesse, 3. Violence, 4. Tenaciousnesse, page 127 Self
supports her self by false comparisons, page 128 Satan imbarkes himself more
deeply in Self, then in other corruption, page 129 Self deludes, by Gods just
giving her over to her self, page 129 Self may be discerned by three degrees
or properties, ibid. Passages of Self may be conceived three ways: 1. By the
ground: 2. The carriage: 3. The scope, page 131 Self is but flesh in all the
work of Law and Gospel, and how, page 132 Carriage of Self is suitable to her
ground; which appears in four things: 1. Her instinct: 2. Her eagerness: 3.
Her endeavor: 4. Her disappointment, ibid. The ends of Self and her scope, is
suitable to the ground and carriage, page 138 All seekers of salvation must
abhor Self, and how: 1. In discerning her tricks; diverse of them mentioned,
139. She will deny herself in somewhat, to satisfy herself in other things:
2. To mask sin under holiness: 3. To defile it self in that it knows: 4.
Pretense to seek God, but intending it self: 5. To offer God more service
then he asks. Self forfeits all her travel and labor for nothing, 140. She
is of an outlasting and surviving nature, 143. She is very close and hard to
be discerned, page 144 Self a perpetual enemy to the Regenerate themselves,
146. making their lives sad and uncomfortable, ibid. If Self in the painful
Professor be so dangerous, what shall become of the profane? page 147 Self
exceeds gross lusts, page 149 The mischief of Self should teach us not to
be offended with afflictions and sorrasives to eat it out, ibid. Staggering,
Non-proficiencie, and unthriftinesse of Professors, is the fruit of self, page
152 Self requires deep searching, to discover it in the soul, page 155 A
Question: Do all that are truly converted, discover Self in themselves thus?
Ans. Two or three ways page 156 157. 158 Motives to self-denial, sundry, ib.
Spirit of Grace, what it is, 168. 170. Exhortation to ensue it, as the opposite
of the spirit of Self, ibid. Marks of it, ibid. The 1. Grace causes the soul
to grow more humble by knowledge: 2. Grace subordinates all to her self: 3. It
subjects the soul to Christ upon his own terms: 4. It resists the special
and personal pangs of Self in each soul: 5. It answers all objections of
Self: 6. It sets Self against Self, ibid. Spirit of Grace serves all in all
for Grace, and how. Three ways: 1. In the discovery of it: 2. In the effects
of that discovery: 3. In the end of it, page 178 Spirit of grace proceeds on
calmly in the soul, contrary to self, page 181 The soul bereft of that
purity of Reason in which it was created, page 202 The Spirit of God must
create holy wisdom in stead of carnal in the soul, page 203 Savor
spiritual things, 235. The means and marks of it five: 1. Savor the
powerfullest ordinances: 2. Love simplicity: 3. Get heavenly mindedness: 4.
Prefer the verdict of the Word: 5. Be wise in thy course, page 236 Silly and
simple ones have an advantage of wiser in point of carnal reason, page 236
Self is proud and coy, page 259 Self in her own way very jolly; but out of
her element, crabbed, page 260 Self defeated rages, 265. Sundry reasons,
ibid. Object. How then is it that hypocrites are so merry? Answered, ibid.
Self may want defeats, because given over by God, to delusion and hardening,
page 269 Self-willed ones, who bind God to their hearings, convinced, page 269
Superiors learn grace of their inferiors, page 290 Servants must be faithful
to their masters, page 294 Servants only can be well bred in Christ's family,
page 296 The settling of a distressed heart by counsel, is a mercy highly to
be prized, page 330 Self and carnal reason are justly reproveable
corruptions, and why. page 343. to 346. Sinners against sensible and ocular
mercies present, are worse then those who sin against the absent promises, 349.
Diverse sorts of such, ibid. Slighters of grace under pretense of ease,
terrified, page 364 Season of ease to believe, is at first, 366. Hard to
recover it if once lost, page 367 Scorners of Gods Ministers reproved, page 388
Satan, who seeks our blood, can persuade us to more cost for him, then Christ
who shed his blood for us, page 396 Sincerity in a Counselor, claims
acceptance. Reasons why, page 410 The Sufficiency of a promise, is the next
object of faith, page 482 Schismatics who reject all steps and marks of
conversion, confuted, page 488 The Spirit of Truth must be the first planter
of truth in the soul, page 577 Sacraments divinely appropriated to seal up to
the soul the assurance of salvation, 592. Therefore not to be counted common
things by the people, nor used so by parents, ibid. Spiritual penalties attend
spiritual sins, page 604 A spirit of sin in a man, what, and how dangerous
it is, 866. especially if conceited of her own welfare, ibid. Spirit of grace,
by what marks it may be tried: Generally by her own working, particularly by
these marks: 1. She is bred of the immortal seed of the Word, and all false
conceptions cast out: 2. By her operations: 3. By the frame and soundness of
it: 4. By the object, order and equality of it: 5. by the carriage of it, page
879 Separatists from our Church, and the corruptions of it, how blind in
discerning their own, page 882 Self-denial urged in general by many motives
and means of direction, page 162 Self-denial in point of sanctification,
urged by the discovery of 4 or 5 false semblances, and false principles
thereof, with some means, ib. Read at large the whole Tract.
T.
Trials are to separate the precious from the vile, in the godly. 95 See
Difficulties. Gods trials should work in us the spirit of prevention, care to
keep our peace, and much prayer to be kept from temptation, page 97 Gods ends
in tempting, unlike to Satan's, ibid. Terror to all that cleave to carnal
reason, Pelagians and others, page 225 Thanks due to God for freedom from this
tyrant of Carnal reason, page 238 Try thy self, how defeating of thy self
works with thee, page 276 To be trusted by our betters, is honorable, page
294 Trial of servants by 6 rules, whether faithful or not: 1. It must be
according to the word and knowledge: 2. must not be contrary to it: 3. It must
be single and sincere: 4. Must not cross the Law of Piety, love or mercy: 5.
It must be equal and regular: 6. It must be diligent and sedulous, page 307
Touchable and tractable natures in show to take counsel, yet persisting in
their sin, are dissemblers, page 402 Tokens of love in other kinds offered to
the Minister, where obedience follows not, are false, page 406 Terror to all
despisers of sincere counsel, 422. Their woe and misery, page 422, 424 Terror
to all such as live profanely, and yet think themselves under the condition
of mercy, page 486 Terror to all that savor not the spiritualnesse of faith,
page 492 Terror to all that wilfully cast off the yoke of Gods commands, 528.
where four things are handled, ibid. 1. their grounds, 2. their practice, 3.
their shifts and colors, 4. application of terror, page 529 Trials of close
obedience to commands, 539. 1. It is truly inquisitive after the extent of
commands: 2. It is tender in affection toward commands: 3. It is aware of
disobedience by each experiment of sin: 4. It rejoices in the voice of the
Word, determining of her doubtful cases: 5. It looks more at the preserving of
a command entire, then at her own ends: 6. It sets not Gods commands together
by the ears: 7. He saves himself harmless in all losses for obedience sake,
upon God by faith: 8. It closes with commands without colors or cavils: 9. In
such duties as border upon her own respects, she is carried to obey upon Gods
grounds: 10. It grows better and better: 11. It seeks to amend the errors
of others: 12. It obeyes when yet there appears not outward fruit of it: 13.
It profits by lively experience of former obeying: 14. It is obedient in her
particular condition of life: 15. It seeks after no dispensations, ibid. to
548. Truths of God must not be taken by tradition and prejudice, but from the
whole body of truth believed as Gods, page 576 Terror to all Popish and blind
maintainers of truth upon false grounds, page 577 Terror to all such as nourish
in them selves most open and odious diseases, seeking no cure, page 866 Trial
of the true spirit of Grace, is from herself, page 878
V.
Unbelief of the Word so much the more damnable, by how much it has been
confirmed so by miracles, page 5 Vnconditionall call of God, what. 10. Why and
how it is free, ibid. Unfaithful servants terrified, 301. Wherein it consists:
sundry particulars, ibid. Vowers first what they will do, and then enquirers
of the Minister for counsel, are dissemblers, page 401 It bewrayes great
Unfaithfulness, to be very forward in great duties, and backward in small,
page 430 Unequal and unsound persons in their course, not to be trusted, page
436 To be at an Utter strait, and brought to a forlorn hopeless condition, is
one step to faith, page 499 Unapt appliers of promises, or of other parts of
the Word, reproved, page 582 Vnproportioned means used by men without a Word,
to effect supernatural things, are evil, and justly suspected, page 590
Unbelief binds the arms of God from performing promises, page 613 Unbelief
cannot beteame her self that bounty in performances, which is in God, 616.
with amplification of the point, ibid.
W.
Word and voice of Gods own mouth, only able to pierce the soul, page 62 Yet
the Word works little without crosses in these days, page 64 Wise men must
learn to be fools in Gods matters, that they may be wise, page 75 Men's will
and mind more to them, then the world besides, page 163 Word of God must be
cast as seed into the soul, when once empty of her self, page 233 Wisdom to
guide a Christians course how gotten, and wherein it stands, in 5. or 6.
properties. 1. Choose that one thing necessary 2. Discern between things that
differ. 3. Be ready for the hardest. 4. Make safe thy retreat. 5. Fear God,
which is the fountain of it. 6. Shun the ways of error. 7. Practice wisdom
both in deliberation and determination. 1. Being wise chiefly for thy self. 2.
Redeem the time. 3. Plot and project wisely for God. 4. Be watchful against
all enemies, especially spiritual. 5. Meddle with thy own business. 6. In
all doubtful cases look to that which is purest, comliest, and of best report.
7. Of 2. moral evils, choose neither, but of a moral sin, and a penalty,
choose the latter. 8. Let things profitable or pleasing yield to things honest.
9. Try men or things ere thou trustest. 10. Be neither too credulous, nor too
obstinate, ibid. Wrathful and habitually peevish and froward persons,
reproved, 269. Much more if defeated. ibid. Waiting upon God, necessary for
such as look to speed of grace, page 274 Wisdom is needful to judge aright
of the ease of grace, page 376 Weak believers must not quite quail and give
over, page 514
Z.
Zeal of first converts described, page 871
This Insertion is to be placed in the thirteenth page of Naamans History, and
the twentieth line, after the four first words thereof, which are these (but a
cause of) and so read on to the end of the said Insertion, and then return to
the former thirteenth page and twentieth line, and proceed on with these words,
moral swasion, etc.
procuring it, which were most absurd: I say, Christ hereby should be made not
the foundation of Election, as Ephesians. 1. in whom GOD established it, but the
fountain of meriting it.

^nswer 2.
Secondly, I answer, though we should grant the parity, and make Adam and
Christ alike in both; yet there be other reasons to be alleged of this
parity, then this, viz. The equal number of the saved. For why? Three other
reasons may be given of Ad m and Christ's equality; nay rather of Christ's
exceeding Adam in his grace: as first grace exceeds sin in respect of the
value and eminency of the person undergoing the work of Redemption, viz. the
eternal Son of GOD: Between whom and Adam, what comparison? Sure in this,
Grace is far above the offense. Secondly, if we respect the grace it self
purchased in point of duration and continuance, Adams lasted but a while, being
in his own keeping; ^loff. 3.
but grace of redemption is hid with God, and in Christ, to abide for ever.
Thirdly, in point of the reward purchased by Christ; which (in respect of the
transcendencie of the Meriter above the offense) restored not the redeemed
only to that they lost, viz. an earthly Paradise, but an eternal glory in the
heavens. I conclude then, Those that make Christ the subject of universal
grace for all and each one, who by the freedom of his will, assisted thereby,
will receive it, or reject it (catch who catch may) I say, these make Christ
only a wandering notion, at the pleasure of each base wretch, not the solid
foundation of election, as making the elect, and only them, happy.

^bject.
But if grace be not universal, then (say these) God deals unjustly, in
offering a remedy upon worse terms then the disease it self. For why? Hereby
he aggravates the contempt of all despisers, causing their condemnation to be
far deeper then before; especially knowing that it will prove so.

I answer: First, it is accidental to Gods offer of Grace, that the
condemnation of the wicked is aggravated thereby. For it is not through his
default, but theirs. His offer is directly to his own elect; but if the other
will mix themselves, and abuse this offer, their blood be upon their heads.
But case a Prince offer his pardon to ten, of whom he knows nine will not
accept it: is it his fault to offer it? or is he the cause of their contempt?
Does he infuse it into them? No surely. Nay further, (to stop the mouth of all
such cavillers) this I add, That God does not hereby only aggravate their
judgment: for he does by his Gospel bestow upon them many gifts of his Spirit,
much restraint of sin, many merciful allowances which others want, so that
by this means their condemnation is lessened.

^bject.
But still it is objected, How can this Doctrine consist with that bounty and
abundance of mercy in God, who would have all repent and be saved? Offering
fully, freely, to all sorts, civil ones, profane, sinful and ignorant ones,
mercy without difference? Does not this absolute sovereignty of God infringe it?

I answer, No, in no wise: The secret purpose of God within himself, and the
outward offer, differ as much, as the presence Chamber of a Prince, and his
privy Chamber. In the former, he shows what he has done concerning the
final estate of his creature: In the latter, what he will have man do,
concerning his own salvation. Secrets are for God, revealed things are for us.
God launches out into the deep; but we must go by the brinke and shore. The
sovereign freedom of God is not taught to dishearten any in Gods way (for who
knows Gods last decree touching himself) but to teach us to go to work with
awe in Gods way, to fear him, to be humbled, submitting our selves to his
revealed will, with readiness, and without cavilling. For otherwise this
sovereignty and freedom in God, hinders not his freedom of grace to allure,
draw, persuade, and soften the hearts of whom he will. But this will try men
whether they will yield to the way of God, or kick against it, and so provoke
wrath.



I answer: The Minister is Gods instrument, to reveal Gods will to the people,
but not his secrets. He must nakedly do his office, and leave the effect to
God, who works grace in such as submit to him. He knows not what God has
intended to any one wicked man. If any will cavil at him, his damnation is
just, to reject Gods cords and ladder. As for Gods complaining, threatening,
denouncing, it is no act contrary to his secret will, but only diverse from it.
And it is a way which he blesses to draw home thousands to himself.





LECTVRES UPON THE Fifth Chapter of the Second Book of the Kings, from the
ninth verse, to the fifteenth.
THE TEXT.
9 SO Naaman came, and stood before the door of Elisha, with his horses and
charets. 10 And Elisha sent a messenger to him, saying, Go and wash thee in
Jordan seven times; and thy flesh shall come again unto thee, and thou shall
be clean. 11 But Naaman was wroth and went away, and said, Behold I thought,
he will surely come out to me, and stand and call upon the Lord his God, and
strike his hand upon the place, and recover the leper. 12 Are not Abana and
Pharfar, rivers of Damascus, better then all the waters of Israel? may I not
wash in them and be clean? So he turned and went away in a rage. 13 And his
servants came near, and spoke unto him, and said, Father, if the Prophet had
bid thee do some great thing, would thou not have done it? How much more then
when he says unto thee, wash and be clean? 14 Then went he down, and dipped
himself seven times in Jordan, according the saying of the man of God; and his
flesh came again, as the flesh of a little child, and he was clean. 15 And he
returned to the man of God, etc.
2 Kings
THE FIRST LECTVRE UPON THE NINTH VERSE.
THE holy Ghost has replenished the whole body of the Scriptures, The
Scriptures full of rarities and wonders.
with more strange and miraculous relations, then any pen of an humane writer
could ever conceive, or comprehend. In which respect he may be called truly,
the Father of Histories. For why? Scarce we shall light upon any chapter in the
history of the old or new Testament, (yea some Prophecies) wherein some notable
monument of Gods extraordinary and miraculous power, either the bared arm and
hand, or some finger of God, is not discovered. In some one Chapter perhaps,
some two or three wonders offer themselves to our view, one upon another, of
remarkable note. Witness those unheard of, and unparalled examples of the
deluge, confusion of languages, Genesis 7. Genesis 11. Genesis 22. Genesis 32. Genesis 42.
Exodus 6.7.8. etc. Exodus 13 Josh. 7.8. Judge. 8.
framing of the Arc, the birth and sacrificing of Isaak, the victory of Jacob
wrestling with God, the preservation of the Church in the famine, the ten
plagues of Egypt, the wonderful passage through the red sea and wilderness to
the holy land, the victories of Joshua even by Rams horns and potsherds,
Gedeons fleece, the conquest of Sifera, the Suns standing still, and returning
ten degrees, Ionahs rescue from the Whale, and the Prophet Daniel from the
Lions. And, for the new Testament, what is it, save a continued tenor of divine
and miraculous operations of the Lord Jesus and his Apostles? So that we may
perceive the holy Ghost to reign in this kind, and to take a kind of
felicity, to get out from naked and common discourse, to some rare and
wonderful expression of the works of God, his Revelations, visions, and
strange acts in and for his Church. The cause why?
And surely, if we shall enquire into the reason hereof; we shall find, that
the Lord has in wisdom chosen this course, as well knowing the mould and
frame of them he had then, 1 Our lumpish earthy mould.
and has now to deal withal: I mean both those Jews, and us Gentiles, all
the fonnes of Adam and the flesh. That is with cloddy, carnal, dead and
sensual creatures, stiffnecked and rebellious ones; wits and affections
savouring nothing but the creature, or at least promises of mere temporal
kind, but as for matters of divinity and spiritual nature, utterly
savourlesse. Contraries are cured by contraries: and if there be any thing able
to raise and elevate muddy and loggish spirits from the dunghill, and from
creeping here below: it must be a divine stream of strange and unheard of
accidents, administrations, and atcheivements, whereby the base heart of man
(as the Angel in the smoke of the sacrifice) may rise up to heavenly and holy
thoughts and affections. Hereby the dull and blunt senses the dead hearts of
sinful men are whetted up, (far more then by ravishing music) to Gods
matters, and are taken off from the earth.

Moreover, the Lord has bin feign to take the advantage of our base frame, 2
By sensible things God takes us at advantage.
(which is much amused and astonished at the sight and hearsay of uncouth and
strange matters:) to drive in thereby holy things, which else would be but flat
notions, vanishing and coming to nothing: the tree which has long lien
sodding in the ditch, if it be once unsettled, may be carried home. Much harder
is it to stir the sense and quicken the affection, lying dead and in cool
blood, then to work a further and superior impression in it, being once raised.
The spirit of a man, though it be corrupt and dead, yet being immortal, cannot
so far forget it self (if once God quicken it) as to lay aside her nature
altogether. Therefore the Lord mainly aims at stirring of it up from her dead
frame. No other reason can be given why John Baptist came with such a hideous
outside of apparel, camels hair, course diet, Luke 3.
and also with the extraordinary spirit of Elia: save that the people being
taken at first by his guise and habit, might be wrought upon the more easily by
his Ministry, preparing and levelling their rough and high spirits for their
Lord Jesus. And what other use had all those miracles wherewith the doctrine of
Christ, and all the preaching of the Apostles were accompanied: save this, that
by and with them as by Tunnels, the influence, power and authority of truth
might enter and prevail with the minds and consciences of the hearers ere
they were aware? That, they being amazed and convinced by the greatness of
those signs and effects which attended and followed the word, might have no
power nor spirit left in them to contradict him that spoke thereby: but yield
and believe the truth for the works sake. The miracles themselves, the healing
of a leper, the restoring of the lame, the raising up of the dead, the healing
of the sick; the doing of the works, and benefiting of the persons, was not
the issue and intent of the worker: but that the glory of that God, the grace
of that spirit which wrought such wonders might soke and sink into the souls
of men, before and upon, whose eyes and persons those miracles were discovered:
That by this mean, conversion from Idols, and sinful courses, unto the living
God might be effected, through faith in the promise. Witness that story of the
woman of Samaria in the fourth of S. John: To whom the Lord Jesus did so
express himself, as to declare all the secrets of her heart, to convince her
of all the villainies that ever she had committed in all her seven husbands
time: and why? Surely that she having her load of heart within her, might go
into the City, and tell it her kindred and acquaintance, draw them to Christ
himself, as being astonished at his excellency; and being once within his
compass, might be easily pulled by his doctrine, to a further pitch of grace,
and say, Now we believe not because of the words which thou have spoken: but
because we have heard him speak himself.

This should teach us a wide difference between Gods word and the writings, and
stories of Heathens; Use of instruct.
who to get themselves a name among men, and to suit the eloquence of their
style, either Greek or Latin Poets and Historians, have stuffed their
writings with abundance of rarities and wonders, for the procuring admiration
of men, and appetite of Readers, Heathen stories unlike the Scripture.
and for the most part fabulous and vain, savoring of man's base spirit, and
lying invention, do as much dishonor their fidelity, as they magnify their
language and skill in contriving; they do but Ape the Scriptures, and steal
away the minds of Students; who, although they may lawfully further themselves
by the tongue and phrase, yet ought to take heed how they be taken too far
with them, as some profane wits have been, who have not stuck to scorn some
writers of Scripture, in comparison of this or that Heathen writers. No, give
all their due, but reserve that preeminence of worth to the Scriptures, which
they deserve; being as much beyond the most exact writer of Story for their
Antiquity, purity, Majesty, and authority, as the Sun is above the poorest
star in the firmament.

Romans 8.6.7.
The carnal man (says Saint Paul) conceives not the things of God, neither
yet can do: they are spiritually discerned by the power of another principle. I
say not that this course of miracles, or wonderful effects is able to overcome
this stupor of our understanding: no, there must be a further progress of the
spirit of grace to effect that: yet this external and remote preparative may
be enough to convince us what a spirit of old Adam dwells in us, and what a
curse lies upon our nature, for the resisting of that light of truth which was
put into us in our creation. And that is the loss not only of actual light,
but even of disposition to apprehend the truths which are offered us, for the
cure of our disease. Our faculty to understand is still left in us, so that we
are not mere blocks and beetles: But in matters of God, so originally are we
blunted and dulled in our spirits and senses, so disabled, and so disguized, so
deeply also implunged into a life of sense and sottish sensuality, that the
mysteries of God are quite above us. As the nature of sensible creatures in
kind, exceeds the vegetable, and the reasonable goes beyond them, so that each
of them wants a faculty to reach the others object: so does the mystery of God,
of Christ, of grace, exceed the understanding of a mere reasonable creature. I
shall meet with a better ground of opening this point after: here only let
this suffice to abase us, and hold us down before God, as degenerate and
miserable creatures in respect of this our incapablenesse of holy things. Jews
strangely insensible of Gods miracles.
We can cry out of the Jews, whom the Scriptures were written unto, for that
they were so dull and slow of heart to conceive the matters of God, his works
and ways, when as yet they were beaten into every sense as it were with
hammers of extraordinary and divine Prophecies, Visions, miracles, and ways of
revealing. Oh! say men; doubtless had we seen the standing up of the sea on
both sides, dry in the midst, the return of the waters upon the Egyptians, the
gushing forth of water from a Rock, and the bringing in of such a number of
quails: how would we have acknowledged the power and Majesty of God? Had we
seen the Law given by Angels with terrors and fire: had we beheld with our
eyes the person of John (a miracle without miracles) and the wonders which
Christ and the Apostles added to their Sermons: how would we have been
ravished with them and believed? I answer: so should they have done indeed, and
you if you had been in their places: But alas! as they did, so should you have
done, without more grace, and that appears by this, that now being under far
greater convictions, and a way of God as far exceeding the power of those
outward signs, as heaven exceeds earth, yet you are as far from conceiving
and believing as they.

Thirdly, it should scare and terrify all of us, who now enjoy the body
Humiliation.
together with all the helps of those divine ordinances which are bestowed
upon the Church of Christ, both public and private; for that (notwithstanding
all these) the most people still remain unperswaded, or half persuaded of the
truth. Heb^ 2.2.3.4.
Saint Paul to the Hebrews, Cap. 2. tells us, if they who despised Moses Law,
upon two or three witnesses were condemned: what shall become of them who
despise so great salvation? who still distrust that truth of God which was
first spoken by the Lord of heaven and earth, coming in the flesh, Miracles
serve to convince the soul of the truth sealed thereby.
afterward confirmed by such as heard him, by miracles and the power of the
word in those who were converted: So may I say here; this very text of Naaman
shall stand up and convince all that maintain self and self-love, carnal
and corrupt reason against the truth and power of the promise; yea, this
miracle whereby the word was strengthened, with all those miracles by which any
truth of Christ has since been justified, shall rise up and convince all
unbeleevers, I mean such as live under means in that day. For why? Though
they saw none of these miracles, yet hearing the word, beholding the seals,
receiving them into all our senses, I say such a word as has been ratified by
all the wonders of the Old and New Testament serving to bear down a base heart
of unbelief, about the truth, power, love, al-sufficiency of God: if they
believe not by all these, they shall be condemned justly by that authority
which they have despised, yea the very frame of the Scriptures, and the
expressions of so many strange and admirable passages, serving to raise up a
base and crawling spirit to heaven: if we shall be found unbeleevers in that
great day of Christ: shall be brought forth as a witness against us, for our
horrible insensiblenesse and stupor of mind and heart. Unbeleefe of Scripture
and Truth of God after so many miracles, very damnable.
For by these the Lord has (as it were) striven to engraven in our spirits, as
with the pen of a Diamond, the truths of God, and mystery of Christ. If then
our souls shall be found so hard and flinty, that this point has not pierced
them: if we be still unconvinced, and this instrument of gold has no more
left impression upon us, then if a straw or rotten stick had been used to
write in our tables of stone, oh how fearful shall our condemnation be!

If any man shall step in here, and demand, Quest. Miracles how far ceased,
hard to say.
has God so sufficiently confirmed his truth by miracles, that there shall
need no more? I answer, I know its the opinion of many, that they are wholly
ceased, and that because the use of them is ceased. the soul of all the truth,
as well in respect of the confirmation of it, by miracles as otherwise; but as I
stagger much about this opinion, so yet I am loath to affirm, that the Church
has any warrant under faith to look for the gift of miracles, to be assuredly
vouchsafed her, although the ends thereof may seem very weighty. Who can, or
dare deny, but that the calling of those Americans, to the knowledge of the
truth, may seem a weighty occasion to expect from God the gift of miracles?
partly by reason of their language, almost impossible to be attained, except by
either a miraculous, or at least a marveilous gift? partly, because there be
poor inducements to draw such imperswasible and brutish spirits, to cast so
much as their eyes upon any means to induce them to believe? In both which
respects, I dare not deny, but that as Satan by lying wonders prevails much
with such as perish, so the Lord may vouchsafe this spirit of miracles to his
Church, when his time is come, to effect the conversion of such. Only I add,
that when his time is come, he will grant his Church an instinct of spirit, to
ask it, and join seriously in the means to attain it; which else he will
not incline them unto, his time not being come. For we must weigh the ends of
our travel into remote parts: whither for our own ends, or for public. If
our own respects be chief, we have no cause to look for miracles. But I
choose rather to leave the thing in Gods dispose.

Exhortation.
the Word of the Father, and the first inditer of all Scripture, Spirit of
acknowledgement of God in his word is to be sought by prayer.
the contriver of all the passages thereof, the worker of all wonders, and the
Author of all grace and wisdom, that he would vouchsafe us the spirit of
revelation and acknowledgement of him (as Saint Paul speaks, Ephesians. 1.18.)
That we being enlightened in our minds, may conceive aright of the true scope
and intent of the Spirit in the Scriptures: Branch 1. general.
and that he would intimate our hearts with the purpose thereof; which is, that
our souls might be captivated under the power and authority of the speaker:
That we rest not in the outside of miracles, wonders, parables, similitudes
which we hear, or read, but considering their aim, be carried down the
stream of the thing spoken, yea the power, To rest in the bark of the word or
of miracles, Parables, Similitudes, is dangerous.
sovereignty, and faithfulness of the speaker: Not only thereby conceiving
more clearly in our minds of the Lord, his Attributes and the truths
revealed, but much more ravished in our affections toward him for the good
things whereof we have tasted. Many choose patheticall texts, histories and
accidents, actions and speeches of special note, to read and please themselves
in; some delight to read of the building of the Temple, others of the passion
of Christ, others other parcells of Scripture to provoke admiration and
discourse, even as they might read any other book of tales and wonders: some
also read texts of devotion and holiness, as the Psalms, or wise sentences,
as the Proverbs with a morrall spirit and scope only, but never muse of the
several ends of such places nor the spirit of grace therein, save only to
amuse their minds, and stir up pangs of affection: But by these, to come
nearer to know their own base hearts, or to close with the examples of such
grace, to fear the judgments of God the more deeply, to believe the promises
better, to subject themselves more to the commands of God and in all to see his
foote-steps and to adore the speaker, few attain it. Therefore let us read
these texts with prayer to God for sense and savor of their meaning and scope:
that we may attain the spiritualnesse of them: Else we shall answer heavily to
God for making the solemn and reverend truths of God, an occasion to nourish
and maintain that corrupt disposition, novelty, carnal admiration, jangling
and unprofitablenesse, which the Scripture especially serves to mortify in us.

To give a taste of my meaning in an instance: An instance of the exhort.
let that be the miracle recorded 2 King. 7. to wit, the Prophet Elisha his
causing of the Iron to swim, when it was fallen into the water; he that reads
it as a bare miracle will only vanish in a wondering humor: but he that reads
it with faith, and reverence, will behold the power of God, overruling the
creatures quality, and causing the weighty body of iron to float like a chip,
contrary to the nature of it. And what will such a meditation pick out of it?
Surely a sweet consolation in the power of God; viz. to overruled a worse
nature in a worse subject: even the dullness and lumpishnesse of an heavy heart
in matters of God, and cause it to mount up from this base dunghill, whereunto
it is fixed, unto heaven and holy thoughts: yea, to change this hard heart, more
hard then a flint, or iron, and make it a soft and fleshy heart, to write his
covenant in it, and cause it to walk in his Commandments; where from it is as
far as iron from swimming. If then the casting in of a stick could work
such an effect: if the bare power of God (only for a witness that the work
then intended was from God) without any respect to the iron it self, could do
this great thing: what shall be the power of God working in and by the
bloodshed and intercession of the Lord Jesus upon an heart of heavier frame and
harder, which thereby shall be much the better in it self, besides the
infinite honor which the worker of this miraculous change shall purchase to
himself by it? although to carnal reason it may seem impossible?

And in particular, 2. Branch, particular.
let this exhort us all to be more studious and zealous observers of this text
in hand. Our Savior could set a special mark upon it, as containing peculiar
instruction for us, to cast down those strong forts and high thoughts in us,
Naamans story, and the passages thereof, very remarkable.
which do destroy the simplicity of self-denial, faith, and the obedience of
Christ. Surely if strange things will affect us, as who now adays affect not
(Athenian wise) new and strange reports and accidents, to hear and to tell
them (though emptily and as passages for present talk) this text has cause,
and may plead to be specially marked above many. Which contains the cure of
the only leper to whom (above all them in Israel) Elisha was sent Naaman a
stranger and Heathen Aramite; suitable whereto are all the circumstances making
toward it: The very root and first occasion of it was strange, Particulars of
it summed up.
by a poor damsel and captive (yet one that had taken notice of Elisha to
very good purpose.) The disease strange, an incurable leprosy; the cure
strange, by the applying of common water to his flesh (to reason incredible.)
The course by Naaman strange in mistaking an Idolatrous King for his Physician,
in steed of an holy Prophet: the redress of the error strange, by an
intimation from God, to fetch him the right way to the Prophet: his carriage
strange, in humble sliding before a poor Prophets door, and (to come nearer
the text) the message uncouth and strange, for a Prophet not to vouchsafe to
come to the door to a petitioning Prince, but to send an aloof message:
Naamans enterteining it strange, and promising but a sinister success, (for
what likelihood is it that a patient raging at his Physician should be cured?)
The persuasion strange even by servants, (not likely either to persuade aright,
or to prevail by persuading) But above all the effect of this counsel,
strange, that he should obey his servants, who cavelled against the Prophet:
the success of his obeying strange, to recover his flesh as the flesh of a
child: And to conclude, the consequents of the success strange, both his
spiritual cure of Soule-leprosie, the extraordinary zeal and resolution to
renounce Idols for the true God: and the most sincere detestation of that most
predominant and beloved lust, which before had prevailed, to wit, to worship
Rimmon himself, and be his Masters leaning stock in that worship. So many
strange concurrences, might (I say) justly force our attention to this story:
and yet the chief thing contained in it, is no stranger thing, then that which
we daily carry about us, I mean self and carnal reason: But so intricated and
wrapped about us, so deeply seated and hidden in our spirits, that (without the
great goodness of God) we shall behold it, read it over and over, wonder at it
in Naaman, but see none of it in our selves, and so leave the perusal of this
Treatise with as small fruit as we began it. Which penalty the Lord keep from
us! and so meet with us and match us, in our reading hereof, by the inspiration
of his spirit, that this story may be a looking glass in which this great blur
of self may so be discerned, that the promise and word of God may present a
better image unto our souls, and transform us into it from glory to glory:
that he that boasts may not boast in himself, but in the Lord.

A second general of the whole text. The person of Naaman the Subject of it.
A second general, as equally concerning the whole text and mixed through it,
as the former, is, the subject of this whole text the person of chief note,
Naaman the leper. The words used by our Savior, do occasion me to touch upon
this point, and its of no small importance. To wit, that the Lord passing by
all other lepers in Israel, nearer hand, and liker to make use of the Prophets
help, then one a far off, (who only by a report of a silly wench at second
hand, had intelligence of him) should out of his mere grace send him to this
Naaman and Naaman to him, (which phrase imports a sending of spiritual
efficacy to conversion) and, make him a mark of greater mercy then his own
people, yea an upbraiding to them, in all succeeding generations. Many lepers
(says Christ) there were in the days of Elisha, but to none of them all, was
he sent, save only to Naaman the Syrian. Whether no other lepers at all were
healed by Elisha, its heard to say: and me thinks as hard to imagine, that all
lepers should so escape his hands. Perhaps they did not: and partly the
Damosells report evinces it, for how else should she so readily point at Elisha
for the cure of Naamans disease, if she had never heard of his healing others
in that kind? Howbeit I affirm nothing: she might speak from a general
honor she bare to the Prophets worth: but this is sure: although some lepers
might come to Elisha; yet he was sent to none save to Naaman: that is, the Lord
used him not to the spiritual good and salvation of any other save him. I
hope, I shall not need to prove the truth of his conversion: If any doubt of
it, let them note, but the scope of our Saviors discourse in that place of
Saint Luke, and it will satisfy him: for, except it be granted that Naaman was
converted, the whole scope of our Saviors speech is overthrown. And that
evident^y is this, Luke 4.27.
to convince and upbraid his own countrymen for their contempt and infidelity:
and that by Naamans example. As if he should say, Trust not to this that you
and I are Townsmen, and near of acquaintance; God is no excepter of persons,
grace is free, and mercy is neither of the willer or runner, but of him who
shows mercy: look well to your selves, that ye despise not the offer I make,
as little worth, and thinking your selves Abraham's seed, and children of the
promise: for, (except ye believe) the Lord can pass by those of the kingdom,
and call in from the East and West, strangers, even such as Naaman, and thrust
out the children. Mark then, except Naaman were converted, the Jews might
have had a ready evasion to escape the dint of this exprobration, and have
said, Why Lord? Elisha was no more sent to Naaman, then thou art sent to us,
there was no more wrought in him, then in us. This had bin to cut the sinews
of Christ's argument asunder. And whereas it may be alleged, Christ did no
miracles at Nazareth: I answer, it is uncertain: But say he did not, it had
bin small upbraiding of them, with the want of miracles, if he had not much
more cast them in teeth, with the want of that, for which miracles served, I
mean grace and faith. This objection then thus removed; I return and say,
that the Lord sent Elisha to Naaman for the cure of soul and body, out of an
especial freedom of Graces, which he denied to others, who were far fairer
for it then he: That the glory of this free and sovereign mercy and compassion
might only be ascribed to God.

The doctrine then hence, is, that Grace is free and sovereign. And, Doct.
Gods grace is free. Romans 9.10.11.
unto this truth does all the Scripture give witness. The Apostle Romans 9.
defending the sovereignty of God, against all cavillers, who cannot endure that
God should differently impart himself to such as are equally inwrapped in the
same state of corruption, says thus, shall the clay say to the Potter, why
have thou formed me thus? And whereas the caviller alleges, that this should
infer a contradiction between the secret will of God touching the end of the
creature, and the revealed, touching the duty of the creature, and says, why
does he then yet complain? q. d. He has barred the creature from obeying and
believing, by a secret denying of power unto it, to do either, and does he
still exhort, warn, threaten, and chide? The Apostle answers, Verse 20.
Oh man who art thou who janglest with God? Is God unrighteous in each act of
his whereof thy wit cannot give reason? And in the same Chapter, Wherefore,
Verse 16.
it is not of the willer, or the runner, but of God who shows mercy. Why
should all others save Lydia, and the Jailor be left, Acts 16.14. and 27.
when Paul came among that people, and all the wise Philosophers at Athens be
passed by, only Denus, and Damaris a poor only man and only woman, being
excepted? And Acts 17. ult.
Who called Rahab and rejected all Jerico? Ruth and not Orpah? Who chose David
and refused Eliab? Who separated the Gentile and rejected the Jew? Who is he
that says, not many wise, learned are chosen, but the mean things and foolish
of this world to condemn the mighty? 1 Cor. 1.26.
Why was that one Eunuch attended and converted by Philip, other Proselites
being let alone? Surely that we might tremble, and say, Oh the depth of the
wisdom, of the justice and mercy of God? how are his ways past finding out!
why should one who came at the eleventh hour fare as well as he at the sixth?
Because God may do as he list with his own. Matthew. 20.12.
Is thine evil, because he is good? No, for of him, in him, and by him are all
things: to him be praise for ever.

Calling to grace double. Unconditionall or conditional, both free. What the
former is. How it is free?
Now that Gods call is free, according to his own sovereign pleasure: appears
by the difference of Calling, which is two fold, the one unconditionall, the
other conditional. The former of these is that external call of God whereby
he ministers the means of the Gospel, by which the effectual call may be
attained. Now it is evident that this is free, for it requires not, nor cannot
require any antecedent disposition or fitness in the called: All are equally
sunk into rebellion in respect of their nature: and as concerning the
practice, sure it is that howsoever the morals of some may possibly be worse
then others: yet this can be no bar unto Gods free visiting them with light; if
he please so to do: and there is no wickedness of man, over which the grace of
the Gospel may not prevail. Deuteronomy. 9.4.
Say not (says Moses) that the Lord has chosen thee from among all other
Nations, because thou were better then they: for thou were the worst of all
Nations: But it was free mercy which thus chose and called thee to the
Covenant, and to be a people: That caused the Lord to call thee from all other
Nations of the world though all the world were his: Again, it is not the
moralnes of any people, nor their virtuous qualities, which can move the Lord
to show them the light of further grace: but if he leave them in their
moralities, it is just and righteous. Sure it is, this unconditionall call is
as free as the rain which falls upon the earth, in some places plentifully, in
some scantly, in some not at all. Even where the Lord in sovereign wisdom
shall please to send it. Some places the Lord permitted his Apostles to go to:
others the Spirit forbad them to visit. God had no people there, therefore the
means were held from them. Not, because the means were not granted: he had no
people; but because he had no people, therefore means were not granted. Now
concerning this former call, how many Nations of the world are excluded? Until
Christ all the world was excommunicate: (for the times of that ignorance God
regarded not) and since Christ, (now full one thousand six hundred years and
odd) how many are uncalled? if some speak truly, scarce a sixth or seventh
part is yet visited: if it were but the one half, it were enough to prove this
freedom. Cavills there are some against this former freedom, (the most of
which are taken from the respects of more sinfullnesse in those people or their
Predecessors, or some former contempt:) but they are so idle and senseless,
that the divisers of them, show rather their desire to oppose, then any sound
reason.

The latter is cond^tion^ll. How free?
The second Call is conditional. And that concerns such as are enlightened; and
that is also soveraignly free, and merely gracious. For why? this condition is
Faith: which is a second free gift to the elect, following the former freedom
of visiting with light. Now this condion is not all men's lot, All men have not
faith. 2 Thessalonians. 3.2. nay it is a flower growing in few gardens. This flows
from Election: So many as the Lord our God shall call, Acts 2.39. and so many
as were to be saved believed. This condition of faith is not in our freedom of
will, but the Lords: Its he, who of his good pleasure works both the will and
the deed: 2 Thessalonians. 3.2. Act. 2.39 and 47. Phil 2.13. John 3.8. Object.
and without his spirits breath (which blows where it will) nothing is done.
Now this condition of the Gospel, Faith I mean, being so few men's portion,
how can it otherwise be, but, where it is, its free grace? But here its
objected: That this were to translate a crime upon God needlessly, which may lie
upon man. I answer. No; still the crime lies upon man, God is free. Adam he had
him not at) shall work out greater glory to his name and attributes, then
formerly he could have done, shall any man grudge him this prerogative, or
count him cruel, or tie him to his own tether? Matthew. 20.13.14.
Is it not free for him to do what he pleases with his own? Is it not in his
power to release or not to release his own advantage? Again, viz. from man's
rejecting of grace: but this proves not a freedom in man to accept it of
himself, if he please: for he rejects not grace by the actual defect of any
thing which he had power or free will in himself to do (seeing that is
merely from the sovereignty of the caller) but from his actual contempt. Esaias
65.1. and hide himself from such as seek him (in some sort) and forsakes the
moral, the pharisaicall, the virtuous; and calls the vicious, the publicans and
sinners: That where sin abounded, Romans 5.20.
grace might abound much more: Many ungodly ones being convinced of their own
woeful incompliablenesse to the grace of God offered, are called, that they
might magnify the freedom of it: and many more civil and morally disposed,
who might seem fair for it; (yet are prone to join themselves purchasers
with God, in this great work) are defeated, that he who will boast, might
boast of the Lord: 1 Cor. 1.30.
and all might stand as guilty and abominable before God.

But here some will object, True it is, All being fallen from the grace of
Creation, stand at Gods courtesy, for he may condemn them, put a bar to
themselves) receive this grace, but if they do not, the cause (say they) is
not from any defect in the sufficiency of grace, or from any sovereignty in
Gods dispensing it to some, more then others: for (say they) as he ought it to
none at all; so, when he offers it freely, he offers it to some one with the
same freedom and efficacy, with which he offers it to any one: and the
difference of the accepting by one, and the not accepting by another, flows
from the different dispositions, and free will of him that nilleth or wills:
but not (say they) from any diversity of disposition in God. Besides, the
reason why they affirm grace must be universal, is this, because else (say
they) God should deal hardly with the creature, to urge it to such a condition
of grace as he does not allow him sufficient strength to perform, and yet
punish him for the not performing thereof more deeply, then if such grace had
never bin offered: yea, to urge it to perform such a condition as he never was
able in his best integrity to perform. I answer. God does not exact any such
condition at man's hand, Adam could not possibly have the power to believe,
Instan.
in his innocence, since that presupposes a thing which Adam viz. Disobedience.
I answer, Adam could not believe the pardon of that whereof he was not guilty:
But Adam could and did believe in general, by an holy trust, or confidence,
upon Gods supporting him during his obeying: which trust though it had another
object (in special) then our faith has, yet (in general) has the same. That
looked at the alsufficient goodness of Creation; this of Redemption; yet both
behold God as the same object still of infinite good, (in several regards) and
fidelity to his creature.

Secondly I answer: That is false, and inconsequent, to affirm, that Adam, to
the whole nature of man: Therefore he must needs bestow an universal grace of
redemption, in Christ upon the same mankind, before he can justly punish them
for refusing it: I say, this follows not: except it be first proved; that the
grace of redemption and the grace of creation, be suitable things holding alike,
in nature. But that, they are not: For, in the creation, the Lord could not but
impart himself to the creature, according to that bounty and goodness of his
excellent nature without any difference. But in the grace of redemption, of
reason.
For first, he had all mankind at an infinite advantage by their fall: and
might communicate himself so far and no further then himself pleased.
Justice was now offended: and therefore, it was free for him to destroy all:
and it was infinite mercy, to save any. Prisoners and guilty ones, use not to
give law to their Judges, but take viz. That the Lord meant by occasion of this
fall, to manifest himself to the creature in a further degree then he had
done, and to glorify himself far more in his Attributes: therefore, to limit
God to our conceit and proportion in this kind, were to cross and contradict
his wisdom and ends, as less wise then our own. But it will be objected,
Adam were as truly in stead of the whole nature of mankind to save, as Adam
was to destroy: we should infinitely wrong the extent of his satisfaction, if
we made it more unable to save, then Adams sin was to condemn: forasmuch as
the Apostle says, The gift is above the offense. Rom 5.15.
Now then if the sin of mankind were so imputed to Christ, as the sin of
all mankind to Adam, what should hinder the universality of this grace? I
answer: Adam was of sin. And the Apostle even in the same place where he
affirms the gift to be above the offense, yet compares [All] condemned in
Adam, to [Many] saved by Christ. All and Many, differ much. Verse 19.
So that we must know that the imputation of sin to Christ, was only such an
imputation of sin as concerned the elect only: for if the sins of more had
bin imputed, surely more had bin saved then the elect. And so Christ should
have added to the number of the elect, and bin a Lord not a servant to
election, (as a mediator:) nor a foundation of executing it, but a cause of
moral swasion to apprehend the truth, and embrace the good which is offered
them, I demand, why do not all partake it, one as well as another? For if
there be such free will in them to receive it, what lets them from it? who
would willingly balke heaven who might go thither, or who would not shun hell,
if his shunning desire would serve the turn? Deuteronomy. 4.
Is there not a natural self-love in all to wish well unto themselves, and to
avoid the contrary, if that were sufficient? If any shall say, the strong
lusts of some dazzle their light, and oppress the freedom of their will from
accepting the offer, then I answer, how can that be called sufficient grace
which is feign to give place unto prevailing corruption? That is only
sufficient which is effectual to overcome and oversway the will, not which is
compelled to yield and give place to the prevailing corruption of the will
which it meets withal. What a dishonor is that, to grace not to be able to
effect her own ends, but to be overcome by corruption? Grace doubtless, (if it
be sufficiently offered to all, that are enlightened) would sufficiently cast
down and subdue the strongest holds, and highest thoughts of resistance, set
up in the soul against it; and so would save all without contradiction, as
being an invincible principle, as much above the power of sin, as God is
above the creature. Either therefore this universal grace does convert all who
receive it (which none is so absurd as to affirm, being contrary to sense and
common experience) or else it must needs be denied to be sufficient and
powerful to do that which it intends. And therefore of necessity there must
needs be another grace confessed, as necessary for the effecting of that which
this universal grace cannot attain unto, and that is that sovereign and free
grace of the spirit, which peculiarly works in the elect; not an aid and
concurring succor to their free will, but that grace of willing freely, which
they want wholly, and that strength to subdue rebellion and unbeleefe which no
enlightening grace (alone) can reach: I say it must be a peculiar grace of
conversion, which works both the will and the deed, and is so effectual,
that no strength either of sin or the gates of hell can prevail against it.
Thus much I thought not unfit to say, for the explication of the point: enough
a popular audidience for the ground of a sermon: leaving deeper discourse to
Treaties for the nonce.

Exhort. To confess the Sovereignty of Gods Grace.
lowly and equal hearts, with this absolute sovereignty of Gods will and
pleasure in the dispensing of his own grace, where when, and how far
himself lists. Princes always love to maintain their own unlimitednesse and
Prerogatives above their subjects, and do not like it that any subject should
make scrutiny into the secret of their sovereignty. How much more should
sinful dust and ashes beware of prying into and descanting upon the
Prerogative of heaven? And because this Cavil not.
beware that we nourish not a cavilling heart against God in this behalf.
Gamaliel advised his fellows wisely to beware lest they went against the edge
with God in the persecuting of the Apostles, Act. 5.
least perhaps (says he) ye be found fighters against God. As if he should
say, if ye should pull God against ye, by opposing his Ministers, ye should
make a good bargain of it, and repent ye at leisure. How much more then should
we beware of snagging and snarling at Gods secrets? which do more immediately
touch his Crown and dignity then any thing, and trench upon his glory and
Attributes, which are precious, and which he will not give to another? Esaias 42.
Learn we this, that secrets are for the Lord our God, let him alone with
them: revealed things are for us. Such is the base pride of our forlorn
spirits, that when we have most deeply implunged our selves into the
praemunire of God, then we can least of all beteame him the acknowledgement of
our misery, and least stoop under his mighty hand: nay, then do we feel a
rebelling and recoyling spirit against God in fighting against his Sovereignty.
John 8.33.
Much like those Jews who when they were under the most deep bondage of the
Romans their enemies, yet had the proudest hearts to say, we are Abraham's
children, and free men and never served any. The cause whereof, is within our
woeful bosoms, viz. that as we have lost our first honor of Creation, so we
have lost both understandings to know, and wills to yield and be convinced of
it: being like drunken slaves, that dream of liberty, and make themselves
merry with their own woe: Even so do we struggle against the prerogative of
God, and scorn that any difference at all should be made between us and others.

Numb. 16.
Hence comes that fulsome conceit of the most, that all who profess
Christianity are in an equal condition to Godward: all the people of God are
holy. They think that those Ministers who put difference between one and
other (except open monsters and odious livers) take too much upon them, and out
of singularity of spirit, and factious pride, do but sow the seed of
dissension between men and women, who else would live alike in neighborhood
and amity. And as for the work of grace and conversion (which indeed puts the
difference) either they conceit themselves to be as forward in it, as the best,
or if they be convicted of the contrary, that notwithstanding the common
profession which they make with others, yet they come short of them in the
spiritual power and fruit of the Covenant and Word, of the Seals and
Sacraments: oh they storm and rage as a Bear robbed of her Whelps! Judge.
18.24
Micah did not make such an outcry after them who stole his gods, as these do
after them who would rob them of their Idol of formal profession. Which (in
truth) argues, that their hearts were never truly meekned nor subdued under
this doctrine of sovereignty. But let all such beware: for every blow which
they give to God, lights upon their own skin: and they carry a black mark
about them of such as must perish, while they scorn to confess the misery
which they are fallen into: and so to apply themselves to the humble seeking of
that peculiar mercy in God which must (if ever they be saved) bring them home
to him. Sure it is, that the winding themselves up in the common sheet of other
men, hoping they shall do as well as they, and abhorring to think that others
should be better then themselves: whiles yet, they let others go before them
in humiliation and faith: themselves rejecting the means of grace: this pride
and fullness of self conceit will sooner seal them up to hardness of heart,
and arm them with weapons of pride, and envy, rage and rebellion against Gods
sovereignty; then bring them into the least degree or step toward salvation.

Secondly, Lie under the conviction of Sovereignty.
let us be exhorted to lie under the conviction of this sad 1. partic. Consider
the root of Sovereignty.
I mean that infinite advantage which thou have given the Lord, by thy wilful
fall in Adam. The little weighing whereof has caused as many errors, and
mistakes in Religion and Divinity, as any one. Confess it to be righteous with
God, to take the uttermost advantage against thee, which the most strict
justice of his can devise. Admit no carnal corrupt colors of reason, or
cavillers, against this truth: but lay thine hand upon thy mouth, and say, Thou
have shut up all under disobedience, Oh Lord, most justly, that thou might by
their sin, set forth the largeness of thy Power, justice, and mercy! yea,
although thou can not sometimes unty the knots of carnal objections coming
from thy rebellious heart, yet loose thy self in this truth of God, and
tremble at it saying, this is a depth too deep for me to fadom, and too high
for me to reach: my reason is as the short arm of a poor child, which cannot
reach far: But whether I reach it or not, I am sure, there is an eternal
truth in it, wherein I rest. And this step is a great degree toward mercy: and
a mark of one whom the Lord will save: I mean to rest convinced, and well
apaid concerning this sovereign pleasure of God: A rebel, hypocrite, and
enemy of God, dare not commit himself to this sea: he chooses rather to creep
by the shore of his own carnal reason, though it be to his own perdition. It
was the speech of an Heathen man, concerning a profound oration, which he had
heard a Philosopher make, what I understood (said he) I admired as excellent:
and I believe also, that was excellent which I understood not: How much more
should thou bear in thy judgment, such a reverend conviction of Gods
matters, though above thee? And secondly, let us rest well contented in the
Lords free dispensation of the several measures of his grace: 2. Instance. Be
content that the Lord dispense grace, in what measures he pleases.
If he please to be found of some that sought him not Esaias 65.1. to make a
shorter work of it, yea to intercept them ere they are aware, in the midst of
an evil course and to power in mercy by large measures, battering, breaking
and subduing them betimes, and (as it were) all at once; whereas he suffers
others, to go on by the year and the seven year, without working any great
matter in them sensibly, but suffers them to welter in their fears, doubts, and
complaints: let us not murmur, but acknowledge his Sovereignty. Of which more
in the use following.

3 Judge not God in the effects of his unlimited Sovereignty, either in sins.
See also Romans 9.17.
Likewise, let us not judge God in the effects of this his unlimited will: I
mean in the trialls, commands, penalties, which he exercises the wicked
withal: for why? he created them holy; and accordingly may in equity, try
them with strict charges, though exceeding their strength to obey. For he looks
upon them, according to that grace which they have lost, not which they have.
So I may say touching those penalties which they incurred by their sin, they
were just. Had they clave to their duty, 4 Or penalties of wicked.
but in the matter of it, they had bin highly rewarded: and therefore falling
off in cool blood from doing the outward act, which was in their power, in the
midst of so many encouragements, how just was their overthrow? Why did the Lord
inflict so heavy a plague upon all the posterity for Adams sin? Because it
was a bundell of all sin, in one: and if he had stood, he had enjoyed all
happiness for himself and his? If the Lord Jesus did justly accurse the
servant, I mean the figtree, for not bearing figs at all seasons, (which, if
sin had not let, it might have done) shall not the master much more be
accursed, for making himself barren being created fruitful?

5 Nor for leading into tentation.
So also, let us not accuse God for suffering them to fall. Its said Hophni and
Phinees could not hearken to their father, because God would slay them. And the
Jews could not hear the voice of the Lord, because Esaias had foretold the
contrary, viz. that God had hardened them. For why? Act. ult.
God put no evil into any of them: But because he saw what baseness and
rebellion was in them already, he left them thereto, and would not overpower
their hearts: for it was just for him thereby to be avenged upon them, for
their wilful contempt: and so make them as snares to others, to fall by. Those
ten tribes were justly snared by Ieroboams calves, because they had played the
Idolaters before in Salomons days, under the freedom of the Temple worship:
and so God would plague them for all at once, and both give them a King in
wrath, and sweep them away in displeasure. A master having a sly servant, often
drunken and careless of his business, to the end he may pay him for all, does
justly send him to some place which accidentally occasions him to fall: he
sends him upon an errand justly, but because he means to prevent all his
shifts, and punish him soundly, he will suffer him to fall into a snare, that
he may take him in the manner, and punish him for all his prankes together. So,
when God punishes the sins of parents upon the children, Ahabs upon Iehoram,
Eli's upon those hundred and eighty Priests slain by Saul, Salomons upon
Rehoboam. For why? The Lord beholding them, in the sins of their parents
imitated and unrepented of, destroies both serpent and eggs together. Let us I
say strive to be convinced in our judgments, Exodus 20. Nor for punishing the
sins of parents in their posterity.
touching Gods most just Prerogative in all these, and all other kinds: and
being settled in judgment we shall not easily stagger in our affection and
practice.

Thirdly, let us submit so far, under this Sovereignty of God, as to do Do
what lies in us to obey Gods will.
and to stoop to all his ordinances, which he propounds unto us for our
conversion. Shall God have us at so great a bay as he has, and shall we wax
careless? Or, because we are not able to do that which he requires for the
matter, shall we therefore, in a sullen and desperate humor, sit still and do
nothing? Shall we not shun any sin for conscience, which we can shun, if
hired with money? Because all is not, either in our willing or running, shall we
neither will or run? Nay more, put case we have brought upon us by our sin such
an avoidable languor and disability, that we cannot put forth our selves to the
uttermost, that common enlightening might work us: to what? Shall we therefore
do nothing which lies in our power to do? yes surely in holy awe of this
freedom of God to do with us, and our endeavors, what him lists, let us
tremble, and in all humility do the best we can: yet trusting to none of it,
loathing to be Pharisees and Pelagians, but abhorring much more to be Epicures
and malcontents: walk we in Gods way, in which he only is found, and may be
found of us: But those that disdain to hear, to pray, to take pains because
God has the bridle in his own hand, show themselves Giants rather, and such
as would be revenged upon God, then desirous to get heaven, by submitting to
his power and Sovereignty. As those lamps were fitly planted under the olive
branches to receive the oil which dropped from them by the providence of God,
so let us accommodate our selves under the dropping of the ordinances,
ascribing nothing to our selves, but all to the mere grace of the ordainer, as
Zachary there speaks, Zacha. 4 5.
not by strength or man's wisdom, but by my spirit says the Lord.

Fourthly, let it teach us tenderness and charity, toward mean ones, Be
charitable to others.
let us not affect the disdaining of the basest, simplest, vilest, (although we
ought to loath their manners) but consider thy self; if thou only exceed them
in morality, wit, and parts, tremble to think, that such silly ones and ungodly
may perhaps arise and pull heaven by violence to themselves, and thou with all
thine abilities be thrust to hell! where were then thy boasting? Ipta was
thrust out for a base excrement from the family of Gilead: Judge. 10.4. But they
were all glad to seek him for their Captain in their distress: Poor Joseph
the slave, was yet so preferred that the Sun, Moon, and stars, were feign to
do homage to him: despise not the least: free grace may make him thy better,
and make thee glad to seek to him for help and succor ere thou die: and envy
not the greatest neither; for the Lord can ingraft thee also into the same
stock, as mean as thou art, if thou can adore his sovereign mercy, which
magnifies it self, as much in the setting up of the low, as the mighty, that
they who boast, might not boast of their person or quality, but of the Lord.

Fifthly, let thy stony heart break in pieces between the hammer of his
Sovereignty, and the pillow of his long suffering and patience toward Break
thy hard heart hereby.
offer thee such means and ordinances; or should pass by the days of thine
ignorance, or suffer any seed or remainder of a tender heart to abide in thee.
I say, it is strange he should restore thee out of so many perils, diseases,
and hazards: still present thee with hope and possibility of forgetting such a
multitude of transgressions, and forgiving thy offenses. What should all this
argue, save a most bountiful abatement of extremity and rigor, and that
(notwithstanding his power, yet) his love is more prevailing with him, to spare
thee? Shall this kindness of his, leading thee to repentance, be an occasion
to forget both his sovereignty, and thine own guiltiness, and (according to
thine hard heart which cannot repent) wax stout and wilful against him, and so
heap up wrath against the day of just vengeance? Romans 2.4.
No, rather, this mixture of both, should keep thee within bounds, and put holy
thoughts of his purpose and pleasure into thee: then breed a desperate enmity
on the one side, or security on the other, (to both which thy heart is far more
propense) then to come in, give up thy weapons, and tremble at thy
wretchedness.

Lay down thy pride and rebellion.
between God, and thy soul, but let it proceed, to bring thine heart, and
whole self, under the authority of this advantage, at which God has thee.
That is, let it work exceeding humiliation, and fear of spirit in thee, and
cause thee to pull down thy peacocks feathers, and lay down thy pride,
rebellion and gainsaying heart, and be as one out of himself. As that jailor,
when the earthquake had broken the prison doors, Act. 16.27.
and loosed the prisoners; thought himself but a dead man: Act. 9.
and Paul being under the arrest of Gods might and power, lay for dead. So, the
thought of this thy woeful disadvantage under the hand of God, should cause the
jollity of thy spirit to quail, and thy bog and bold heart to be abashed,
saying, if this be thus, whence, comes my impudent, resolute purpose to go on
in my course? I see, I have not mercy at my command, nor grace pind to my
sleeve, when I can but use three or four good words at my death. Alas! I
perceive I my self am infinitely under the advantage of Justice and wrath,
both in Adam, and by my own wicked courses! Is this then (Oh my soul!) a
season of revelling, of casting care away, of adding drunkenness to thirst? Is
this a time to contest, to provoke, to increase sin by wilfulness? What? do
I think to scare God by my murmurings and cavills against him? Oh no! this is
the way to make judgment inexcusable! and hell seven times hotter then at
first! See Esaias 28.22.
Therefore lay it to heart as those in Act. 2. did, when they heard Peter show
them what pickle they were in for murdering the Lord of life. Oh! their hearts
were gored as with a swords point! So, let rottenness enter into thy bones,
tremble and say, What if the Lord should take this advantage of his to destroy
me? What if his long suffering all this while has only spared me as a vessel
of wrath, that he might with the fuller swinge, come upon me and all at once
sweep me to hell? what a taking are those men in who are at their enemies
courtesy, as having lost all they have, or condemned in as much as they are
worth, and at the mercy of their adversary, who has got an execution against
all their estate? surely he were an odd man for stoutnesse of stomach who
should stand it out and dare his enemy to ceaze upon him. Alas! Esaias 27.4.5.
what a poor wretch should he be made? So here, what rescue has the dry
stubble against the advantage of fire, if once kindled in it? Oh! if thou can
bring down thy base and sturdy heart by this meditation, how thou stand at
the mere courtesy of him, who cannot only destroy thy body, Luke 12.4.5.
but cast body and soul to hell: if this will master thy proud heart and make
thee crouch and put thy face within thy knees for confusion and sorrow, thou
have attained some part of that end which this convincement serves for.

Seventhly, yet rest not in this dejection only. Consider that the sovereignty
Sovereignty is free to save, as well as to destroy.
but sometimes to abase it, and save it. There is a sovereignty of mercy, a
free and bountiful grace as well in that God, who has thee at this advantage,
as a power to condemn. And therefore apply thy self to the beholding of those
cords which the Gospel puts in, and offers thee in this dungeon, and of that
ladder which is thrust in for thee to come up by, as to the mere implodding and
sadding thy thoughts with the likelihood of thy confusion. Consider its one
step to pardon, to lay to heart Gods advantage. For who are they who perish,
who carry a black mark of wrath about them? Surely those who either
acknowledge no such thing, live at hearts case, and elbow-roome, and come
leaping forth in their chains with Agag, or else (if they hear of it) murmur,
fret, and kick against it. 1 Samuel 15.
If then thou have escaped both, one thing remains, escape also an
unbeleeving heart: Rest not in these suburbs of hell, but behold the freedom
of mercy in the promise. And do not reach first at Election, and so fall back
and break thy neck: Election not to be first looked at, but the offer of grace.
But take this first work of humiliation in thee as an hansell of hope that
more shall follow: and as for Gods secrets, they must attend faith, not go
before it. Therefore nakedly and without further dispute, convince thy
judgment of a possibility of escaping this advantage which God has thee at.
Not by thy struggling and fighting against it (as Pharaoh against the waters
returning) but by thy meek and humble stooping under it. And know, that this
doctrine of Gods sovereignty serves to try the spirit of men, of what mettle
they are made of, and to condemn none, save the finally rebellious. Those who
cease whetting at Gods secrets (as not belonging to them) and only betake
themselves to the softly streams of Siloam: beholding with steadfast eye, Deuteronomy.
29.29.
the freedom, bottomednesse, and unchangeablenesse of the promise, have a
mark upon them of such as shall be saved, the sovereignty of Gods advantage
against the poor creature notwithstanding. Come then to the Lord and say, thou
may indeed justly damn me, yet thou may also save me: O Lord do not
destroy thy creature, let it please thee to have mercy, and desire not the
death of a poor wretch: with thee the fatherless shall find mercy, of which I
am. What boot shall it be for thee to have my blood? Oh spare a little! let me
recover my self: if thou must needs be just power thy wrath upon despisers,
but spare the penitent, and such as lie at thy feet as lost.

Eighthly, let this conviction of judgment turn thy soul to make an
adventure, and where thou see a breach made, there to lay the battery Assay
to believe.
and redemption (yea stronger) then ever the former advantage lay: calls thee
to lay hold of it strongly, in the blood and satisfaction of thy Redeemer. How
do thou find thy self affected in this case? Whether chusest thou to curse
God, and dye, or to break and pull down thy stomach, and live? judge thy
self herein acording to the rule? if ever the advantage of God drank up thy
spirit, how wentest thou to work? did thou recke thy teene upon God and
quarrel with him for his forsaking thee, or soughtst thou after a way of hope,
by Gods cutting off his own advantage in his Son? Do thou behold the Lord
Jesus lying at the stake with thy guilt, as thy surety, for whose sake the
deadly enmity of God is abated toward thee? And does this cause thee to take
more thought for thy soul, then to dispute with God? Well then, feed thine
heart with this thought; that the Lord will save some, and whom, save those
whom its provided for; even those who can believe that free mercy is as well
worth the embracing, as sovereignty is worth the fearing? and therefore
determine with themselves, rather with a trembling foot to go toward the
former, then with a blasphemous mouth to go to hell? Leave Gods secrets, and
try him in his revealed will, and way, he has professed that none who choose
life shall dye: none shall endure the disadvantage of their sin, who come to
Christ, as having discharged them from it, by bearing it for them. Choose then
to live. 1 King. 20.33.
Ahab had Benhadad at a great advantage. If his power had driven Benhadad to be
stout and desperate, there had been no remedy, but he must have dyed upon his
own sword. But he left the sharp point of his advantage, and be thought
himself that the Kings of Israel were merciful. His servants put him in hope,
that he might possibly fall into merciful hands. This drew him to give over
despair, and to choose hope, and therefore with trembling acknowledgement of
the advantage, and with ropes about their necks, he sends to this King for
release, and pardon, and sped of it. Do thou so and prosper; choose the hope,
and renounce the despair. All Gods people having two things set before them,
by the one whereof they cannot choose but perish, by the other they may possibly
escape: they being led by the spirit of hope and grace, forsake bondage,
terror, and despair, and light upon the other. And that conducts them by a
door of hope, to the Palace of pardon.

When those lepers who were shut out from all company and relief, laid
together the sad spectacle of the assured dying in the city, with the possible
(though perilous) hope of life in the camp of Aram, 2 Kings 7.3.4. Adventure
upon the promise.
what did they. They put their lives in their bosoms, they counted them no
more worth then a straw under their feet; if they save us, we shall live (say
they) if they kill us we are but dead men, better is it for us to die with
adventuring for life, then to die here in cool blood: and so they were saved.
Do thou so. Know it, there is no poor soul who was ever freed from Gods
advantage and wrath, save they who gave final free sentence against
themselves, as making full account to perish, if mercy did not save them at a
narrow and a dead lift, even a hundred to one? Have thou ever passed this
narrow adventure? Then, though (in respect of thy self) its an hundred to one
but thou perish, yet in respect of God and his promise upon which (as a sure
bottom) thou venturest, thou can not but be saved. All the difficulty is in
the adventure. Loath are men to carry their lives so loose; skin for skin, and
all they have, they will give for life. Job 1.
But they whom God has brought to be at his uttermost advantage, will give
over all their own props, hopes, helps, duties, devotions, and performances,
and carry their lives in their bosom, if they perish by venturing upon the
promise, they perish: but to be sure by not believing they must perish: He that
is brought to this point, may say truly, if I had not perished, I had perished
indeed, my perishing was my happiness: In thus doing, thou have hope, but
otherwise none.

Ninthly, yet so venture thy self as a forlorn wretch upon the Lord, Venture
not at hap-hazard, but upon a sure stay.
David, whereof nothing can defeat thee. Esaias 5 5.3.
Unbeleefe may hold thee some while at the staves end, but such a one as thou
art called to know, that thy fears are taken away, and turned to an hope which
shall not be ashamed. Take no thought for the advantage which Justice had thee
at: the Lord will see to that, and has seen already to it, in casting it upon
his son. If thou object, Esaias 53.
The Lord has laid this penalty upon one whom he loved more dearly then ever
he hated thy sin: fear not therefore but he is appeased. If thou can
humbly come in and plead it for thy self, thou art one upon whom the Lord will
not serve himself, by condemning thee; having already in the flesh of his own
Son served himself to the uttermost, that thou might go free. Now the
Lord has ceased his plea, and turned it to a desire, that thou would be
reconciled, which if thou art content to be, its no rash venture, but its a
taking hold upon his strength to make peace: and thou shall have peace. Esaias
27.5.
If thou will not esteem of this strength of offered reconciliation already
wrought for thee without thy cost to be far more precious, then the former
advantage of wrath is terrible: Thou shall be found to ascribe more to the
guilt of a finite creature, then to the satisfaction of an infinite God, and
the offer of an infinite reconciliation. Come in then and lay hold upon this
refuge with strong consolation: Heb. 5. end.
Take no more thought what becomes of the plea of justice, then the Lord
himself does: if he will have free mercy rejoice above sovereign justice, why
then should thou shrug at it? and why should thou grudge thy self that which
God can beteamed thee and so destroy thy self, rather then set thy seal to
his offer to be happy? True it is, thou have been so soaked under the former
anguish of the Lords justice and advantage, that thou can not so easily
forget it, and the news of this mercy seems an incredible thing unto thee:
but remember that the Lord is willing thou out-grow thy fears by degres:
though it be not suddenly done, yet be not sullen and wilful, and time shall
work it: mercy shall in time subdue thy suspicious heart: Incline only; have a
coming soul to this offer, and the Lord who suffered thee long in thy
rebellions, Esaias 55.4.
shall much more be patient toward thee in thy timorous and weak approaches
toward his grace; he shall spare thee as a father spares his child that fears
him; Psalm. 103.
and thy smoking flax shall not be put out, nor thy bruised reed be broken,
through thy conflict with the drudgery of thy distrustful heart: Ma^t. 12.
Reach only at this strength, as able to save thee, and as belonging to thee,
and nothing shall come between cup and lip to defeat thee: Death it self
shall but hasten the promise for thee: when the fruit is come to the birth,
this strength of the promise shall bring it forth. Wait thou quietly, and be
doing good, and thy judgment shall break out into victory: Whatsoever thy
weak beginnings were, thy increases shall be great: Believe it and rest thy
self, for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it. Job. 8.7.


Faith is the greatest glory, that the soul can yield to God.
but glorify him, above whatsoever else thou can do for him. Its his scope
to shut thee up under this sovereignty of his justice, and show thee his
uttermost advantage: that he may try thee whether the sense thereof will draw
thee to his ends or no: That is, when thou hear of a free grace above and
beyond this justice, purchased by his dear Son: that they who believe it,
may glorify all his whole excellent union of Attributes in one, and confess
him to be most just, wise, powerful, and gracious, in his way of redemption,
above the grace of creation: I say, he does try thee whether thou will give
him that excellent glory which he has sought to himself by occasion of thy
ruin. If thine heart then can freely beteame him this glory, and more fully
empty it self in the glorifying of him, then in thy own escaping the former
advantage: know it, thou shall honor him above all other honor, in thy
believing. And by thy distrust, and sealing up thy heart under the darkness,
bondage and fear of thy former guilt, (whatsoever Satan and unbeleefe tell
thee) sure it is thou go the next way to cross God of his purposed
intention to glorify himself marveilously in thy pardon and salvation. 2 Thessalonians. 1.8.
And therefore instead of his being admired in thee because thou beleevest: he
justly will be admired in thy double vengeance, because it was not enough for
thee once to sin in Adam, but thou addest drunkenness to thirst, in denying
that grace which would have taken occasion by thy sin, to settle an infinite
glory upon himself, and far better estate upon thee, then Adams innocence could
have done. And so much for this second use of exhortation.

Secondly, this point should be humiliation to all sorts, because the
Humliation to all sorts in respect of Gods having us at so infinite advantage.
Although he have released the maine advantage, by forgiving us: yet, so long
as sin, and this body of death abides, so long all the penalties abide,
incident to our nature: our Lord Jesus himself all the days of his abasement
and flesh endured them, and we much more must stoop under them, that we might
be conformed to his sufferings. How should it pull down our carnal
presumption and jollity to consider, that even while we are hearing the word,
the Lord might stop our breath, (as the breath of one almost, was while this
point was in handling, being a sleep at the sermon) which of us stand not at
Gods courtesy for somewhat which others are deprived of. How is our frail life
on the sudden, intercepted? how many are choked with their meat, nay have bin
choked with a Fly, or a raison stone? how many make their beds their graves? in
the midst of their feasting, their mirth, talk, and company, arrested with the
stroke of Gods hand? how many have made their feasting cheer, to be the cheer
for their funeral? how many are slain by the high way by the fall of their
horse? others have their eye lasht out by a twig in their travail? Absolon is
snatched up, by his long head locks, by a shrag of an oak; when we are secure
of our children, lo one is scald with water, another drowned in it, another
burnt with fire, other come to other sad casualties: All to teach us to humble
our souls each day before God, and confess the many just advantages he has
us at; us I say and ours, and that, salvation is from the Lord: we take it for
granted, if we have tilled our grounds, we shall have a sowing season at our
pleasure, if we have sown our seed, and waited our time we shall have our
crop, and if we have carried it into our barn, we shall thresh and eat of our
travail: and so (ordinarily) we do, through mercy: yet we are still at Gods
advantage in all, by wet, by drought, by fire, and vermin, and an hundred
ways, all to teach us, God is not so tied to us, or to the means and
husbandry we use, God is not tied to us in outward protection always.
no nor to his promise neither, but that our presumption, infidelity and
unthankefulnesse may provok^ him to use his prerogative, and to destroy all:
that so we may walk with more awe and fear before this our God who is a
consuming fire: and teach us daily and nightly, to shut up our selves and ours
in the Arc of his protection: to arise up, to dress our selves, to eat, to
work, Deuteronomy. 33.11.
to walk, to converse, to lie down, with an humble, thankful heart, neither
as slaves, nor yet as presumers, but as those whom the Lord has at a
perpetual advantage, and may use it if he will, and if he should say (as he
might better say it, 1 King. 20.1.3.
then that boasting Benhadad did) All thy wives, children are m ne, all thy
gold and silver is mine, thy treasures also and all thy wealth is mine: yea, if
he should lay his hand upon all or any (as which of them is not subject to
casualty?) thy mends were in thine own hands. Oh! with how narrow an eye and
foot, and how soberly would we use each blessing if we were bound in a statute
to a creditor, to surrender all at an hours warning, and stood at his courtesy
for the bread we eat? Would we then take our fill, or the uttermost liberty of
our commodities? Even so let us walk humbly before God who is our Sovereign,
and has our lives, wealth, and persons at command, in a moment to surprise us.
Let us daily take all as lent us from his hand, let us use all humbly and
purely as if we used them not, let us count out selves daily to be in jeopardy,
and bid adieu daily to all comforts here below, yea life it self. As an holy
man being asked over night, whether he would go to such a place to morrow, or
no; answered, I thank God, Note.
I have known no morrow these twenty years. A sign, with what an humble,
sober heart he used life it self, and much more all inferior comforts, whose
tenant at will he confessed himself to be, and with what an heart he commended
his spirit into the hands of him that gave it, as often as he lay down to his
rest. And sure it is the little acknowledging of this Sovereignty and salvation
of God, is the cause why many of us are compelled to learn it, by sad
experience, who else might enjoy it with more freedom.

Gods not being tied to us in grace, urges Prayer for daily assisting grace as
very necessary.
The like I might speak touching Gods spiritual safeguard of our souls, and
the salvation of his Church. The Lord is not absolutely tied to us in these
respects. We should humble our souls for these also, and say, thou can
(Lord) if thou will, vouchafe me such a measure of comfort by believing, peace
in my conscience, admiration at thy love, burning zeal for thy glory,
compassion and brokennesse of heart for my breaches of covenant and daily
failings: Thou have the key of the womb, of heaven, of the deepes, the grave,
and of mine heart: Lord the restraints or enlargements thereof are from thee:
Thou have promised, thy grace shall be sufficient: 2 Cor. 12.7. Esai. 63.13.
but my wretched, proud, defiled soul may provoke thee to shrink in thy
graces, thy rolling of bowels and opennesse of spirit: But yet thou art the
sovereign Lord of thine own good things, thou can if thou will, remoove my
tickling heart after the world, mine envy, pride, hypocrisy: Thou can (if
thou will) purge out my sloth, deadness, hardness of heart, security,
unthankefulnesse, and the like! Oh Lord these cause me to walk sadly, and to
groan daily for ease! Oh that thy good pleasure were to perfect thy first
grace, with this second assistance and efficacy, and to cast in all those
promises to the first, which concern mortification and a new creature. Oh that
I might not provoke thee by my wilfulness and unbelief to restrain the
influence of heaven from me, and to make thy clouds as brass, and mine heart
as iron! Lord thou may in thy sovereign free grace enlarge thy self! let
not my base rebellious distempers dry up the welspring of thy promises.

God gives not account of all his matters.
And to conclude, the Lord is a sovereign God also in respect of his
administration of his whole militant Church. Although she be his spouse, and
has a right to all his goodness: yet God gives not an account of all his
matters, nay oftentimes, she incurres a praemunire with God, and by her former,
lazy, Laodicean temper of a fulsome, careless, surfeted spirit, deserves that
the Lord should use his sovereignty and prerogative of discipline over her, for
her correction and amendment. Therefore although he take not his loving
kindness from her yet, Sins of the Church, the cause of Gods hiding himself.
her Lethargy and Palsy frame, her weariness and contempt of his ordinances
and their power, may cause him to chasten her with the rods of men. Now we are
(in such cases of wanting the means, of injury and violence of times,
encroaching of enemies, inundation of errors and profaneness, and decay of
love and zeal in the better sort) very prone to tax Gods wisdom, and call
him to our bar, as if we would teach him more wisdom. See Jer. 12.1.2.
But alas! the Lord is a sovereign God, and knows what physic our maladies
require, he knows our rust will not be filed off without much rubbing and
scowring: He looks at the general ends of his providence, which are to punish
severely, the declensions and revolts of such as profess his Name: let us not
wonder that our prayers stick in their ascent, and prevail little: we look
still at means and ordinances, to be still as we have been, but the Lord
looks at the melting and purging out our dross, and trying us whether we be
reprobate silver or no. In this case, what shall we do? call for our prayers
back again, and give the Lord over? No surely: let us know we can go no
whither to speed better, if we leave him: but confess his sovereign power
might force him to a decree against us: and lie low, licking the dust of his
feet, John 6.68. 2 King. 23.2.3. etc. Jer. 45.5. Psalm. 119. Mica 7.9.
with Iosia and his people, striving as much against the stream as we can, and
craving our own lives may be given us as a prey, if we can speed for no more;
but however, not forsaking our covenant nor giving him over, through a sullen
discontented heart, till either he plead our cause and bring forth our light,
or else make our poor lives tolerable in the midst of our sorrows, and teach
us wisely and faithfully to serve our time. So much for the second Use.

Thirdly, this doctrine is confutation and reproof of the enemies of
Confutation of all Cavellers against the Sovereignty of God.
all such as take away the ground of this sovereignty of God. For if it be so
as many dream, that man is only in a dark dungeon, yet still has his eyes in
his head, to see and apprehend light if it be offered: and a liberty of will by
Romans 9.
Thirdly, it reproves our carnal vanity, who in our thoughts will be bold
Matthew. 8.
as those Jews spoke of that Ruler, that he deserved he should do him the
favor of healing: so these think it were but reasonable that God should grant
mercy, to such a towardly and zealous child, or novice. But as that Ruler
hearing of their words to Christ, came himself and abased himself, cast off
his merit, and his building of a Synagogue, professing himself unworthy under
whose roof Christ should come, and so prevailed: so must thou deal with the
sovereignty of mercy, if ever it be thine. No, no, not the appearances of man
can bind the Lord, but his free love must overrule him. The most poor,
despised, impotent, and silly wench among all thy brood may speed of mercy,
when the bravest, wittiest, and hopefullest of the^ goes without. Look at none,
despise none by the outward semblance: Grace is free: who knows but thou may
be an instrument of sovereignty, to breed some savor of mercy, even in that
wife of thine, which has long been most averse in spirit, in that poor
drudge of the kitchen, who has come last to prayers, that child, which of all
the rest seems of least capacity? its not the easiness of our heart to
accept, nor the rebellion thereof to refuse, but the invinciblenesse of the
Lords soul, who cannot be pulled from his Elect, and the efficacy of grace,
and powerful mercy, which carries the will of the creature before it (not by
compelling or necessitating of it) but by a sweet persuasion and drawing it by
his own cords to believe it: making it of nilling, willing, and of
willingable, and effectual to embrace it.

Esaias 65.1.
Is God tied? Is he not sometime found of them that seek him not? who never
dreamt of him, but walked in their ignorance, and jolly in their lawless way?
And does he not suffer some that seek him with a Pharisaicall heart, to go
without? yea, although they seek him humbly, and painefully, does not he know
his own best season? Is thine eye evil because his is good? does he tie
himself always to one course? God courses in the drawing home of his, very
diverse.
No surely, some he inclines to the means and breeds an hope a far off,
others he holds under the means a long time in darkness: the truth is, he is
tied to no course, to no persons, seasons, means, or measures. Turn thine
impatience to humble self-denial, and adore God in his liberty: go to work
aright, and ascribe to no means, nor to thy self, but his mere good
pleasure, and this will Gods will double with the difference.
The other whereby he appoints the duties of men: The one is unknown to thee:
adore it, but snare not thy self with it: let not that forestall thy care and
diligence in use of the means appointed by the revealed will. Say not thus, if
I knew my self ordained to salvation, I would apply my self willingly to
them: but how do I know whether I belong to God, the means as God offers
them: which shall be a sign unto thee of an humble and plain heart: and
descant not upon that thou know not (a sign of a froward, rebellious
spirit.) Thou art in the dungeon: the Lord offers thee a ladder to come out,
cords and rags to hale thee up. As Ebedmelec did to Jeremy. Should Jeremy
standing in his mire, Jerem. 38.11.
have felt more will to descant upon Ebedmelecs purpose in the casting in of
rags and cords, then desire to apply himself to the way of coming out, might
he not have lain long enough there? but if God have given thee the heart of
Jeremy, to tremble at the dungeon: thou will not find leisure to quarrel with
Ebedmelec, what his meaning is unto thee, but simply judge his meaning by his
act, his love by his cords: and say, thou may leave me here still with my
cords upon my shoulders, but it seems not so by thy offer, for then thou
might have spared this labor. Therefore, I obey thy charge, and trust thee
for drawing me up, who gave me thy cords! and when I am drawn out, then will
I say, now I know thy good will by the effect thereof. Do so in this case, and
prosper. And so much for this second general, arising from the whole context.
And also for this time. Let us pray, etc.

THE SECOND LECTVRE UPON THE NINTH VERSE.
9 So Naaman came with his horses and charets, and stood before the door of
Elisha.

10 And Elisha sent a messenger, etc.


WE come now (beloved) more closely to the words themselves: Entrance upon the
ninth verse.
and begin with this ninth verse (as an introduction to the points following to
the twentieth) although it contain none of the five generals which I intend
chiefly to dwell upon, yet it is the key to unlocke the door of entrance upon
all: It contains the immediate occasion of the miraculous cure and conversion
of Naaman: Containing the Antecedents of the cure of Naaman.
and of those antecedent passages which lead unto it; both the message of
Elisha and Naamans entertaining thereof, of which after. But for this ninth
verse, sithence it has in it some maine points of doctrine, which depend upon
the connection of former verses, we must open them first, as all points gathered
out of historical dependence, require the annalyse of the story before going.
Thus then briefly the story leads us to this verse. First, The Analyze of the
whole History from the first verse.
it presents to us a noble man ( Naaman by name) Earl Marshall to the King of
Aram, a man of great valor and courage for war, and of as great acceptance
and esteem with his Lord, (being his chief favorite, upon whom the King
leaned:) yet a leper, and as much held under with his filthy noisome malady, as
set up by his dignity. And surely if we had not some sour sauce to our sweet
meat we should surfeit? if all were according Naaman the news of a recovery.
For whereas in some former skirmishes, the Aramites had taken prisoners of the
Israelites, and among the rest, a young Damsel; lo, it was her lot to be
taken into the service of Naamans wife. The maid (whether our of a better
observation of Elisha, then ordinary, and remembering what worthy acts she had
heard of him: or whether out of a desire to win favor at the hands of her
Mistrisse) seeing how the case stood with her Master, and perceiving well how
welcome an addition the cure of his leprosy would prove, to all his other
happiness; calls to mind the Prophet Elisha, telling her Mistrisse that if
her Master were but with him, he would soon heal him of it. A special and
first handsell of providence, swaying her to be the first happy moover in this
Naamans inquisitivenesse and restlessenesse, Prove. 18.1.2.
upon the hearsay: For a man's desire he will soon separate himself. So does
he: lets all matters lie by, and seeks out immediately how to compass his
purpose: and in the first place, using the interest he had with his master the
King, to write letters in his behalf, to the King of Israel (who now was the
vassal of Aram, and therefore at his command to do what he could, to content
him) he obtained his desire. The sum whereof comes to this, that although no
letters were directed in special to Elisha: yet because it was supposed that
there was no subject of Iehorams, who might not quickly be at call to serve his
turn in the working of the cure: therefore (as it became a King) he writes to
the King of Israel, to see the business dispatched.

Naaman: a greater difficulty affronts his hopes then he feared, to cross him
in his cure. For, the stupid King of Israel, (having small intercourse, and
less interest in the Prophet of God) mistakes the letter, and the scope of it,
and construes it to a sinister sense, viz. that a quarrel was picked with him,
he rends his clothes, and asks am I God to heal lepers? which doubtless, he
had not said, if his thoughts had bin upon the Prophets miraculous assistance
two chapters before, 2 King. 3.5.6.
when he was in a distress, for lack of water. Naaman thus far within the
Element of mercy and cure) does not fail, but puts in life to the business:
and checks the senseless King by a messenger sent from Elisha; who upbraiding
him for his sottish ignorance, prompts him with that truth which corrects
Naamans mistake, saying: although thou can not heal him thy self, yet be it
known to thee, Israel has a God who has a Prophet, even Elisha by name, to
whom if thou send this man, he will heal him of his leprosy. Upon this
message the text tells us, that Naaman forsaking the King (who could do him no
good) comes now (full of courage and good hopes) that although he had
miscarried hitherto, yet now, at last, he should without any more ado, speed
of his journey. And therefore he with his horses and charets come down and
stand before the door of Elisha. Thus we see the coherence, and have the
patient standing humbly at the door of the Prophet, forgetting his state, and
being at the courtesy of the Prophet for his cure. Now for the last of these.

Two things I would commend unto you out of this verse. Two generals in this
ninth verse.
The former is, the habit and behavior of this great Prince, and favorite
Naaman, being now at the door of the Prophet. We hear of no rapping or
bounsing at his gate, such as is mentioned of Iehoram in Cap. 7. Vid. cap.
who sent a cursed messenger before him to beat down the door upon the
Prophet and Elders, (met in a holy sort before God in the judgment of famine)
and following himself, with a bloody threatening, and swearing spirit, God do
so and more, if the head of Elisha stand upon him this day: 1. General.
N^amans humble carriage.
But all humble, and lowly carriage, such as became a petitioning Patient, who
though he brought fees enough with him, yet could speed no way, save by waiting
and obeying. This behavior may seem strange in so potent a Prince at so mean
an house as the Prophets, and toward a man in show so far inferior, as a
poor old man to a Kings favorite. Surely these days would scarce affords us
such a pattern of humbleness, in great ones toward Gods Ministers. But the
reason was, Naaman had, and felt that burden and clog within, which beat off
proud thoughts: not only the honor of the Prophet, and divinenesse of the cure
awed him: but the yoke which was upon him, subdued all hautinesse, suppressed
all stomach, and pride, telling him, as the case stood, it was no season for
him to take upon him imperiously; He was now fighting a new battle, wherein not
his arms, but his patience must bear mastries. Doubtless, his great spirits
might rise, and provoke him to insolency; but still he minded his errand, aand
for the time, thought it fittest to stoop lest he should loose the maine, his
cure hoped for, this amed him and kept him low: standing with all his pompous
retinue at the poor gate of poor Elisha, waiting, and glad to wait for a
favorable answer.

The point I would urge, is this, Doctrine. Great straights are Gods season to
pull down a stout heart.
the only season of working a jolly and stout heart to crouch and creep, is,
when God has it at a bay, even to stand at his courtesy in some great straight
and extermity. It was thus with Naaman; and is thus generally, with most men
who are not of desperate madness: And, the point is general (although I shall
touch it after in a special sense by the text) and applyable both to good and
bad. A more wilful and wicked contrariety hereto, we cannot have then that of
Iehoram which I named, who thought to fight it out with God, when the famine
pinched him, and to kill the Prophet: and yet (to go no further then himself
confuting himself) when he and Iehoshaphat and a third King went against the
King of Moab, Cap. 3. and was at a straight like to perish for lack of water,
both he and the Armies: behold what a change it wrought on the sudden? For then
he seeks to the Prophet and bemones the straight in which the Army was, making
no other account, but that God might justly suffer them all to perish. And when
Elisha disdained to look at him, yet his fiery spirit held it self in, by
compulsion, from any misdemeanor. So that he must be a monster of men whom a
deep straight will not subdue and tame unto the stooping to any conditions. I
grant this may sometime prove only an act of policy, or of carnal fear, and
so cease. We read of a royal spirited Emperor Henry the fourth of Germany who
being wearied with the tyranny of sundry Popes, and of Alexander by name: was
at last by his roaring Bulls and excommunications (which in those days scared
the greatest) brought to such an exigent, that he with his Empress and their
young son, were feign to stand 3. days barefoot at the proud Popes gate: And
being after admitted to his presence, when he was urged to lie prostrate before
him, the Pope treading upon his neck, and spurning off his Crown with his
foot: although the spirit of the Emperor could have rebelled, and began to
disdain it, yet for policy sake, he was compelled to desist. Its noted in
Judges that when the Ammonites oppressed Israel: the Elders of Gilead and
brethren of Iptha (who before had thrust him out for a bastard) being in a
straight for a Captain, Judge. 10.
were compelled to go to Iptha to crave his return, and to undertake the
war; and when he cast them in the teeth with their former injurious casting
him out, yet the extremity they were in, humbled them, and kept them down so,
that they were glad to take shame to themselves, and to beg aid even of that
bastard, when they saw their welfare lay bleeding at the stake, and none fit to
help them but himself. These are but common natural instances: yet they lay
forth the point thus far, that the natural spirit of the hautiest, and most
disdainefull man toward such as himself, will abate and come down when an
exigent is upon them: And the like may be said of man toward God, when they are
laid upon his bayard, and when he has them upon the hip by any deep and
straight sore and extremity. Yea, it is true even of Gods own dear people,
already in Covenant with him: whose slavish hearts have often been compelled by
Gods Chains upon them, to forget their jollity and sensual appetite, and to
stoop to Gods power under their straights. That which I formerly spoke of the
Sovereignty of Gods Nature, I may here verify of the outward extremities which
he brings us into: Both serve to bring down the heart and to make it humble
and subject. Job was an holy man, yet such natural scurffe the Lord saw to
lurk in his spirit, that he was feign, by the loss of all his substance,
children, health of body, the enmity of his friends, the terrors upon his
soul, the admonition of Elihu, and the Lords own tawing of him by the view of
all his power, and the terror of Leviathan and Behemoth; at last to wring this
speech from him, Cap. 42. I abhor my self in dust and ashes. Hezekiah also
was a godly King, Job 42.3.
but his treasures and wealth and elbow-roome made him so fledge and jolly,
that he forgot himself, till the Lord smot him with the plague, Esaias 38.15.
put him in fear of his life, and urged him to say, I will walk all the rest
of my days softly, in the bitterness of my soul, in the midst of my house.
The Lord had him upon the hip, and then he could crouch. 1 King. 19.12.13.
Jonah 1. and 2. 1 Samuel 24.
Elija, Iona, David, and Solomon, all holy men, yet till they were frayed with
the thunder and earthquake: cast into the Whales belly, straighted between the
choice of either famine, war, or pestilence, and the like: saw not into the
frowardness, rebellion, and stoutnesse of their spirit.

But of all others, it is truest of such spirits as the Lord subdues to
himself and draws out of a cursed sinful course. Such as this pattern in
our text resembles, Naaman I mean: for although as yet he was not privy to
Gods purpose toward him in this abasing of his stout heart, yet he was (in
Gods dispensation) now in the way unto it, and by this as a step came to the
other. The prodigal (who is a true mirror in all points of a debaucht sinner
and fugitive from God) was feign to be pursued so narrowly by the hand of God,
Luke 14.15.16.
that till there was no possibility of subsistence for him any way, he never
thinks of a father, and less of return, and least of humbling himself. But
when he was brought to an absolute straight and could no longer hold out, his
great stomach and resolution never to see his father, begins to quail, and
then his father began to savor with him.

It is with the spirit of a sinful Rebel against God, as it is with a City
besieged by a strong enemy: but the City having both abundance of outworkes,
and strong forts raised up, with plenty of provision within: besides store of
brave soldiers who will spend the last drop of their heart blood, ere it be
said, they are cowards, scorn to yield their City. But when long time of
assault, the instance and unweariednesse of the besieging army, has battered
down all their forts, Simile.
murdered all their Soldiers with the Canon, beaten down their City over
their ears, houses, Temples, walls: and opened a wider breach for entrance
then they can make up again, besides the exhausting of all come and victual
within, and intercepting all succors from without: Then perhaps (when no remedy
else from foreign aid appears) they will hang out the white flag, and cry
for conditions of surrender: but before, nothing but scorn and defiance will
be admitted. Even so is it with the unregenerate soul, she pleases her self
with her false treasure, the persuasion that she is rich and full and happy,
and yet perhaps remains merely ignorant, or at least in a formal and
dangerous estate, insensible of wrath or danger: This state she finds ease in,
and when the Lord would hunt her out of it, she sits upon her Idols securely
and will not stir: The outworkes and forts of the soul against God.
She imbarkes her self in this error, by the conceit of her wealth, health,
youth, outward contents, want of crosses, credit, good success: how can God
hate her, giving her all these? if the Lord drive her out of these outworkes,
yet she runs into stronger forts, compares her self with others worse then her
self, pleads her civility, innocence of life, good parts, devotions, and
moralities: if God ferret her out of this burrow, she will annexe and apply her
self to Christ (after a fashion) for aid, and entrench her self within her
duties, tears, good affections, zealous performances, good opinion of others:
if this fort be battered, she will still betake her self to her seeming
self-denial in many things, forfeit of her will, of sundry lusts, pleasures,
bad company, and redeem self with some forfeit of self: She will not be
pulled out of her Castle of self-conceit, nor give up her counterfeit
sufficiency and treasure within, for any withour, one bird in hand is worth two
in the bush: Till at length, custom and confirmed error do so harden her,
that she will sooner part with her life, then her false happiness, or resign
up her bulwarks and City to Christ and his besieging Army.

In such a case what must the Lord do? See Deuteronomy. 29.19. The siege of God to
such a soul.
Surely either give her quite over as impregnable; and raise his siege, or else
resolve to put her to the uttermost straights that can be: Sometime by blasting
her best blessings, and with some deadly disease taking off the edge of worldly
content: making her soul to loath dainty meat, or putting a surfeit and
fulsomenesse into all which she enjoyes, that she cannot taste them: or letting
in a vein of vengeance into conscience, convincing her that all is not well,
so that nothing can comfort her, Job 33.14.15.
she is Gods enemy, an hypocrite, an unbeleever, wants the promise, lives
without God in the world, never was humbled, broken, denied her self, never
was lost nor forsaken, and therefore never was out of her own bottom, to live
in another stock and root of Christ. When the Lord mixes himself really with
crosses, with terrors, with law, or Gospel to convince the soul either of
sin, or righteousness, then she begins to feel a straight, and to be at a
loss: else she is merry: and so long as she has one ragge to cover her
filthiness, one penny in her purse, one crust to gnaw upon, one shred to hang
by, Revel. 3.18.
she will be clothed, rich, full, and complete, Christ shall never hear of
her. It must be an hard besetting with a narrow straight, which strips her, and
robbes her of her selfe-sufficiency. Therefore Elihu (Job Cap. 33.) under that
one instance of sickness; sweetly compares the state of an unregenerate person
before straights come, with the estate when they are upon him. Before (says
he) God speaks once and twice, by promises, and by blessings, but man hears
like the Adder with a deaf ear: she makes wash-way of patience, word,
conscience and all. But when the Lord afflicts both Conscience and body at
once, the one with terrors and affrightments in the night (when men should
sleep) the other with a consumption in his parts, so that his bones stick out
and clatter, his soul loathes dainty meat, his moisture is spent, and the
buriers and mourners gape for him: Then, in this straight, if an interpreter
come and declare his righteousness, and set him at liberty, he shall be
welcome: Why? Oh because God has assuaged his pride! and tamed him so, that
whereas before he was too high for any man to talk with, now being on the
rack, you may have him at any terms, and willing to come to any conditions.
Surely so it is in any other kind of straight, whereby the licentious spirit
of man is subdued and scared: while that lasts, the man is in a quite
contrary frame, to that he was in at liberty.

viz. Why the soul is best in case to deal withal under an exigent then
otherwise? I answer. First, a straight calls in and limits the spirit which
before went at large, and no compass would hold it: It brings the heart into
bounds. The sick bed is narrrow, the sick conscience is upon strict terms
with God: whereas health and security make men wild, Job 39.9.
like the Roe or wild Ass. Who shall yoke an Unicorne to the plow? But the
Lord having a man upon the hip, can make him stoop to it. The very she Ass,
when she is in her months may be a taken in a pit: Jerem. 2.14.
cannot rise and run away, she is in a straight, her big body will not suffer
her to escape. Now, whomsoever the Lord converts, he will narrow their course,
and bring them to a short so that as Paul without the law was jolly and alive,
so is this living without any bands or chains. Now, under a straight it
reflects upon it self some sad notions of fear, sin, guilt, wrath,
judgment, so that the case is much changed. Fourthly, it abases the pride of
the heart, conceit of it Elihu calls Gods hiding of our pride. Straights will
take away the bubbling and pride of a wretch, and force him to an humbleness:
yea, they will hold down the spirit to a patience and bearing long, so that
the Lord may take leisure to do that which a free heart and jolly, in sin
could not attend unto: before a Sermon of an hour long was irksome: Now with
Saul (at Damascus gates) it takes law, and says, what will thou have me to
do? Fifthly, it bores an ear into Jonas arrest: which before lay in a bed of
ease, sloth and sottish carelessness. Seventhly, it makes Naamans disease
seemed now hideous, a cure precious, all his honor and favor at home is
forgotten for the time. Tenthly, it causes the Naaman here did. And to conclude
he is now meet Naaman was not yet, because not tawed thoroughly) yet he is in
preparation to it. He is content upon any conditions to have ease, to renounce
his own money and price as Naaman, to accept it of free gift, to be as bare and
beggarly as if he had not one brass farthing: and to make his best requital,
to be only this; a free acknowledgement of the mere, naked, entire, and
superabundant bounty of love and good will in him who cured him. I say when a
man is thoroughly begirt, and put to it, the Lord works thus by it, as by this
example.

I confess, where the soul is but in half a distress, Exception. Straights
make hypocrites but to counterfeit while they are on the rack.
or in a straight without God attending it with the spirit of grace, there is
no other work effected save violent and constrained which comes to nothing;
for the soul under a pressure, is like a man on the rack, who to avoid the
pain, will say any thing, though it be a lie. But when the fear is over, then
they return to their old byas again. Examples whereof we have of all sorts,
Pharaoh by name, and the Israelites. For the former, during those ten plagues
oppressing him and his people, what promises would he not make? how did he
tremble and send for Moses, Exodus 6.7 8 9. cap.
and resolve to dismiss Israel? but no sooner was he at liberty, but he
hardened his heart worse, and would not suffer them to go. Touching the latter,
the book of Judges, is a sufficient witness: while they were under cruel
Lords who vexed them, how importunate were they, time after time to be
delivered? what humiliations did they profess, Judge 10. end with 11.1. etc.
and shows of repentance (and no doubt self meant as it spoke, but the heart
being still it self, deceived it self, and mocked God) and being rid of the
straight, became worse Idolaters then before. Oh what will not the deep
deceitful heart pretend for her own ends! Simile.
They say the Fox being in a snare will gnaw off her leg to quit her self of
the peril, and go upon three legs: so the vile heart will do any thing for
the present, that so after she may enjoy her self either wholly or in part.
But if the Lord himself make the yoke of set purpose to catch a wild wretched
sinner and stop him in his course that he might turn him home: not only the
straight, but the word also shall work upon conscience, as well as the outward
man, and whatsoever the lets are, as subtilty, pride, rebellion, the Lord will
conquer and subdue them to the obedience of faith.

Explication of the point.
To open this a little, conceive it thus. It is with the spiritual man
enlightened, as with the carnal. A corrupt appetite always seeks to it self
some object of false happiness. Some compting knowledge to be an happiness,
seek that, others honor and preferment, others their ease and welfare, others
jollity and the pride of life, others reputation and name among men, others
long life and prosperity. If they attain their desires, they are pitched, as
they would be, and enjoy happiness in their attainements. But if God cross
them of their intents; as for example, if he deny the first capacity and
ability of parts to compass his aims; if he defeat another, by denying them
promotion, and preferring others; if he cross a third with the loss of
health, and perfect senses, that he tastes no pleasure in his games and
pastimes, or old age removes him for them: if a fourth be followed with the
disdain and ill opinion of the multitude: if a fifth be afflicted with
diseases, and be in peril of death: alas! what is their life worth? being
robbed of their whelps, their life is but wearisome, they are at a set,
joylesse, and out of heart. As a mizer having lost his treasure, or an
ambitious favorit out of his Princes favor, are like Nabals, their hearts dye
like a stone in them. Only by this they can help themselves, that as it was
their misery to choose such base objects; so it is their subtilty, when they are
defeated of the one, they turn to another. As if learning fail, then run to
preferment; if that fail, to ease, to pleasure, to money, or the like, and all
because the soul loathes a straight: So is it with him who is enlightened and
convinced in conscience. When once the Lord by his law or terrors, convicts a
man, that although he attain whatsoever his heart desires, yet he has gotten
but a fading Paradise, he has no more then an hel-hound may have: he has
nothing which can quiet the appetite of the soul which is immortal: I say,
when such a light comes into the soul, telling him the misery of all he has,
and the happiness of a man that has that which he wants, Christ and pardon,
grace and heaven: how can it be, but such a man lying thus convinced, must
needs be as a man stabd and slain, bereft of all his fools Paradise at once?
But if such anon hearing of a better happiness, will play the hypocrite,
dissemble a kind of religion, make himself demure and holy, precise and
zealous in the worship of God, and yet still hold his former erroneous
happiness, colored over with some devotion, destitute of any better principle
to settle upon, what is this, but to get out of his pressure by a false
indirect way, and so deprive himself of the true end of his conviction, which
is to cast out his old principle, and bottom himself upon an new? But to what
tends all this? The sum of all is, that a straight and pressure when the Lord
is the maker of it and the holder of it on: is a special means to pull down
the heart before God, and to force it to seek conditions of peace, upon Gods
own terms (be they never so difficult) and that to avoid a greater
incombrance. For why? The Lord is able by this mean not only to subdue corrupt
self by his law, but also religious self, erroneous and deluded self by his
Gospel: and so to translate the soul merely from a false bottom to a sound,
whatsoever it cost him. But where the Lord and the Spirit of the Word attends
not such straights, although in an extremity, the heart is beset and
straighted, yet afterward it will slip the collar: and in the mean time, will
use all tricks and shifts (as the poor creature hard hunted, and in danger)
to avoid the trouble, yea it will turn it self into a thousand guises and
devices, rather then leave her old trade, and cleave to a promise.

I come to the use. And first it might be instruction and admonition to such of
us, as go for the forwardest Christians. Use 1. of Instruct.
Instruction first to teach us to adore the wisdom of our God in the
administration of the times in which we live in. The word seems to have done
working upon the consciences of the most, few are gastred by the terrors
thereof, few sustained by the promises, few are sensible active watchful
walkers. I doubt not but God has his jewels in corners, his secret ones,
whose hearts and ways lie close to him, in these degenerate times. But for the
body of hearers, either to be converted or (in appearance) converted already,
strange it is what a numbe palsy, what a Laodicean temper of indifference,
ease, and self-love has covered us over: scarce one in a long time gastred
out of his neast of form or profaneness: and such as are, keep their
consciences at such loose terms, that few can discern them to be under the
Banner or authority of any Sovereign. Now what does the Lord? Surely he is
feign to lay men upon the bayard, and to afflict them with one yoke or other,
either personal or general straights. Self-love has over-growne all, that
except God stepped out of his ordinary path of speaking, to doing, and did cause
each face to wax pale, and each hand to be on the pained plat: some by
poverty, others by debt, or imprisonment, or losses, or reproach, or pursuit
of enemies, malicious tongues, unreasonable men, desperate unfaithfulness,
treachery and injuriousnesse of such as they live with: Sure it is, the word
would work but little upon us. Even the wise Virgins are all fallen asleep,
with the rest. Matthew. 25.
How should the Lord search us, what conscience, truth and sincerity lies at
the bottom? Surely now, if ever, we should rouse our selves and say, the
Philistines are upon thee Samson, Judges 16.22. When the power and pureness of
worship, when the substance and matter of religion grows questioned, when men
teach, profess and walk so, as if any profession would serve their turn:
yea, many such as have seemed most zealous, sincere, and faithful, wax cold,
maintainers of disorder in their places, live in contention and jealousy with
the best, pluck in their former horns of forwardness: others play the
Time-servers and leave God to shift for himself, saying, now see to thine own
house David: Is it not time for the Lord to come with his sharp trial among
us to search what is in us? To gaster the consciences of some who were never
awakened, by some outward straights; hardness to live, banqueruptnesse and
ruin of estate, beggary and misery: others by searching trialls and
extremities, that either they must carry their lives and states, gifts and
hopes in their bosoms ready to let out, or else they must prostitute their
consciences to sin and treachery? yes surely: or else he knows (if we might
be let alone) we would grow to the formality, softness, security, commons and
fulsomenesse of others who have no spark of grace in them. But now perhaps
being searched to the quick, and put to it, we dare not for shame lay our names
at the stake of perpetual reproach, by giving God quite over: now perhaps, we
will shake our selves and say, shall such an one as I betray God? shall I
pollute his worship? shall I defile that truth which I have received incorrupt
from others? shall I help to destroy Gods law, deface the power of goodness?
sort my self with such as are enemies, separate my self from my brethren? No
sure: I wish I had looked to it sooner; yet better late then never: At last I
will give witness to God to his truth, honor, servants, Sabbaths: I will no
longer give aim to the religion of these times, their saplesse, dead and
powerless profession: my soul loathes it: I long to reprove and confute all
Popish, Pelagian, superstitious, and formal religion: and therefore let parts,
let ease, let liberty, preferment, honor, gifts, outward prosperity go where
they will, my darling I will not lose, I will not bite off that precious stone
(for which I am hunted) and cast it to the hounds, to save my life: But I am
resolved (through mercy) to my uttermost to justify the power of truth, both
in my judgment and practice. Oh it is the wisdom of God to send such
straights and snares among us, for the discovery of hypocrites and base
counterfeits! and for the exercise of that secret grace in his own which else
through ease and self-love would rust and cankerfret.

Admonition. Lay to heart the little humiliation of the land under public
straights.
I will more sparily touch foreign nations and Churches, French, Dutch, or
other: yet let it not pass us without notice, that after all these
hurliburlies and havocks of war, of persecution, of famines, pestilences, and
such miseries (as scarce in any age have been heard of) the hearts of those
nations remain still as secure, profane, contemptuous of God, blasphemous,
drunken, contentious (yea in the midst of their late victories) so regardlesse
of Gods honor, either in abandoning Papists and Popery, or in settling power and
purity of worship, but still as desperate, the Ministry as saplesse, and the
people as fruitless as ever! Oh how just were it with God for these evils, to
turn the wheel back! and to suffer Papists and heresy to encroach again,
and make their second bondage as much deeper then the former, as the loins are
greater then the little fingers, yea as their latter evils and abuse of Gods
providence have exceeded the former! But to leave them and come to our selves,
how do we at home generally bear off all Gods straights and pressures with
head and shoulders? No man laying to heart any thing: but as Esaias 64. says, No
man seeks after the Lord, nor stirs up himself to lay hold upon him: All
lick themselves whole with false tongues, every man taking thought how to save
one, Esaias 64.6.7.
none understanding the Lord in his way, what he should mean by his wasting us
by plagues, consuming our people with poverty, destroying our fowls with
cleanness of teeth, depriving us of the lives and labors, and worthy services
of so many Ministers, Nobles, Warriors, good Governors, and Christian
professors of his truth; few consider the scope of God in these differences
that are between Prince and Subject, Subject and Subject: Complaints are in all
men's mouths, sorrows upon all states: But whereas the Lords scope is hereby
rather to unite all the Nation against the common adversary, to draw all to an
holy consent in seeking mercy for the Church, and agreement between divided
parties, that by a general humiliation, and preparing to meet the Lord, we
might prevent ruin: Alas! when was there more pouring out of our hearts to
sensuality, ease, Sabbath-breaking, lusts, excess of pleasures, riot, gaming,
and stretching of our selves upon beds of Ivory, that the clamours of the
oppressed, the afflicted people of God might not be taken to heart, or
regarded? Who considers how the hearts of the fathers have been estranged from
the children, Malac. 4.
and the childrens from them? who trembles at it, and fears lest by a common
enemy the Lord should smite the earth with cursing? who has humbled his soul
under our moth-eatings, and seeks to prevent the Lions tearing of us in
pieces? But all of us abhor to acknowledge any pressures, please our selves
with such contents as we enjoy in private, that we might oppress sense and
conscience: He that could bring us news of all well, hopes of good, welfare
and prosperity, should be a welcome man to us: but as for sadder times, to
search the sound from the hollow, we are loath to hear of them, because we
are loath to prepare for them. The effects of those things cannot please us,
the causes whereof we are loath to bestow the cost to remove. In the mean time
how is the Lord frustrate of his expectation? for, he pinches and yokes us,
that he might hear of us, that our beloved, precious lusts might be divorced
from us. We pray and fast, but the Lord tells us, we cannot speed, because we
still keep a breadth in his narrow, Esaias 58.5.6.
and in our afflictions are light-hearted: our hearts are not broke enough, our
special lusts we have pleasure in, when heaven is falling upon our heads: we
can believe nothing ere we feel it, lest it should cost us labor to cast it
out. Our Babylonish garment, secret plague of heart, precious sin, we dare
nourish in the midst of all terrors and crosses thundering about us. So mad we
are, that we cry peace in the midst of ill tidings, ruins of other Churches,
troubles in our own, dearth, unseasonable weather, losses of our estate, and
evils both suffered and feared. Surely God has us down now: Joel 2.12.
common stuff will not serve us.

I might speak as much of our abusing of personal streights. The like
complaint in respect of personal pressures.
How many of us are privy in our places and dwellings to sundry who in the
extremities of horror, and guilt of conscience upon their sick beds, have sent
for the Minister (whom they have scorned before) and there vomited up all their
gorge, accused and condemned themselves for their pride, malice, drunkenness,
contempt of religion? have shed salt tears in abundance, wrung the Minister by
the hands, cried him mercy for all wrongs, covenanted and taken witness (if
they lived) they would be new men? They have been near to death, and had
reconciliation offered them: But no sooner has the hiew and cry been over, but
they have returned to their vomit, their bowing like Bull-rushes has turned to
stand bolt upright, and they have grown more base and wicked after, 1 King
13.6.7
then before, As Jeroboam while his dried hand lasted, was tame and penitent:
but when restored, fell to his Idols double and treble? What? was there not
such a deep pressure upon them, as spent and consumed their flesh and marrow,
and brought them to the graves brinke? Yes. But yet it was not deep enough, it
pierced not to the inner man, the heart was the old one still: (so that we
Ministers had not need to be over confident of them:) for if that had been
pierced, then the thoughts of their heart, the affections and lusts had been
galled and purged. As the Philosopher being beaten with Clubs, Men not to be
trusted on their sick beds.
said: You beat my Tun (meaning his skin and flesh) but you beat not me: so may
these say to God, Thou layest me upon my bed, breakest my bones, take away my
stomach, abasest and humblest my flesh, and terrifiest my sense; but my heart
is whole, my stoutnesse, unbelief, hollownesse and profaneness remain, my
soul was never flayted! who would ever have thought it? Surely if the Lord then
mean thee good, he must put more drammes and drugges into the Physic, else
they will never work. Note.
Take heed: Jeroboam had a command first, that he broke; then a Prophet, him
he scorned; then a threat, that he out-grew, and at last was left so hardened,
that means ceased, because God meant to destroy him. Beware this be not your
lot.

Wonder not that men so little joy in hearing of streights.
either general or personal. Surely they see that they are searching,
humbling, taming things, sent to pull the heart low, and lay it open before
God: this they fly from, as Moses from a serpent: therefore, as Pharaoh by his
Sorcerers, and Jeroboam by the death of the Prophet, hardened themselves against
the streights that befell them; so do these, with foolhardy courage, fly
against the returning waters, lest they should be stopped in their course. All
the wits that men have, are (mostly) spent upon these two objects, either
dispensing with the strictness of commands: Or when judgments come, avoiding
the dint and pressure of them. Men's shifts against their streights.
Men shuffle them off thus: either they concern not themselves, or they befell
by chance, or may be bought off with money, or shunned by policy, or worn out
with time, or lessened by comparison: But to take note thereof, to lay sin to
heart, and repent of it, they are utterly opposite to it. David was not more
resolved to lie in his filth, and when Vriahs death was told him, 1 Samuel 13.
he did not more equivocate with his conscience, (saying, Tush, the sword
kills all sorts, what is his death to me?) then these profess to go on
blind-folded with sweet enchantments, or fool hardily with rebellion; and, to
give no way at all to divine yokes, and pressures to pinch them. What argues
this, but a desperate heart to fight it out with God, 1 King 7. end.
with him that said, This comes from the Lord? shall I attend him any longer?
Such a cursed hard heart does but keep all to the last, heaping up wrath, and
when long-suffering has spent it self in pulling them to repentance, then
shall they be left to conflict nakedly with hell and vengeance, till it carry
them away quick, and there be none to deliver! Oh! be admonished, take note in
season, rather, of Gods meaning, and fight not against God? What? do ye
think that God hampers you either by word, or works, to destroy you? If his
meaning were so, he could do it without warning. And as for shifting off Gods
yokes, be sure of it, there is no counsel against him; if you balke him one
way, he can match you ten ways. Better stoop betimes, No r^sisting of God. 1.
2 King. 16.
and come in freely: for he can make thy whole life a pressure, fill thee with
all adversity, as Oded says: If thou escape the Lion, the Bear shall meet
thee; if both, a Serpent out of the wall shall bite thee. There is no
struggling.

And besides, why should a straight so scare thee from God? has it no power or
use in it, to draw thee nearer God? will nothing serve thee save to hate him
(for amends) whom thou have already hurt? Is not all for thy good, if thou be
not a Bedlam? And may thou not bless God for a Little-ease, when the world
could not hold thee, nor the earth bear thee for thy wildness and
insatiablenesse in sin? Tell me, Streights cannot be well wanted.
if God had not matched thee, who could? had thou not been damned? Shall then
the remedy be worse then the disease? will thou break all chains, withs and
ropes, like Samson? cannot a prison hold thee when all is done? Oh (if not
before) yet at the last, when God has thee there, grinding like an Ass, look
up and say, I will return to my father. Or think thou that thou shall not
profit by it? Remember, it is a mark of a reprobate, not to profit by the
last medicine! Oh! there is abundant gain in a cross and straight. Believe
the doctrine, and apply thy self to it, sue to God for an heart to concur
with him in it, and thou shall find a straight to be more wholesome for thee,
then to have thy will! Heathens could say so, and art thou a Devil to deny it?
One of them (a deep observer of moralls and events) having known one to be
very licentious in life, and after coming to see him on his deathbed, writes
thus of it to his friend: Yesterday I understood (by visiting such a one) how
much better we are in sickness then in health: For, what sick man shall you
see covetuous, or libidinous, or revengefull, or contentious? So that it were
to be wished, that we were such in cool blood, and in health as in fear of
death we are forced to be. So far he. So that we shall need to consult
with no Scripture for the matter: But if we do, we shall read, Lam. 3.27.
It is good for a man that he bear the yoke: and verse. 22. even in chains and
banishment, the Church confesses, The compassions of the Lord are renewed
every morning; which she did scarcely see in liberty. I need name no more.
Only, let this be noted, That it is not wise for us, so studiously to shun or
shift off streights, Shun not streights.
nor so eagerly to lay for ease and liberty to the flesh; except we would
covet sorrow, and avoid humiliation. Rather, lay together, what vantage
thousands have made thereof, both Prodigals before conversion, and Revolters
after repentance: how the pride and jollity of the one in knowing no God (as
Nebuchadnezzar and the Jailer) has been turned into meekness: and how the
carnal sensuality of the other (as David being driven away by Absalom, and
Samson in prison) has been corrected and changed to sobriety and watchfulness.

Lastly, let this exhort all who would be truly happy, to look up to God the
maker of yokes, the easer of yokes, and the sanctifier thereof, that he would
concur with them, in giving them a kindly work and issue Exhortation Look
up to God for a sanctified use of all strairs.
Alas! straits and extremities are no real substance of goodness, but only
preparatives, and accidentalls, occasioning the work. The effect of grace
rests in the pleasure of him that sends them: if, with an heart of mercy,
they shall not cease till they have left the soul under the authority of
grace: if not; they shall only make it inexcusable in the day of destruction.
Rest not then in this, (which many rest in) that they feel an awed, fearful
heart, checking and taming them, from old ventrousnesse, and sauciness against
God: This is a great change, but not the change which they must look after.
For as a Master, Not only to awe and tame us.
does as truly loath a base slave, as a saucy fellow, to be his servant,
preferring a lowly and cheerful subjection before both extremes, so does the
Lord: he loathes both the bold and the servile spirit. If Naaman had rested in
this, his crouching at the Prophets gate, under the disease he felt, he had
never been cured: and yet, even this was one step to pull down his stomach.
We see that when he was put to it in the next verse, he raged, (as base as he
seemed here.) A Lion is a Lion still, both couchant, and rampant. But if a Lion
were made a lamb, it should be a Lion no more. Religion stands in no foreign
violence, or pangs and acts of compulsion: but in inward habits and principles.
Every violent thing does but watch her time to be set at liberty: as a
prisoner to find the doors open, and to file his chain off. Why? Because he
was, where he would not be: and seeks to be where his delight is. A proud,
carnal heart, vain, and loving sensual objects, may be held from them a
time: and for the while (in some respects) think its well that its free from
the tyranny of some lusts, for the noisomeness sake: But when it can have
liberty to them, and be let out to old objects of vanity, pride, and
sensuality, it prefers it rather, because the constitution of it is naturally
so: I say therefore, rest not in such an estate. Consider how endless it is to
strive with a body of evil, by a few pangs of actual distaste, and violent
restraint? Think with thy self, how little thou have prevailed by all this
course, and that it will be a work ever to do; till the Lord bind the soul to
her good behavior, by putting goodness into it, and causing it to behave it
self well: it is but as the damming up of a violent stream, which will have
her course. Be not too much dismayed at the thought of a new change of thine
heart: its at the first, a sad object to the carnal heart; but the sweetness
of it, at last, makes it welcome.

The Lord begins with violence, but ends in sweetness: the spirit of grace
working a principle of delight in the soul, But to work a change in the soul,
and to turn it to God. The dismal thoughts of a true change.
by a mild and softly drawing the will, freely to choose grace before
corruption, even for the good and savor which it feels therein. As it was
lately with a melancholy man upon his marriage: he was exceedingly dejected to
think, that now he had put himself into a new frame which he had not
formerly known, and lost the liberty of his single estate, brought the charge
of wife, children and family upon himself, whereof before he was free: so is it
with the corrupt part when it judges of that estate which God pulles her to.
But if God match that fear with the sweetness of union and marriage to
himself, and make his yoke easy, oh then! love maintains the soul in grace
with sweet, and content. Beg then of the Lord, that thy pressure may not be
remooved, till it have left the print of mercy behind it, and brought thee, so
under graces command, that thou may wholly be the Lords. Princes arrest
their subjects, for some debts, fines, forfeits, or services due to themselves;
which being paid, the party is at his own liberty. But the Lord does not so:
he arrests not a man, to bring him upon his knees, to wring from him some
terms of homage; but to subdue the whole man, and the principle of the mind,
will and frame to himself. Concur with this end of good, and prosper. But,
if it be thus, the effects will show it: for then, Effects of change will show
it.
not only the stoutnesse of the heart and the rebellion of it are held under
by strong hand for a time; but, the subtilty thereof is truly turned to
simplicity, the ease, sloth of it, into diligence; the indifferency of it, into
earnestness, the wearisomnesse of it into restlessenesse and diligence, the
inconstancy of it into stablenesse, the acts and pangs of it into habits, and
principles, the violence, into liberty and holy delight, to submit it self
both to the way of believing, and the fruit of subjection and denial of it
self, both in legal and evangelicall respects. And so much for this doctrine,
so far as the scope of it will bear. I might enter into further matter, both
to discover the infinite tricks of a false heart, to nouzle it self in a
corrupt estate: and the trialls and ways, whereby the Lord sets such an heart
at liberty; But I foresee, that the points following, will better occasion
these things, and therefore, I only make this doctrine a preparative to them

Now I proceed to the second doctrine out of these words. Doct. Whom God means
to convert, them he first prevents by occasions, and means.
That Naaman comes and stands at the door of Elisha. And that is this, That
whomsoever the Lord intends to bring home, and convert to himself, he will
order all means most sweetly and agreeingly, to that purpose. We see, Naaman
and his retinue brought to the door of Elisha: But how? surely by the
providence of the same God, who had purposed his conversion, he is brought to
the means, to wait and expect the season of it. And all things (we see) fall
out and concur aptly, to it. First Naaman is infected with a loathsome
disease, that under the hope of curing that, he might make an errand to the
Prophet, whom he had not else visited. Secondly, a maid must be taken and the
Aramites must fight, and take her, place her with Naamans wife; the maid must
know, Passages of Gods prevention in Naamans case.
and be able to report of Elisha, to her mistrisse, Naaman must ascribe credit
to her; and all these must concur that he might hearken after Elisha.
Thirdly, letters must be eroneously sent to Iehoram, that Elisha might thereby
correct an error, and turn him to himself, which else had not bin. And
lastly, Naaman hearing of the Prophet, must forthwith repair unto him, and not
expect till Elisha tend upon him, else he had missed of his cure. All these
occurrents God most wisely orders and rules for the ends he intended: so that
the one could no more be defeated then the other; if any one had failed, the
effect might have ceased.

The like may be said of the conversion of Onesimus, Proofs of the point.
Epist. to Philem.
who had played the thief to his Master Philemon: God meant he should be
converted by Paul's Ministry. Lo, how does the Lord order the means unto it?
He does not instill falsehood and flight into him, but he orders it: He
overrules him in his journey, that he might not peake aside into this corner
or that, but go to Paul, and lighting upon him, might by some direct and
seasonable speech from him, be turned from his falsehood to God. So in the case
of Cornelius: Acts 10.
The Lord meant to settle him (being a good Proselite) in the faith of the Lord
Jesus. The instrument by whom, was Peter. How should he know of him, or where
to come by him? The Lord in a vision intimates it to Cornelius, and he sends to
Joppe to Simon. But Peter was armed with a mind to reject their errand,
because he was a Jew, and Cornelius a Gentile. True: But, immediately before
their coming, the Lord rectifies Peter, and frames him to go by a vision of
all crawling vermin in a clean sheet, which Peter was bidden to eat: and,
refusing to do so, was commanded not to esteem that unclean, which the Lord
had made clean. No sooner is Peter rectified, but they knock: and he is
prepared to go with them, comes, finds all ready, and converts Cornelius. To
conclude, thus it is with the Eunuch of Candace: He passing by that way, Acts 8.
where Philip preached, the Spirit prompts him to join himself to that
Charet. When he comes, he finds him reading in Esaias a piece of a Prophecy,
cap. 53. concerning Christ's generation: and, not knowing the sense, asks
Philip; who takes occasion thereby to open to him the whole mystery of Christ,
and convinces him of the truth, whereupon he is converted. I heap up no more
examples. Read the passages of Acts 9. Acts 9.
in Saul.

Read Esaias 10.7.
meant no other but to spoil and make wreck, yet God used him only as his rod
of vengeance. And, as he meant to scatter those ten Tribes for their horrible
idolatry: 1 King. 12.13
so he orders the whole frame of premises tending thereto: He divides the
Kingdoms of Rehoboam and Jeroboam. He suffers that snare of Division to cut
off the ten Tribes from Juda, and her worship, Temple and sacrifices: To
devise an idolatrous worship of Calves. He plagues them with a succession of 3
or 4 cursed families and their offspring, Jeroboam, Baasha, Omri, Iehu: and,
after them, left them to a most desperate government of Usurpers, Shallum and
the rest, till the whole nation was carried away into perpetual Captivity.
And, when it pleased him to redeem his Church, he also acted the spirits of
those instruments of deliverance, as, after the 70 years Captivity, 2 Chr.
36.22. Ezra 1.2. Ezra 6.6.
he stirred up the spirit of Darius, Assuerus, Cyrus, and others, to begin and
perfect his project. Nay, not only so, but, there is no act concerning the
welfare of his, but he orders it. He foreseeing the family of Jacob must (else)
perish for food, long before lays to prevent it, in the antecedents of it:
Genesis 35.5. and 25. and Genesis 45.7. Genesis 41.14.
Suffers Joseph to dream an odious dream, his brethren to sell him to
Putiphar, his wife to attempt, accuse, and imprison him, the two prisoners to
propound their dreams, and receive satisfaction, Pharao in the distress of
his spirit to hear of him in that respect, to consult with, and resolve
himself by him, to promote him to be chief in the Kingdom under him, causes
Joseph to prepare and store up corn, and so relieves Jacob and his sons. All
this whole frame he himself confesses to be from God; you (says he) intended
evil to me, but the Lord intended greater things, even to preserve the lives
of his Church. That great work of Redemption by the Lord Jesus had one main
passage in it, Luke 2.1.
That Christ must be borne at Bethlehem. Mary was now big, and dwelt at
Nazaret. But, the Lord causes Augustus Caesar, to tax all the world, and to
command all the Jews to repair to the City of their nativity and family. This
charge being exact, poor Mary must carry her big body thither: and, there
travail of Christ. Nothing could hinder. Saul must be the King, whom in wrath,
God appoints over discontented Israel: To this end, the Asses must go astray,
he must seek them, be in a strait, go to Samuel, and he warned of God, must
meet him, 1 Samuel 9.2. and 19.
there Saul receives the message, and is anointed. Now mark, the reason: If
the Lord be thus in all those events which concern his Church in the g^nerall,
and the external only, how much more shall he appear, to be active in the
most excellent part of all other, viz. his drawing home all such to himself as
belong to his Election? Surely as the act is the most eminent piece of all
other Providence, so God his activenesse, and powerful concurrence thereto,
(in swaying all premises to infer the conclusion of his Purpose) must be most
eminently seen in that above all others.

Secondly, if the effecting of the substance of their conversion whom Romans 8.
The enlightening of them by the word, the humbling, the breaking of heart, the
persuading of them to believe is from him. How much more the ordering and
preparing of circumstances, according of occasions, accidents, times, persons,
and the like, must also be ascribed to his most divine dispensation?

Thirdly, if the Lord should leave his own ends at randon, to be ordered

Fourthly, we know, the end being once set down in the mind, orders his
wisdom and providence, to fore-lay all means, which tend thereto; I mean
the conversion of the poor soul. I do not make Gods and man's intentions like,
in all points, but illustrate the one by the other. The difference between them
is large: for first, men's ends are before their enterprises, and they are
successive also, here one mean offers it self to promote their end, there
another. Not so in the Lord, who perfectly and at once (though orderly) does
both determine his ends, and contrive his means, Gods forefight and man's
differ much.
and beholds the effecting of the one in the other, necessarily and unfallibly:
Gods means never fail him in his projects, whereas man for lack of
sufficient forecast and provision, is disappointed far oftener then he
succeeds. Men may so concur to their own ends, in their preparations, as to
use sinful instruments sinfully, partaking with them in their evils: But the
Lord, although he often use sinful occasions and accidents, and instruments to
compass his ends, yet he concurres not to their sin, but only disposes
and over-ruleth it to good: As the Lord used Jeroboam and Iehu's ambitious
desires to effect the overthrow of the houses of Rehoboam and Ahab. 1 Kings 13.
Acts 9.1.
So he used the sin of Saul to be an occasion of his deeper humiliation;
Acts 2.39. Acts 18.
and the sin of the Jews, Acts 2. who murdered the Lord of life, to prick
and break their hearts the more easily by Peter's Sermon. So the Jaylors
desperateness, cruelty and rage against the Apostles, to convince him the
more, deeply convincing him afterward. So much for reasons.



Gods preventions wherein they stand, and in what particulars.

The first branch.

God overrules, diverts our intents to serve his.


That the Lord overrules, and diverts, and alters the intentions of men, that
whenas they intend one thing, he intends another, either crossing their own,
to effect his, or wrapping in theirs within his own, as most prevailing and
chief. Thus did the Lord here in Naamans case. He dreamt of nothing less then
any cure of soul: yet the Lord intends it as chief, and casts him in the
other as an overplus. Thus Paul discoursing of his conversion to Agrippa, Acts
26. Acts 26.
tells him he was going like a Pursivant with a Bouget of Letters to Damascus,
to apprehend the Saints there: But the Lord (who had separated him to a far
other end, even to be a chosen vessel of grace, and an Apostle to carry his
Name to the Gentiles) cast him down from his Palfrey, smote him to the ground,
and amazed him, till he had thoroughly subdued him under his own will and
government. Herein showing himself to be as Paul, Ephesians. 3. Epes. 3.15.
calls him, the Father of all the families of the Earth. For as the Master of
a family overrules his servants will and business; and, when he intends one
work in an ordinary course of service, his Master has some other business of
greater consequence to send him about, and so the servant is acted by his
master to forbear the one, and dispatch the other; so is it here in the great
work of salvation. Many a man uses to make an ordinary work of going to a
place where the Word is preached: he aims at business, or company, or
novelties, or perhaps cavilling at the Minister: The Lord aims at fetching him
within his net, that he may divert his purpose, and draw him to conversion.
Not only as Esaias says Cap. 65.1. The Lord is found of such as sought him not:
that is prevents the thoughts which were roving helward, worldward, and
sinward, Job 33. Esaias 65.1.
to think of matters of greater consequence, even heaven and happiness: But
(which is more) when they perhaps purposed to cross with God (as Paul did) the
Lords intents overrule man's, and turn him the way which himself intends. As
old Eli, overrules Samuels feelinesse, and says, if he call again, say,
speak, for thy servant hears.

Secondly, the Lord where he means to convert, will mightily overpower the
soul from stumbling at such discouragements, Overpowers the soul from
stumbling at discouragements.
and obstacles Naaman here had his dismaiments: yet the Lord by a secret hand
of his own, held him on, assuaged his rage, and set his servants on work,
Gal. 1.17 Act. 9
till he had effected the cure. When the Lord had Paul on the hook once, he
suffered him not to slug out the work, till he had finished it. Act. 9.

Thirdly, the Lord disposes of all outward occasions, He disposes of all
outward occasions, both remooving them which let, and framing them which help.
which lead to Peter, who was no way like to go with the servants to
Cornelius, as being an heathen: what does the Lord? works Peter's heart from
that objection, and so from unwillingnesse: nay, more, he does make the one
privy to the others want, and, as in a vision, Paul saw Ananias coming toward
him, to open his eyes, so on the other side Ananias in a vision, is informed of
Paul's praying, and waiting upon the Lord for remedy. God brings both together,
and suits the one with willingness to be helped, and the other with readiness
to help: and so, they were mutually fitted to do and receive good, each to,
and from other. So in Paul's case when he was to go to Ananias, how unwilling
was he to be the instrument of settling and satisfying him? Therefore the Lord
steps in, and remooves that let, and tells him, he is a special man for his
own use.

So oftimes when parents, friends, Minister himself are discouragements to a
poor novice; how does the Lord (foreseeing such a blur) turn the eyes of
Crocodiles, to Doves eyes, alleniate, and draw the hearts of fathers to the
children? what fair way does he open? Again, how does the Lord dispose of
such requisite circumstances as concur to the ends, without which, it could
not have been effected? Sometime by bringing a man into such a place, or Town,
where a faithful Ministry resideth, sometimes into some such family, where the
name of God is called upon faithfully, sometime preparing for a man such a
dwelling as is compassed about with good neighbors, whose example and help
may be a loadstone unto him, John 4.
as the woman of Samaria (being her self first drawn from her scoffing to
believing) drew all her kindred: So oftentimes the Lord by shaking one maine
Pillar-stone in an house, causes many little stones to rattle down after. So
many a young Scholar by a godly Tutor, many a young youth or maid by a
religious Master or Mistress, many an ignorant novice, by marrying a good wife
or husband, and, into a godly family, grows to be religious. All these are
gracious preventions. And from the same preventing mercy it is, that the Chain
and Coherence of the means, one after another, is so united and so continued
by the Lord, that whereas the breaking off of any one, might split and mar
the frame; the Lord holds all together, for the effecting thereof. As here,
except all the four premises had held, Naaman might have been easily defeated
of his issue. But the Lord suffers no one link of the chain to break.

Fourthly, the Lord most aptly and fitly accommodates all circumstances
Accommodates all circumstances fittly to the end.
age, season, person, place and other opportunities. If Naaman (being so great)
had not been made little by the condition of a leper, could he have stooped so
low as the Prophet? All are not so fit to be dealt with, by every instrument:
some, more are drawn by a still and softly voice, others by the thundering of
terror: the Lord suits meet persons to meet objects, that so the work might
go forward. Not always the same person, is apt to be wrought upon, by all
occasions: As when the mind is filled with business, all that is spoken, is
as it were spoken in a man's cast. Luke 10.40.
Martha, being cumbred with much serving, was as a full vessel, for the time,
all which had been put into her had run over: Therefore Mary, whose mind was
free and empty, was fitter to sit at Christ's feet, and profit. All places are
not alike, to all sorts: While children live under their Parents wing, at ease
and liberty, they mind nothing, that good is: perhaps, being abroad; and being
put to it, marked, and noted in their conversation and behavior, seeing that
the world is hard, and living under strict government; they begin to look
about them, and to digest those counsels, which they have long been taught.
Every age is not so capable: when years have hardened a man in his evil
course, he is far worse to be wrought upon; then in his younger time, having
less experience of evil. So that the Lord takes men in the fittest season, in
youth, and prevents the unfittest, and so for all other circumstances.

Fifthly, the Lord mercifully stops and prevents such accidents, as (if
Prevents such evils, as might hinder his ends.
Thus, the Lord prevents an ill marriage, an unapt yoke fellow, when, as yet
there was far more likelihood that way, then any other. Yet the Lord crosses
and defeats it, so that it shall not take effect: so also he stops and cuts off
some such companion by death, either friend, or husband, or wife, or the like,
whose example or counsel, might possibly have hindered the good of the other
party. 1 Samuel 25.
Abigail being freed from Nabal, was at liberty for David: and so, many a
well-minded child, overruled by a cross and peevish father or mother, when
God removes that tie, is at more liberty to enjoy the means, and to profit.
So that, the Lord when he intends any thing, does always remove out of his way
the lets which might hinder his work.

Lastly and especially, the Lord does put life, success and blessing into Puts
life and success into all occurrences.
as are offered by his providence, that they shall take effect, and leave the
impression of grace behind them. Because God meant well to the Prodigal, he
so ordered the matter, that even contraries seemed to work together for the
best. God often works by contraries. Luke 14.
If he had kept still with his father, ten to one he had been as the other
brother. But even the misery which he felt, which might have been the next way
to have made him desperate, and to have rusht himself upon vile courses, to
his ruin: or caused him to have laid violent hands upon himself: yet, by Gods
dispensation, wrought him to an utter loathing of his bad ways, and himself:
and, to an earnest desire to seek to his father for pardon. Much more then,
does the Lord bless other ways of sinners, which are less unlikely: as we
see in Naaman here, no one passage befell him, but brought him one step nearer:
and, when he had his own desire, that wrought in him such a brokennesse of
spirit, that he was thereby fitted to receive a better boon from God with more
thankfulness. So that poor blind man, Ioh. 9. John 9.
(whom Christ purposed to save) although at his first cure of blindness, he
was not converted: yet, the Lord was so effectual in his cure, so brake his
heart by that love, that when he was most bitterly reproached and
excommunicated for confessing him, yet he gave not in, nor shranke, but
convinced them with shame, and put them to silence: and, when our Savior had
him upon that advantage, he meets him again in his straight, and by a few
words, speaking to him, converted him. But these may serve.

Now for use of the point, it is manifold. First, it is terror and admonition
Terror with admonition to such as are under no prevention, but always at one
point.
who walk securely in their way, some neglecting all means, others using the
most holy and effectual means in a mere formal manner: Both of them justly
left at large by the Lord, to themselves, so that nothing works upon
conscience: But, even as the Windmill, turning in her round every way, yet
stir not out of their place: so is it with them after ten, twenty years,
they are where they were the first day, no step nearer God, but many further
off. For why? alas! they are far from acknowledging any preventing grace of
God in their course: They know no other means, but to go to Church, and
present themselves among others in the place, and so home again: As for a
providence to prevent them, to bow and sway their hearts to any tenderness and
towardliness, to see themselves drawn by God, to know themselves, to see into
their nature, to abhor it, and embrace all opportunities for their own
spiritual furtherance to salvation, they are far from it: And as they live,
so they dye: And, if the Lord at any time do scare their conscience, or move
them to any better thoughts of their ways: yet alas! they have no intimation
from God, of any mercy therein, are soon weary of them, they vanish as they
came: And, when they look back into their course past, their youth,
education, company, marriage, dwelling, Ministry, or the like, alas! they
cannot speak of any moving of heart, stopping their lewd course: still they
are in their thorough-fare, hear like blocks, are weary of good company,
shun all opportunities of good (for fear of being better) glad when they can
wash off good duties, and wind themselves out of all occasions for heaven!
Alas! poor wretches! ye shall not need put off with one hand, that mercy
which you cannot pull on with both: It must be singular grace which must
prevent you, if ever you come to good: But to go against the edge of
providence, thinking your selves happiest when ye are out of the element of
it, is fearful? Does it not sting you, that you have felt so little of Gods
prevention, in all your ways? So many of your years, time, acquaintance, not
only stirred, but converted to God since your beginning, and you still as
saplesse and senseless as ever? Does it not disquiet you to see, all is too
little for your ease, will, world, lusts and vanities? What? have ye no
sighs, nor sobs in your dreams, and upon your beds, how it shall fare with you
in the day of wrath; and that there will be bitterness in the end? 2 Samuel 2.
What (I pray you) is more miserable then to live without God in the world? And
who live so, but such as feel not one pull by the ear, one knock at the door
of your hearts; or if they do, forget and shake it off with as little savor
or regard as pigges tread upon pearls! Alas! if he who is the author of the
Scriptures, of Ministry, of Sacraments, of long-suffering, of afflictions,
has never yet cast the least seed of light, or spark of heat into you, which
should teach you to acknowledge these ordinances and administrations of his,
and to tremble at them? Are you worse then Devils?

Application of the terror by admonition.
Therefore I pray you consider of what I say; If the Lord raise not up the North
wind to blow upon your spirits, to incline and persuade them, it will be long
enough ere you of your selves stir one inch off your own ground? If he alter
not your intentions, sure it is you will intend small good to your selves: but
please your selves in your drousie, dead and senseless way, till ye go hence
and be no more. Me thinks you should rouse up your selves, and moan your selves
to the Lord, saying: Am I the only dry, barren wretch of all others, whom thy
Spirit should never blow upon? whom no mercies, crosses, or government of thine
should ever affect? I see O Lord, thy steps wheresoever they go, drop
fatness! and thy fingers drop mirrh upon the handle of the door, Cant. 5.5.
where thou knockest! But I am still a barren, desolate creature, without any
acquaintance with thee in thy ways! And for the second sort of such as have
felt the Lord coming toward them in sundry ways, and that he has not left
them without witness, but by his Word, his works, by death of wife, or
husband, or by good company, or loss of children, estate, name: many privy
and secret warnings of their conscience, has checked them, or offered them
many means of good, and drawn their hearts thereby, but they have shaken them
off as a dog does a blow on the head. That sometime in such houses and places
as they have dwelt in, sometimes in hearing some searching Sermons, or by the
offer of Christian yoke-fellowes, or by other occasions, Such as God has
prevented beware of dallying.
the Lord has solicited them earnestly to turn and repent: howbeit, it is with
them as with Israel in the wilderness, whose carcasses were scattered therein,
they have tempted him, and seen his works, but to no purpose, for the Lord is
vexed with them for their stubbornness, and their hard and rebellious hearts,
which will not know God, nor come in: Oh! beware lest this patience of God,
which should have drawn you to repentance, do not harden your hearts to utter
destruction! To both sorts, I say this, Know it, if those whom the Lord means
to save, he will be always busy about them, to accommodate all things to their
calling and conversion: what a woeful case are they in who have (all their
lives long) either seen no finger of his, in meaning them good, or else escaped
his fingers most subtly, and slily, as fast as he has pursued them?
Doubtless for ought can appear, the Lord means them no good: if they had
been sheep belonging to his fold, he would never have suffered them to err,
and lose themselves so deeply in their lusts, but he would have recalled them.
But his not suffering the breath of his spirit one whit to stir in them,
doubtless he means they shall nuzzle up themselves in a dead, senseless
estate unto perdition! Oh! what beds of ease do you lie upon, that you should
take one nights rest, two nights, till you find your selves out of this misery?

Secondly, this should teach us to adore this great God, and only wise,
Instruction. Adore the wisdom and love of God in his preventing grace. Jerem.
10.23.
clouds and the grave: but of the hearts of the sons of men: He only can
order their courses, ways and intentions, to their own greatest good, and his
glory. It is not in man to order his own way: the heart and purposes of men
are their own, but the dispositions thereof are from the Lord: as the issues,
so the preparations to life, and death, are in his hand. It is no privilege of
a Prince over his subjects, nor of a parent over his children, nor of husband
over wife: They have authority to overruled the bodies, the outward behavior
and duties of such as are under them. But for the secret over-swaying of
intentions, and turning them from their own to his way, it is only the Lords
prerogative. It is with man's intentions, as with the body of a man in a ship
who walks upon the hatches from East to West: Yet the motion of the ship being
contrary, carries the man the way of her own motion nevertheless. This should
therefore breed in us singular reverence of God, and provoke us to magnify
him, both with our praises, and with our prayers. With our praises first: By
praises.
As the Church in the Psalm having professed that she had seen goings of
God, both toward their fathers and themselves, Psalm. 68 24. Deuteronomy. 8.
in wilderness and Canaan, that he might humble and try all in their heart;
subjoynes presently, The men singers that go before, and the women singers
after, Psalm. 123.1.
and praise the Lord. If the Lord had not been on my side (should thou say)
in disposing every way for my conversion, I had never been brought home. But I
see that it was the finger of God, that when I had run my self into desperate
company, forsaken the counsel of all friends, and shaped a course to my self,
perhaps to spend my patrimony riotously: perhaps to haunt harlots and lewd
companions: or to travel beyond sea in an humor of discontent to seek my
fortunes, or to seek the world, and implod my self in the dirt and dunghill of
covetousness, or to m^^ch my self resolutely with one whom I fancied, only
for her out-sid^ ^ay^^g, Give me her, for she pleases me well: then did the
Lord provide better for me then I deserved, turn mine intentions quite off,
and divert them to serious thoughts of mine estate, prepare a good wife, a
peaceable life in marriage, good friends, good Ministry, and turn me from
the pit. I sought a good frame in a blind corner, under an Idol, the Lord
took him away, sent a better, and took me napping in my hole and brought me
home to himself. Job 33.
No good soul that has tasted these preventions of God, can be silent:
Sundry passages of preventing providence.
one praises God that living in a desolate profane corner of the Country in
the practice of drunkenness and lewdness; the Lord sent a friend by
providence to the house where he dwelt, who by his sober caniage and report of
the fruit of the Gospel in other parts, brake me off from my sinful life, bred
a zeal after God and good means: by which I was haled out of my dungeon, to
live under the Ministry in Goshen, where I was convinced by the light of
truth, and converted to God. Another comes in and says, O Lord! if I had rusht
upon such a match, lighted upon such a Ministry, I had been quite lost: thou
plantedst me better: As Psalm. 80. the Church blesses God for pulling her from
Egypt where she grew as a lilly among thorns, into a better soil. So should
we, adore Gods preventing us, accommodating and suting occasions, crossing
lets, giving strength to the means, and overruling purposes: as no doubt the
woman John 4. going to her kinsfolk, and saying, Come, see a man who has told
me all: magnified mercy, which finding her in a cursed, scornful and profane
way, stopped her, and changed her heart. Paul (to be sure did so: 1 Timothy 1.17.
having showed how God found him a persecutor, blasphemer, and wronger of
innocents: yet abounded in mercy, and called him home: Oh! he cannot wonder
enough at it, tells it out to others, and himself concludes, Now to the
immortal, invisible, olny wise God to sway all to his ends) be all honor for
ever! yea and we should never cease to call upon ours, as well as our selves to
do it: when I sent thee forth (my child) as Jacob to Laban: the Lord did order
thy journey for the best: defeated thee of that thou would, and diverted
thee to that which was far safer and better for thee! Do thou not see how
he leaves others to themselves? does not prevent them with any softness and
tenderness, provides not well, suffers them to run wild, and to tire
themselves in their own vanities! Thus good Naomi perceiving that God had
heard her prayers for poor Ruth a stranger, Ruth 3.
to rivet her into the Church and make her the mother of David's grandfather:
provokes her to wonder, saying, who art thou my daughter? And hearing her to
entitle God to the work, she confirms her to trust God for afterward.

Our prayers should succeed our praises. Genesis 24.12.
Eliezer believing the Lord to be such a wise and powerful disposer, fell to
prayer, that when Rebecca should come out to draw water for the cattle and for
himself, the Lord would prevent her with such thoughts as might promote and
succeed his enterprise. So should we, in our journeyes, travailes, attempts of
weight, changes of our estate going to the congregation, meeting good company:
beseech him that his good hand might appear in all these, and through all the
occasions of the day; for the furthering and not dismaying us in our holy
course. See Job 1. end.
Yea even for others we should earnestly beg, and say, Oh Lord! this day my
husband goes to such a Sermon: Thou know he looks at nothing save his own
ends, rests upon his smooth civil bottom, that he is no gross person: his
wordly wit, ease and pleasure are the wheels to carry him on: Oh Lord! often have
I begd mercy for him to open his heart and change him: Now prevent him Lord,
let thy Minister be in his bosom, convince him, lay some block of thine to
stop him, Ezekiel. 14.3.
remoove the stumbling block of his own iniquity: send him home more humble
then he went, though thy spirit blow never so weakly, yet let it blow, and by
little and little bring him home: Let me be no let to him, and thy work. My
unquiet heart is ready to discontent my self, (and so the husbands to the
wife) when I see matters go amiss, and so give way to passions, unkind and
unsavory words: But alas! The work is thy prevention: So for others: Lord
when I send forth my children to the University, or to service, I hope all
shall be well: They shall meet thy good hand to prosper them, they shall be
brought nearer to thee in knowledge, and thou will bless studies, tutor,
company to bring them to better pass: But all is in thee, I have hitherto been
too confident, they have miscarried, and stumbled at base examples: Lord, now
at last prevent them for good, Genesis 43.13.14.
and lay such hold upon them, that they may not slip. Jacob sending his son
Benjamin to Egypt (little thinking what God intended) yet entreated God to
bless them, and to send his Angel before them: and to give them favor in the
sight of the man. The Lord heard him in that, and added a further blessing: for
he so hampered them by Joseph's wise austerity and policy, that their conscience
began to check them for their selling him: and so by degrees, their sin
coming to light, they could cry out, God had found them all out in their
baseness: Some of them incestuous as Reuben and Judah, others murderers, as
Simon and Levi: and the rest like them: Cap. 45.
but in likelihood this became the first step to their reclaiming. Oh! so
should we beg, Lord we send them out into the wide world, or, we are to go to
our long home and leave them behind, among Lions, Bears, and Wolves and
Foxes. Lord let them find favor with thy Majesty, let thy good hand go but
with them: All pray for wealth and prosperity for their children: Psalm. 4.6.7.
But Lord show them thy countenance, and that they are of thine Elect, and
therefore within thy Covenant, wheresoever they become, prevent them with
grace, let thy Ministers and people love them, let all turn to their good,
their services, their dwellings, tradings, marriages, Ministry: and let them
see that none can find out any thing after thee, that thou art in all, because
things could not have any way framed better for them, then they shall find.
Stop all lets, and crossings either from within, their proud vain hearts; or
from without, Satan his subtilty, and the baits or snares of this world!

Add so both these: It should breed humiliation in our hearts.
It should hold us in an holy awe and reverence of God, and teach us to set his
Crown upon his head, when we see, it is not all our counsels, Ministry (be it
never so powerful) education, thought and care which can prevent our own
hearts, or the hearts of ours, or others who belong to us, with any goodness:
we may pray, and commend them to God as Isaac and Rebecca did Jacob in that sad
pilgrimage of his to Padan: The Lord it must be who must succeed him, Genesis
28.1.2.3.
who must encourage him at Luz, and set forward his journey with prospering: So
that this should abase us in all best attempts. Solomon could not (with all his
wisdom) foretell whether a fool or a wise man should inherit all his
travailes. I confess it ought to stay us from discontent, Eccle. 2.19.
if God have not heard us for our children, but suffered them to run riot, if
we have (as Job) jealously offered sacrifice for them, and commended them to
the good hand of God: but all this will not exempt us from grief when we see
them scapethrifts and unhappy ones, when we do not commend them to the word of
his grace, we may thank our selves if they thrive not: yet, in our best and
most solicitous desires, we must not rest satisfied in our endeavors, but
still humbly tremble under the power of that God, whose prerogative it is to
prevent them with mercy, to accommodate all occasions, to stop all obstacles,
and to succeed all helps for their good. Oh! the woeful ruin of thousands
who have bin children of the choysest prayers, tears, cost and care, should
teach us to lie low before the Lord in this case. Monica was so careful for
her son Augustine, that Ambrose told her, the son of such prayers could not
perish: and as it fell out, he was a true Prophet, for never had any man
greater and stranger preventions, as may easily be seen^ in that life of his
(written by his Deacon to excellent good purpose) as the lives of many other
Worthies both ancient and modern have bin, for the setting forth of the
blessed fruit of Gods preventing providence, both for the salvation of the
parties, and unspeakable good of Gods Church by the labors of such
instruments. And for this use so much.

Of Consolation.
It should comfort and Experience of former prevention should encourage us for
time to come.
that God will leave them in the midst of his work, unperfect and unfinished.
It is a woeful unthankfulness in many, who having found God gracious to them
and theirs beyond expectation, in preventing much evil, seasoning them
betimes, even in their tender years, and stopping evil: That yet they dare not
trust him forth on: especially if they perceive any staggering in themselves,
or delaying of their desires, so that God proceeds not on with them and theirs,
according to their hopes. Judge. 13.22.23.
But let them learn of a woman, Manoahs wife, to correct their folly: who
hearing her husband to fear least God would slay them: answered, no; for then
God would never have freely discovered himself to them at all, touching a Son
which should save Israel. Surely if those first free preventions, and gales of
grace were so prised, and so thankefully entertained, and observed by us; we
should not dare to give over God so easily for the finishing of his work.
Dallyance with Gods first preventions, is the cause to change his course.
But it is commonly men's dalliance with the first grace of God, and his early
preventions of us and ours, yea it is our presumption upon free mercy, as if it
were pinned to our sleeves) which causes us to wind it about our fingers, and
carry it loose about us (as a pearl in a loose pocket) and which causes the
Lord to blast us, to change his first course with us, to suffer us to wax
pearke, and saucy with him, and to venture upon such occasions, companies, and
actions, as, at first, we durst not think of: And so the Lord frowns upon us,
and changes our first motions, into cold qualmes, and loose affections, and the
base fruit of our presumption; to try whether his grace be precious or no, and
whether we will forsake our fatness and sweetness of first beginnings, to
exalt our selves, our wits, conceits, and humors: and through embracing of
lying vanities, forsake our mercy. If we do, let us know the Lord prevented
us, rather to make our destruction inexcusable, then to convert us. But if it
be otherwise, then let it appear in our extraordinary humiliation and tears,
Jonah 2.8.
repentance and recovery of our former works and affections: let not Satan
stall us in our own mire of sin, nor oppress us with distrustful bondage
and despondency of heart, to drive us to despair: let all our vanity be vain,
and all our stolen waters bitter, our pride and newfound selfe-contents
odious unto us, in comparison of former old compassions: let us be zealous, I
say, and amend: rather then harden our hearts, so far, till the print of our
first preventions, tenderness, fear, and conscience be quite worn out. This
by the way, not impertinently.

But to return; if there have been a level and even eye to walk according to
our first Grace: let us not warpe ungrounded fears out of unthankful
distrust, to think like that wretch, 2 King. 3. God has brought us to this
point to forsake us, or (as t^^y said) to slay us in the wilderness. Read Jer.
2. and we see how the Lord speaks to such as cavilled against him: Oh! (says
he) I remember the love I made toward thee in the wilderness (a barren dry
land) and the first love of thy youth, when thou were dainty to me: and still I
can beteame thee the same love, if thou were not weary of it. A sweet place.
Could God find in his heart to be so to Revolters, to Idolaters; such as had
forsaken his fountain, and dug pits to themselves; and shall he not much
more (poor soul of little faith) remember thee? Art thou of no more worth
then so? Oh! the Lord remembers his first love still, its precious to him, he
cannot forget it, and is it not so to thee? Put case his assisting and
perfecting grace seems not in thine eye so proportional at the first? May
there not be cause? Is it not to teach thee to claspe about the first, as the
Ivy about the bow to suck out juice from it to support thee? Doubt not, but
proceed: He that prevented thee first perhaps when thou soughtst him not, or
soughtst him but formally; he will not fail thee now: he will stick to thee
by his assisting grace also, uphold thee in thy zeal, means using, make the
mystery of Christ more clear and evident, draw forth real desires, and
hungers, esteems and diligence: yea he will not give thee over till he have
also finished the work of conversion and effectual calling in thee by the
work of faith: and by daily familiarising with thine heart by his promises,
create the fruit of the lips which is peace, in thee. Isaih 57.17.
Only suffer not thy self to wax lazy, loose and dallying with him, to give
him over thy self, and then lay the fault upon him: That he was very forward
to lay the foundation, but was not able to finish his building. None but
hypocrites dare bring in such verdicts; (rather slanders) upon God: Luke 14.30.
Be not thou the first.

And again, it may be consolation in a second regard to all such: to of
encouragement. Romans 5.8.
will now much more stick to them having a promise to plead. Which I speak,
because many forgetting the old mercies of God by a worldly unthankful, and
estranged heart, make that part of their lives most sad which should be
gladdest of all. And that, What to do when fear of our corruptions masters us?
by distrusting God for the mercy consequent upon their calling: They fear,
that God will never, make them masters over some special corruptions of
theirs, pride, world ease: nor increase any grace to any fullness, but only
leave them to a poor pittance; nor yet uphold them in their outward wants and
crosses of poverty or infamy, Deuteronomy. 32.13.14.
etc. by his all-sufficiencie: nor rid them out of their streights by
unreasonable men: nor recover them out of their revolts to their former
integrity of course. To whom I answer: Do ye thus require the Lord, O ye
unthankful people, scarce worth the name of people? Did the Lord give ye
brass out of the stones, and silver out of his hidden treasures, mercy when
ye looked for none, that ye should still distrust his promise? If when ye
were strangers, yet he so prevented ye to make ye children, shall he forsake
ye being now in covenant? Did he kill the old Serpent, and Leviathan, and
shall he suffer her spawne to destroy ye? Did he remove the guilt of sin from
destroying you, and shall he leave the venom of it to be a goad in your side,
and a prick in your eyes, to make your life desolate? No, not except ye
forsake the promise, looking that God should drop mercy still out of clouds,
and prevent you as at first, without any believing of yours! No: he now puts
ye to it, to work out your own salvation with fear, and having his precious
promises, 2 Cor. 7.1.2.
labor to perfect your sanctification: To take his Sword, Helmet and
Breast Plate, and fight the holy war of God against your selves, Judge. 3.2.
and all enemies, and not to look that the Egyptians should still be drowned,
while you look on. While ye were children, ye did as such: but being men,
the Lord looks his stock should grow, and be put to occupying, and that ye
should be settled and rooted therein. As for outward blessings, Esaias 25.
has God made you a feast in the mountains, and will he deny ye it in the
valleys? Luke 12.23.24
Will he so cloth the Lillies, that labor not nor spin, and shall he leave
you to shift for your selves, who (next to the kingdom) serve his providence
for a meet portion here? Matthew. 6.32.
shall he not cast in these things without sin or sorrow? Did he prevent your
souls from perdition, and shall he not prevent want from your bodies? Does he
so cloth the herb and flowers of the field, which to morrow are cast into the
Oven: and shall he not doath, feed and provide for you in this world, 2 Pet. 1.
for whom he has provided a crown hereafter (as Peter says) immortal and
not fading? To conclude, if he have overruled your intentions for his own
glory and your own salvation, should ye fear lest any Devil, or instrument
of his, should come between you and home? Say thou live in dark times, in
places where the wicked bear sway; Esaias 63.
what then? As the Church Esaias 63. cries, Thou were merciful to us of old,
Lord, what? are all thy bowels and rollings restrained Oh! deliver us still?
Thou can over-sway their intentions by the same prevention, and turn them to
the contrary aim! Their policies and devices against thee and thine, shall
not prevail: thou can scatter them thou, can avert, convert or pervert
them at thy pleasure: 1 Samuel 23.27. 2 Samuel 17.7. Gem. 31.29. Acts 9.9.
Avert them as Saul from David: pervert, as Achitophels against David: convert,
as Paul from a persecutor. They shall say as Laban to Jacob, It was in my power
to do you hurt; but the God of your Fathers appeared unto me yester night and
prevented me: Acts 12.3.
Herod, Acts 12. intended to bring out Peter to be slain after James: but the
Lord had another purpose which overthrew his, as cob-webs swept down with a
besome. In a word, if God once declared his prevention of mercy toward us, Oh!
let us not presume, yet let us honor him thus far by our experience, that
still the same God will be at work for us in our particular course, to turn
all to better then we could look for, Ruth 2. and 3.
as to poor Ruth when she went out to gleane barley, the Lord found her out
rest all her days: Oh! if once he have delighted in us, he still will rejoice
to make us objects of like mercy, so that all shall see us to be his
favorites, and long for our portion. And for this point, Sermon an Verse, thus
much. Let us pray, etc.

THE THIRD LECTVRE Upon the tenth verse.
VERSE X. And Elisha sent a Messenger unto him, saying, Go wash seven times in
Jordan; and thy flesh shall come again to thee, and thou shall be clean.

VERSE. 10. But Naaman was wroth, etc.


THIS poor Pilgrim, and patient Naaman, as ye have heard (beloved) has
stood some time at the Prophets door, denying himself, and his esteem, Entry
upon the substance of the miracle.
honor and favor with his Prince: he and his train submitting themselves, and
standing at the courtesy of God and his Prophet for his cure. And, although we
hear of no words, or suit coming from him, yet his very habit and standing,
in the deep silence of it, speaks and calls aloud for the Prophets help.
And indeed, it had been hard-hearted and unmercifull for Elisha (having himself
sent for him to his house, when he was wildred) seeing how humble his suppliant
is, to have let him to stand as a dumb pageant, without salutation. Courtesy
and morals could not have denied him that favor: and much more that Spirit
wherewith the Prophet was filled, a spirit of mildness, mercy, exorablenesse
and easiness to be entreated of a petitioner so miserable, and coming so
far for help: must needs hearken to his request. This verse therefore shows
us, what message Elisha sends him to the door. And now (at this third Sermon)
wear passed the Antecedent occasions leading us to the Contents of the Cure:
and are come to the chief substance of the story. Whereof to make a full
Analyze all at once, because it would clog the hearers memory, therefore we
think it here superfluous, only we will several the story into her
branches, opening the first of them, here in our entrance upon it, but for the
rest we will refer them to the threshold of their particular handlings, that
every thing may be more lively and better remembered. The whole story then has
these five distinct parts: The first Elisha his message sent to Naaman standing
at his gate, and full of expectation, and that in this tenth verse. The second
is Naamans entertainment and construction of it, The general heads of the
story, five.
and how it took with him, and that in the eleventh and twelfth verses. The
third general is, the Rejoinder of his poor servants upon their masters
misconstruction of the message, and that contains their loyal and serious
treaty and counsel of wiser interpretation, and for better carriage: that in
the 13. verse: The fourth is the issue and happiness of all: the sweet
conclusion of a sad entrance, and that is, that upon the overture and
intimation of his servants (or rather of grace) he changes his former
resolution to be gone, into an obedient submission to wash in Jordan. The fifth
and last, the issue of his obedience: partly immediate, that he found the
Prophet true, he was instantly cleansed, his flesh returning as a young
childs: partly remote, and consequent upon it: in his return from Jordan to
the Prophets house, and making his respective acknowledgement: in his zealous
and loving offer of recompense: in his earnest though weak devotion: in his
firm and full resolution of future closing with God: in his tender and most
sensible touch of heart for the sin which mainly pinched him: with request for
advice about it for time to come: whereto the loving answer of the Prophet is
annexed; Go in peace. These are the parts, First of the first, in this tenth
verse.

The first of the five generals. Branches of the tenth verse three.
There is no great difficulty in the words: That which is, may be resolved in
the opening of the heads of doctrine arising out of them. And they are three in
order: First, that Elisha sends a messenger, but comes not out in person to
Naaman: that concerns the manner and way of Elisha his answering. The second
concerns the matter of his answer, Go, and wash seven times in Jordan: A
message still harping upon the former string tending to vindicate all the glory
to God, by substituting of such a creature, as could steal no honor from God.
The third issues from a question, That seeing God aimed at his own glory, to
which end he would use still the creature in the cure: The answer to which is,
the Lord having bound sure enough for himself and his own glory, in so poor
a creature, and unlikely healer, as waters: does yet in a sort provide for
Naaman afterward: viz. That whereas there was implied in this charge, a
gracious promise that he should be healed, the Prophet would confirm his weak
faith in the promise and unseen power of God, by the real sign of a thing to
be seen and felt, even the waters of Jordan. This being shortly premised for
distinctnesse of the point, let us open the first of them, and the ground of
that which flows thence.

Elisha (we see) comes not himself, but sends his messenger. Why? I pray you.
The first point in this. It was not pride or stateliness in Elisha to deny
treaty with Naaman.
Was it for state, and surlinesse? No surely. That had been a very indirect
mean, to have cured pride, or self-love in Naaman: or to have drawn him out
of himself to one above himself. Popish arrogancy, and Pharisaicall pride of
Ministers, thinking to hold men at a certain distance toward their greatness,
recompenceth not, nor attaines Gods righteousness. That proud Prelate, and man
of finne, who sets up himself above all that is called God, and under a
title of the Vicarship of Christ, plays the Antichrist: who has magnified
himself hitherto, and enlarged his territoties by an outward setting up
himself with pomp in the eyes of a deluded multitude of superstitious fools:
has yet never won any honor in the souls and consciences of men, but
rather made himself to stink in men's nostrils through his intolerable
insolency. His treading upon Emperors necks, kicking off their Crowns,
Popish insolency of Clergy over Gods people intolerable.
dethroning them by excommunication, forcing them to lackey him on horseback,
and holding his stirrup: His making a real, essential difference of himself
from other Bishops and Ministers: holding then at staves end, dancing
attendance upon his haughtiness (Holiness I should say) months, weeks,
days and years, ere audience can be given: scorning the Laity as accursed.
This pride, though it have kept up his Satanicall tyranny through fear and
terror in the hearts of Idolaters; yet has made him and his doctrine, life
and manners, execrably odious. For why? it is as contrary to Christ's
humbleness, as the state of one mounted upon a Spanish Jennet, is contrary to
the meannesse of one riding on an Ass: and that by the confession even of some
of his own strain. So that, when his Messenger Augustine came here first into
England, in his name and pride, to subdue our Britany to Popish yoke: the poor
Monks of Bangor summoned to appear to his presence, beholding the base pride
of his seat, raised throne-wise above the ordinary seats of others: even by his
Masters ear-marke he was smelt and discarded as a proud usurper, and no commer
with an Apostles spirit.

Which I speak not as if I would from hence raise any doctrine from a negative
ground: No doctrines from negatives.
but lest the question should be resolved without some observation, this I
would say to our selves of the Clergy, By the way yet, some clearing of the
doubt, and an hint of instruction.
that humblenes toward our people is the truest and surest preservative of our
honor entire in their souls. State, and distance may set us up in the sense of
some ignorant ones, who rather slavishly fear us, then love us (and yet even
these, when they utter their thoughts, will give us their livery:) But as for
those who know how to value a Minister of God in the name and for the work of
a Prophet, nothing more honors a Preacher in their hearts, then his humility.
I deny not, but there ought to be due respect of people to their Minister: but
I deny that it is purchased by austerity and statelines: And yet I do not allow
a Minister to be hail fellow well met with each companion: nor, to avoid the
extreme of stateliness with another extreme of commonnesse, complying with
them in the Alehouse, bowlings, or boon-fellowships: to hang about their
shop-windowes, and mix himself with them in his paper-service at all turns,
buyings, bargains, wills, purchases (except in a pious and necessary way of
Christian love.) But, by the authority of his labors, and the integrity of his
life, to uphold that esteem which is meet for a dispenser or Christ: and, in
this sense we ought to see that no man despise us. But yet, on the other side,
Tit. 2.15.
we must not over-Lord it among them, to bring them under our girdles, 1 Pet.
5.3.
and to boast our selves as the best men in the town: for so shall we but
out-shoot the Devil in his own bow, and show our selves distrustful of Gods
providence, as if he were not able to bring forth our light, Psa. 37.5.6.
except we our selves do it, by reflecting, our own shine and beams upon our
selves. No doubtless: we shall lose more in the Hundred then we gain in the
Shire, and left our worth to be valued by others. A base proverb.
There is a base Proverbs, Thou shall be so much esteemed by others, as thou
esteemest thy self. But it holds only in the Devils dominion. As for God (who
resists the proud, but gives grace to the humble) the weapons of his warfare
are not carnal, 1 Pet. 5.5.
but spiritual, casting down strong holds, and all high thoughts to the
obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10.4.
and most of all in our selves, who are his Standard-bearers. But I must recall
my self from this negative digression.

Why Elisha comes not forth to Naaman.
Well then, if it were not pride and stateliness in the Prophet, what cause was
there why he should send to Naaman, rather then come forth himself? Was he not
expected? and, might he not fear some aspersion to his person, God, and
Religion, by his aloofnesse? Surely, by the way, these things ought much to
curb our base passions! Bishop Hooper, that famous Martyr of Christ, and man of
tender conscience, being of somewhat a more retired and private spirit and
carriage then usual, did cause some Christian men and women, who honored his
integrity, and sought advice from him: to wonder, and to stumble at his
austerity. A defect which he could not easily amend in himself. But it cost
him sorrow afterward, as some of his letters witness, that he should grieve
any good heart by such an offensive carriage. Those letters are also extant,
wherein reverend Ridley craves pardon of his dear fellow-Martyrs Bradford and
Sanders for his unbrotherlike passages in some cases: a time there will be, in
which every one that fears God, will mourn for the least misdemeanor in this
kind. Gods glory is precious, and his peoples souls cost dear. They must not
be offended for our humors, or trifles: better a millstone were hanged about
our necks, and we cast with it into the sea, then to offend one little one.
This by the way.

Ministers must be tender of Gods glory, and jealous of offense by their
carriage.
I answer, there had been in this case of Elisha some fear of this, I mean of
offense, if God had not discharged him from it by a Supersedeas to his ordinary
charge: but having a warrant for it, he might trust God the better for
preventing of hurt. As the Prophets were extraordinary persons, so the most of
their actions bare a special reference toward God, not themselves: And, so it
was here: Elisha was a man familiar enough in his own case, as appears in his
homely and courteous carriage toward the woman that set him up a Table, 2 Kin.
4.12.13.
Stool and Candlestick in his Chamber. This was no great state (nothing near
Naamans) yet thankfully accepted. But there is a season for all things: to be
familiar with a poor Tradesman, Eccle. 2.3.2.
and to be strange to a Prince, both lawful. Now the Lords work was in doing,
and Elisha might not procure to himself the note of courtesy, by breaking a
command; as that Prophet (who to avoid discourtesie) went back to eat with
the old Prophet, 1 King. 13.19.
and lost his life. When God discharges us by a closer-command, its folly to
affect the name of unseasonable obeying.

And by the way, it is no small error in men to interpret Scriptures according
to the letter, without respect had to the scope, and circumstances proper to
the text. The Letter of the Scripture not to be wrested against the sense for
men's humors.
As the Papists, who by this means, snatch extraordinary facts of Moses and
Christ's fasting Matthew. 4. Ebuds killing Eglon, Judge. 4. Elijah's affronting
Ahab 1 King. 20.21. or the like, to such ends of their own, as, not God, but
themselves are the authors of. Not the fact of burning the Passover relics,
Exodus 12. and of robbing the Egyptians: but the warrant of God overruling
ordinary cases, for special ends of his own must be regarded. Now I say, the
Lord had another end in withdrawing Elisha from going forth. For why? He saw he
was more carnally adicted to the Prophet then he ought: More specially of the
cause.
he came full of carnal esteem of him, as a man of great power to work
miracles: 1. To prevent carn^ll esteem of his person: and the outward cure.
He looked also at the outward cure: full he was of himself and his carnal
hopes, who but Elisha with him, as a great Physician with a patient, for hope
of cure: This, together with a confidence, he had of his own sufficiency to
give him full content for his pains, as if he had gone to an ordinary man, and
looked to take and pay: did wholly eclipse the honor of God, who will not give
his glory to another. The Lord loved Elisha well, and his reputation, as we see
Cap. 2. yet not so well as to part with his own, 2 King. 2.5.6. Esaias 42.5.6.
for his sake. If God had intended only a bodily cure, it had been enough to
have come out and laid on hand upon the leprosy, and so, an end. But the Lord
who had a further scope, even to acquaint Naaman with himself, 2. To cast out
his own spirit.
his power, love and mercy in healing his soul also: saw, that this could not
be effected withour fetching a further compass: viz. by casting out the aim
at bodily cure alone: the confidence upon a Prophets skill, 3. And to raise up
his spirit to God.
the admiration of a man's person, the fullness of Naamans carnal hopes: all
these justled aside, the glory of God, and the preparation of Naamans heart to
entertain the gift with a due respect to the giver: And therefore, the Lord
thinks it best to suspend Naaman a while longer, and to train him by degrees
to a more spiritual heart in embracing such a double mercy. Tne Lord strives
with his spirit, as Genesis 6.2. to drive out of it that same carnal savor, hope
and content wherewith he had filled himself, having heard that the Prophet
could heal him. As for spiritual cure he felt no disease, nor knew any remedy
of it: But, the Lord meant it, and therefore meant that Naaman should in the
mean season be secretly prepared for it. As our savior told Peter, what I do
now, John 13.7.
thou know not, but hereafter thou shall. The Lord therefore by this
crossing his hopes, does desire to let in a further light into his mind, then
yet he had: That he might consider, that he was not now come to an ordinary
person; to heal his body: but to the Lord, and his Prophet, to work a divine
cure: here therefore, he must look up to God, stand to his courtesy, adore his
power, love, goodness and mercy: here is no marquet for money to bear
mastery, all must come from mere goodness: and that, not from a Prophet, but
from the Lord working by him. Now therefore having to do with him, let his
carnal savor, and erroneous conceits ly by, let him empty himself of a
wordly heart, and get an heavenly, as having only to do with God and not man.

The ground affords many sweet meditations: I will briefly touch upon two or
three, and so proceed. Thie first is this, All the course which God takes in
bringing home the soul to God is (in a word) but this one, to subdue the
carnality and unsavourinesse of the heart, Gods way in converting any is
chiefly to subdue carnal savor.
and the blindness and error of the mind, to the obedience of Christ. From
first to last the Lord aims at this, (if we mark it) through all the
preparations of effectual calling, whether by Law or Gospel: which may appear
by this, that the issue of all the work of calling is faith. And faith (we
know) is the chief obedience of the heart to the word, both commanding and
promising, and tries most of all, the subjection of the soul. Such then as is
the end, such is the preparative: all the whole course of God therefore in
converting the soul, is to yoke down and subject the heart to himself, 2
Cor. 10.4.
by casting out all which is set up in it, against it as Paul speaks. All
opposition, all rebellion, all enmity which is therein, whether before the
means revealed, Note well.
(as all natural poison of heart (such as Naaman here is full of, carnal
savor of his cure, resting to the prop of flesh and the Prophets ability) or
under the means themselves revealed, must stoop to God; somewhat or other,
terrors or promises, or both, must rid the soul of each high thought, strong
hold, and error which suffers not the Lord to enter. So is it here with Naaman:
he comes full of carnal confidence upon the arm of flesh, and his own
rewards, hope of speeding and going home an whole man; but the Lord intending
to send him home a new man, crosses him in his old, and strives to subdue the
savor of his flesh to the savor of divine power.

Naaman, for in the next verse he fell to rage against the Prophet.

2. Branches of use of Exhortation.
There is in the soul a kingdom of darkness, and Satan ruling thereby: If
God mean good to the soul, he will translate it Judge of our selves by this
order. Col. 1.13.
Look therefore to your selves well at this plat: and, first, be not
discouraged although you find under the means and ordinances, Word, Law,
Gospel, fasting and prayer, woeful fightings of corruption and concupisence,
rebellion against the work of the Law, resistance of the Gospel: These will
be: and oftimes it is better it be thus, Rebellion in the regenerate tends to
the greater humiliation. Romans 7.13.18.
then not: for if the Lord be in the work, this very rebellion against God
shall turn to good, and abase the soul so much the more after, as before it
swelled against God, I mean when he shall overpower it by that Spirit which
convinces of sin. Then I say shall the sinfulness of the soul out of
measure sinful, occasion to it self a deeper humbling, then if it had never
rebelled. Be not therefore troubled at that: but be sure that the work which
it leaves behind it, be sound: be sure the soul revolt not to her former
ignorance, fleshly savor, fullness of her own wisdom, and corrupt, worldly,
proud, peevish and profane frame, lest it grow worse then ever.

Of exhor. Romans 14.17.
Judge not his kingdom of grace, peace, and righteousness to be set up in us,
before the kingdom of sin and darkness be pulled down. Christ and Belial,
two Kings, two kingdoms cannot stand: 2 Cor. 6.14
one throne must be set up upon the others ruins. The text tells us, 1 King.
16.22. when Omri and Tibni stood in competition for the Crown, the followers
of Omri prevailed against the other: So, Tibni died, and Omri reigned. Just so
it is here. Till Tibni die, Omri cannot reign. The best judgment of Gods
people, is not by what they have, but what they want.
The Kingdom of God cannot stand till Satan's be pulled down, for they are
incompatible. Judge not your selves then I beseech you by those fruits which
make semblance of goodness in you: as by increase of knowledge, gifts to pray,
much hearing, good memory, reforming and abstaining from some evils, biting in
some ill qualities, which dare not break out. But judge your selves by the
casting down of your strong forts, and high thoughts, and stout hearts: one
dram of this will secure you more of a safe estate, and hold out longer then a
pound of the other. Try whether in all your other proceedings, and seemings to
grow in the house of God, your selves grow daily lowlier, meeker, brokenner:
for all Gods gifts are seasoned with humility: and negatives (in this kind)
are your surest marks: not so much what you have got in knowledge, but what
you have lost of your own. If ye prove this latter, the other will prosper
alone: otherwise this will be a canker to fret out the marrow of the other. It
is no hard thing for a man to judge what meat his appetite stands to, or not.
Observe your own frame, after all your hearings, God will not judge ye by the
helps, means, or gifts ye have: but by what your selves are. If then your
secret consciences bear you witness, that when all is done, yet a proud heart,
a scornful spirit, uncharitable, selfe-loving, rank for it own ends, resting
upon carnal proppes, angry, revenging, clasping to the creature (as Naaman
here did) or the like, still lurk in ye, and bear the sway, when ye are put
to it; in Gods fear do not rest till the Word have wrought a further work in
you, and cast down this kingdom in you. Seek for more working both by the
terror and promise: For surely till this old kingdom be down (at least subdued
and tributary, as Saul's house under David, Edom and Moab to Solomon;) all your
hearings cannot profit you. Tremble when ye meet with the old kingdom (you
shall soon try your selves when occasion of trial comes) and be well assured,
that whom the Lord calls, them he subdues, and here he pulls up one prop, there
another pillar of the old throne, here he subdues ignorance, there a false
heart, there a carnal mind, God subdues corruption in his by peece-meale.
the savor of the flesh, the will of man, the pride, the stomach, the wordly
ends, till he have ruined the throne: And although a subtle professor will
cover all these with the mantle of Religion, yet still the comparison abides,
because he wants an heart to be rid of it. But as for others, you may feel
them with a glove: for even in the midst of their devotions, giving thanks for
meat, praying or hearing, their hearts are with their covetousness and lusts;
and sometimes they will be quarrelling and praying, talking of the world, and
saying grace with one breath. But so much of this branch.

A second is this, The second meditaion upib this.
I have noted before in Naamans crouching at Elisha his gate, how that disease
of his abased him very far to such an inferior as the Prophet was. Now we see
he receives an affront from him, by him whom he so submitted himself unto,
being so far from healing him at the first, that he comes not out to salute
him. And why? To teach him to cease his crouching to the Prophet, and crouch to
God another while.

Some might say, alas poor man! he had sorrow enough before! but Elisha,
whereby he comes a little further to consider whom he had directly to deal
with, even the Lord himself, who suffers not the cure to proceed, to the end
that he might look better about him, and see into his base heart, which
hindered it. And we must conceive that although this wrought not presently, yet
the Lord being with it, it wrought somewhat at last. Let it briefly teach us
(beloved) thus much, Bodily crosses can reach no further then bodily ends. Job
33.13.
no cross nor bodily strait (of it self) can reach further then to a bodily
end: There must be a word added to the works of God, before the heart will
break. The Lord must (as I noted before) speak once and twice, ere pride will
be hidden and the soul humbled in kind, and then it stoopes. Well said
Habacuc, Cap. 2. I heard thy voice, and my lips quivered, my limbs trembled,
and rottenness entered into my bones, that I might have peace in the day of
trouble. And Esaias, Cap. 28. asks, whom shall I cause to understand, and whom
shall I teach wisdom? Heb. 4.12.
even him that is weaned from the breasts, and who trembles at my words. The
word and voice of God only able to pierce the heart.
It is the voice of God which must pierce the heart till it tremble. The voices
of sick men's repentance wanting a word, vanish. The reason is, because the
works alone are a brute sound, and have no tongue in them: The word is all,
only God has blessed it, and therefore other means are unblest. The word
must be the interpreter. Nay, many times under a cross alone, the heart waxes
more hardened and rebellious: or at least wise it puts off God with confessions
under the rack: or else it winds out it self, and counts it as a common
accident befalling mortality: Its my hard lot (says one, God help me) to be
thus afflicted. Even as blessings alone bring none to feel love from God (of
themselves) being common things bestowed upon all sorts as it hits, so is it
with crosses. Nay, some blind idiots imagine Popishly, that their portion here
in trouble, and straits, is a sign that they have their hell here, and shall
not therefore have it hereafter. But however, sure it is, let a man have never
so much sickness, poverty, reproach, fear of death upon him: none of these
are blessed to search out his pride, jollity, carnal ease, unsavorinesse,
Atheism, worldliness, or the poison of old Adam: These all may lurk and
abide under a cross: a man may still nouzell himself in his sensuality,
security, rotten peace, unbeleefe, and hope that he is in Gods favor. But when
the word comes, that dashes out all errors, and false conceits. Why so?
because it brings God into the soul (as the Arc into the camp) and causes
the soul to behold herself in the glass of his perfection; the nearer it
comes to God, the more it loathes it self. Job 42.2.
I have now seen thee (says Job) therefore I abhor my self in dust and
ashes. Let it teach us never to rest till the Lord has turned us out of our
common path, and brought us into a narrow way, even to deal with himself. His
word will present him unto us, as in a glass wherein we may behold him in his
excellent Attributes, his Justice, Wisdom, revenge of his enemies, a Judge of
the wicked, a rewarder of the righteous. This sight will cool our courage (as
it did Naamans here) stop us in our headlong courses, make our own conceits
and errors odious, teach us to wait upon God, till he shall hearken to us:
till he shall humble, convince, and persuade us. Doubtless, when we come
closely to behold his face, and to feel his authority over the conscience,
how severe an avenger he is of all our pride, rebellion; and that he whom we
have to deal with, beholds our inward man and all the corruption thereof:
nothing is hidden to his eye, but all things are naked and manifest before him:
then all our heat of spirit, Heb 4.13.
confidence of our happy condition, disdain of others, pleasing our selves in
our carnal hopes, applauding our parts, our duties, performances, will vanish
as a private man's lands and livelihoods vanish in a great Map of the world.
Then our plumes quail, and we say, depart from us O Lord sinful wretches. In
the sight of this Sun, all our darkness, and unrighteousness, Luke 5.7.
become irksome, and all our corruption is swallowed up in this sea of his
perfection. So much for this.

The third and last short meditation from this ground is this, The last
meditation.
that as the Lord began before to humble Naaman in part, so he holds him still
close to the work of humiliation, and enlarges him not, Proud nature of man
quickly forgets humilition.
till he had brought him to sound humbling of soul. It shows us what our
nature is, in this behalf. We are like to light Cork, which will floate
aloft, and (except a man hold it under by strong hand) will pearke up to the
top. When we are down and low, one would think it should be a great work to
raise us up to any cheer again. But no sooner is the stone blown upon, by a
little puff of wind (although it have been steept in water a whole night) but
it waxes dry again presently, as if never wetted. The hard and stony heart of
proud man can never sufficiently be battered, and tamed; but it will return to
her course again instantly. And the truth is, These days especially, and why?
the days we live in have a peculiar disease in this kind, above former
days: Gods wrath revenging our former contempt of his law and terrors of
conscience, and our dallying with them, and shaking them off, through a base
heart, weary of trouble. To be abased and low when and while the Lord will have
us so, for our own good and to think well of it, is a rare grace. We are a kin
to Jonah, Jona 3. and 4.
who was no sooner out of the Whales belly but (contrary to vow and covenant)
pearkes up again presently, and quarrels with God; for converting Ninivee: and
for his slain gourd: and no wisdom would charm his folly. So Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles 32.25.
after the like recovery of the plague, and promise of humble carriage, yet
instantly bubbles up again, upon the coming of the Ambassadors. If this be
done by the green tree, what is to be looked for in the dry? What wonder then
if Naaman may so ill be trusted with a cure at first, under hope of humbling
afterward? No, the Lord will hold him while he has him, and treads upon his
heel still with new affronts to keep him at that bay till he have thoroughly
cast out his scurfe. God makes clear way before him.
It is the Lords course to do his work substantially and thoroughly: he will
not sustain any dishonor in his own, that he has built them by halfes: As
for hypocrites, they fly before they are half feathered, and can do him no
discredit. Hence it is that the Lord has been feign to prolong affliction and
abasement upon his servants: that others beholding them might suspect
themselves. It might seem else a superfluous thing to add water to the sea:
and so long crosses to Job, a man already truly humble, and fearing God. But,
Job 1.1. 1 Timothy 1.16.
as Paul speaks of Gods grace toward him, that it was for the example of more
then himself: so was Jobs humbling, a pattern for all men to behold their own
base heart in this kind, and what an hidden depth of scurfe is in the chinkes
and corners of it.

Verily, in these days, he or she may be as wonders and strange sights, who
walk duly (in the sense of past and present corruption) before God with
humbleness, and privitie to themselves: As the sive holds water while it is in
the water, Simile.
and no longer; so does our proud heart stoop while the yoke is upon us: But
few subdue their hearts to this safe demeanure daily. That if another man
should come and tell them, Friend, me thinks your spirit is very light and
inconstant, not swayed to humbleness: 2 Kings 2.
he might answer with Elisha, I know it, hold your peace: for, I bless God, I
am under the aw of Gods greatness, and my base heart, is ever before me: Psalm.
51.
I walk continually in a jealousy of my proud and fickle spirit in this
kind! Word works little without afflictions in our times.
How few are there now-a-dayes cast down by the Word alone, without some
powerful addition of afflictions, to set the Word on working? When the Lord
has cut the veins, and let out some rank blood by the Law, how is he feign
to set men in an hot bath of some other cross, to keep these veins in
bleeding? So that except God keep us very low and bare, so rank we are, that
we fall into a Pleurifie again instantly.

Use of the point.
The use we should make of this branch, is briefly this; First, that we walk
heavily under this body of death in us. Counting the same our heavy burden:
mourning bitterly that our base spirits should be so weary of Gods yoke, so
light, so frothy and inconstant! Oh (should we say) who has more cause to
walk humbly before God every hour then I? (being guilty of so many
rebellions, so deep-died, of so long continuance, hardly washed out, so
canker-fretted) and yet (Lord help me) my tears are as the morning dew, and my
spirit more fethery and giddy then any man's! So prone to relapse to my old
humors, and to forget the sorrow which my sins cost me, and all the vows of
humblesse and a broken hearted carriage! Walk heavily under the misery of a
slight giddy heart.
Truly this disease causes a good soul to walk uncomfortably, and the very
best graces of God to afford less savor and comfort!

And secondly it should teach us all, especially Gods Ministers, not to be
over-forward, to rest secure of our childrens estate, or of others, who at
first gave good hope of true humiliation under the Law; Charity is good.
let us charitably hope the best of all: But yet let us eat some salt with
them, and wait some time to see what fruits will come of it, whether they wax
not weary, Heb. 12.7. 1 Timothy 5.11.
Heb. 12. of Gods chastening, and like those widows who waxed wanton against
Christ, and weary of Church Service, returning to their old vanities, But yet
too much credulity not meet for Gods people.
being dead while they were alive. Particularly observe, whether the Law be as
welcome to them still as at first; how they brook the discipline of such a
Schoolmaster, that they might get down their base hearts, and keep them
under. Mark them, whether the pride of their spirit, opinion of themselves,
jollity of the world, warmth of their own feathers, and pride of life, cause
them not to forget their former humblings, as if now they had learned a new
lesson, to be less precise, and more wise. If we see such stuff in them, we
shall have little cause to repent that we suspected their beginnings.

And lastly, for our selves, count we it the only safe estate, and that which
promises soundest comfort, most peace, best safety, and sweetest feelings of
Christ, when our hearts are kept within the bounds of fear and humility, and
awfulnesse: And, desire the Lord not to trust us over far, nor leave us long
without some wholesome Items and buffetings, rather then we should wax loose,
and run out of his blessing into our own warm Sun. Blessed is he that
fears always, and if God crosses him not, crosses himself. And so much also
for this third branch, and this first observation.

Now I come to the second, the Message is, Wash seven times in Jordan, The
second ^bservation out of this tenth verse.
and thou shall be clean. Touching these words, as they contain a charge, and
a promise annexed, I shall speak more at large when I come to handle Naamans
obedience in the verses following: Here I only touch a point or two generally,
flowing from the words: and first, the mean which God appointed him to use for
his cure: to wit, the washing seven times in Jordan.

Ere I come to this point, a Papist, or Master of superstition, would here make
a stop (as a traveller at a cross in the high way) and pick out a mystery out
of the number of seven. Why seven times, says a Papist,

I answer: Naaman acquainted with the ceremonies of the lepers clensings:
Levit. 14.8. etc.
which yet I dare not affirm: for then he might have sent him rather to the
Priest at Jerusalem; then, to an extraordinary Prophet, raised up in the
absence of the ordinary Priest, which now was expelled from the ten Tribes.
Therefore rather I answer: That so it pleased the Lord to have it, See 2 Cro.
16.3.4.
and the question might as well be made of any other period of number, 3.4.5.
as this of 7. Only Popish superstition thinks, it has never made her nose
clean, save when it has forced blood by wringing it too hard. Forsooth they
look after mysteries in each corner and verse of the Scriptures: and this
period of seven, is a very precious number with them, and has a great deal of
holiness in it. They say the holy Ghost uses it ordinarily, both when he
would determine an uncertain number of many, by a certain, Mat. 12.
(as seven spirits for many, seven abominations for many:) and also when he
would set down a voluntary period, then he names seven: as Elisha bids his
servant go look upon the sky seven times, 1 King 18.43. J^sh 6.3.4. The
number of 7. a great fancy with Papists.
the Lord bids Joshua compass Jerico seven times: And it is true, if in that
respect they hold it a sacred number, as used much by the holy Ghost, I agree
with them: and I think the holy Ghost does the rather use it because it is a
model and determining of the works and rest of God after the creation of the
world, the circle whereof, being the period of seven has in likelihood
occasioned this period of seven, to become a style of numbering with the holy
Ghost: yet when the seventh day was sanctified, we read not that the number
was. Number of 7. no holier then other numbers.
I pass by the favor which this number has with Arithmeticians, for the
commodiousnesse and previledge of computation. But, as for esteeming of this
number of seven, to have any more holiness in it, then other numbers, it is
ridiculous and superstitious. They must have theit seven sacraments for
religion sake, and their seven fold exorcisme and adjuration of Devils, their
seven Ave Mary's, their seven degrees of Angels, seven penitential Psalms,
and in a word, wheresoever they go, they go by sevens. Seven deadly sins
they will have, and seven contrary virtues, and seven steps to perfections, as
if they might go to heaven by a ladder, of seven stairs. This number has done
them some pleasure, for else they would (no doubt) have proceeded to sevenscore
sacraments as well as to seven. And seeing this number is more precious to them
then Gods two, it is strange that they dip not the infant seven times instead
of three, counting it more holy then the Trinity! we abhor them, and all
their superstitious fopperies, and mysteries, more fit for inchanters and
sorcerers to work by, then such as go to work on Gods name, by the power of
a word, and ordinance.

See Joash his reproof, 2 King 13.19.
The holy Ghost ties not himself to this number (as often as he uses it) but
uses all other numbers as occasion offers it self indifferently. As for.
Naaman here, of the number of seven serves to teach any thing, it teaches the
depth of infection in his body (and much more in his spirit) which needed such
frequent washing one after another, and all too little. But as for any
holiness in the number (as seven) otherwise then the charge of God exactly
required, we put none at all, in it. We leave that superstitious holiness, to
them, who turned religion it self into a mass of superstitious, judaicall,
pharisaicall, heathenish, and sorcerous vanities: The true successors of
Pharisees, (as our Savior tells us) That they put Gods service in washing,
pots, and platters, dishes and trenchers, and sundry other toys, destroying
substance for circumstance: even so do these: They place religion in old
slippers, shoes, boots and buskins, rotten chips, rotten garments: in
Crucifixes, Images, and rusty relics: and so in numbers: yea, asthe Pharisees
would have the most holy sacrifices, and Temple of God to borrow their
holiness from the gold of the Temple, Mat. 23.16.17.
and the altar of sacrifice, so do these. Forsooth, the most holy Ordinance of
preaching, prayer, sacraments (if these Pharisees may be believed) must be
holy, because offered upon their altar or superaltar, because made, said, or
done in, and upon their consecrated Temples, Pulpits, or Mass altars! Oh ye
fools! is the whether is the more holy! the gold or the Temple! Oh ye altar or
sacrifice! the Pulpit, or the solemn ordinance of preaching! the Church, or
the prayer offered up? A separation of place, we acknowledge, to be meet, and
fit, common use, for Gods: but, for inherent holiness in it, we abhor, and
renounce. To conclude, let us cleave to naked Scripture, and not fancy to
ourselves a Samuel, wheresoever we see an old man, in a mantle, nor a mystery,
where there is no such matter; and, so leave the simplicity of truth, for a
novelty of superstition. Ever since such scurfe took place in the Church,
substance decayed: as the dog lost his flesh for the shadow: such shells cost
more the cracking, then all the kirnell is worth. The more we cleave to the
sacred, and pure truth of God, the more we shall abhor all such fooleries.
Give me one sacrament of Christ's institution, and let them take the seven: One
prayer made in faith, and let them take their 7. Ave-maries: one cross, and
the power of one Christ, and they, their seven crossings, and rows of Beads,
And so much (if not too much) for this number of seven.

The message it self.
The message it self follows. Naaman looked to be cured by great Elisha that
worthy Prophet: but the remedy which God makes use of, is the washing of his
flesh in Jorden seventimes. A poor thing (one would think) to compass such a
great effect. But so it is, commonly the Lord effects those things which are of
greatest consequence, by poor and seely means, such as the world would think
most unlikely and contemptible. Commonly I say, so it is: I say not always. For
sometimes, God uses to effect solemn things, by see ly means.
the Lord chooses great ones, and wise ones, and learned, and valourous, and
experienced, and in great esteem, to be his instruments: because he will be
known in his own gifts, lest they should not be esteemed: But when it is
thus, commonly the Lord shows as great power in making such instruments great,
being of themselves before mean or despised: at least he brings them low in
their own eyes, and makes them rare patterns of humbleness, before he dare
use them. Esters hist. cap. 2.3.7.8. etc. 1 Samuel 16.12.13.14. 2 Cron. 34.35.
etc.
Ester was a great woman and effected a great deliverance: But she was made so
of a poor captive, so that still God was as manifest in her, another way. So
David, yet made of a poor shepherd and therefore a mirror of as great
providence. Iosia effected great things: but how? Not by his greatness, but by
his extraordinary grace of melting and humbleness. If God use great ones,
either he makes them great of mean ones, or mean of great ones.
And so many Preachers perhaps are used to do God some glory: But if
comparison be made (not between them and other of meaner gifts, but between
them and the effects of conversion) what is a base sinful man with all his
complements to God? and put case that sometime the Lord do use some men of
great esteem with some carnal persons for their excellent parts, the better
to win their great stomachs to like of his truth: yet this commonly is but a
general preparative to their conversion: for the Lord will strike the maine
stroke afterward, rather by some other instrument of meaner worth. All the
Scriptures do with one consent bear witness hereof, both in doctrine and
examples. Our Lord Jesus his work of salvation was the greatest work that
ever was done in the world. And who was he that did it? I confess in himself,
Esaias 53. 1 Cor. 1.20.
the wisdom of God and the power of God: but in the eyes of the world most
base, the stumbling-blocke of the Jew, and foolishness to the Gentile. By a
son of a poor woman, not an Empress one borne in a stable and a cratch, not
in a Palace: one that had not an hole to hide himself in: one that rode upon
an Ass, and had a few silly men and women cry Hosanna to him: who dyed as a
malefactor upon a Cross, the most cursed death of all other: By him the Lord
effects this great work. Not that he could not have used greater
preparations, but so it pleased him even to make him the corner stone, whom the
builders refused. So the Apostles were used to preach Christ in the world, to
subdue and conquer it all to himself: who were they? No men of great breed,
birth, Luke 5.
training or learning, but poor Fishermen, utterly unlearned. So Paul, a
poor creature in show, a poor withered branch, a man that affected no quaint
phrase, no elocution, but was weak in speech, 1 Cor. 3.
is used to do more then any of the rest. See 1 Cor. 1. Ye know brethren, your
calling, how that not many learned, noble, or rich, but the mean things of this
world, has the Lord chosen, What is a greater work then conversion and
calling? And who are greater and more precious objects then the called? Who
honor God more then such as bear his image, and are partakers of his Divine
Nature. Now if God should choose great ones, and jolly, wise and politic ones
to such ends, he should confute this point; but he uses the poorest (as Saint
James says) and most base off all of this world to be heirs of salvation?
That so when his excellency shines through the elements of their baseness, the
glory may be his own.

Paul, 1 Cor. 1. Where is the Scribe? where is the Law interpreter? where is
the wise? God has confounded the great things of the world, by his own seely
things. No wise man or Artist has such delight to discover and shame a proud
Mountebanke and emperick, as the Lord has to confound a proud person who
thrusts himself into his solemn business. God delights to confute great
things by seely.
He scatters the wise in the imaginations of their own heart. And the Lord
knows the wisdom of the wise, that it is but folly. The weakness of God is
stronger then man: and the foolishness of God is wiser then man: and therefore
by his weakness and folly he delights to control the strength and wisdom of
man. Those false Apostles gloried much in their parts, and speech, and skill:
But the Lord chose poor Paul with his weakness to do more good in the point of
conversion, then all of them. They made a great boast to man ward, and who but
they? But the Lord laughed them to scorn and all their complements, as enemies
to the grace of Christ: and they who could discern, at length perceived all
their scope to be the setting up that trinity, of Belly, Ambition, and
Covetousness, Phil. 3.18. and, so being discovered, they vanished in the
opinion of the Church as smoke.

God is very jealous of his glory.
When he gave Jerico into Iosuas hand, he was very jealous least Israel should
ascribe too much to themselves, and therefore befooled all their great courage
and strength with a march about the City, Josh. 6.
and blowing with trumpets of Rams-horns, and thereby the City walls fell down
prostrate on the earth. J ^dg...
These could rob God of no honor, they were safe instruments to use: when
Gedeon had a complete number of soldiers ready for the battle, they were an
eye sore to the Lord: he thought he should be a loser in point of honor: and
therefore he told him he should abandon all the rest of the Army: and of those
of the Army (being yet too many) he would try who would lap water as a dog,
and who would take it into their hand to drink: these latter, being many he
sent away, and the former being but three hundred he would use to get the
victory. The reason was, because by them (as no way proportionable to such an
effect) he could fear no treacherous robbing of his honor. So true is that
Esaias 42. My glory, is as my self, dear to me, I will not lose it upon any
terms, nor give it to another.

We are prone to Idolize means.
or if we do not so, yet we cleave too much to means: or if we set up God
above them yet we would tie him to bless them without fail. Touching the
first of these, Jer. 2.13.
we naturally go to work, and weigh things in the balances of our own
reason, And that three ways. The first.
and what they will afford we will yield the Lord, but no more: This age we
live in, excells in this carnal esteem of instruments, parts and abilities of
men, and smoother of all divine work under these feathers. As Samuel
proportioned Eliab to a Crown at first sight. When great exploits be done by
such as are brave and jolly fellows, men wonder not, but say, Yea, he was a
brave man indeed: It troubles our base eyes to look beyond that which is next
us, and to see God in such effects. As silver answers all things in price, so
strength and parts answers all effects in efficacy and working, and so God is
thrust out of doors. As in a Market men lay down money, and take ware, so in
this Market of worldly wisdom, men think to effect any thing if they bring
powder and shot to the battery. The Lord therefore substitutes seely
instruments in stead thereof, and when mighty effects follow, then is his might
magnified.

For the second, though we deny not but the Lord is chief, The 2.
yet still we look at means, and think God works by them, and why should we
not therefore embrace them? Our base hearts fall short of God through laziness
and distrust, as well as by Atheism. And therefore even here also God lays a
block in our way, to stumble at, and break our shinnes, to teach us to behold
God more closly in the use of means, both in matters of the World, and of the
Word: he puts us off from our Elisha, and sends us to wash in Jorden.

Thirdly, if we go a little further, The 3.
and set God up in his place above the means, yet we take it for granted, he
must not fail us: we will tie him to overruled, and work by the means: and
think much if God satisfy us not accordingly. Whereas we should so look at
God, as an absolute sovereign Agent, who can work or not work by them, above
them, against them, without them.

Now I come to the use. And first this is instruction in sundry kinds:
Instruct.
to teach us why the Lord has so stripped our land and kingdom of We have lost
many worthy instruments, because we ascribed too much unto them.
their wisdom, their learning, experience and sufficiency. We have not
looked upon God, in their gifts, zeal and labors: we have magnified our
selves in our store, and provision, as if we should never be desolate: as Tyrus
did pride her self in her store of Jewels and precious stones: and as Babel
sat like a Queen, and said, she should never see sorrow, and therefore was
suddenly brought down: See Ezekiel. cap. 26.27. and 28. verse 13. Jer. 51.53.
Lam. 1.9. John 5 35.
and as Jerusalem thought her self the holy Mountain and City of God, the
mirror of the world, having the Ark of Gods presence, his Temple and Priests,
his Ordinances and Prophets, his Word and Oracles, therefore, Lam. 1. she came
down wonderfully. Even so has it been with us. No sooner has the Lord
planted in any place a faithful Minister, as a shining Light, and burning
Candle, but the people have fallen to idolize him, to rejoice in his outside,
to think themselves safe and happy in enjoying such Instruments: ascribing all
the effect of his labors to him, little acknowledging the finger of God, or
the office which he sustaines; not honoring him for the work sake which he
serves for, to reconcile them to God, to beget them to a lively hope by the
Gospel. This baseness of our fleshly respects, has caused the Lord to rob us
of them, and to set mean ones in their rooms: To teach men to lay to heart
their former carnal ends. How many have received Prophets to far other ends
then the Lord ever sent them? To make them as terms of comparison between
person and person, some to hold upon Apollo, 1 Cor. 3.3.4.
some Cephas, some Paul, some others. To censure, to jangle, and some to bring
themselves and Towns into some credit in the country: others to get good
custom for their wares and shops: others to make themselves well reputed and
praised for their forwardness and zeal in profession: whereas yet, alas! the
means being gone, and the sive taken out of the water, they have proved as
mere formal time-servers, and as ignorant of their grounds, as they who never
made show at all. Others have securely rested in their labors, never looking
for any change of heart thereby, but thinking the Prophets shall live for ever:
and when they are gone, fretting at their preciseness of conscience, and
unthankfully leaving them to sink or swim, and shift as they can. Is this
(beloved) to honor God in his ordinance? to cleave close to it, as (under God)
the mean of conversion? Is this to count their feet beautiful, and to adore
the Lord in the variety of his gifts and instruments? Romans 10.15.
No, no: and therefore the Lord has been fain to take them out of the way, and
leave us to our selves: so that our supply was never so great as our defeat is
strange. All to teach us to look at the simplicity of Gods ends, to serve God
first, and man with his leavings: let the Lord have the heart: set him up
there, in self-denial, humility, faith, sincerity and faithfulness: and then
let the instrument have the overplus, that honor and countenance which
belongs to him for his service. For God counts not himself robbed by that
esteem wherein we have his Minister under himself, but that which he has
above himself. And surely it is not for nothing, that the renowned King
(lately slain) in the heat of his wars, King of Sweden.
often spoke a little before his death, that the Lord would not long suffer him
to live, because the people made him such an Idol, and robbed God of his due,
to magnify him. Papists worship a dead block for want of knowledge, and we a
living one for lack of faith: the one for a little carving and workmanship of
gold and silver: the other for a little varnish of gifts or excellency or
parts: the one from man, the other from God, but both idolatrous; because
against the honor of the giver.

Instruction.
is, to teach us why the Lord does so defeat men of their purposes and
projects, which they frame to themselves, when they go to work upon their
own heads, in matters of God. We have seen it with our eyes verified, Eccles.
9.11.
which Solomon speaks, That victory is not always with the strong, nor race
with the swift, nor wealth to the provident, nor esteem to the vainglorious,
nor spiritual success to the Minister, though learned and rarely qualified,
because men have boasted of their strength, swiftness, policy, experience,
providence, and abilities, more then the Lord. I am witness my self of some
sad events in this kind, that men have spent themselves in their study, to
perfect some special discourse and Masterpiece of their own brain, either
to bear down the truth, and broach schismatic points: or to win the
spurs, and get themselves the eternal repute of learned persons; or some
vain applause of fantastic auditors (as if they sought a plaudite) upon the
stage (a base profaneness both in them that seek it, and them that offer it.)
But the Lord has so resisted their pride, and struck off their wheels,
brought them to such a reproachful nonplus before all their auditors, that
they have verified the speech, God resists the proud: Jam. 4.6.
and some of them have got more grace, when they became more humble: Oh! what a
terror it should be to all such as dare affront God in his own element, and
covet to honor themselves with that, which they sacrilegiously have stolen
from God! If the Lord loath it in a mere politic Atheist, and in an heathen,
the one affecting the glory, the other defiling the vessels of God, Herod I
mean, and Belshazzar: D^n. 5.5. Act. 12.23.
both which were fearfully plagued: If (I say) this were done in the green
tree, what shall be done in the dry? how shall they escape who with more
impudence and resistance of light, shall dare God to his face?

A third branch of instruction is, concerning the wisdom of God Instruct.
Wonder not why God chooses seely instruments.
Wonder we not why the Lord should choose such poor and seely means and
instruments, for the effecting so incomparable events, of humbling of the
soul, and converting it to God, as he has done. To speak of some personal
instruments first, may it not be wondered at, that the Lord should work by such
poor, yea contrary means to reason as he has done in casting down the
throne of Antichrist, and rearing up the kingdom of the Lord Jesus? By poor
Luther, a despised Monk, to convince a great part of Europe of their many
hundredth years error, and to bring in by degrees, the light of the Gospel into
so many nations, making the very pillars of Popery to shake, and the
foundations to tremble? By such a poor seely creature as William Tindall, to
subdue our poor English Nation to the knowledge of Christ? By a Prince who
both in practice and writing professed himself the Defender of Popish faith
(and sat in person upon the lives of some of Christ's Martyrs, shedding their
blood to satisfy that Whore) to do a work, which if many Princes together
had joined to do, had been unlike to be accomplished, that is, to cast out the
Pope out of his freehold and possessions throughout the land: were not these
great things, are they not the Lords works, and mavelous in our eyes? By our
Josiah, a child of seven years old, afterward to settle the Gospel throughout
the Dominion, abandoning the refuse and tail that remained? By what means
since Luther, these six score years, has the Gospel been supported? and that
against the gates of hell, and the policies of Papists every day more and more
increasing, and recovering the wound which they received? Surely, even by poor
seely instruments, which God raised up in sundry Nations, armed only by the
weapons of a spiritual warfare: that the glory might be Gods. As Zachar. 4.
the Lord speaks of those two great Olives, Iehoshua and Zerubbabel, despised
men, crope out of captivity, assisted with a poor multitude of captives, in
the midst of most potent enemies: that even these two should restore the ruins
Jerusalem, both the Civil and Ecclesiasticke state, though to man-ward there
were no strength in them: yet by my Spirit and my strength, says the Lord,
even as the two Olives dropped oil without any help or Art of man, into the
Lamps set under them by divine providence. And touching the Ordinances, what
were the authority of a sinful man of like passions to us, toward the subduing
of the conscience of rebels and traitors, and converting them to God? What
strength of the greatest warriors, or Rhetoric of Orators, or wit of
Politicians could come near it? Only the Lord has chosen such poor
conduits, and conveyances, that his own glory might sustain no prejudice by
men's leaving the Lord, and committing idolatry with the means? Why has he
clothed his Sacraments so poorly, and allowed us no sumptuous pomp and bravery
in them, save to deliver us from a Carnal, and to recover us to a Spiritual
worship? As if a jealous man over an unchaste Spouse, should purposely receive
no servants into his house save meanly bred, base and deformed, that so he
might remove all color and pretense from her, to fall in love with any save
himself? What is so ordinary as to hear a poor man utter a few words? or see
him power out a little wine, or offer a morsel of bread? No voice being heard,
no sight to be seen besides? Yea, why is it, that all furniture of Jewish
Temple, Altars, Worship, those Ordinances of outward solemnity, the Ephod, the
Garments, Gold and precious stones, those carnal ways of visions, dreams,
apparitions, miracles, and fire from heaven, Heb. 1.1.
are all turned into one way, Heb. 1.1. more spiritual, that is Christ
preached by men? Surely that the Spirit convoyed by them, might appear to be
from God, and not man. But of this read more in my former Treatise of
Sacraments.

Object. Then pull down Arts and Sciences.
Ere I come to any further use, here is an objection offers it self: viz. If
God use so mean things to do the greatest works: Then (may some say) it may
seem, the meaner and sillier the persons be, the fitter they are for God to
use and honor himself by: and then, why pull we not down Students, learned
men in Tongues and Arts, and set up Tradesmen in their rooms? Answ. No.
To which I answer: No. The Church of God has always joined the porch of the
School to the Church, and drawn thence into her service men sufficiently
qualified for all knowledge, and parts meet for the Ministry. When the Master
leads the hand of a Boy to write, the less the Boy moves of himself, the
meeter he is to grace the skill of the leader. But if any should infer
hereupon, that the Boy were better want an hand altogether; who would not say,
this were a ridiculous consequence? It must be presupposed, that he who is
not qualified with gifts to teach, is no organ or hand at all for the Lord to
make use of. Amos was an Heard-man, and in that respect mean enough: yet
withal exceedingly qualified by extraordinary inspiration: so the Apostles
unlearned, and men of trade, howbeit very admirably gifted for the Ministry.
Otherwise they had been no instruments of any honor to God at all, but rather
of great reproach, as if God should appoint men for the greatest uses, and not
be able to qualify them with gifts conducing thereto. Even so now, Arts and
Studies are come in the stead of extraordinary inspirings: If men should want
the furniture thereof, how should they interpret the Scriptures, order their
speech, utter their mind, persuade the hearer? The grace of the Spirit runs
in these as in a stream. But my meaning is, that men of like infirmities with
others, mean perhaps for breed, for other carnal endowments, policy,
greatness in the world, yet the Lord having qualified them with abilities of
wisdom, grace, and poverty of spirit, uses them (as mean as they are) to his
own greatest ends, conversion, I mean, and edification of souls. Though in
other outward respects they promise little, yet the Lord works great matters
by them: Or if they have other complements of authority in carriage,
awfulnesse, experience and wisdom in the world; yet being humble also, and
abhorring pride, state and jollitie (as all Gods Ministers ought to do) they
are mean in the eye of the world (whatsoever inward excellencies they have) for
the world esteems them so much, as they esteem themselves by the greatness of
their stomach. Now it is not their skill and knowledge which can hinder their
humbleness in their own eyes: no more then ignorance can cause humility. Nay,
I dare say, Gifts and graces do no more cause pride, then ignorance causes
humility.
that if the number of proud ones were surveyed, we shall find more of them
proud through ignorance, and for lack of a bottom, then of their knowledge:
though neither (without special grace) can be humble. As then I would have
none mistake me in this point, so by the way, I would admonish all bold,
ignorant and raw novices, and young Ministers (of whom the world is full) who
no sooner are crept out of the shell, but think themselves fit enough for the
Ministry (being yet wholly untrain'd in the way thereof, and very prone to
fall into the condemnation of the Devil:) I do admonish all such to look to
themselves: and beware lest through a pearking and ventrous spirit, and a
desire after their own ends, gain and living, they dishonor God, bring his
ordinances into contempt, and by their running and shifting from place to place
for means, they snare their consciences so far, that they can scarce get out
again when they would. Runnagate, idle, unlearned Curates and Hirelings, are a
great bane to the Church. Let them wait the time, attend to reading, deny
themselves, learn of their betters and ancients (which few of them do) and
trust God in due time for service and respect in the Church.

Further, this point should minister exceeding consolation to poor Consolation
to despised ones in the eyes of men.
and silly and contemptible in the eyes of the world (as indeed never was there
a more scornful age of those who are truly religious at the best, but
especially if they want parts, wealth, breed, learning to commend them) Oh! God
does great things in poor ones, by poor ones, for poor ones. If the Lord
has humbled you truly, and made you wise to salvation, rejoice, although
perhaps you are counted but poor politicians, poor worldlings, though perhaps
your learning be not deep, and a subtle fellow may circumvent your simplicity
in a bargain: Oh! let not this discourage you. James 2.5.
For the Lord often does as much good to a poor creature, by the want of some
excess of worldly wisdom, as he loses esteem by it among men. The Lord
chooses such (often) to be heirs of salvation: and their opposition to grace,
is commonly (commonly I say, for sometimes the most silly are the most perverse)
a great deal less then theirs who are more deeply wise, who frame to
themselves many objections, and stumble at many offenses. As these poor ones
have not the reach which many have, nor the depth, so neither do they meet with
such real lets from within. Alas! they are not so curious, so proud,
selfe-loving, but they are glad to stoop to the conditions of the Gospel: they
have little within them to cast down, and little without them to forfet, they
are little ones in understanding, wealth, honor and reputation, and therefore
they are fit to make Gods little ones: They are glad to be accepted of God,
they are lost to the world, they stink before great ones, therefore if God
will esteem them, they are thankful, their hearts are low, broken and ready
to wonder that the Lord should cast an eye of respect to such. Matthew. 11.6.
Therefore Matthew. 11. the poor soon receive the Gospel. Oh! little do such
think what rubs the Lord has taken out of their way! Besides, when that grace
shall be seen in such silly ones, which great and wise ones cannot purchase
with all their wisdom and learning: when the Lord shall make them shine in
holy example, love and zeal to Gods glory, tender of offending, innocent,
humble: nay, when the gifts of rare holy wisdom, of prayer, conference,
judgment and discerning of things and persons shall appear in them, who
wonders not how such should come by such gifts? God works a great thing by
them, when he ordains praise by such to himself. As the Lord Jesus had no
beauty in him, Matthew. 21.16. Joh. 7.
unlearned, and yet so able to pose the Doctors, and to stall his most potent
enemies. And his Disciples, Acts 4. when they stuck so to Christ, that they
daunted the Elders; Oh! how it drew admiration from the people, and glory to
God! So Ioh. 9. those who had known the blind beggar sitting by the way, and
now heard with what a new tongue he convinced the Pharisees, they glorified God.

That poor Martyr, Alice Driver, in the presence of many hundreds, did so
silence Popish Bishops, that she and all, blessed God that the proudest of them
could not resist the Spirit in a silly woman: so I say to thee, Out of the
mouth of Babes and sucklings will God be honored. Even thou (silly worm)
shall honor him, when it shall appear what God has done for thee, what lusts
he has mortified, and what graces he has granted thee! which those that are
wiser then thou, fret to see in thee! Oh! be thankful! John 1.50.
The Lord can yet do greater things for thee, if thou will trust him: he can
carry thee upon Eagles wings, enable thee to bear and suffer strong affliction
for him, to persevere to the end, to live by faith, and to finish thy course
with joy. Oh! in that he has made thee low in heart, thy other lowness shall
be so much the more honor to thee! Do not all as much and more wonder at Gods
rare workmanship in the Ant, the poorest bugge that creeps, as in the biggest
Elephant? That so many parts and limbs should be united in such a little
space: that so poor a creature should provide in the Summer time her Winter
food? Who sees not as much of God in a Be, as in a greater creature? Alas! in
a great body we look for great abilities and wonder not! Therefore to
conclude, seeing God has clothed thy uncomly parts with the more honor,
bless God, and bear thy baseness more equally: thy greatest glory is yet to
come, that when the wise of the world have rejected the counsel of God, thou
have (with those poor Publicanes and Soldiers) magnified the Ministry of the
Gospel: Luke 1.5.
surely the Lord also, 1 Thessalonians. 1. will be admired in thee, a poor silly
creature, that ever thou were made wise to salvation, and beleevest in that
day! Be still poor in thine own eyes: and the Lord will make thy proudest
scornful enemies to worship at thy feet, Rev. 3.9.
to confess God has done much for thee, and wish thy portion when God shall
visit them.

Admonit.
It should cause such to tremble, and seek to be as little in your own eyes,
as they seem great to others. For otherwise, those excellent accomplishments
wherein they excel others, may become snares: Their privilege may become
their prejudice! Wise ones must become fools, that they may be wise in Gods
matters.
A learneder man then any of us could tremble at this meditation; The idiots
and fools rise up and snatch the Kingdom by violence from us, and we with all
our learning are thrust down to hell. Oh! how sad is this! Once a Princess
beholding a learned Civilian lame of his feet, said, Thy deformity is our great
enormity: meaning that he was disabled to stand in her presence. But when the
Lord shall say to many wise and great ones, your excellent parts are my
detriment, what a sad greeting will that be? Oh! it had been better for me if
thou had been poor, lame, an Idiot, then great and jolly! Surely thou
might have honored me more with meaner gifts, (thine heart being lowly) then
with all these, thou being so proud! The best use that many put their parts to,
being this, to strengthen themselves and others in their profaneness, luxury,
ambition, and tyranny. Oh! therefore, be a fool that thou may be wise! Let
all thy parts stoop, yea be too little for Christ, to preach, to profess, to
honor him! And be afraid, lest (otherwise) the Lord shall overlooke thee, and
say, Oh this man was too big, too stout, too stately to believe, too great to
get through such a strait gate as heaven is! Camels cannot go through needles
eyes. Oh pray God to little thee, to pare off thy superfluities! Oh Lord, take
out this proud heart of mine, puffed up with gifts, experience, skill, wisdom,
Oh cleanse them all, make me humble, and betrust me again with them, and then
being shaven and washed, all shall serve thee: and I shall lose all my
excellency in thy glory: thou shall eclipse all my parts that my humility may
honor thee! My deformity shall be no detriment to thee, but I shall give thee
the glory in the treading of my best readings, arts, skill, elocution, and
whatsoever humane perfection, under thy feet. Lord accept me, and do what thou will with me, so thou keep me from all sacrilege and robbing thee of thy due.
Tit. 1.15.
To the pure all things shall be pure, if thou have purged my parts, 2 Timothy
2.21.
I shall be a vessel prepared for every good use: and as fire and water are
good servants, but ill masters, so when my spirit and stream shall be wholly
carried in thine, I shall be, I may be trusted with thy gifts, to honor the
giver.

Oh that my words could reach to many Ministers of worthy parts and endowments!
of whom some vanish in the base abuse of their liberties, Caveat to Ministers
not to abuse their parts to ease and pampering of the flesh
the creature of meat and drink, of recreations and pastimes, of apparel and
fashions: maintaining themselves and their wives in pomp and pride of life, to
the destruction of souls! Others fall to excess in drinking, base company,
lurking in their dens, either in their Colleges, or in the Country; utterly
unprofitable Cretians, slow bellies, evil beasts, Tit. 1.12.
as that Poet said: filling their panches, and surfeiting upon pleasures:
Others insatiable of livings, and ambitious of preferments: Others, setting up
their gifts above Christ, and choosing to preach ten words without
understanding, rather then one to the peoples reach! Alas! is this the fruit of
your studies and parts, your abilities and gifts, that when you should in
humility feed the flock of God, you despise them and set them at naught, 1 Pet.
5.2.
and honor your selves with Gods spoil! Beware lest the Lord pursue you, and
make you regorge these unsavory morsels of yours with horror and detestation,
or else revenge himself of you for all your sacrilege, when there shall be
no remedy! Then shall you wish (as some have done) that you had been as poor
and silly ones as walk upon the earth, so you were free of robbing God of his
glory! Greek, Ebrew, Latin, Fathers, all learning is good: But if it have
lost her savor, and be as the ointment which stinkes by dead flies, Luke 14
34. ult.
what shall it be good for? Surely to be cast into the streets and to be trodden
upon, yea to be made the just scorn of men, who never made conscience to
reserve to God the entire service of his gifts, but fed and prided themselves
with his colors. 1 Samuel 2.14.
Hophni and Phinees would thrust their forke into Gods kettle, and steal his
due: but no sacrifice could satisfy for such sin, the Lord swear he would
receive no payment for their ransomtil he utterly rooted them out! Seek not
therefore your selves, set not up your names and parts to be idolized, scorn not
those whose diligence and pains in the Church exceed yours, learn of them,
disdain them not. God does great things by poor means: but seldom receives
honor from such as seek to get up into their own saddle by Gods stirrup: and
by their preaching the sacred truth of God, hoyse up their own sails, and
outrun the Lord by their own pride; wonder not, nor fret that you lose the
hearts of Gods people, and that they turn from you; John 10.27.
for his sheep hear his voice, and not the voice of a stranger. Alter the
property of the unsanctified parts, and let them be devoted to an humble
service of his Sanctuary, Exodus 35.23.
and then your gold and blue silk shall be accepted: else Goats hair and
Badgers skins shall be preferred before you. And to end my counsel, consider
but this, although you should repent before you dye, yet you must be saved as
it were by fire: 1 Cor. 3.13.15
God will not suffer any of your hay and stubble to cleave to his foundation of
pearls: This is the best of it, your work must burn by the censure of Gods
purity: but if your work burn not by your repentance, both your selves and
your work too shall burn through your impenitency.

Godly Ministers must not only use, but also lay down their parts and
services if God so require.
I confess it might beseem my self to learn of some of them, yet let me
speak one word! Beware (my Brethren) lest having seemed to escape a gulf, ye
be drowned in a shallow! Renounce even those gifts also by which you seem to
honor God: rest not in this that you dare not basely pride your selves in any
of your parts above God: but beware of a finer spun self then this: deny your
selves even the second time (as I may say) lest otherwise you fall in love so
far with your service, that you grow to think God cannot want you. Perhaps
God may try you in your only son Ishac, Genesis 22.2.
whether you can be content to want him or no, for God, as well as to enjoy him
in God. The only trial of the denying of your own parts for God, is, if when
God calls for them in sacrifice, you be as willing to make shipwreck of them,
as to improve them. Be not more anxious for God then he is for himself: for he
can make the stones cry, although you should hold your peace. To serve God so
with your gifts, as to be loath (upon any need) to forgo your selves,
distrusting God in case of losing them, fearing the reproach of men, or what
damage, hurt and dishonor may accrue to you in your private despised
conditions: I say, this is to serve your selves and not the Lord. Enquire
closely as well upon what terms your very gifts themselves may prove
dishonorable to God (as the case may stand) as your forfet of them (yea much
more) if God call for them. Note well.
To despise to stoop to the enquiry after the least evil which may defile
your consciences in the improveing of your gifts: or, to live ignorant of any
such duty as might honor God as much, or more, then your gifts: To conceal
and hide from your own eyes any part of Gods will, under pretense of the best
service, done by your gifts: To distrust God in supporting you for a good
conscience, in the forfeit of your gifts; and lastly, to rest in this, that
seeing God may use your sin to his own glory, therefore your sin may seem
less in your own sight! What are all these, save unseasonably to pin your
service upon Gods sleeve? and to serve under a false banner, to lose more in
the hundred then you gain in the shire? and in a word, Vzza like, out of your
heat and resolution to serve, not to care upon what dishonorable and unseemly
conditions you go to work! I judge no particular person: I leave you to the
judgment of your own conscience. I do not accuse you as if ye sought to
win the spurs by your parts, or could not take it well of God, if sometime
he held you short in gifts and performances. I press yet another thing: Be
your service never so allowable, yet fall not in love so with it, pity not
others so far in the want thereof, that you should be unwilling to come under
the command of God, as well in suffering as in obeying. 1 Cor. 14.32.
The spirit of Prophets must be subject to the Prophets, (be it never so good)
how much more to God himself? And it is as good sometime to take counsel as
to give it: and as good to look so to some one thing (which we desire, and
find our selves enabled by God unto) as yet not to blindfold our other eye to
over see some other duty lying before us, which (although perhaps it be
unwelcomely sudden to us, and speak in our cast, yet) is such an one as God
calls for at our hands to a further honoring of him. So shall we do greater
things (when God abases us in our selves, and has us at his beck) then, when
all our best gifts are improved, without such a command: so also shall we
proportion our selves in some beautiful sort to walk with God, and trust his
Alsufficiencie both in our sufferings and our doings: and God shall honor
himself in both, and us for both, we doing both, in selfe-denyall and faith.
Luke 17.10.
Although (poor wretches) when we have done all we shall be but unprofitable
servants.

Fourthly, this is terror and conviction to all Papists and formal
worshippers. Popish stateliness of devotion is odious to God.
for their scorning the simplicity of Christ and his Ministry and ordinances:
and counting the mean things thereof a derogation to their Religion, and an
occasion to make the worship of God vile and contemptible to the people. And
therefore instead of mean and foolish things, they stablish pompous, great and
wise ways and devices of their own: glorious Images, Roods, Crucifixes,
relics, donaries of gold, silver and jewels: They fill their Churches with
paintings and curious pictures, and strive who shall outstrip the other in the
beauty of buildings, the curiosity of carvings, of imbellishings of Idols, who
shall have the richest copes and canopies, and the most sumptuous Altars,
chalices, pixes, and other complements belonging: when their Mass is most
gorgeously set forth to the sense, and when the Ministry of Christ is thereby
eaten up (as the fat kine by the lean) when all spiritual means of
mortification are turned to carnal and outward, such as the flesh delights in,
but the lazy and base heart of man abhorres, then do they think the service of
God best dispatched. Oh ye hypocrites! who do oppose God point blanke in his
purpose, and turn the conversion of souls into perdition of them; how will ye
answer God in his day of account? ye pretend that hereby ye grace Gods service,
but, the truth is, ye overthrow it, embondaging the senses and enthralling the
consciences of men to a worship pleasing and possessing the carnal part, but
leaving their souls lean and sterved for lack of spiritual instruction. God
requires that his spirit in the ordinances, 1 Cor. 2.1.2.
should quash and control all the excellency of man: and you strive by amusing
and detaining the eyes and ears and senses of the body, with pomp and state,
to quash the power of preaching, and the efficacy of the spirit. But there
shall come forth a fire out of the breath of his mouth one day, and consume all
these inventions of yours, and carry both you and them to the place whence they
came. The misery is, that in the mean time, you do snare and lead innumerable
souls to hell, and leave them at last either to senslesnes or despair, and
none may say, what do you?

Proud hypocrites disdain to be taught by mean persons.
The like I may say of all formal hypocrites: who disdain the sillines of Gods
Ministers, preaching, and sacraments: they forsooth scorn that every base
fellow should have the credit of converting them; they could be content to
hear Christ preach, or Paul, or some of the Apostles (who yet if they were
among them should be as base with them as the basest) they must either hear
some great learned Doctor, or scholar of renown speak to them, or else they
will not lend their ear: others say that their Jesuits are the only men of
learning now a days, as for our English Preachers, alas! they are but silly
fellows to build a man's faith upon: In a word, either they will ground
themselves upon the wisdom of flesh, and the preaching of such as seek with
curious and quaint oratory, and the deceitfulness of man, to entangle the
mind, or else they care not whether they hear any or no. But oh ye wise
worldings! know ye that God does usually the greatest things by meanest
instruments? know ye not that flesh loves it self, and that there is small
hope of doing any great things by fleshly means? should then flesh glory in
her self, and take away the glory from God, by an unsanctified and unsavory
boasting of it own strength? Surely look to it, they who build their faith on
man, must rush their souls to destruction of necessity. And the wisdom of
God has chosen the foolishness of preaching to save them that believe. If
ever ye look for this, be wise intime, and become fools that ye may be truly
wise to salvation. 1 Cor. 1.1.27.
Of which I shall speak more fully in the next use.

Examine.
what great things God has wrought in them by the poor and silly means of
his Ordinances. Try whether the Lord has by them translated you from the
kingdom of Satan and darkness, to the kingdom of his dear Son, rid you
out of the thraldom of your lusts and Idols, to serve the living God. Think
not that the kingdom of Christ stands in a few tricks of wit, or entising
words of a frothy Mounteebankes tongue: think not that fine sentences, or
strong lines, or a jangling wit, priding it self in a vainglorious Preacher,
will go for pay, when Christ shall come to judge. Trials and marks of our
fleshly wisdom subdued Luke 18.8.
The great work which he will look for, will be faith unfeigned, a broken
spirit, love out of a pure heart, and a new creature. Therefore take some
marks hereof, and try your selves.

First, the Lord by poor means, will cast down that frame of carnal Acts 9.
Revel. 3. Psalm. 119.
and you shall be anointed with eye salve, to behold wonders in those poor
instruments and ordinances which you have so long despised. The old judgment
of error, and this foolish world, shall be taken away, and a new Spirit of
discerning shall be given you, to look off from the base outside of man, of
preaching, of Sacraments, and you shall see a divine power and majesty
therein. The Ass shall not seem so base as the rider seems glorious: and you
shall strew your clothes, and bows of trees in the way of Christ, crying
Hosanna, and magnifying God, that by such poor pipes and channels, conveyes so
great things to men. Ask your selves, did you ever perceive such a work
wrought in you? If not, you still abide in the gall of bitterness, and are
pur-blinde, seeing nothing a far off.

Secondly, the Lord will make you so far from your disdain, that he Acts
2.37.
who came trembling about those same Apostles (whom in the former Chapter they
had flouted and mocked, as drunken with new wine) and said, Men and brethren,
what shall we do to be saved? So shall you do, such as you have jeered for
zealous men of the Spirit, you shall now be glad to be admitted to ask them
what course you may take to escape hell? and surely try your selves in this
point, if still your disesteeme of Gods Ministers continue in you, you are none
of those in whom GOD has wrought any great work in.

Thirdly, the Lord shall correct that corrupt self-love and partiality in 1
Cor. 3. Ephesians. 4.
and the edifying of the Church in love. Partiality and private ends of your
own shall stink unto, as knowing, that if God convert you to himself, he
makes you members of the body, which bears you up, not you it. Not the
meannesse of the vessel shall now offend you, but the rich treasure in it
shall ravish you: now if your souls may be saved, all other respects shall
vanish.

4 Trial.
Fourthly, God will teach us to deny our selves in that base ease and sloth of
our spirits, which satisfies us in having, in hearing a Minister, and the sound
of his words, which contents us in that we enjoy Sabbaths, Sermons, and
Sacraments by course, in a rolling succession, without observing the power and
savor which any of them leave in us. This commonnesse, and taking all for
granted upon a custom, blindes us, even as a cloth hung before our eye,
hinders the action thereof, and puts it out by degrees. This ordinary
accustoming of our selves to that which is obvious, casts a veil over our
hearts, so that we never come within the holiness of the ordinances, neither
mark any great work done by them, either in our selves or others. And by this
means we are hardened by them, rather then wrought upon, either by humbling,
quickening, or renewing. How has the Lord then wrought in us? have we after a
long sleepy, and drowsy hearing and receiving, at last been pulld by the ear,
and jogged by the Spirit, to stand up, and be awakened, to see the wonders
hidden under the veil of humane infirmity, and the poverty of the
Ordinances. Do we wax weary of formal remembering of a few sentences, or
commending the Preacher, talking of what we heard; and do our hearts begin to
burn within us when the Word is opened through the evidence of that Spirit
which speaks in the Word? Luke 24.
Do we feel the weight of truth uttered by a weak man, to bring our souls
under the authority of God, even as if he himself spoke? Do we feel the
power of an Ordinance (as far above man, as heaven is above earth) to awe and
overruled us? It is a sign that God is preparing to work somewhat more then
ordinary in us, if we suffer it not to slip from us.

5 Mark.
Fifthly, this shall be another sign to us, if we acknowledge a providence of
special mercy, in that the Lord will use poor means to convey his
greatness and goodness into us: For, what proportion is there between the
Majesty of God, and our baseness? Or how should we endure either to hear his
voice, or the voice of an Angel? Therefore the familiarity of the instrument,
and the weakness of the Ordinances, is a great benefit unto our simpleness.
And as those Israelites were not able to bear the terrors of God, no nor so
much as the face of Moses (being armed and honored with the extraordinary
gifts of the spirit) were feign to desire that Moses might speak, Exodus 20.
and that with a veyle upon his face, to weaken the shining of his countenance:
So should we turn our offense at the baseness of Christ, and the ordinances,
into admiration and thanks, that thereby, the excellency of God might be
accommodated the more easily to our weakness.

6 Mark.
Sixthly, another mark is, when the sinfulness of the instrument abusing the
ordinance, by his ignorant, rash, confused and unprofitable handling of the
word: yea, attempting the Sacraments with profane hands, through the
scandalousnesse of his life: does not weaken the esteem of the ordinances
themselves in our hearts, nor cause us to stumble at them, and slight them ever
the more. Rather, when our souls tremble at such impudence and boldness of
man, (that they should dare with unskilful or impure spirits, to obtrude
themselves upon Gods holy matters) and look up to God by prayer, that either
he would better and change, or else cast them out of his Church; that they may
no longer darken and destroy the excellency of truth, by their sacrilege and
audaciousnesse. Mean time, looking beyond the sin of the person, let us behold
the glory of that Ordinance in the nature thereof, which yet we see so sullied
and eclipsed by the blindness and wickedness of base usurpers.

Lastly, 7 Mark.
when we can fasten upon those great things which the Lord offers us by weak
means, and that by faith in a promise; taking them out as our own peculiar
portion. For, as when the Lord cast down the walls of Jerico by those
Rams-hornes, the chief active instrument of the miracle, was, the faith of the
Church, Heb. 11.
as the Author of the Hebrews tells us; so, the great things of God are
conveyed by faith into the heart, through the Conduit of a promise. Look what
the Lord of the Ordinances, Sabbath, and Sacraments, has promised to work by
them in the soul, (when there seems least likelihood to man) that the soul
may and will expect from him thereby through faith.

Therefore try our selves in some of these. This doctrine aims not at
discoursing of the several works of the Word; yet so far as the point will
admit, let us try our selves by some of them. The promise of God assures us,
that the weapons of the Minister of God, are mighty, through God, to cast
down strong Towers of a prejudicate, rebellious, stout proud heart, and the
high thoughts of man, 2 Cor. 10.4.
which resists the obedience of Christ: Can we then speak it in truth, that we
have found this virtue go out from the Word into us, that when we went to the
Word full of our selves, yet we have returned thence empty? And as a Soldier
out of an hot battle, wherein he has lost an hand, a leg, or received some
deadly wound; yea, (which is more) lost his great stomach, so that he sees
himself to be a very fool, and no body to that he seemed: So, have we seen
that in the Law which has cooled our courage, and made us afraid to set up
our bristles any more? Then a weak Ordinance has wrought a strong work in us;
for it has mastered that which was our strong fort, I mean the fervor of our
jolly stomachs. It was not the work of a poor instrument, but the power of God
which did it.

Again, it is the promise of God that the truth shall make us free? Have we
then felt that it has unbound our souls from the chains of our fear,
bondage and infidelity? Has it so enlightened us with the glad tidings of
Christ, that it has also piercied into our affections deeply, to long and
hunger after them for our selves? Did we find, that after once we heard the
truth as it is in Jesus, we could not lin, nor give over till it conveyed the
merit of his satisfaction and blood into us, to pacify our conscience, and to
rid us of that fear of death, Heb. 2.15.
whereunto before we were subject? And so renew our souls by the efficacy of
his death, so that we have crucified our old man with the affections and lusts:
Ephesians. 4.18.
and felt the blood, strength and marrow of the new Adam and quickening Spirit
reviving our veins and bones? Surely then poor means have done great things
in us, far above all which the power of weak man can reach unto. Again, the
Gospel serves to breed and beget the soul to the hope of immortality and life
in us. Do we then feel, that as poor as the Preacher was, 2 Timothy 1.
yet the Lord overruled him so, as by the power of the Spirit breathing in
him, the carnal savor of the creature, the love of the world, and a fading
life here below, is driven out of us, and the breath and savor of Grace and
Heaven is put into us? Has it cast out our lingering after an earthly Paradise,
irrecoverable, and carried us into a Paradise of glory, never to be cast out
more? Has it filled us with heavenly desires, even while we are upon earth?
Has it set us in an estate of content and peace? yea, as it were in a rich
vein of hope, wherein we are restless, and ever digging deeper, till we
attain full satisfaction in the fullness of the fountain? Surely, if we can
say this, in any measure, we may buy and sell upon it, that the promise by
faith has been the mean of uniting us, base flesh, and sinful dust and ashes,
to the Lord himself, eternal and incomprehensible: that is to say, corrupt,
weak, wretched man, to God, blessed for ever. Nothing can do such a work but
a divine ordinance by the power of a Mediator through a promise: for what is
weaker then a Minister to effect it, or what more impossible and incompatible,
in reason, then for a sinful man to partake it? This then be said of this
second thing collected out of this verse, to wit, the means of Naaman his
healing, the washing in Jorden.

The third gerall.
The third and last point out of this verse I will propound by answering a
question briefly, Naaman, but the power of God only in and by them. To what
end did the Prophet so press upon him the washing in Jorden? and why had it
been so heinous a contempt for him to have neglected this charge? Answ. Why God
uses outward means to convey grace: viz. To stop man's devices.
The answer is double: First, in respect of the necessary concurrence of the
water to the instrumentalnes of Gods working: Secondly, in respect of a sign
or ratification of the promise in the heart of Naaman. To open both these in a
word: For the former, it is always the course of God to work by means and
instruments, sensible and bodily; when he has to do with us, men of a bodily
and sensible nature. As in the duty of prayer, though the work thereof is
properly spiritual and holy, and the Lord can tell our hearts, as well as our
tongues; yet it is his will that we offer it up by the instrument of outward
speech, orderly set and sensible: Take unto you words and say, Hosea 13.2.
receive us graciously. So, though the power of regeneration stand not in
speech, but in the Holy Ghost: yet the Lord will not so work immediately, but
by the ministry of man to man, he has ordained to convey his spirit into the
heart. And the reason is plain: for else what a door should be set open to the
fantastical spirit of man, to vent his own speculations and conceits, without
any warrant from God? Who would not frame to himself revelations of the
Spirit, and devise new inventions of serving God? How do Anabaptists boast of
their own fancies? How do they despise the ordinary calling of Ministers and
preaching, and thrust forth themselves by the instinct of their own spirit, as
if they were some great persons? How do Papists devise new worships, as that
Mass of theirs (which is nothing else save a mass of many ingredients added
by sundry of their Popes, or masters of ceremonies) and those many Sacraments
of theirs, whereof not one print of Gods appointing appears in all the
Scriptures? If this be done by them, against the express will of God, what
would they have attempted, if they had been left unto themselves? How infinite
would they then have been? Therefore the Lord will have all that look for any
work of his Spirit, to attend the means closely, and reverently, and only by
and through them to expect for blessing. If God please to unite his grace only
to them (ordinarily) may it not well beseem us to tie our attendance and
observation of his power in and by them? This is one cause why the Lord would
not extraordinarily convey himself to the Eunuch, to Cornelius, Acts 8. Acts
10. Acts 9.
to Saul at Damascus, save by the intermediall instruments of Peter, Philip,
and Ananias; our spirit is always in our extremities: for either we run to
our fancies, conceits, sloth and ease, contemning the means, or else (when
means must be used) we fall to idolize them; both which the holy Ghost
abhorres.

Another reason is, in respect of Naaman himself; who was a novice. Why are
signs and sacraments used by the Lord, for the effecting of spiritual things,
viz. to assure our weak faith.
Now because that was a difficult object for him to settle upon, the Lord
appoints him this outward and real sign of the waters, to prop up his faith
by, and to settle his inner spirit by the external sense. As if he should say,
Go thy ways, I will heal thy leprosy believe me: and if that be unlikely to
thee, lo I give thee a sign, even the waters of Jorden, that, as verily as
thou shall drench thy self therein, so verily will I by my spirit heal thee.
Occupy thy self in obeying of me, and lo, I will be present with thee, to put
thy weak heart out of doubt, concerning thy cure. This was always the course
which the Lord took with his old Church, whenever he promised any blessing
or deliverance unto them. Judge. 6. and 7. and 8.
Thus Gede^n a man inexpert in war, was feign to be strengthened by the fleece
both dry and wet: and by the dream of a barley loaf by one of the Midianites;
yea the Lord never revealed any purpose of his to the Prophets; concerning
either the public, or any special person, but he strengthened it by some
outward sign, suting the thing, and affecting the sense. Thus when the Lord
meant to rend ten Tribes from Rehoboam, and give them to Jeroboam, 2 King. 12.
Ahijah the Prophet is sent to tear his garment into twelve pieces, and to
give him ten, and keep two. A very real resemblance. And that young Prophet
to strengthen his denunciation against the same Jeroboam, Cap. 13.
and his idol at Bethel, told him two signs, one present, viz. the falling
out of the ashes from the broken Altar of sacrifice: the other to come, Iosiahs
poluting those high places by burning the bones of the Priests upon them. So
Esaias strengthens Hezekia, in the news of his recovery, Esaias 37.
by that famous sign of the Suns going back ten degrees. And so, when
Ahaz refused the sign, Esaias 8.
the Prophet gave the Church one touching the deliverance from Rezin: to wit,
the conceiving of a Virgin (some two or three hundreds of years after) even
with a son, who^e name should be Emanuel. Infinite it were, to speak of
Ezekiels brick, pourtraying the siege of Jerusalem, the hole in the wall, by
which he convayed away his stuff: Ieremies basket of figs, the best and
worst, that could be eaten, to describe the difference between the Jews in
Babel, and the rebels at Jerusalem. The like was Agabus his taking Paul's
girdle: and the very false Prophets Zidkijah and Hananiah, affected the like
course in their horns and yokes. Even so, the Lord did teach his people by
many bodily ceremonies, cleansing of leprosy by the Priest, and, washing by
outward sacrifices, and the like. And by those many resemblances of the blood
of the Paschall Lamb sprinkled, and the flesh of it eaten: as also by Manna,
the Rock gushing forth with water: Also by the cutting off the foreskin of the
male, he made the Lord Jesus and the power of his death and cross to be
known sacramentally, (although but darkly) in his Church. And now under the
New Testament, although the worship be more spiritual, Sacraments excel
common signs.
yet the course is the same. True it is, Sacraments exceed signs in their
efficacy, yet agree with them in this general kind of outward signifying or
strengthening the soul by signs. For what else does the Lord by Baptism, or
the Supper, but ratify the weak receiver, in respect of the faith of the
Covenant?

Let us therefore make use of this holy course of God for our conviction and
assurance: and as seals exceed bare covenants, because they carry the parties
to an assurance of faithfulness between them, through the strength of the Law
of the land in that case made and provided, that they may not stagger or
question the meaning of each other: so, let us thankfully embrace the course of
God toward us for our establishment in his purpose and covenant, both to
ingraft us into himself, and nourish us in himself, as the branch in the
stock. Let us not cavil at the difference of miraculous and ordinary signs:
for the Author of the one, is author of the other, and (in measure best known
to himself) has promised concurrence with the one as well as the other: yea,
the miraculous herein, comes short of the ordinary, in that the former had but
a temporary assistance for the present occasion; whereas the ordinary have
promise of a more spiritual and excellent assistance until the end of the
world: let us not then requite the Lord basely for this his provision: let us
not become weaker thereby, as weak children in their limbs, when they are
taught to stay themselves by a rail or frame for the nonce, grow weaker after
such provision then before. Whereas rather we should use such helps as
purblinde eyes, and weak limbs use: that as Spectacles and Crutches, both to
preserve and relieve their sight and goings. We should struggle against our
carnal distrust, by these sensible stays, and say: As verily as I have been
washed in the Jorden of Baptism, so verily shall the flesh of my soul come
again, as the flesh of a little child, I shall be clean, and I lot upon it by
faith. As truly as I take, and eat and drink this bread and this wine, so
certainly shall I be nourished in my weak faith, and cheered in my fainting,
drooping spirit, to run my race, and to grow in holiness. But because I have
in a set treatise for the nonce, pressed this point fully, therefore I here
repeat nothing: let the Reader look upon the former Treatise of the Sacraments,
as I have alleged it before. See also more of this in the 21 Lecture, after.
It is now time to put an end to this doctrine and verse, and to conclude the
Sermon. Let us pray, etc.

THE FOVRTH LECTVRE Upon the eleventh verse.
VERSE XI. But Naaman was wroth, and went away, and said, Behold, I thought he
will surely come forth to me, and stand and call upon the Lord his God, and
strike his hand upon the place, and recover the Leper.

VERSE. 12. Are not Abana and Pharfar rivers of Damascus better then all the
waters of Israel? etc.


WE are now (beloved) by providence come to the second general head of this
Text, The second general of the text. viz. Naamans answer to the message.
and that which contains in it one of the maine scopes for which I chose this
Scripture. And it contains in it the answer of Naaman to the Prophets
message: For the handling whereof I will first lay down the method of the
answer in these two verses, and so come (God willing) to the several points
therein, as they lie in their order. Generally then observe, Naaman tried by
Gods delay of the cure.
that Naaman is thoroughly tried by Gods delaying of his cure: God searches him
to the quick, now he is set in this fair way of providence, yet the Lord stops
his course, and makes the cure more longsome then he looked for: And how does
Naaman take it? Surely very ill, and unwelcomly. Three specialls in this verse.
This general contains three specialls: The first (not in words, but in
sense) is the ground of this distaste, which he does not conceal; he is too
full, and this is the third affront he had met with in his journey: For first,
1. Naamans self-conceit and prejudice.
he goes the wrong way to the King of Israel, and loses that labor. Secondly,
when he is set in his way, lo, he comes to the Prophets house and crouches;
but the Prophet comes not at him. Thirdly, that might have been borne, if the
errand had been thereafter; but now that also savours of dallying and delay,
and now he utters all, and says; Behold, I thought with my self, he would
come out and lay on his hand and heal me; but lo, he sends me word I must go
to Jorden. Surely, this is but mockery, I cannot think he means me good: Thus
he utters himself. The opening of it.
The root then of his discontent, is his conceit or selfe-prejudice, he would
frame a way of cure to himself, without any warrant from God or the Prophet;
to wit, that now (sure) the work would soon be done, Elisha would lay on his
hand upon the disease, and in Gods name heal it without any more ado. Now he
sees it falls out otherwise, he is at a set, and knows not what to make of
it: If he had moderated himself in his heat of selfe-thoughts, and said thus
within himself; Surely, it is God that I have to do withal, and how he will
go to work with me, I know not: I may imagine a thing, but he in whose power
the stroke is, must determine, and good reason that I follow, and be led by
him; and well I may, for I shall be a gainer at the last; and what is it for me
to wait, in respect of the exceeding good I shall enjoy? If this had been his
thought, how well and equally had his heart been carried through the work? But
lo, selfe-opinion sets such a color before his eye, that he is wholly
transported with it out of his own possession, and now being crossed of his
own plot and way of healing, he is out of patience. This is the first thing.

The second special: The fruit of this conceit. Discontent and rage.
The second is the fruit of this defeat, and that is wrath, and going away in a
rage: both testimonies of selfe-defeated: First at the message hearing he is
wroth, and when he had vented the cause, then (as a man gathering more and more
stomach) he adds this, viz. an abandoning and renouncing of the Prophet, and
turns away in a rage; yea, resolves to give him over (as full of him as he
was before) and to go home as he came, let all go which way it will, he
will lose all his labor, rather then be thus gulled and mocked by any man. A
strange thing that this stuff should appear in him, who had so far put
himself upon the Prophet.

The third special: His strengthening himself in his humor, by carnal
reason, in Verse 12.
The third thing is the backing and hardening himself in this his discontent (for
all wrathful ones love to seem mad with reason, lest it should appear that
want of reason made them so) and his color is to confute the Prophets message.
The sum is, the Prophet has sent for me to make a gull of me, pretending to
heal me when he intends nothing less: For if he did, to what end should he
prescribe me to wash in Jorden? If washing there would serve, how comes it to
pass, that there be so many Lepers in Israel unhealed? And if so be, Jorden
be such sovereign water, what are our rivers at home, Abana and Pharfar, which
yet never were known to be medicinable for the leprosy? What a message then
is this to send me, Wash in Jorden and be clean? Lo (I beseech you) to what a
man may come who is blind-folded with self! He will stiffen himself in his
error by any argument coming next hand: Carnal reason then here offers it
self to confute the message, as a mockery. And how (I pray) does it argue?
Thus, Its a senseless, unlikely thing, nay impossible to reason. What then?
have thou forgot thy self Naaman? Came thou to be healed by reason, or by a
Prophet? What a consequence is this? Carnal reason judges otherwise,
therefore it is ridiculous that Jorden should heal. Nay rather, if a Prophet
from God will heal by Jorden, why may he not? For he heales not by Jorden, as
Jorden, but as by an instrument of Gods divine power. Therefore rather to argue
against God by carnal reason, is more ridiculous. Thus much for the opening of
these two verses.

The first general handled, viz. Why God delayed the cure still? That he might
know himself.
I will first give a brief touch of the trial which God put here upon Naaman,
in delaying his cure. Why was it? To try all which was in his heart, and to
make him see what metal he was made of: God was loath to send him away with
his cure, and a proud wrathful heart withal. Therefore now he discovers him
to himself, and rather by this delay of the miracle, chooses to make all his
crouching and humbleness, break out into rage and distemper, and bewray him
openly, then he should nuzzle up himself in a fair opinion of that which is
not in him. Naaman feel the Lord present in this work? Did he not as a
carnal man in all this? or is it any wonder he should be a wrathful raging man,
being a Heathen, and crossed in his maine aim? I answer: Naaman to be
conceived of as one under Gods workmanship.
When once Naaman truly came to himself, both the former rubs, and this
affront of delaying his healing, wrought a mavelous abasement in his soul,
and set forward the work exceedingly. I have already handled the reason why
the Lord stopped Elisha from coming out: Now I would briefly add this, how God
tries him in disappointing his haste, and thereby occasions him to rebel and
break out, that he might know himself yet more thoroughly. And let it teach us
this, That the custom of God is, Doctrine. Whom God will save, he will teach
them to to know all in their heart.
when he is working any great change in any, he will try them deeply, and
make them know what is in their spirits: They shall find many a stop in their
course, things shall not succeed as they desire: God will hide himself from
them, and seem not to regard their labors, prayers, tears, endeavors, but
suspend their hopes and desires from such success as they look for. And why?
To try them, of what frame they are, whether their forwardness

Thus the Text says, Deuteronomy. 8.2. Deuteronomy. 8.2.
that the Lord dealt with the Israelites in the Wilderness. First, he would
not lead them the right way, by the land of the Philistims: but by the
Wilderness: and there he would so hold them occupied, that whereas they might
have been there in forty days, he led them a traverse of forty years. He
held them to hardmeat, and when he gave them a supply, yet he gave them but
from hand to mouth: and why was all this? Moses tells them; even to try all
that was in their heart, to turn it up-side-downe, that by all the weary
journey of the Desert, their hunger, their wants, Gods provision, their
unthankfulness, Gods judgments, wasting them, delaying and crossing their
lingering after Canaan, a land flowing with milk and honey, by the ruin of all
the carcasses of them that came out of Egypt, the Lord might cause them to know
themselves and the Lord thoroughly, deny themselves, wait upon his promise, and
enjoy Canaan with a more humble and thankful heart, then else they had done.
Otherwise what boot had it been to have brought the^ into Canaan with their
fathers spirits? The land certainly had surfeted them, and vomited them out
else, as soon as they had come in: but now God begins with his people as he
means to proceed.
The Lord begins with his own as he means to proceed: He means to make them
patient, meek, enemies to self, privy to more corruption then the world
knows of, jealous and watchful, and willing to be as God will have them, and
to think it best to be base, when God sees it meet: this I say the Lord is
feign to deal with his betimes, even in the first beginnings of his grace, (as
a man would bow a twig as he would have it grow after:) And therefore in the
very threshold he stops their hasty course, and whereas they would think they
might be converted and believe quickly, asoone as they feel their need and
hear of a promise, lo, the Lord makes it a longer work then so, and delays
them, till he have laid a foundation for after times, till he have made them
know all that is in their heart, and not think much of Gods corrections
afterward, as having been traind up to the yoke from their youth. Ephraim was
as an heifer unaccustomed to the yoke, Jer. 31.31.
but when she was yoked and humbled, she converted to God, and smote upon her
thigh, and so was fitter for mercy, then when she was wild and unbroken.

To teach us the price of grace.
which of us would ever think grace to be such a thing as it is? which of us
would not wax wanton with God, and forget our former condition? which of us
would p^^se mercy and conversion as the inestimable, free gift of a gracious
God, who might have left us at large, to the corruptions of the world, and the
depth of the Devil? But, when we see how the Lord crosses us, what blocks are
in our way, and how hard it is to be vessels prepared for mercy, to be cleansed
from our evil savor, which would defile the grace of God, then we wonder that
ever the Lord should bestow any mercy upon us at all. And so, we walk in the
sense and savor of it more humbly and thankfully afterward: we suspect our
base hearts, we are jealous of forgoing it, earnest to pursue it, glad of the
least dram of it, and why? we know the price and worth of it, In this frailty
and corruption of nature, we can bear no great measures of grace.
by good experience of that it cost us to compass it. Where is there a man who
is meet to enjoy any great matter from God, either outward blessing, or
spiritual favor, without pride and swelling? So that the Lord is faint always
to be much in preparing such as he intends to bestow any great matter upon. How
long was David in preparing by the Lord, See 1 Samuel from chap. 15. to the end
of the book.
ere he came to the kingdom? Between his first anointing, and his Crowning,
how many turn againes and pursuits had he? Surely as the Merchant of the East
Indies who ventures for rich wares and precious commodities has an hard task
of it, goes through strange hazards, by pirates, by tempests, by winds, by
rocks, and by continual fear, both going for them, and coming home with
them: and all to teach him the price of them, that he may after enjoy them more
soberly; so is it here. The Lord is feign to prolong the day of his mercy and
pardon, and to bring the soul through many adventures, to teach it to enjoy
mercy without wantonness, giddiness, lightness, and boasting. A drunken man
can bear strong drink or wine with his weak brain, as well as our slight
hearts can entertain grace: we wax vain, and frothy, idle and empty, as not
knowing what we have received from God, nor how sober and wise we ought to be
in the use of it. 2 Cor. 1.2.3.
So Paul: the Lord meant to betrust him with deep revelations: But before that,
how was he feign to buffet him? what bitter greetings had he of his vile heart,
and how was he abased in his own feeling? And why? Surely to teach him to
walk humbly not to swell, nor disdain others, but to distinguish the
excellency of Gods grace from the baseness of his own spirit.

As we see it to fall out in the disposition of seasons and weather: Simil.
while the winter season is in her settling and height, although there be a
general coldness of the air; yet it is mixed with some calmnesse, and
moderation: But when once the spring tide is approaching, we see what
inequality of weather there is, winds, raines, tempests, and blustering: all to
purge the sky, and to bring down the winterly distempers of it, that the coast
being clear, the sweet season of the spring and summer may succeed. Just so it
is with the soul: perhaps while it lies under the winter of her own
desolation, she makes a shift, and has no great chains upon her, as being
under the hatches of misery: But if once the Lord cause the spring time of life
and conversion to approach; strange it is, what tempests, clouds, and weather
arise, the heart grows full of fears, corruption rebels, by occasion of the
Law, and self rises up in arms by occasion of the Gospel; a marvailous change
appears in the soul, through terrors, bondage, doubtings, resistings,
cavellings, and distempers of a base heart, loath to leave that hell of hers,
(which by custom became her heaven.) But all this is but as it should be, the
Lord proceeds gradually and by steps, delays the work of grace, and all that
the coast may be somewhat cleared before hand, and the soul prepared to
welcome the season of mercy, with calmenes, humbleness and modesty. To
conclude, the Lord is To discern them from such as are not his own.
to the end that he may discern them from such as are not of his number. For
why? when hypocrites once come to see the conditions of grace, what attendance
upon means, what knowledge and sense of sin, what deep convincing of conscience
is required: how humble, hungry, painful, earnest, the Lord looks the soul
should be, that desires grace, how plain-hearted in her aims, and prising it
above all liberties, how willing to sell all, (and glad it may) to buy this
pearl: lo, their rotten carnal hearts fly off, and abhor to stoop so low
upon any hopes: They thought heaven might be compassed with small ado, and
that they might have it, and their own wills too: But when they see it will
not be: nay more, that many a poor honest soul is feign to wait long at Gods
gate, till he see it a fit season to bestow his grace upon it: alas! poor
wretches! they never were either so pinched with sin, nor affected with
mercy, as to bestow half the cost for it, although they might be sure of it:
and therefore they fall off, either altogether, and so turn back to their
lusts; or else, if light and compulsion of conscience scare them from that,
they still abide as they are in a saplesse, fulsome, and dead course. But it is
not so with the others. Gods true Merchants of the best pearls, who know the
true worth of them, will not be beaten off by such discouragements, but (but
with Naaman in the verses following) rather then they will forfet all their
hopes, and carry back their lepers skin With them: See Mat. 13.44.
they will put their lives in their hands, or rather themselves in the Lords,
to deal with them as he please, and whatsoever difficulties or delays they
meet with, they will bear them, seeing they are for the best, all shall end
well: By waiting the Lord will appear at last, but by giving him over, they
are sure to perish. Oh! there is great use of this course! how many desperate
hypocrites does the Lord try hereby, discovering their baseness, rage, and
discontent? and how does he comfort his own faithful poor servants, that
have waited upon his salvation, assuring them it was his own grace that
sustained them in such delays and difficulties to hold on?

Use Instruction and admonition to all Novices in grace, not to be dismayed for
difficulties.
The use whereof should be instruction and admonition to all Naamans and novices
in regeneration and the work of conversion: first, that they make no other
account before hand but to find difficulties and affronts in their way,
although perhaps they set forward at first with fair wind and great hopes:
yet that both wind and tide may turn against them, before they have done. Let
not him that puts on his harnis, boast as he that puts them off. Rather make
account of the hardest before and be armed against it, be not discouraged nor
faint in the onset, for I tell thee the worst of Gods way is easier then the
best of thy former course of lust and ignorance, the paths whereof are
pleasant, yet going down to hell. And being warned thus, it will be half an
arming to thee, it will cool thy carnal heat, send thee to God for strength,
and make thee out of savor of thy selfe-attempts. Secondly, when thou shall
meet with such hardnesses in the way, wonder not nor shrink back: say thus, I
entered upon regeneration with this proviso, and labored to cast the hardest.
If easier terms be offered by Gods providence, if Satan be kept off, or
corruption, held under, or the work made sweeter then I feared, let me count it
my gain and a portion which many of my brethren want. But if I meet with
brunts, let me not desist and go back to Egypt, but proceed on toward
Canaan, hoping that yet the issue shall be good. Say thus, now the Lord is
trying of me, of what mettle I am made, even as he tried those soldiers that
sooped water, Judge. 7.
or lapped it: now is the season for me to look about me, now let me abhor
to play the timeserver, hypocrite, staggerer, and revolter from Gods way,
because I meet with offenses in it. If now I turn away and be distempered,
vowing that I will never go on one step further, nor strike one stroke more, I
shall show my self and the mettle I am made of, but if I shall meekely devour
and digest these affronts, then I shall show a patient waiting heart upon God,
and one that esteems grace above all my labor, and a rich bargain upon the
price. If Naaman had been aware what God intended him before hand, he had
said no less: God tryes me by this delay, God make me meek, and keep me from
rage! But because he was yet ignorant, therefore he must be conceived as one
whose passions and anger the Lord meant to cover and pardon in due time, and
therefore now overruled for his good afterward.

Quest. What difficulties are they which Gods travelers endure?
But some may ask, what difficulties do ye mean? I answer, such as these.
Many enter upon conversion upon great hopes and affections stirred up by the
Gospel: But after a while, perhaps it pleases God to show them their faces in
such a glass of terror and confusion, that their hopes are turned into horror
for some good space together. Answ. Manifold. 1. Inward.
And in this condition they are tempted perhaps to avoid wounds of conscience
by making away themselves if God staid them not. Others feel a raging heart
with themselves, whether they were not better abandon all hearing and praying
any longer, and return to their joviall company and pleasures of sin again;
that so they may shun this sharp Schoolmaster by playing the trewants, and so
be at some ease: except God show them that this discipline (as untoothsome as
it is) yet is wholesome. Others

Others feeling these wrought in them, yet when they hear that faith

Others are outward affronts which meet with the soul, 2. Outward.
some are molested grievously with sad motions and temptations and conflicts
from Scripture, or with such qualmes and combats as do arise up as sparkles
from the over deep terrors of conscience, or the endless risings of their
corrupt hearts, casting up mire and dirt in them, and in the face of the truth,
and this irksomnes abides long, if God see good to enlarge Satan Cant. 5.6.7.
who buffetted her; These should have encouraged her: Even Ministers are often
great affronts in the way of poor souls, rating and scorning them for their
singularity; especially when they (through error) light upon such, as thinking
better of them. So do Parents, Guardians, Masters, lay offenses in the way of
their children, orphans, servants; some threatening to dis-inherit them, or to
disgrace them; others by their snibbing and chiding, or over-bearing them,
Conclusion of all with admonition.
I conclude therefore as before, let not such be dismayed, nor give over the
work of God, but remember God is now trying them, whether there be soundness
or no in them to continue: and if they will wait meekly his leisure, after he
has taught them to deny themselves, he will be found of them, as here of
Naaman, and reveal himself to them at last, more then at first.

Instruction. Christians must look for difficulties, as well in their
progress, as in their entrance.
much less to wonder if they meet with sundry affronts in their course of
Christianity. For if this be done in the green tree, how much more in the dry?
If novices who are so unfit for trials, meet with so many rubs to keep them
from faith: how much more must they look for them whose strength is greater?
Therefore consider, I pray you, and know God will try all, upon whom he has
bestowed any special favors and blessings: One way or other, sooner or later,
the Lord will lay stops and blocks in your way, to try what is in you: and
whether all that he has done for you, can prevail so far with you, as to
think him worth the cleaving and clinging unto, with faith and confidence. Genesis
22.2. Esaias 38. Job 1. Genesis 39.7. 2 Samuel 16.5, and 25. Matthew. 26.69.
Abraham must be tried by Isaac, Hezekiah by the Ambassadors, Job by loss of
all he has, Jonah by the errand to Ninivee, Joseph by Putef^rs wife, David by
Shemei, by Nabal by Mephibosheth, Peter by the Damsel, and others of the
Saints by other trialls: whether God be above their carnal delights, whether
their hearts be lowly, whether they can deny their wealth, their will, whether
they be that in secret which they are openly, what meekness, patience,
equality of heart is in them, Professors in their novicery look not to meet
with many troubles
whether they be sound and resolved to stick to God, or no. None shall want
their trials. Alas! many a poor soul entering upon profession, looks but from
hand to mouth, how he may hold fast the promise, and live according to
knowledge: but lo, in a short time after troubles arise in the married estate,
sickness, losses, enemies, pursuits, wrongs: such as he expected not: On the
other side, A none of them.
the Lord perhaps arms some strong corruption to pinch and gall him, which he
knows not how to be rid of: or stings him by unthankfulness

And what wonder? Do we think that God is willing to lose his cost? or to
harbor such under his roof, as he knows not what to make of? Such as under
color of Religion, maintain a great deal of loose scurfe within them? Is it
for the glory of God to own such? No surely: he will put them to it one time
or other, that he may by this mean separate the precious from the vile, and
their own hay and stubble from his own Pearls and Jewels. I grant, we think
otherwise, and hope to escape in a mist, and to carry our course even and
fair, God will try his, to separate the precious from the vile.
without any great trials or affronts: and the rather, because perhaps we have
long made a shift to go on smoothly, with praying in our families, and living
quietly with our wives, hearing Sermons, and the like. But the Lord, who will
have us known to be such as fear God, and eschew evil, and declare our
selves to be further off from mortal ones, then so: will take a course to try
us further what is in our heart. We see a loud wind may long blow upon a
rotten tree, on the good side, and the tree make a shift to stand: But at last
there comes a shrewd right wind, and gets into the hollow of the tree, Similie.
and affronts it on the rotten side, and then it puts hard to it, ten to one if
it lay it not under feet. Let us not then fence the hedge where it is highest,
but where it is lowest: strengthen the feeble knees, and rectify that which is
crooked; seek not praise to our selves for our gifts and labors, but know
there is a greater work lies upon us, to stick to our tacklings when the Lord
tries us; if God will bereave us of our only beloved lusts, and take from us
the pleasure of our heart, and that which is precious in our eyes (as he told
Ezekiel) if he so bring it about, Ezekiel. 24.16.
that we cannot have him and our credit, ease and carnal content also, then
let us consider what we have to do, and whether we will be faithful or no:
Now is our day of trial: now to magnify our selves, and seek applause, and
spare our own selves, for ease, for outward respects, is unseasonable. Think
of these matters ere they come: let us not be so busy with cockle shells and
toys upon the sea side, that we forget the tide, and so be swept away all on
the sudden. Despise not Gods trialls, nor put the thought of preparing for them
out of our minds, as matters of less import: think not to carry our course so
smoothly, as that we shall never be moved: lest God gaster us with some such
enemies, as come with the necessity of armed men, upon naked and unprovided
ones; and so make each vein in our hearts to ache, because of our rashness;
Beware lest they make us examples unto others of more wisdom and prevention,
who might have given example to others of self-denial, uprightness of heart,
and trusting God in the greatest streights. For surely if we do thus seek to
save our lives, Matthew. 16.26.
we shall lose them, and no great thank for our labor: and that which we have
preferred before God and peace of conscience, shall come out at our nostrils,
as most irksome vomit.

Amplification of the point. John 21.
The day of trial will not be to us as the day of our freedom and ease, but
as our Savior tells Peter; When thou were young, thou girdedst thy self, and
wentst where thou would: but when thou art old, another shall gird thee, and
lead thee whither thou would not. Prepare we for that day in our day of
liberty. Know that Halcyon days will not last always, but it is meet that
offenses and stumbling-blockes be laid in our ways to try us. And commonly
when we think our selves most stapled in our ease, and exempted from trials,
then are they at our heels. So that it were our best wisdom to suspect our
selves most when our way is most pleasant, Suspect trials most when our estate
seems to be calmest.
and our neast warmest and best feathered. Job did thus, and when sorrow came
upon him in the midst of his prosperity, yet if came not before it was feared.
Use we our best outward contents as if we used them not: and so, the forgoing
of them shall not be so excessively distasteful, nor lie in our way as
stumbling-blockes, when God shall try us. Behold them as things which may give
us the slip when we least look for it. Nero, that tyrant, having a fair woman
to his Empress, would sometimes take her by the neck, or chin, with these
bloody words, O goodly face and neck! but when I list, it shall be cut off.
Such an Item should we give our best contents, lest perhaps if we trust them to
far, they suddenly betray us to sorrow in forgoing, or an ill conscience in
retaining. Oh fair mercies! but when God will, they shall be cut off! And not
so only, but labor we to stand upon good bottom, and to trade (not like
banquerupts) with other men's stocks, (who when they break, are found never to
have been their own men:) but with our own stock, be it never so little, if
it be good, that is, the love of God, soundness of heart to the truth, good
conscience and faith unfeigned. These being joined with zeal and courage in the
defense of a good cause; will be armor of proof without, and a continual
feast within, whatsoever our affronts and discouragements shall be. Faith shall
then bear us out as a shield bears off blows: and assure us, that let this
cursed world be never so disastrous, yet God will keep us from absolute
straits, and so order it, that we shall not depart from his fear, nor forsake
his covenant. They say that the Bezor (that creature which has that cordial
stone) being hard hunted by the hounds, and knowing by instinct also, what it
is she is hunted for, (not her skin nor carcass, but her stone) will bite off
her privities, and leave them to the dogs to save her life. And the like I
have heard some affirm of the Fox, that being caught by the leg in a snare,
she will gnaw it off, flesh and bones, to escape with her life. Let us take heed
of such policy, to wit, when our precious conscience is pursued, (which to
some Nimrods is a more precious thing then the precious life of a man to an
harlot) then to bite it off and throw it to such Beagles, Prove. 6.26.
to save our skin and carcass: They will make themselves as much or more sport
in rejoicing at our flesh and nakedness, Judge, 16.25. Genesis 37.30.
then the Philistines did at Sampson their enemy: and when we have lost that
Jewel, as poor Reuben spoke of Joseph, how shall we behold the face of Jacob
without confusion? Or what shall it profit us to fish with a golden hook for a
poor fish, and lose it for our labor? In vain is a net laid for that which
has wing: or the deceitful meat of the wicked ruler set before us to snare
us, Prove. 22.1.2.3
when we are jealous of our appetites, and put our knife to our throats.

Let us also (to conclude) walk in this dangerous world, Conclusion of all
with admonition.
as a man would walk in a place full of snares laid to catch him. Not only
with no purpose of committing evil, but with a full purpose and armed mind
not to commit it: Watch we to the occasions of trial: Seeing our way is so
strawed with snares, let us watch and be armed.
which are offered us: small ones may discover us to be weak, if unarmed,
when strong ones shall not foil us if watchful. When the object of wrath,
pride, contention, unmercifulness, strongly offers it self, let us start at
it, and say: This is to try what is in me: now had I best look to my self:
The Philistines are upon me: I shall this day be tried by subtle and lewd
company, perhaps I shall hear the godly depraved, jeered at, sin and baseness
exalted. God keep me, if now I cast away my weapons, I am tried to be a false
traitor, God will trust me no more; but if I preserve conscience, Genesis 22.12.
God will set his mark upon me for one that is faithful, as Abraham. I say,
both in this, and all other cases of trial, Look to our peace.
let us confess that God may justly try us: for he has put a treasure into
us, which he will not have us to imbezzell, or betray to any enemy. We are
never tried by God, Gods ends in trial, not like Satan's.
but to sift our Branne away from our Flower, that his graces may be purer, and
more precious then Pearls. Satan indeed tempts, that he might boult out all
our Flower, and leave nothing but Branne. Satan also tempts us, that he might
leave us as he did Judas and Saul, stripped and bereft both of grace and peace,
to an hardened, desperate, impenitent spirit. But the Lord tries us; that after
he has found us upright and faithful he might set his mark upon us, of
allowance; and that we might for ever walk in and out, Phil. 4.
both toward him with confidence, and within our selves with peace, passing
understanding. Which peace, as we have procured by a good conscience, so it is
preserved thereby: Therefore look not at the difficulty of a trial, but look
at the misery which an ill conscience, and the happiness and joy which a good
will leave behind it: such a reward as all the fulfilling of our lusts can
never afford us? Can the son of Ishai give ye vineyards? And can your lusts
equal Gods boones and bounties? 1 Samuel 22.7.
Therefore let this peace of God so rule thee, that thou would choose to
forgo thy life rather then forfet it. Moreover pray daily, not against trialls
(for the trial of our faith and faithfulness is more precious then gold) both
in respect of our selves who know not what our grace is, 1 Pet. 1.7.
till we be put to trial, nor yet what corruption lurkes in us, and therefore
know not in what respects we should either be thankful, or humbled: and of God
also, who is honored much in the trialls of his, and when he purposes most to
honor them, And pray that we be not led into temptation. Mat. 6.13.26.41. Heb.
3. ult.
he tries them, to know them. But I say, pray, that the Lord would not lead us
into temptation, to be foiled like slaves, by Satan or our lusts: And, if
indeed the Lord will have us go through the brunt and purgatory, beseech him to
sustain us by his strength and pity us when we are tempted, that we may stand
to it courageously and wisely, through his strength. And if we have failed in
our trial with Hezekiah and Peter, 2 Cron. 32.26. Mat. 26. ult. Esaias 38. 1 Cor
11.28.
let us be humbled again after it, as the one, and repent as the other did:
and so feel our very slips and faylings to be occasions to better us, and to
try, and judge our selves, that so the Lord may not judge us. And so much for
this first point out of this eleventh verse.

I proceed now to the next point in this verse, which is one of the maine
points which I intended in the choosing this Scripture (beloved) to treat of
among you. The maine point of this whole Text and Treatise.
And that is the cause it self directly of this distemper of Naaman, the
unseasonable stop of the cure expected. And that was this, that he had a
self-conceit of a way of curing him, (whereof yet he had no ground) which now
he is crossed of. He confesses it himself at large: mark his own words,
Behold (says he) I thought with my self, that he would surely come forth and
pray to his God, and strike his hand upon the place, and heal the leper. But
who told him so? had he any warrant for it? no, none save himself. But now, so
deadly does this conceit and toy of his own brain work with him, that being
defeated, he is out of sorts, and chooses rather (hearing of Gods way) to go
away uncured, Doct. Self is the enemy when all is done, which will bereave an
unsound heart of grace.
then to be cured thereby: or by any way save his own. The point which I
commend unto you is this, when all is done, without especial prevention self
will defeat the soul of mercy. That is, although men are in a very forward
likelihood of obtaining conversion, yet there may be some bitter root of self,
which may thwart and bring it to small effect. I mean not that such a tech as
Naaman took here, may do it: (for all are not as he, in point of ignorance of
Gods way) but from this particular of self in him, (which was self-conceit
and carnal ease) I gather a like conclusion of all self whatsoever, A further
opening of the ground. Note.
(for self is a monster of many heads, a stock of many bows and branches.)
That self may mar all the fair endeavors of a man toward grace, if it be
not prevented. But perhaps this doctrine will seem stranger then the former to
such as conceive Naaman to be in no forwardness toward conversion at all.
Naaman. So that his jarring with the way of God in the point of his healing,
was not only a resemblance, but a real let of Gods work in that greater
work of conversion.

But then it will be demanded what forwardness Naaman was in here, Quest. Was
Naaman so forward?
which was so let here by his self-conceit? I answer: First, he was very
sensible of his aile and malady; and laid it deeply to heart; for why? Answ.
Yes, and wherein.
he had wealth, honor, strength, and favor with his Prince, wanted nothing
that might make him great: yet what were all these to him, having his leprosy
hanging about him? Secondly, God sends him the message of a cure by
strange-providence of a Maids report, who told him of the Prophet: and hearing
thereof, what desire of recovery does he bewray? How eager is he to pursue it
to his uttermost? 1. By going to his Master for letters of commendation and
request: 2. And having obtained them, furnishing himself with all such
provision and rewards as he thought meet for the journey: 3. He uses all
means with diligence to compass this his desire, repaireth to the King of
Israel, the fittest way (as he thought) for that purpose; and being mistaken in
that, is glad to hear of his error, and to mend it speedily. 4. He abaseth
himself (below his condition) so far, as to stand at the Prophets door, to
crouch and creep (in the sense of his disease) for the cure thereof, with
exceeding reverence to the Prophet. All which (although they might seem only
natural effects of a man under trouble) yet being orderly steps to a greater
work, in Gods purpose, and some of them (in a sort) religious acts of one that
acknowledged a divine power to heal him, do argue that somewhat was in him
toward the effect. And yet, lo, here steps in a techie toy, that is, Yet
crossed by self conceit, a toy and prich.
his prejudicate and forestalled heart conceited against the mean appointed by
God: and this was, that he looked to be healed another way, more easy,
present, and familiar to his humor, How?
viz. that Elisha himself would come forth and by applying his hand to the
place, work the miracle. And this marred all the former attempts; and besides
hindered him; first, from marking the message which contained a plain, Eglon an
heathen King, Judge 6.
hearing of a charge from God (no way assuring him of good) was so obeysant, as
to come off his throne, and worship God, how much more might Naaman? but lo,
his preconceit let him from it: As also, from seeing his false heart full
fraught with rage against the Prophet (when yet he seemed to

And just so may the case stand with such as have made as many spiritual steps
toward conversion, as Naaman did toward his cure. They may first be brought to
a deep plunge under sense of sin and the curse, Application of the ground,
to the doct. in hand for the clearing of it. What fair hopes men have.
and that by the word of terror, convincing their conscience: under this they
may be most wearisome and restless. They may be kept from shaking off their
terror by other objects of pleasure, profit or worldly contents; they may
hear of a remedy by one of wisdoms handmaids, like well of the glad tidings,
long after it, make speed toward it, neglect no cost, means, or attendance
upon it; joy in the turning themselves out of their errors and mistakes, and
the appearance of more hope of ease: they may honor the instrument with
exceeding reverence; wait at the posts of wisdom, not hours or days, but
months and quarters, thinking long till some seasonable answer come unto them,
thinking themselves happy that they may speed at last, And yet how dashed.
when all their labor is ended. And yet when the point should come to an
issue, and the fruit to be borne; then shall one self or other, either
selfe-ease, or self-will, or selfe-wit and conceit, assisted with carnal
reason, yea, selfe-endeavours, selfe-devotion, selfe-mixtures of her own with
God, bereave the soul of all strength to bring forth: one or other self (I
say) shall step in, or be cast in by the devil (as the gourd into the pottage)
to mar all: to set the chief work as far behind, as it seemed before to be
set forward: in so much, that the voice of God both commanding to believe, and
promising speedy ease and forgiveness, shall be as a thing far off. And
whereas the obedience of faith is, or ought to be, the upshot of the cure: lo,
this self shall so blindefolde the mind, and disable the heart from marking,
pondering, and applying the promise thereby, as if there were nothing in it;
whereas in truth, all steps toward grace, without this, are frivolous: ye^ the
base heart shall think this more frivolous then all the rest; stumble at it,
cavil, be discontent and fly off, as if it had wrong that her endeavors and
pains be not accepted without it: which in truth, is no other then to quarrel
with God, that her own way may not be preferred to his, and seeing that may
not be, rather to choose not to be healed at all, but abide still in her old
condition, then not to prosper by her own way and device. I have desired to
open the point at large, because I make it the ground of a large doctrine,
whereof I would have none make question. So much for the ground of the text.

Naamans self conceit and ours, may differ in the special, though the same in
kind.
But I foresee that my hearers will by and by run to enquire whether this tech
of Naaman be in their breasts or no, and whether it has hindered their
endeavors: and also, that all well affected Christians would be loath to lose
their labor and sweat (if they knew how to prevent it) till they have enjoyed
the promise. And therefore I must tell them, that I gather a general point
from a particular: Naamans self was one branch of many; but there be many
more, all as dangerous to them as this to him. Seeing then I think it will be
desired, that they might know the several sorts of this monster, and the
marks of this secret else, self, I mean: therefore, ere I reason or apply
the point, I will stay a while upon the discovery of the several sorts of this
disease, and so return to the point again (if God please) in the matter of
Application. I think none will deny, that of all other lets of grace and
salvation, this of self, is the most dangerous: and the reason is, because it
is most inward and immediate. I may say of it as Paul speaks of uncleanness,
all other sins are without the body, but this within, a disease of the
intrailes and bowels. Self, the most dangerous enemy, because most inward and
immediate.
Even so, all other lets and enemies of Christ are outward; Satan has many
injections, temptations by Atheism, by the needlesnesse, difficulty, yea,
impossiblenesse of prevailing; he has many base colors to delude the heart
withal by the contrariety of Christ to the corrupt spirit of man: the world
also has many base and false principles to beat off the heart by, as the
disdain of them that are so zealous, 1 Cor. 6.18.
the erroneous opinions which it has of Christ and the profession of his
truth: Others hurt by this most mortally.
but all these are without, and more easily avoided; the power of the Word
sooner scatters these mists. The greatest mischief comes from within, and were
it not for self, they could not prevail by all their baits and fears: Self
opens the door and betrays the soul to them. But now, to discern the
nature, the sorts, and the marks of this enemy, requires some wisdom; for
the which work, although the wisest is most insufficient, and my self
unfittest of all; yet the necessity of the point laying this task upon me, I
shall adventure to say so much as at least may provoke others to consider of
the matter more seriously, to consult and give sentence.

Self is (to say truth) nothing else but the very spirit of corruption, Self
what it is in the root; viz. the inst nct of old Adam.
and the instinct of old Adam in an unregenerate heart, discovering it self in
all other kinds, but most eminently (for slinesse and contrarinesse) in
resisting the work of conversion. And it may be distinguished into these two
branches, either self of opposition to Christ, Self of two sorts: either
opposite self to Christ, or mixed with him.
or selfe-mixture with Christ. The former whereof hinders the soul from
Christ, by opposing and tendering to the soul a sufficiency of her own
without Christ: the latter seems to abhor such profaneness, and places
only sufficiency to make the soul blessed in Christ alone: but in the point
of applying and receiving thereof to it self mixeth her self with him, and
scrues her self and her own ways into the sufficiency of Christ. The former
of these is more carnal and gross; the latter more close and spiritual: the
former impugnes the sole-sufficiency, the latter the all sufficiency of Christ;
the former the soul may sooner be driven from; the latter she must be fired
out of, and (as the Fox) dug out of her burrow ere she will renounce them.
All Self is the spirit of corruption, but this privy self is the quintessence
of that poison. All self sets up it self against Christ; Note.
but this is the secret privy-chamber wherein the unregenerate soul imbarkes
her self. For, Simil.
as it is in the defense of a City against a beleaguering enemy, partly there
be some out-workes, halfemoones and retrenchments to hold the enemy at larger
distance, and partly some nearer stronger bulwarks and forts well manned and
furnished with armor and Canons, in which the chief hopes and force of the
City consists: its no such difficulty perhaps to drive the Citizens out of the
one, but its a matter of good importance to beat them out of the other. So, I
say of these two branches of Self; its not so hard a task to dissuade the
soul from the former; but when the Soul runs to her maine Fort and Castle,
Self mixed with Christ, its an hard thing to teach her to discern it, but
almost impossible to fetch her out of it. The only wisdom and omnipotency of
grace can effect that.

Though the latter be chiefly aimed at: The former of these two occasionally
entered upon.
Concerning the former of these two my Doctrine less aims at, because it takes
for granted that a man so qualified as I have already spoken acknowledges
himself insufficient of himself to get blessedness. My chief scope is to
encounter the latter; yet for light and distinction sake I will point at the
several kinds of the former, that the Reader may not be unsatisfied about the
object of the whole intended discourse. For the former then which is more
gross: this is of five sorts; profane self, natural self, Five sorts of
it. 1. Profane self. 2. Natural self. 3. Carnal self. 4. Creature self.
5. Religious self.
carnal self, self in the creature, and religious self. First of the first.

Fire (we know) is put out by pulling away the fuel, but especially by
casting on of water: so, all self opposes Christ, but above all selfe-lusts,
or self resolved to live in any sin, does abandon and expel Christ, who
indeed came to destroy sin and him that reigned thereby. Therefore sin and
Satan held and maintained, do most punctually destroy Christ. True it is,
sin (alone and nakedly considered) serves to magnify grace; for where sin
abounded grace exceeded, and where sin is out of measure sinful, grace is
out of measure gracious: but where sin abides in the heart as in her center
and element, loved and lived in, there Christ is quite shut out of doors.
Sin is not alike dwelling in all, 1. Profane self what?
but in some men it dwells without a law, ignorantly, inconvincedly; in others
it rules against a law, rebelliously; and so the enmity of it to Christ does
differ in degree: howbeit in all such as it dwells in, it opposes Christ in a
direct kind of contrariety. Hence the Apostle demands what agreement
between Christ and Beliall, 2 Cor. 6.16.
the believer and the infidel? light and darkness, sin, and that grace
that pardons and purges it? Ioh. 3.19.
And our Savior, They loved darkness rather then light, because their works
were evil. Alas! such come not at Chrst so much as in the remote means or
Ordinances by their good will, or at least for mere fashion: much less to the
promise of Christ, to save them. They are alive, jolly, merry, well satisfied
already: give them their drink, their harlot, their world, and god Mammon,
their belly, ease, pleasures, or like lusts; they are well, and for the rest,
they leave it to such as care for it: as for themselves, their hell is their
heaven, and Christ is not so sweet to a needing soul, as that which Christ
came to destroy, is sweet to them, till the Lord scare them and bid them go to
their all-sufficient lusts for salvation. Either they know no better, or love no
better. If Christ should come in, the kingdom which the Devil has set up,
and the scepter he swayeth in their souls, by their profaneness, breach of
Sabbaths, atheism, pride, contention, disdain, intemperancy, incontinency,
swearing, uncleanness, and the like, must (as that strong man) be cast out by
the stronger, and spoiled. And that were as sad and uncouth to them, as the
coming of those Danites and stealing away Mica's gods was irksome to him: his
joy, and strong hold, all-sufficient treasure was stolen, and poor wretch,
what should it boot one so woe begone, to live? The last and chief rest and
content of a sinner, being his lusts, must needs cause Christ, who comes to
rob the soul thereof, to be accounted as he who robbes a Bear of her
whelps. Sin and lust to such a man is as the Lamb brought up in the bosom
(as Nathan says) and being as his darling and his son. Hence it is, that the
sufficiency of these lusts, ause the sufficiency of Christ (which stands in the
settling of a soul upon a sufficiency in pardon, peace and joy of conscience) to
be abhorred.

I would have no man mistake me, as if I hereby did establish a doctrine of
repentance before faith: sundry mistaken Scriptures have deluded the erroneous
judgments of some Divines to think, Repentance goes not before faith.
that because sin expels Christ, therefore repentance entertaines him: (men
of unhappy aims,) who cannot avoid one rock, save by rushing upon another; I
confess in the place alleged, Paul cites these words out of the Prophet,
Depart and go from among them and I will receive you, and be a father unto
you, and you shall be sons and daughters of me, says the Lord Almighty. But
this text shows not that repentance is a step to the receiving of a man by
faith and adoption: but rather it discovers this, That till the Lord had
humbled and abased the Jews for their idolatry, and setting up of false gods
against himself, and committing spiritual filthiness with them, there was no
hope of being received into favor or marriage with him. Otherwise, repentance
and turning from idols to God, and from darkness and the kingdom of Satan,
to Christ, presupposes faith to purge the conscience, and to make us beloved
and accepted. The sum briefly is, That this point urges us not to repent
ere we believe (which were to overthrow the need of a Christ, and then to come
to Christ) but to show us that ere ever Christ be truly closed with, sin
must be nipt in the neck. That jollity, content and hearts-ease which a sinner
found in his lusts, must be thrown out both litter and whelps of his heart,
ere ever he come to behold Christ with his sufficiency to save. One womb
cannot at once carry two conceptions, and the soul cannot at once serve two
masters, God and Mammon, Christ and lusts. The sufficiency which lusts
erroneously afforded to the soul, making her deem her self happy in them;
and to be as a man of a full stomach who loathes a honey-combe, must be
abandoned by legal consternation, and humbling, ere Christ be precious. Christ
must be needed as meat by a stern belly, ere ever he be had. But that he
cannot be, while the love of lusts, lived in, surfeits the appetite. And this
is the first of those branches in which grosse-selfe consists.

Of which, this I say; Oh! that it should be possible, that such a nature as
was first created with a soul capable of divine being, The degeneratenesse of
our nature discovered.
and bred to immortality, should so debauch it self, and lose her honor, as
(not with Nebuchadnezzar to forgo his throne to feed with beasts) but to
forfeit Gods image to become a beast! Nay, I wrong a beast to speak so: to
become worse then any swine or beast, and to wallow and incorporate it self so
into spiritual filth, as to forget what it was ever borne unto: and not only
so far to degenerate as to embrace the enemy of God, and that which Christ came
to destroy; but to set up such a sufficiency to it self in it, as to abolish
that sole-sufficiency of mercy to pardon and purge it! yet this I say of it,
that although sin of her own nature, and in her course, tends by degrees to
defile, harden, and make the soul impenitent and desperate: yet if God break
off the soul betimes from it, ere it have cankerfretted the soul, it is more
easy for such a sinner to come to some sense, conviction and humiliation for
it, and so to some need of pardon, then many a Pharisee who under pretense of
abhorring odious Publicans and offenders, is riveted into a conceit of his own
righteousness: both a Pharisee and a Publican oppose Christ; yet the former
more then the latter, because Christ came not to call the righteous, but the
sinner to repentance. And so much of this, so far as this Digression will
permit.

The second self natur^ll, or the civilian.
I proceed to the second, that is, to the mere Naturalist, or Civilian. By whom
I mean such an one as lives upon dregs, the very relics and ruins of the
image of God decayed. To open my self briefly, the Lord out of infinite mercy
has so dispensed and ordered the penalties due to sin, in the fallen
condition of Adam; that, although the wrath and curse of God upon the same lie
equally upon all his posterity, yet for some ends, The floodgates of
corruption restrained by providence.
his own merciful indulgence, and the commodity of common life, he has in
some persons restrained the floodgates of this deluge, so that sin has a
limitation and bound set unto it, both for sundry kinds and measures of it.
Some being more innocent, harmless, righteous, just, temperate, sober,
courteous, civil then others: which virtues, although they are as pearls in a
swines snout, planted in a cursed nature, out of which nothing can proceed,
save that which is unclean (for the clearest water in a standing kennell or
puddell, though it differ from the mudde underneath, yet savours of the same
stinch) yet comparatively seeming to be less ill and impure, then the muddy
and base lusts of the unclean, the profane and openly wicked; obtain among
men the repute and opinion of virtues. And indeed so they are, in order and
respect to the welfare of a Commonwealth: in which, its no small outward beauty
and happiness, to live with such, in respect of the fierce, injurious, Favor
of nature is enlarged by many means, in the natural civilian.
noisome and hurtful qualities of the lewd and wicked. And this favor of
Nature in many men, is greatly enlarged by sundry means.

First, by the laws of men, which tend to settle civility, and innocence in
their governments; which having penalties annexed to them severely censuring
delinquents, 1. By good Laws.
cause the selfe-loving spirit of flesh, partly from a confessed goodness in
the virtues themselves, partly from fear of punishment, and partly a love of
praise and reputation among men (who count such rare pieces) to cloze
therewith, to curb and keep in their distempers, and to accommodate
themselves to the order of community.

2. By education and Discipline.
Secondly, by the institution and discipline of Moralists, instilling into their
disciples, the seeds of virtue and outward life, propounding rewards of
commendation and honor to such as attaind them: shame and reproach to such as
ensued them: in which kind those heathen Masters of manners excelled. For, by
your continual fostering those sparkles of nature left upon the herth, and
laying together such principles of art, as they preceived to make for the
engendring and nourishing thereof in men's minds (especially their tender
novices not being leavened before with lusts) they got such a perfection, both
in negative absteinings from evils, and positive performances of duties, as may
justly make even Christians to tremble, that they should come so far short of
them both, in subduing of passions, and practice of selfe-denying virtues,
being under the discipline of Christ himself.

Thirdly, 3. By their experience.
others by their experience which their industry and observation of politic
courses among men has purchased unto them, have obtained such measure of
perfection in this kind, that they have been able to rule others by the
authority of their skill and carriage, and to contain towns, corners and
Kingdoms in peace and order: which being so extensive a good (within her
compass) must needs cause men to imagine some excellency therein.

Fourthly, 4. The examples and opinion of men rarely virtuous.
the rare parts and endowments of such as are thus qualified (excelling in show
the virtues of some such as are in an higher rank of christianity and
religion, and blemishing their weaker qualities) must needs reflect upon them,
more then ordinary esteem among such as behold them; and especially when they
shall bewray more bounty, liberality, compassion and mercy, forbearance and
patience, with other useful and admired virtues, then they who claim the
chief name goodness.

Fifthly, when besides all these Civilities and Moralities, 5. Some tincture of
religion.
they add some varnish and luster from a tincture of Religion, keeping their
Church, applauding a form of serving God, and discoursing of such matters:
which although they do not for any perfiting of their virtues, (which they
^ount to be their strong hold) but only for complement and formality, 6.
Similitude with the godly.
yet hereby they stop the mouths of any who might brand them with irreligion
and profaneness. Add hereto, the similitude which they seem to hold with
the godly; for they also have their slips and errors, sometime blemishes of
note, and vices of deep dye: and alas! these have no more, and therefore so
long as outsides only may hold water, there will seem little difference.

There are none so bad and base, None so bad, but some shreds of good may be
found in them. 2 Samuel 12.27. 1 Samuel 11.7. Genesis 27 41. And what use a civil
person makes of it.
but have some shreds of goodness in them. Ioab a vile, cruel and bloody
wretch, yet a valiant Captain who fought Gods battles, and was useful to the
Church in destroying the enemies of it. Saul a notorious hypocrite and
self-lover, yet adorned with abundance of heroical, martial, politic and
moral virtues, wisdom, awe and authority, courage and resolution, equity and
justice, love to his followers, till his spiritual treachery of heart, quasht
them. Esau himself had his restraint of malice, and so had Haman till their
fitter opportunity. And in a word, as there are few so good, but they have
their tincture of some evil: so, neither are there any so bad, but they have
some moral relics left in them of virtue and praise. And this causes them
(through a base heart balking God in his way of Christ) to rest themselves
satisfied in that sufficiency which they find in these things; as thinking
they need seek no further for any superior happiness, because they find
this to give them so abundant content, both from within and from without,
feeling these feathers and colors of their own both to heat and to adorn
them. And the truth is, this self of morality and nature is so much the more
dangerous, by how much (in show) it seems so glorious: for how vast a gulf
seems to be between the former vicious, forlorn caitiffe, and this painted
moralist? Alas! nothing is more apt to puff up a natural man, then the abused
privity to a former estate of excellency: such and such they were bred, and
although they have lost all, yet their breed, and the relics of their old
ruins are enough to make them some body. As we see it in them who having bin
well bred, Simil.
and fallen to decay, though they have nothing to take too, yet even in the
necessity of forced begging, beg with indignation at the baseness of it, and
will say, good Sir show some respect to a poor Gentleman, putting on their hat
instantly, and scorning to be as they are: even so is it here, That which
should most abase us, does most pride us, our very ruins seem rarities unto
us, and nourish a sufficiency of our own in us, so that we cannot resign it
up and throw it at the feet of Christ, to purchase a better. But then much
more prone are we to be puffed up, if we think that we have raised our fortunes
to a pretty estate the second time, by our own improvements and industry: None
are prouder then such as being privy to their ruined estate of creation, yet
make themselves believe, that by their own worth, they have raised themselves
from it to a very fair competency of estate in moral and civil virtues:
others remaining still in their beggary of viciousness and base evils.

Use of the point.
Briefly then of this second sort, this I add, Oh how lamentable is it, that a
man borne to be a son of God, and beautified with his own image should
become so disguised, as having lost grace in the substance, to rest in a mere
shadow thereof, destitute of a principle of divine life and goodness! and to
stay all such from their conceit of selfe-sufficiency herein: A civil estate
dangerous.
let me tell them, first their virtue is copper coin, and wants of the nature
of gold as much as kennel water of the pureness of spring water: therefore
their sufficiency is but a dream, a fruit of their ignorance, and owlelight of
discerning: nay it is but a madness, as he must be a fool who really can
satisfy himself in counters as if they were pieces. Secondly, there is no
safety herein, for the error of their conceit may more harden them against
Christ, then the profaneness of the wickedst, if God vouchsafe them both equal
light. Thirdly, if God leave them in this hardness of heart, they may prove as
desperate opposites and pursuers of all grace of Christ, and Christians, as the
most horrible open swine, yea worse, as we see in Saul and Julian. Therefore
(to conclude) let all such know, that till the Lord have lighted a torch by his
word of a greater discovery of themselves, then yet they have seen, they are
far off from the embracing of Christ, they are wedged already into so deep a
sufficiency of their own, that Christ's is unsavory. And therefore, although I
will not advise them to renounce the virtues themselves, nor judge them as vile
as open offenders: yet I wish them to come under a better banner, and cast
their own worth upon the dunghill. They are gone up to heaven by a ladder of
their own framing and setting: But they must come down each step thereof with
more shame and confusion, ere they can set one step toward Christ's ladder: in
which respect I see not but he who stands upon the ground still, and never went
higher, is somewhat nearer the bottom of Christ's ladder then they. And so much
also of this second kind of gross self, viz. selfe-naturall morality: I come
to the third:

The third carnality or fl^shly savor. Romans 8.6.
And that is carnality, or fleshly savor: of the which I spoke somewhat in the
tenth verse, and shall say more in verse twelve: Here therefore I will only
touch the point, and show wherein this gross self opposes Christ. Its true
of all carnal savor which Paul speaks, that its enmity to God: and why?
because its profane and opposes his holiness. But its enmity to Christ also
in another respect, to wit his alsufficiency to save: and why? because it has
a deep selfesufficiency, and needs nothing: Its carried in a stream and
smooth way of it own, its full of it self, and we know whatsoever is powered
into a full vessel runs over. There is no piece of self more grossly
opposite, because none more abounds in it own sense: and when it can enjoy it
self, its happy in it own esteem, but if crossed, has no joy in being. Take
such a carnal man's sufficiency from him, and he is as one that hangs in the
air. Understand it in a few instances, the profanely carnal or Atheist, the
worldly carnal, the learnedly carnal and such as are well parted and the
selfeloving: these will give a taste of the rest. For the first, the carnally
profane person having fleshly wisdom enough, perhaps policy, skill in the
law, wealth at will, place and authority to back him, how does he scorn and
disdain Christ, his religion and members? As those jolly Captains sitting in
council of war with Iehu, 1. King. 9.
seeing the Prophets servant coming to him, asked what made this mad fellow
with thee? and Gallio sitting as judge of right and wrong, Act. 18.14.
hearing the question of the Jews against the Apostles, scorned them, and
drove them from his Tribunal. As Herod and his men scorned Christ's person as a
mean silly man to be a King: so do profane carnallists scorn his religion
and members.

Alas! the very garb of Christ and Christianity is odious, The carnal wise
scorn Christ.
they stumble in the porch, and never get into the house. They feel a real
bottom of flesh to subsist upon, which is their deep policy, that they can
give counsel in weighty matters, foresee outward dangers, judge of difficult
cases between man and man, sway others by their authority and terrors, they
see all glad to stoop to their lure, and this makes them admire themselves: as
for Christ, alas! he is a spiritual subject more fit for such as live in a
Cloister, affecting a contemplative life, or for Gods fools! Tush! (say they)
we scorn such fancies as those, to deny our selves, to believe a promise, to
live upon breath, and casting all our own sufficiency away, to rely upon Christ
and the word: we love real contents and satisfaction, such as will hold water
in the world; make us esteemed and wise in men's conceits: and ye shall observe
such as these, out of this swelling fullness of their own, behold Christ as a
man upon the top of a pinnacle beholds little children playing; yea even as mice
running our of their holes. As for preaching, they choose to hear none at all,
but if they must for fashion needs hear any, then they must be such as in
whom more savor of man's wisdom appears, then power of Christ: such as preach
quaint things, fair and far off, pleasing conceits, such as leave them as they
found them, and touch not their sores. Offer them a man that preaches Christ or
walks in the spirit of humility and selfedeniall, and they count him a fool:
(even as the carnal Jew and Gentile, counted Christ hmselfe folly, and a
stumbling block) geering and gibing all that comes in the likeness of Christ
or uprightness.

Secondly, the like I may say of a carnal wordling; 1 Cor. 1.24. Carn^ll
worldling full of himself.
he is as full as his skin can hold of his own sufficiency. Ask him of
bargains, Lordships and purchases, great marriages and matches, or tell him of
some great meetings, feasts, pastimes and pleasures, company of jolly folks
talking of news or meriments to spend their time, or of any other thing that
savors of the world, and ye shall have him in his element, profane, perhaps,
they will not be (except it be now and then expedient) but as for Christ and
his sufficient salvation, they count it but a fulsome object, never well till
such talk be over; and by their good wills, they would not sit in company
where such matters are stirring: to be sure, they are best when they are eased
and gone. If they love a Christian preacher or professor, its for some carnal
savor they find in his outsides, his learning, courtesy, mirth or complement:
but else the world loves her own and such as savor the things of this life: And
by this means, they please themselves so deeply in the sufficiency and content
which they get from the spirit of the world; that (although perhaps their
consciences sometime pinch them for the vanity of this their sufficiency, yet)
the spiritualnesse and preciseness of Christ is a burden to them which they
will not touch with their least finger.

Come in the third place to the carnallity and savor of good parts and
endowments; Carnallity of good parts an enemy to Christ.
and we shall find it a woeful opposite to Christ, filling men with such
sufficiency of their own, that Christ is a mere superfluity with them. They
bewray this sickness (many of them) by the impotency of their pride and
selfeconceit: they are as drunkards overcharged with wine, they know not how to
carry themselves, or to walk upon the ground. Acts 26.24.
As Festus basely spoke of Paul, Much learning makes thee mad: so I may truly
say of these, their parts and gifts do so overpower them in conceit of their
own sufficiency, that it makes them to turn mad humorists. And whence is that?
surely from the impotency of that pride that is unable to keep within bounds
of moderation, and so must be within boundlessenesse of humor. It was noted of
Diogenes, that monster of pride, that coming to Plato his house at a feast
time, seeing there goodly cussions and tapistry, he took them and trodde on
them, saying I trample upon Plato his pride; but he was well answered, that he
did it with a far greater pride of his own. Many worthy Grandees for their
worth and skill in their faculties, Law, Physic, Divinity, and other
professions have been overthrown this way, I mean by sickness of self-love
and selfe-admiration. Some scorning preferment, not out of humility, but as
thinking it under them; and because its the usual portion of Parasites or the
reward of some who are so far below themselves. Others affecting rusticall
carriages or cynick qualities mean attire, little applause, small requitalls,
and disdaining gifts and praise, only to be pointed at, and because they enjoy
themselves, with far more sufficient content, then others can satisfy them.
And its hard to find rare parts without such tinctures: and we have seen the
rash adventures of such, as out of the ambition to be thought such, have rusht
themselves upon such rocks as have split them: falsely pretending zeal, but
indeed sacrificing to their own nets.

This appears in petty mat-aswell as great.
How many men of learning and much reading, are so full of it, that they
disdain at such as go beyond them in preaching or power of Reigion? They have
read more books (they say if you believe them) then ten of these precise
preachers and zealous fellows: and this puffes them up in their own opinions;
and indeed they who preach little (if their ease will suffer it) may read much.
Those Pharisees who sat in their schools reading their profound lectures of
the Law, and having their novices sitting at their feet, (as Paul did at
Gamaliels) teaching them their Cabala, that is, their dreams, traditions, and
Rabbinicall observations: when they saw the Lord Jesus and his Disciples go up
and down, preaching and abasing themselves to the reach of the poor people, 1
Cor. 1.
disdained him, as a man of no learning: they were stuffed so full of their own
skill and knowledge, that they scorned his simplicity. If they now lived,
Matthew. 23.25.
they would prefer the washing of their cups and platters before preaching of
Christ and repentance. Tush, (say those Pharisees John 9. Joh. 9.
) Thou art borne in sins, and should thou teach us? This people knows
not the Law, and is accursed. Oh! Camels cannot enter into a needles eye, nor a
man puffed up in himself, into the Kingdom of God. How do such as these bear
down preaching, especially twice on the Lords day, and scorn them who do so,
as idots and dunces? And to conclude, this disease creepes into the meanest,
even poor Tradesmen, if they have better parts then others, to remember and
repeat sermons, to speak or pray in company, (if there be not special grace)
how it makes them to bubble and swell? I may say, the very brain knowledge of
Christ, has so puffed up many, that they never came to see need of him to
salvation: but if they may be all in all in meetings, and hear themselves
talk, and others admire them for their parts, and none contradict them, Oh
this is their fools Paradise! This makes them think themselves self
sufficient, and to need nothing. Nay for a need skill in men's trades may do it.

The fourth sort is of such as who stand upon their greatness and superiority
over others in Towns and places. Carnal savor in superioriy or greatness,
what.
They look upon themselves as the chief hinges whereon the door turns, and
they bear the purse, others are wholly beholding to them for maintaining the
poor, for upholding the Gospel; they bear all charges, and the whole sway of
government; and as for others, they are of the poorer sort, and may well be
spared, men of small judgment, experience or ability to do any thing; and
this makes them swell in the pride of themselves, and to seem great in their
own opinion, though alas! they are so only in comparison of the meanest, and
being considered in themselves are but silly and mean ones: what would these
be if they were Magistrates, Justices and Rulers of the Country? If so small a
thing make them so jolly and sufficient in themselves, what would these be if
birth, nobleness, worship, honor, dignity and reputation in the Country,
filled their veins with ranker blood, and their spirits with greater stomach?
And (to end) the like I may say of the savor of self-love, and of such, as
being wholly wedded to themselves, and narrowly spying out all occasions for
their own ends, how their case, welfare, maintenance, esteem and credit, life,
living and liberty, gain and thrift, gifts and parts may be supported; How
dangerous.
neglect others, and let all sink or swim; so they may subsist; what care
they? I say of these (for brevity sake) as of the former, they are full of
themselves, and look at a sufficiency in themselves, and therefore the Lord
Jesus, (who serves for none, save them that are poor, base and desolate must
needs be an unsavory morsel unto them.

And therefore in a word to admonish them, this I say, consider all such carnal
and self sufficient ones, when the evil day shall come, what shall all thy
pride and profane disdain, Admonition to these former sorts.
thy worldly wisdom, thy parts and greatness, thy self-love profit thee?
Alas! they only serve here during the time of health and prosperity, and the
season of the Gospel, to damme up the passages of thy soul from Christ: but
when once sickness, sorrow and death approach, their image shall be
despised; and they will become burdensome: Then shall they cry out, now we see,
the humble, the poor in spirit, the unlearned, the mean in account, and such
as have little to lose, are all in all: now they who denied themselves and
sought to be sufficient in Christ alone, are the happy men: Then ye shall wish
your selves as little, as ever before ye affected greatness, then shall ye
wish your selves had rather been by-words and outcasts for Christ, then to have
scorned the simplicity of Christ; Then shall ye wish your Camels bunch (that
deep opinion ye had of your parts, learning and greatness) were pared off:
Then when ye shall hear God pronounce sentence, you were too great for the
narrow gate of heaven, men of too great parts, wisdom, policy, and self-love
for Christ, then I say, you shall be sick at the stomach of all these, and
vomit your sweet morsels, and all your Quails, and objects of sufficiency
shall come out at your nostrills, yea vanish before the sufficiency of Christ.
Then shall you wish with Paul, Phil. 3.
Oh! that all things which I counted so precious, had been dung and dogs
meat, that I might have won Christ, and been found in him, empty of my
fullness: Oh! that I had desired to know nothing save Christ crucified, and
that his fullness had left no spirit in me, 1 King. 10.
as Solomon's wisdom in the Queen of Sheba: Oh! that all my best parts had
served Christ, as too base to attend him, and not scorned him as too base for
them: Thus you shall do then, but who knows whether then it will not be too
late? sure it is, if ever Christ and his sufficiency become sweet, Revel. 3.18.
the Lord will purge you of your Laodicean temper the whilst: he will make you
hungry, base, naked and empty, that you may buy of him gold, silver, apparel,
and all sufficiency to salvation: pull down your proud stomachs: be fools
that ye may be wise: prick and let out the wind of your empty bladders, and
cast down your Scepters and Crowns at the feet of Christ, that he may lift ye
up. And so much for this third branch of gross self, carnallity or savor of
the flesh. Touching carnal reason I shall speak in verse 12.

Sensual self or the creature, what.
The fourth follows, and that is self in the creature, or in outward things:
As in the blessings of marriage, of health, of long life, success in our
earthly matters, skill in the world, convenience of dwelling, abundance of
ease, sleep, friends, pleasures, content in our estate and wealth, fatting,
welfare, diet, attendance, fullness of outward accommodations, victory over our
opposites, freedom from crosses, elbowroome in the world, acceptance with our
betters, favor with such as can help us in our straits, unlooked for gains,
and overplus of commodities meet for the use of this life, The creature is
very apt to tickle and satisfy the corrupt heart of man.
not only for need but for delight. These (both all of them, and any of them)
have a marveilous agreeing nature in them with the corrupt sensual appetite of
man; and therefore easily incorporate with our spirit, and tickle the flesh, so
that as a girdle full enough for the loins, easily compasses the body, and
keeps it close within the compass thereof; even so this sensuality and gross
self of the creature easily begins the heart and compasses it with delight
therein: so that it must be a marvelous strong convincement from an higher
cause, which must dissuade, unsettle and gaster the soul from such a
sufficiency. As music through the familiarity of it to the ear and sense,
does so please it for the time that it is led from serious thoughts and objects
of worth, and is taken up and possessed wholly with it: so, the comfort and
warmth of the creature in every kind (and the more the worse) has a marveilous
attractivenesse, enchantment and unsuspectednesse in it, to satisfy the soul
with it self, and causes it (while its warmed in this nest) to say with that
Epicure, I am as I would be, and I wish no better: Alas! what wonder? The
souls misery is not only in this, that she has lost her true Paradise: but
that she is always hankering, and catching at every shadow and vanity, in hope
to lay hold upon the Paradise she has lost: she dreams that she had one, and
should have one, but what an one she has lost, or what she should recover, she
knows not, she gropes as one smitten with blindness, about the door, but
cannot hit upon it, the further she wanzes, the further off she is from true
content; But to be sure that true Sufficiency and Paradise of grace, she has
no appetite after it.

Nay any false vanity and most lying content in all the world, is enough to
cheat and to seduce the heart from fastening upon it. Again, we see, that men
can find a secret satisfaction to themselves to be as they are, (to the end
they might rid themselves of any further care after a sufficiency of Christ)
although they have no earthly content in the world to still them: nay perhaps
when sickness, poverty, shame, debt, sorrow and all misery at once environs
them: hope of freedom kepes their carnal heart from bursting, be it never so
far off: and if any thing in the world, even the very rags on a man's back,
or a crust to feed the belly, yea if it be but moon shine in the water which a
man can catch at, it is enough: any thing rather then Christ, nay any babble to
avoid Christ will serve the turn. What wonder then, when a deluded heart can
fasten upon any real contentment to flesh (be it never so far from
spiritualnesse) as ease and welfare, or the like, if I say, it greedily catch
at that, and satisfy it self with it, seeking no further? But if it have
variety and choice of these to repose content in, so far may we be from
wondering at men satisfying themselves herein, that rather we may stand and
wonder, that ever the Lord should so powerfully break in upon the soul, as to
gaster it from such a self sufficiency, convince her of her nakedness, and
pull her from her own, to seek a sufficiency in Christ. And there is reason
for it. For this like a viper, Has a peculiar deceit in it unsuspected.
stinges the soul to death by sweetness. Perhaps the former sorts of gross
self admit some checks and stings of conscience, through the corruption
thereof: But these, being the good creatures of God, and lawful both for kind,
use, and abundance, yea for a competent delight in them (if we could hit upon
it rightly) do; without any suspicion, with a smoothness and facility carry
the heart into the stream of their sufficiency and s^^suality, and so choke all
longing or desire after Christ. Perhaps every one is not so gross as he who
sold his birthright for pottage, nor to say, to the wedge of gold, Thou art my
God: This all would confess to be horrible, and to deny the Almighty in plain
terms: Job 32.
but when men can join these with the Almighty, and yoke them (as men do
horses and oxen in drawing of the same plough) to draw the affections of their
souls equally, to love and satisfy themselves in, (as what is more easy,
then to cosen the heart with this error) Oh then! how hard is it to cure such
self in the creature, or to show it the baseness of such a sufficiency? Any
thing serves a base heart which has lost her savor.

Further illustration of this.
That which is spoken of Laodicea, agrees to this self, even literally. Thou
say I am rich and clothed, and need nothing. Its the secret voice
(though all will not speak out) of worldly wealthy ones, and of all others of
the same rank before named (each feather being of the nature of this nest of
self) viz. I am sufficient of my self and need nothing. Rich and jolly
worldlings ascribing that to their wealth and to the creature, Rev. 3.18.
which is the Creators due, that is to put their confidence and trust therein,
1 Timothy 6.18.
and not the living God; and to turn the glory of Christ (which is
uncorruptible) into the image of a base creature, Romans 1.
to make it her all in all, her fulness, her sufficiency, and so seeks no
further. A carnal heart never stands to question what the difference is
between the content of the creature and the comfort of Christ: alas! it has
lost that savor, Genesis and Josh. ult.
and cannot see a far off, therefore rests it self as Terah and his comp^ny on
the other side of the river, and never comes over it with Abraham, to the land
of promise. Behold in the creature she will set up her rest. And suitable to
this is that of the wise man, The rich man's riches, is his strong hold: Prove.
18.11.
not only to hide himself in, against all affronts, but to fortify himself
against Christ and his grace. No question of it, the appetite of the carnal
heart which wants the creature: and the savor of the carnal heart which has
got it already, (though commonly it provokes a thirst after more) are the two
common bars of the most people to keep out Christ's sufficiency: and (in my
judgment) the latter more then the former. Eccles. 7.12.
For Silver answers all (says Solomon) that is, a man of silver may have
anything, because its the price of all things: how hard then is it, to see an
insufficiency in a thing, which is the price of every thing. Money and wealth
can build Churches, pulpits, buy all ornaments of a Church, Bibles and Tables
and Chalices, and hire Preachers, and maintain the Gospel: now, why then
should it not buy Christ too? especially if alms, good deeds and works of
charity, accompany a profession of Christ and his religion; and a verbal
depending upon him and his merits alone, (not any Popish works or Idols) for
salvation: Alas! such profession of word and holding Christ in judgment, may
easily stand with living upon the creature, and building the souls nest of
joy, content and sufficiency in the holes of this rock.

How hardly then should such a rich man or such a self in the creature enter
into heaven? What an enemy it is to Christ.
It is easier for a Camel to go through a needles eye. The Lord Jesus the
truth it self spoke it of a young man, who thought himself past danger, Matthew.
19.23.
who yet hearing of this sufficiency of Christ, if he would sell all, went away
sorrow^ull; and why? he had great possessions, that is, great possessions had
him, and filled him top full with another sufficiency, which made Christ
unsavory: and the same I may say of these who were in the chase to get them:
when the sufficiency of Christ and all his dainties and fullness (even a feast)
was offered them, lo, their answer was, I am to go see a farm, I have bought
oxen; Luke 14.
I am to marry a wife, have us excused, we have that which we like better, we
cannot come. Farms and oxen are joined with wives, to show that self in any
creature and carnal content, sets the heart at rest, and gives it a common
wealth within, so that it need not seek out. Matthew. 13.
So the third and last bad ground, which had both some root and some depth
within, yet without was so cumbred with these thorns of money and pleasures,
living, preferment, great dependances, favor and repute in the world, that
(like a canker) they fretted out the marrow and vigor of Christ and faith, or
need of his sufficiency. First, How the creature forestalls Christ. 1. It
swells the soul with imagination that God loves it. 2. Prides it self in the
ease and welfare which it feels.
the fullness of the creature swells the soul up with a conceit that God loves
it dearly, that he will entertain it so richly: thinking him to be as busy
in heaven to make it a mansion, as he has been liberal in giving it one
here: not dreaming that the body may be full when the soul is lean, and that
riches are given for a snare of the owners, as Micoll to betray David.
Secondly, it prides the soul, to think of her self according to the outward
appearance and glee of wealth and welfare: and that the soul is in as good
case to God as worldward: and though there be infinite much in the world
against it, yet such is the bribing property of self in the creature, that it
perverts sound judgment, not suffering the soul to think a thought against
her own worth: conceiving that all should think her, as she does her self,
very good and in a safe condition: Not remembering that for all the creature, it
may be blind, miserable and naked! and go from a Paradise here, to an hell
hereafter, as Dives did. Thirdly, it stiffens and hardens the heart against the
words both of Law and Gospel, 3. Stiffens the heart against the word preached.
the one including all (the richest) within wrath, and driving them to a loss
within themselves: the other offering the eie-salve, gold and robe of the Lord
Jesus to supply that loss. How shall that soul hearken to either which feels
no need when the ear and heart is so bedulled and engrossed with fullness and
fatness of the creature, that none of the Redeemers sufficiency can enter? Now
if it stumble at these two in the porch, how should it ever enter into the
secret, the holy of holies, in faith and regeneration?

This may be enough for the purpose of this discourse, to open the truth; save
that this one reason may be added, That self in welfare and wealth, has in it
the spirit of scorning the Ministry of Christ: With disdain.
it bewrayed it self even when Christ himself preached: for it is said, That
some who heard him scorned him, for they were rich; Luke 5.
and the like humor possesses their successors. And this property agrees well
with them who make the creature their strong hold: as I have heard of a City
besieged, which cast out loaves and victuals to the enemy in scorn, and
telling them, that they were far from starving. As he said, soul take thine
ease, thou have laid up for many years: Even for so many, that the need of
Christ will hardly be felt. Therefore to conclude this branch also, let me
admonish these persons, that if ever the Lord will settle the alsufficiency of
Christ upon them, Admonitions to this sort.
he will first captivate this self in the creature and sub-ordaine it to
himself: he will cause the image of it to be despised; yea, cause the soul to
cry out of her self and say, what a fool, yea a beast am I in thy sight!
Psalm. 73.
the soul I say shall be full of the creature, even in a contrary sense, that
is, stomach sick of it as a surfeit: The Lord shall rectify the souls
judgment about this self: then the rankness of this pleurisy to be let out
of the soul. 1. See the vanity of the creature.
First, by showing it the vanity and insufficiency of it to help in the day of
wrath: how poor a fort it will prove in the day of affliction and fear: It
cannot rid the owner of an ague, of the tooth ache, of the least affront; it
has no blood in it to satisfy. 2. Behold the image and face of God in the
promise.
Secondly, the Lord shall set the soul in a serious posture and meditation of
that presence of his, which shall make all the earth and the glory of it to
vanish and melt, and those who have been foremost in this creature-happinesse,
to come hindmost and stand a far off, from them who have chosen Christ to be
their sufficiency: then shall the glory of the one be turned to confusion; and
the disdain of the other to admiration. Then shall all their worldly proppes
become as broken staves, the splinters of which shall pierce them (much more
then ever the care to get them could pierce them) with sorrow, 3. Behold the
curse stamped upon the creature
yea despair: The Lord will cause them to look into the creature, and to
behold it, as branded with a curse by sin: but doubly cursed, when in stead
of serving Christ, it resists him and fights against him, and makes Christ and
the soul servants to it: which is to renounce him who is blessed for ever, for
that which is cursed for ever, not only through the want of Christ, but
through her enmity to Christ.

4. See the ugly hue of this sin.
Fourthly, They shall see the ugly shape of that creature which they have made
an Idol, and committed spiritual Sodomy with it, as degenerate a villainy, as
to commit filthiness with a beast. They shall see what a dampe it brings the
soul into, when it places her happiness in the earth, and the hidden
treasures of it, how it makes the word and ordinances most fulsome and
unsavory: 5. All the savor of a creature rests upon mercy.
5. That all sweetness which any creature can afford, must come from Christ,
dropping fatness into it by his footprints in it: what savor then can it
afford, when it opposes Christ's sufficiency by her own vanity, and so robs him
of his? what savor can the soul suck from a creature which is a dead carrion?
what is all the comfort of a creature to a dead soul; not only destitute of
the life of Christ, but stabbing Christ to the heart, and rejecting his life?
yea 8. It will work the soul to a revenge of it self; choosing to cut off the
creature from it self, then, it would not be cut off from it. By these and the
like convincements the Lord will cast down the fort of self in the creature;
stripping it naked of all her false sufficiency: showing her she is but a gull
not able to afford that which she crakes of, that she has nothing but bare
walls to boast of: that so, this strong hold being razed and made level with
the earth, poverty of spirit may enter into the soul; and Christ and his
sufficiency (which only belongs to them who are brought to naught in
themselves) may come into it. 2 Cor. 10.4.
Therefore let all such as have felt this disease in themselves, cease to
marvel why their hearts have been so empty of Christ, Conclusion of the point.
and been left to such a woeful staggering of heart in point of comfort: For
they have forsaken the fountain, and dug broken pits to themselves which
will hold no water. Let them renounce them for hereafter and say, Ashur shall
not save us, we will not ride upon horses; upon these vain creatures: for
with thee the fatherless shall find mercy; make them no prop of support,
either by greedy seeking, Jer. 2.13. Hos. 13.2.
sensual keeping or loathnesse in forgoing: And Lord I find my self as
destitute and forlorn a wretch in point of grace, notwithstanding all my deep
portion in the creature, as if I were the veriest beggar in the Country: I see
all true sufficiency to be in thee, and that thine exceedes mine, both for
kind, root, quality and degree of content, as much as a carnal, a fading,
blasted and vanishing, yea a vexing one, is inferior to a spiritual,
immortal, incorruptible and satisfying sweetness: wherefore I count my self
the same man whether I want or have, abhorring my self in dust and ashes: I
renounce mine own, and rest at thy dispose for the creature, to have more or
less of it, and cleave to thine. And so much also shall serve for this fourth
branch.

The last kind of gross self, is Selfe-religion, or Religious self. The
fifth Branch Selfe-religion.
And this is the invention of Satan (Christ's deadly foe) that whereas all will
not be profane, nor naturalists, nor epicures, but will be religious: lo, he
has a bait for every fish, What it is.
and can insinuate himself as well into Religion it self, as into lusts and
pleasures: and so provide, that in all the duties and privileges which
professors of Christ boast of, yet there shall be a cord upon their heel
which shall pull them back from all power and savor of Christ, as well as if
they had never been toward any Christ at all. And so the nearer Christ they
seem to go, the more dangerous shall their selfe-delusion prove, and the more
confident their sufficiency of devotion makes them, the more woeful shall their
defeat at last be: and all for want of soundness and sincerity. And in this
point I would insist in three things: Privileges, Duties, The branches of
Religious self three.
and degrees of Religion: All these strengthen Selfe-religion in hypocrites and
time-servers, and shroud them under a false covert and protection of that which
is far from them: for the first it was always, is and will be, 1. Privledges.
the boast of Jews, Papists and common Protestants: They were the children of
the free, not the bondwoman, Abraham's seed, such as whose all the promises
were, to whom the Ordinances and Oracles of God belonged: others were dogs and
swine and accursed to them: they cried, the Temple, the Temple: they were (of
all other nations) the chosen generation, Matthew. 3.9.
the peculiar people, all others rejected save themselves; The Lord must want
worshippers, if he cast them off: and by this means they were so puffed up in
themselves, that when Christ came in person to offer himself for salvation,
they abhorred and slew him, and cast him out of the vineyard: that fullness and
sufficiency they felt in their privileges, Privledges of Religion great enmity
to many in keeping them from Christ.
caused them to live in a practice of horrible treachery and impiety against
God; and desperate contempt of the Lord Jesus, as it were under a banner of
defiance. Just the like is the practice of Papists: who under color of the
Church, the Church, the succession of Bishops, the ancientnesse of their
Religion, the glory of their outside of worship, pomp and bravery of rites and
ceremonies, their prosperity and worldly happiness, their large and general
extent in government, their superstitious devotions; and what not? which flesh
can desire, make themselves believe, that they are the only Christians, and
all other are upstarts and counterfeits. So do our common Protestants and
hypocrites; they boast of their baptism, their part in the communion of
Saints, their right to their word and ordinances, they are no hangbyes, no
Gibeonites, no recusants, no profane ones, no morallists, nor epicures, but
constant worshippers of God, frequenters of the sacraments, and partakers of
all the privileges of the Church. When Constantine restored the Church to her
privileges, she began to degenerate.
And this puffes them up, the devil blinding them, that they should be
bewitched with his charm and look no further then a bare privilege: comparing
themselves with such as still walk in a loose and profane course, and in
respect of such, deeming themselves very religious. But what is the effect
hereof? surely this, that under pretense of their great privileges, they are
full of themselves, so that the pith and marrow of them, (for all tend unto,
and end in Christ, or else are empty shells) faith I mean, and Christ in his
sufficiency to forgive, save and sanctify them, is a mere stranger unto them.
The Church was purest, when her privileges were fewest.

The like may be said of duties: It was the great boast of that Pharisee (and
of all his tribe) that he fasted twice a week, 2. Religious duties.
gave alms, paid tithes of all, even to mint and cummin: he was not as the
publican, no extortioner, no briber, no usurer; and this made him crow upon his
dunghill exceedingly, and swell in his law righteousness, that Christ never
came in his mind. Luke 18.11.12.
Those Pharisees in the Gospel upon whom so many woes are pronounced, how full
of their duties were they? Christ himself was a libertine to them and their
strictness; a companion of Publicans and sinners, a glutton and winebibber, in
comparison of their abstinence and sobriety; How dangerous.
he could not keep a Sabbath strictly enough for them, nor walk closely
enough to please them. Phil. 3.7, 8, 9.
And Paul who had been one of them, and after his conversion, bewrayed their
secrets, confessed that as he trusted to his privileges of a Jew, of
circumcision, of his sect; so especially that he walked to the uttermost in
the most precise strictness of his profession, making conscience of being a
Pharisee; and throughout all his Epistles what does he cry out of so much as
his and their law righteousness, that is that exact and strict walking in all
the duties of the moral law and ceremonies: Oh! how this conceit of their own
virtues and moralities stiffened, swelled and puffed up all this bastardly
brood, not only to disdain profane ones, but also to abhor the
spiritualnesse of the Lord Jesus, and to contemn the offer of his grace as
base and superfluous? And what was the chief object of our Saviors outcries,
Matthew. 23.
woes and curses, save this rabble of Pharisees? (one whole Chapter being spent
therein) yea his bitter and irreconciliable antipathy and enmity of spirit
against them above all other either heathens or profane ones: Surely because
he saw that above all other opposition to himself, this was the most deadly and
damnable, to set up a god against a Christ, an Altar against an Altar, a
righteousness coming from a mere selfe-loving and self seeking principle,
from a carnal bottom, to a carnal end, against the eternal, spiritual,
pure righteousness of the Lord Jesus; who came to discover not only all
gross unrighteousness and make it odious, but also all righteousness of
flesh and all the obedience of hypocrites, and to cast it as unsavory salt,
dung and dogsmeate upon the dunghill: And to be brief, what else is the
religion of our days and times both among Popish and carnal Protestant
worshippers, save their duties, devotions? The one boasting of his masses,
sacrifices, alms, penances, empty fastings, building of Hospitalls, doing of
good works, and all to establish their own Corban and Kingdom; through the
merit of their own congruities and condignities; the other, their serving of
God, hearing his word, receiving his sacraments, abstaining from the sins of
usury, drunkenness, uncleanness, and doing the duties of the Sabbath, of
mercy and charity, of righteousness and equity: But to be sure, both of them
swelling in the opinion of themselves; both abhorring to feel any pinching
need of the Lord Jesus and his sufficiency, to pardon both their
unrightousnesse and also their counterfeit righteousness, being both equally
damnable.

But the third branch, viz. Religion in point of degrees and measures, The 3.
Branch Degrees of Religion.
is of all the most dangerous piece of Self, and swells the unsound and
hollow heart of man in the opinion of himself: Some boasting of their
knowledge of Gods will in general: others of some degrees of legal
humiliation: a third sort of a wonderful sweetness they have tasted in hearing
the Gospel, and the glad tidings of life and salvation thereby; a fourth
showing how they are awed by the knowledge of the word from their former
courses; what degrees of grace have been wrought in them, how long they have
been hearers, What degrees of Religion a man may attain unto.
and held out in their profession longer then many revolters, what zeal they
have showed in setting up the Ministry in their Towns, prayer in their
families, care and conscience, and good example in their lives; how many sins
they have laid aside, what good they have done in their repeating of Sermons,
calling upon their kindred and neighbors, what services they have done for the
Church, run, ridden, written, bestowed pains and travel to settle order and
government in their places, how they have honored, graced and maintained the
Minister, invited, entertained him to their houses, how they have stood out and
suffered for the Gospel. Others go further and instance in the power of the
promise of Christ in their souls: what ravishing passions of joy, admiration
and thanks that sweet doctrine has wrought in them, what pangs of deep love
and affection it has raised in them, how it has bred in them abundant weeping
and sorrow for their sins, humiliation and fear under the hand of God, how
they have stood upon thorns, till the Sabbath or lecture day came, what ardent
desires after the word, what longings, what frequent use of means it has
wrought in them, and how they have denied both lust and liberties for Christ,
and could be content (for the time) to beg, to go to prison and suffer for
him; Besides many effects which this has wrought in them, the curbing in of
their tongues, their passions, and their lives which were wont to be full of
lying, deceit, rage, revenge, unmercifulness, unrighteousness; but now they
are become true of their word, quiet, moderate, courteous, gentle and merciful:
All these things laid together, cause them to think no less then that their
state is good and sound to Godward; for why? the hearsay of Christ wrought all
these things in them; And yet (not to condemn any particular person for these,
seeing God only knows the hearts of the sons of men) how many have we known
by woeful experience who have attained some of these or all these degrees, And
to how small purpose.
who yet in a short time have bewraied themselves to be time-fervers, and
wanzed away to nothing, as fast as ever they seemed to come forward?

Alas! they never called themselves to question, never tried their estate by
the rules of the word, nor came to put difference between a conscience
proceeding from supernatural revealing, and between divine and spiritual
persuasion: The Apostle has a strange speech, 1 Cor. 15.19. 1 Cor. 15.19.
If our hope were in this life only in Christ, we were of all men most
miserable: whereby we see, that many seek their Christ only for this life:
that is, how they may make use of Christ here below, for a while to get
themselves some inward truce with an accusing conscience, or to get themselves
credit, ease and welfare here among men, with whom they see Christ and Religion
are in request: But as for a Christ to save, to sanctify and glorify them for
ever, they never hoped or believed in him for that. Wherein they come short.
And why? First, they never came to see themselves wholly lost and forlorn in
themselves, but still held some prop of their own to support them, though
Christ should fail them, and so never feeling need of him, could never
savingly and cordially make to him and apply him. Secondly, they never looked
at a promise for it self, but from some pangs and flashes of self, liking the
news of Christ, for the good it presented, taking the word to themselves,
rather in a dream and a fancy after a thing they would have, then for the
naked truth of the promiser. Thirdly, or else they were led by outward sense,
the credit, gifts and plausiblenesse of the Preacher, in whose light they
rejoiced, while it lasted, but if the minister were once removed, (then as a
sive out of the water, so) they lost all their zeal again: It bred with him
and died with him. Fourthly, they heard without discerning of truths, taking
all alike, not cleaving to the doctrine as such, able to ground and to settle
them in peace through Christ: but as good things in general, at random,
without putting difference, observing order or coherence. For, if another
Minister came, who preached his own vagrant and ungrounded fancies, they were
as ready to hear him and be led away as by the former. Matthew. 11.19.
Fifthly, they looked upon the zeal of others who snatch the Kingdom with
violence, and thought it a disgrace for them to be more backward; and so
hanging upon the common haunt and multitude, never examined what inward
principle led them; and so, when zeal grew cold, and profession more dead,
they grew as cold and dead as others: Sixthly, or else having no root in them,
they clave to the word in peace and prosperity of the Church; but when they saw
the times to frown and trouble to come, then they saw they thrust themselves
further in, then they had strength to wind out, and so withered, and brought
shame upon their profession: Seventhly, or if they were grounded in knowledge,
yet not in soundness of heart, for so soon as the devil came to recover his
possession, Luke 11.25.
he found them empty, swept and garnished, that is, still tainted with old
lusts, world and pleasures, though for a while they seemed to have forsaken
them. Eighthly, though they received the truth of Jesus, yet not as the truth is
in Jesus; not to purge them, Ephesians. 4.21.22.
to change their base qualities, to transform them from glory to glory:
Ninthly, if they have proceeded to some shows of holiness, yet they have not
come under the authority of the commander, from the faithfulness of the
promiser, who has made his yoke easy and his burden light: Their obedience
is rather in the letter, and in the easier points of the Law, then the hard and
craggy; Matthew. 11.29. 1 Samuel 13.
they go not up the hill with Jonathan upon all four, but down hill; They
are like dead fishes which swim down the stream, not living ones which
swim against it, in some few things, not all, with an equal exact carriage,
in some acts, not in the bent of their spirit, and the stream of their life: As
the springs are, so is their running to themselves; if they be taxed for any
evils, 10. Then they excuse them by infirmities, and lick themselves whole by
the sores of the godly; not remembering that the godly have sundry defects in
grace, but not one (as themselves) maine want of grace; and these they pretend
not as excuses; but groan under as burdens; also they color themselves by
this, that their sins are few, and but small, or else necessary, or but
secret and not breaking out: whereas a sound heart knows, one sin may be as
full if it run into one channel, and may be as much delighted in and fed on,
as many dishes; also that Gods people never fall into such a necessity as to
sin; are free from such straits, as to stretch conscience for ease, credit,
wealth, and outward respects: and lastly, Lots wife paid as dear for her
contemplative sin as for her actual: And (to end) they abide in their evils
and recover not; whereas Gods people are as a blade of good metal which
being bent will return, and are never well till with the needle of the dial
they stand just toward the North of repentance. Twelfly and lastly, if they go
forward to suffer for Christ, it is with much ado, and struggling against it;
and in such sufferings as they can lick themselves whole another way; or if
they be driven by necessity of shame or light to it, yet rather out of
compulsion, then purity and goodness of their cause and conscience. And so
much be spoken for the clearing of these three branches of Selfe-religion.

I conclude this last branch with admonition also; that we abhor this
sufficiency of selfe-religion and righteousness. Its the stillest stream of
all, yet the deepest gulf, and under pretense of drawing nearest to Christ his
privy chamber, becomes the greatest traitor to him. I condemn not morality,
civility, religious duties and degrees: As the Towne-clarke Acts 20. said to
them of Ephesus, Diana is a great goddess, who denies it? But we must make no
uproare for her: So, these are good, but they must make no mutiny against
Christ, and by a sufficiency of their own, destroy his: If they come under his
banner to fight for him, they do well: But to erect one of their own against
his, is deadly treason. Therefore as mariners in danger of life by shipwreck,
look not at the value of their wares, nor the use of them, silks, velvets,
corn, wine, tacklings of ships, but how they endanger their lives; so in Gods
fear let us do with selfe-religion, a commodity in show far above morality
or carnal welfare, but if it equally (or more) endanger the ship and life of
the soul, cast it also with the rest overboord: remember not, many of these
five sorts of gross self, politiques, carnal, wizards, moralists, worldlings
or Pharisees, get into heaven: Alas! they stick at the porch, This sufficiency
of self must be abhorred.
not in the narrow gate: how then should they enter? If ever God make such
capable of Christ, he will pare off their Camels bunch, and make them of Saul's,
Paul's: who says of this as well as of all the rest, I counted them all as
loss, and as dogsmeat, that I might be found in Christ, not clothed with
mine own, Phil. 3.
but his righteousness. Be wise in time, lay not out their money for no bread,
nor your pains for that which satisfies not; empty their souls of it, that
Christ and his good things, refined wi^es and fatness may satisfy you: Let
others pray to God to pardon their vices; Esaias 55.2.
do you beg mercy and pardon for their virtues, for their religion, duties and
performances: If the heart be brought to renounce this sufficiency, its a sign
there is a better coming in place: when all is done, say of thy self as
Luther of those devotions, I count my self no nearer heaven by them, then if I
had played the Publican all this while; nay in some regard further off: The
Devil else will cut thy veins in this warm water and cause thee to perish
insensibly. Consider that to have this self of thine, may seem somewhat; But
to cast all this off, and be naked and nothing; can only prepare thee for that
fullness and sufficiency of Christ which can only save thee: Which grace the
Lord grant thee: Thus for a more clear handling of this argument, I have
digressed from the stream of my doctrine; it is now high time to return to it
again. So much for this time. Let us pray for a blessing, etc.

THE FIFTH LECTVRE continued upon the eleventh Verse.
VERSE XI. But Naaman was wroth, and said, Behold I thought thus in my self,
surely he will come forth, and call upon the Lord his God, and strike his hand
upon the place, and recover the leper.

VERSE 12. Are not Abana and Pharfar, rivers of Damascus, better, etc.


HAving in the former Lecture (beloved) made way to settle this maine Doctrine
of close Self upon her bottom, Return to the maine scope of the point of
mixed self.
by severing from it some kinds of self more gross and palpable: I must now
(taking it for granted that you remember what I have said of it already)
proceed to the handling of the point: And lest any should think there is no
finer spunne self, then that I have spoken of: First, I will mention some
branches of this root, mixing themselves with the soul in her strife after
faith; and (as the Ivy about the bow) twining about the best endeavors of the
poor soul, to hold it off from the promise. This being done, I will prove the
doctrine by Scripture and reasons: Thirdly, I will lay down an answer to a
question, for the opening of the dangerous nature of this enemy. And lastly,
come to some use of the doctrine. First of the first.

First then, that you may perceive (brethren) what manner of thing this mixed
self is, Mixed self wherein it discovers it self.
I will name some of the chief instances wherein this disease discovers her
self. The which I mention without any curious order, and leave them to the
godly wise to consider of, every one to single out his own annoyance. The
first is self error, 1. Error.
imagining that the Lord in his promise and offer of Christ does not so offer
him as therewithal conveying power and efficacy of persuading and inabling the
soul to accept and believe it of it own power, thereby creating in the soul
the fruit of lips, Esaias 57. Jam. 1.16.
but rather upon some condition of our own strength mixed with the Lords
goodness to concur (of our selves) with the promise. Secondly, self-conceit
2. Self-conceit.
(such as Naamans here was) fancying a way of our own speedier and quicker
then we have warrant for, to wit, that if once the soul be under a condition,
and prepared for Christ, by sorrow, desire and diligence; the work of
believing is as present, as the grinding of the corn, when the upper millstone
runs upon the nether: whereas faith is the stamp of the spirit, which
blows when it lists, 3. Self-preparins.
at his pleasure. Thirdly, selfe-preparations, that is a taking up of a rest in
the soul, that if she can but attain to these, she need go no further, for
these can be wrought in no other then in such as shall be saved: whereas first
the question is, whether they be truly wrought, or from self-love; and
although they proceed from the promise, yet happiness consists not in them,
but in the omnipotent power of God, carrying the soul by them into the stream
of the satisfaction of Christ, the only blood whereof is sufficient to save it
by faith. 4. Selfe-bondage.
Fourthly, selfe-bondage, which is, when the soul is so extremely oppressed
with the relics or returns of slavish fear, through corruption and guilt,
too deeply apprehended; that it is dazeled and held under from beholding the
free and clear truth of the promise to set her at liberty; yea if melancholy
and frowardness of will be added hereto, mixed with the ill custom, to
conceive so deep enmity in God against the sinful creature, that she will
hold her own peevishly, against all the light of the word, or counsel and
persuasion to the contrary, viz. that God the offended judge is the first mover
in this frame of conversion, and has cut off his plea willingly, and intended
the way of reconciliation himself. The fifth is self-love, 5. Self-love.
when the soul so looks at the promise, as an object of immediate good to
herself, and for her own ends and welfare; not subordaining her own
salvation to the glory of God, and the declaration of the depth of his wisdom,
1 These. 1.
and the riches of his grace, that he may be admired in them that believe.

6. Sloth.
The Sixth is selfe-sloth, when the soul has a wambling and fulsome aim at the
promise, not indeed seriously and sadly digesting the ground of Gods so free
offering the inestimable jewel of Christ to her, for pardon and peace (called
in Scripture the strength of God, Esaias 27.5.) I mean the full appeasing of his
justice, by the payment of a price; nor yet with how faithful an heart, full
and free grace he offers, but loosely forgetting that all is yea and amen in
Christ, and looking at the promise, as at a thing naked and unfurnished, has a
strong consolation and refuge, Heb. 7. Heb. 6. penult.
The Seventh is selfe-treachery and doubtfulnesse, whereby the soul having the
general offer of God to all under the condition, 7. Treachery.
yet because she is not named in the word, therefore doubts that in special
she is not intended in the offer, and so grows to think that she may separate
the things which God has joined, whereas she should rest in this, That the
Lord debarres no soul from grace which debarres not herself, Esaias 55.1.
saying, Ho every one that thirsts, come etc. and the particular is included
in the general; and if every poor soul should thus go between bark and
tree, and cavil, who should ever come to believe? Eighthly, 8. Infidelity.
selfe-infidelity, which is a deadly dart of Satan piercing the heart, even
when the fruit is coming to the birth; tempting thus, why art thou so bent to
cleave to the word? How know thou whether it be Gods word or no? If it be,
how can thou prove it? If not, whereupon do thou build thy great
confidence? And this dart often so prevails, that all the former witness of
the spirit, touching the truth of God, by many evidences seems to be lost.
Ninthly, selfe-cavilling, 9. Cavilling.
when the heart is set upon excepting against the promise, either from her own
unworthiness, or Gods long delays (which provoke the heart to weariness) or
comparing of the forwardness of others, with her backwardness, or else that
God means not as he speaks, but the contrary, even to cast her off with some
mark of vengeance: sometimes rushing upon the rock of election, as if all
labor were lost, because she is not predestined to salvation, (as if we were
to get to the highest step of the ladder, before we have ascended by the lower)
sometime descanting about the way of revealing, why it should be only by the
word and spirit, and not by sensible ways of expression, by voice from heaven,
or extraordinary convincements: and so in sundry other respects. 10.
Selfe-feare, 10. Fear.
that the work of faith will be so hard and tedious, that it will never be
compassed, by so weak and frail a creature as she is, so ignorant,
forgetful, corrupt and estranged from God; the present sense of these and
other corruption, dazeling the spirit, and enfeebling the heart, so that it
grows to a falling sickness, and is at a loss upon each occasion, each
Sermon it hears seems to speak dismal things unto it, and it thinks it
were better wholly to give over hearing then hear: yea and in a strong tech
and pang, dare not, or will not continue to hear, for fear it should be
worse, and heap up wrath instead of mercy: so that all which is said either in
public or private, seems to leake out, Heb. 2.1. and sometime this fear
comes from unlikelyhood of ever forgoing all sin, or holding out to the end.

Eleventhly, selfe-staggering, 11. Staggering.
when the soul is between the condition of the promise, and the performance:
as for example, if she be urged to believe, because the condition is already
wrought, then she questions that, whether it were ever wrought, at least
aright, because alas! her sorrow is little, she has never been so deeply tozed
by the law, nor so broken hearted and full of affections and diligence as
others: on the other side, when she feels the condition comfortably present,
then she staggers about the promise, saying, the condition is not the matter,
but the belief it self, and that is above her power, many come far who never
believe, and faith is the gift of God and free, and what if it should never be
wrought, or she should die and be past hope, ere it be effected? Thus Satan
comes between cup and lip, to defeat the soul of her due: whereas, if she
were stayed and settled upon the word, and (as 2 Ioh. 8.) would not lose those
good things which she has gotten but hold a little, closely, till more come,
the work would not be always to begin; as the frame of a Carpenter when it is
disordered as fast as he lays it together. Twelftly, selfe-fullennesse and
unthankefulnesse, 12. Sullenness.
(which is in a contrary extremity to ease) when the soul will not see or
acknowledge what God has done for her, nor abase her self, as meaner then the
least mercy of God, nor confess that any step toward conversion, is more then
the Lord owes her (having her at an infinite advantage by her guilt) and so
choosing to spend her time in sullen complaints, for the measures she wants,
then gracious meltings and praises for any thing she enjoyes: whereas the
Publican thought it mercy to tread on the earth, to look up to heaven; and it
is mercy that she is not in hell, but under hope and Gods ordinances and
patience: This is the fruit of pride and does set back the soul more from
profiting, then if she could stoop to be at Gods dispose. Thirteenthly, 13.
Ease.
self-ease or dalliance when the soul through idleness has lost her former
diligence and earnestness and painfulnesse in using all means public and
private for the making of her calling and election sure; waxes slacker in her
esteem, and in her love and affections, as thinking her self now past danger:
and so neglects the seasons and intimations of the spirit, plies not nor
follows the motions of the assisting and perfecting grace; but lets them
wanze as if she could meet with them at her pleasure: but by this means Satan
circumvents afterward and stings her for this confidence and presumption,
because she is guilty of slighting such grace as she feels to be past her reach
to recover, and therefore justly suffers for her looseness and giddiness. 14.
Dullness.
14. Selfe-dulnesse and deadness of spirit, in not marking and pondering,
digesting and applying the truths we hear, and so growing toward ripeness
Heb. 5.10. which sin makes us not only non-proficients in the doctrine of
Christ, but also inferior to our selves, and far short of that we might be;
especially when this disease comes not from natural disability and unavoidable
weakness, but from affected error, as from an heart overmuch implodded in the
earth, and made heavy by sensuality and carnal ease, Luke 21.37. Luke 21.37.


15. Foolishness.
Again Fifteenthly, selfe-folly, I may better call it self hatred, when we are
not so wise or forward to dispute for the truth and honor of God and his
promise, as we are to reason against it, and our own souls, thereby making a
work, (not easy of it self) to be more wearisome and tedious then it need to
be; whereas rather we should reason the matter seriously between God and our
souls (as in Ierem. 2. verse. 9. the Lord biddes us to do, Jer. 2.9.
and Esaias 1.18. Esaias 1.18.
) and laying the desperateness of our misery to the hope of his promise, we
should rather wonder that all place of pleading should not be taken from us,
then cavil against a plain naked word of God, pinned upon our sleeves. Those
Ninivites when yet they had no clear promise, Jona 3.8.
yet reasoned thus, who can tell whether Gods fierce anger shall turn away or
no? They thought it their wisdom rather to catch at a word a far off, then
to lie in present misery without hope. But self-folly still delights to shut
out it self by her disputes against God; and cowardly to shun a possible mercy
that it might lie down in remediless sorrow. This (I say, must needs be
horrible fool-hardinesse, rather to perish, 16. Slinesse.
then venture upon a promise of ease and remedy. The last of all, is self
subtilty or slinesse; whereby the soul secretly withdrawing her self from the
power of the promise (which ought to work all her works for her, both preparing
and finishing) and finding her own affections of hope, sorrow, joy, desire and
the rest, very ready to put forth themselves in the work of disposing the soul
toward Gods grace, and to mix themselves wi h the word: does welcome and
applaud her own self and all her abilities, and begins to compass her
self with her own sparkles, with her own feelings, and with the joys which
come from her own welwishes to her self: which having no root of Christ and
his spirit in them, but of self-love, must needs vanish and leave the soul as
low as ever they found it, and so the longer and closer they are clave to, the
greater confusion they cause: till the soul being weary of her own pride and
mixtures, freely resign it self (as empty and nothing) to the mere good
pleasure, persuasion and leisure of the spirit to act and effect all both
preventings, assistings and perfectings, by his own strength; which is always
strongest, when the soul lies lowest, as the red earth of which Adam was
formed, till the Lord breathed the spirit of life into it; And surely to
conclude, there is nothing more easy then to be deluded in the trial hereof:
for such is the enchantment of self in this kind, that no experience of
disappointing the soul, by her false feelings, will teach her to deny her
self and humble her self before God, except only she apply her self closely
to the rule of the word, in every step she takes, examining from what bottom
her affections and preparations proceed: and finding self to be chief in the
work, instantly to suspect it and constantly to resist it, believing that the
most abiding and lasting work of hum^liation and preparation proceeds from the
sweetness and freedom of a promise from a reconciled God, when the heart is
most desolate and helpless in her self. By these few the reader may perceive
what I mean by this privy-selfe: and by these heads he may learn to judge of
other like which are infinite.

Now then I proceed to prove the point, that this mixed self (when all is done)
will deprive the soul of mercy; if it be not prevented. Let the first text be
that Heb. 4. ult. We see they were disappointed of the entering into his rest:
why? were not they fair for it? Proofs of the point.
yes surely they had forsaken Egypt, and come a great journey in the
wilderness. But what let them? Unbeleefe. And what caused that? Self. Not
only their wishing to be in Egypt at their fleshpots, nor yet their fornication
and Idolatry: But (as Esaias tells us) they rebelled against his holy spirit:
Esaias 63.10.
Their spiritual rebellings, cavillings, distrust, were the causes: They erred
in heart (as the Psalmist calls it) that is, Psalm. 9.2.
they entertained false conceits against him, sometime they asked, Can God
spread a table in the wilderness; Sometime they pitied their children saying,
Alas! We shall never see Canaan: Sometime they said, Numb. 9.
the Giants were able to eat them up, there were chariots of iron: Sometimes
they said, this was not the way: God might as well have brought them the right
way to Canaan, as the wrong, if he had meant them well. They made the promise
of entering (easily and plain in it self) to be difficulter then it was: some
saying, it is as high as heaven, how shall we get thither? can we climb up?
others thus, it is as deep as the nethermost earth, how shall we descend
thither? is it possible for us, to construe so hard a promise, whereof we see
neither sense or color? to make a work of forty days, to be forty years,
and yet mean us well? Therefore Moses tells them, Deuteronomy. and Romans 10.
say not the word is far off, for it is near thee, in thy mouth, yea thine
heart, that thou might believe it. The deceit of the erring hearts warped
these crotchets, to hold them out of Canaan, and to scatter their carcasses in
the wilderness. Another text is, Heb. 12.15. Heb. 12.15.
Let no man fail of the grace of God. Let there be no bitter root springing
up in you, to defile you, and turn you off. He had spoken before of Esau, who
was the first borne, and sought the blessing with tears, yet failed of it: he
came too late, after it was conveied away from him too sure, to Jacob: why? he
had a bitter root springing up in him, a selfe-willed, peevish heart against
his brother, he disdained that he should be preferred. The Apostle applies it
to the Hebrews, who were fair for the promise (read Romans 10.1, 2, 3, 4, Romans
10.1, 2, 3, 4.
5, 6. etc.) but yet failed, and lost it, the Gentiles were preferred. And why?
there was this bitter root of self in them, they stood upon their conceit,
none were the Church save they, none so righteous as they; They scorned that
dogs should go to heaven before those whose righteousness was so precise as
theirs: and this conceit defiled, hardened them, and overthrew the
righteousness of Christ. They could never submit self to the word preached,
nor comply with it, but bitterly rejected it, and them who preached it, as being
a new way to heaven, and not that which they had learned: and should they stoop
to this new learning of Christ? This bitterness overthrew them.

So Ahaz Esaias 8. Esaias 8.
was fair for the promise of victory: insomuch as the Prophet bid him demand a
sign: he would not: why? Selfe-presumption let him, he thought he was sure
enough of God, if once he spoke the word: But the Lord looked at his own
honor, and therefore gave his people a sign, by a Virgin that should conceive
and bring forth a son: So that the confidence of his foolish heart, which
thought he believed God, whereas in truth, he sought himself only, and not
the glory of God, Luke 4.
deceived him. So it is said, Luke 4. the Pharisees and Elders coming to John's
baptism, despised the counsel of God, touching their salvation: why? because
they were carried with strong selfprejudice against the way of John's Ministry,
and chose rather not to be faved at all then that way. The Galathians were
fair for heaven also, and ran well: Gal. 3.
what let them? a misprision thrust into their heads by false teachers, that
Paul's way and Gods way agreed not, and that the old way by Ceremonies was best,
easiest and likeliest, because agreeing with flesh; and this makes Paul to
fear, lest he had bestowed his pains upon them in vain. Our Savior Christ's
Disciples were fair for faith: what let them? selfe-sloth, dullness of
heart. Oh you dull and slow of heart to believe all which is written in the Law
and Prophets concerning Christ! Luke 24.
in what a depth of darkness did it hold them? Their eyes were held so down,
that they could not discern the Lord Jesus, when he stood and talked with
them. I will but add one or two more, That young man in the Gospel was not
far from the Kingdom: what stopped him? Surely he came full of himself, and
had kept the Law from his youth: this he had a strong conceit of: but when he
was turned out of that confidence, and put into a new way of selfedeniall, and
selling all, he went away sorrowful; not only because he was covetous, but
because forestalled in opinion that his way was best, and is now crossed. To
conclude, that is a solemn text which our Savior urges Ioh. 5. Joh. 5.
How can ye believe, when ye seek or receive honor one of another, and seek
not the honor of God only? Secret self will so serve God, that she will
foist in her own ends, credit, praise and respect, even while she seems to
seek Gods: and so while she should save her own stake, she loses Gods:
she aims not at him and the glory of his grace only, and therefore not at
all. So much for p^oofes.

Reasons of this doctrine are many, and may be drawn from many heads: as
first from the nature of this corrupt self. Secondly, from other From the
nature of this self.
For the first, we may consider the danger of mixed self from her own corrupt
quality, both in respect of the first familiarity of it, Secondly, the
generalnesse of it, Thirdly, the violence of it, and Fourthly, In 4 things.
the tenaciousnesse or continuance of it. Touching the first bosom; beloved,
1. Familiarity or closeness.
and inward corruptions do most bleare the eye of discerning, and pervert
judgment, because they go in a stream least suspected. A traitor who
insinuates himself into a man so deeply, as to comply and correspond with him
in all his courses, will deceive most dangerously. So self runs in the
stream of nature, and pleases it in every thing, it is as a bribe in the hand
prevailing wheresoever it goes. Prove. 17.8.
As that natural agreement and well pleasingnesse of Delila to the humor of
Sampson, forestalled all which was spoken against her, so that he laid it not
to heart, but went forward: so self has a bewitching nature, and will suffer
no objection to prevail. For why? All seems to be as it should be: the flesh
is so tickled and enchanted with selfe-ease, self-conceit, selfe-duties and
the like, they do so delude the heart with an opinion, that all is as it should
be, that it detaines it in error habitually; yea it can so incorporate it
self into all the best religious duties, that she will very hardly be
distinguished: one would think the anointed of the Lord were before him; that
of the Apostle expresses it well: it does easily beset us: Heb. 12.1.
as a man whose loins are compassed about with a close girdle, is as he would
be: If any doubt or scruple arise in the mind about a man's estate, by and by
self rocking the cradle stills the whimpering child, and all is quiet, and as
it should be: Its like a bad Courtier which watches (as a cat the mouse) that
none whisper one wry word in the Princes ear; or if he do, yet he is close at
the elbow and suffers nothing to enter. Secondly, the Generalnesse: Self is
not as particular lusts, as adultry, 2. The generalnesse.
lying, murder, covetousness or the like: but self is all corruption in one,
the very spirit and root of bitterness, Heb. 12.15.
which gives joice and nourishment to all branches; Its the Idol of all
special lusts, to which all do homage and service; its the body of all those
members, (I may rather call it the soul of all) in which they live: All their
springs are in self: now then if this be so general and so overspreading an
evil, what wonder if the deceit thereof be as general and dangerous? what
may not the Prince do, and yet no man open his tongue against him? what may
not a Pope do, though he draw innumerable souls with him into perdition, who
may say, what do thou? Such a Lord and Pope is Self, and more universal.

Thirdly, the violence of it: Self is near it self always, 3. The violence.
and desires such objects as are profitable; but much more when the object
promises a great contentment and advantage: faith and grace and holy duties are
subjects promising great reward, even immortality, Romans 1.
when therefore these are propounded to the soul (though upon far other
terms, yet) how forward and eager is corrupt self to act her part? and how
does she boast, that she can put forth her self in so high matters? what is so
self putting forth, as an handmaid affecting the place of her mistress? who
can bear her insolency? what is so negotious and eagerly busy, as an usurping
Absalon acting the part of an unlawful Prince over subjects? Prove. 30.23. 2 Samuel 15.2.
Such is self: never so stirring and like her self, as in Gods matters, which
promise the greatest gain and good to self; and what wonder then, if so
stirring and violent a thing, do deceive a man, and hold him in an opinion of
welfare? 1 Kings 9. Acts 9.
Iehu in his heat of selfe-zeale, being warm in his gear: Ananias and Saphira
being in the heat of their great charity, had no leisure to discern that
subtilty and self ends (which prevailed over their outward performances) the
one of murdering Ahabs posterity for a Crown (for so it was) the other the
robbing of the Church, for the saving of some money. 4. Tenaciousnesse.
Fourthly and lastly, the Tenaciousnesse of self: I mean when she is put hard
to it, rather then she will shrink in her horns and lose all her labor, she
will hold close to her own tacklings and devour a great deal of difficulty.
For a man's desire he will separate himself (says Solomon) that is deny
himself and go far, Prove. 18 1. 1 King. 15.27. 1 King. 18.28.
if need requires. It was easy for Baasha to kill Jeroboam, when it went in
the stream of his own ambition: But not easy for Baals Priests, when the
case so required, to wound and lance themselves; or now for Papists to whip
and mortify their flesh, or for those in Micha 6. Mica 6.
to offer the Lord the first fruit of their bodies, for the sin of their
souls, rivers of oil and wine: yet what will not self stand to, (within her
possibility) rather then resign up her right? Sleidan reports of a soldier
cast out of the top of a castle (among others appointed to be so slain) a
marveilous height from the earth, who yet by miraculous providence, catching
hold on the shrags of a mulbery tree, saved his life. Such a thing is this
self: rather then perish, she will catch hold upon any thing, (be it never so
above her in show) not only hard duties, but even sufferings, and herein seen
to amate and equal even true selfedeniall, till she be tried: What wonder
then in such achievements, if she delude the soul dangerously, and maintain a
false principle to overthrow it? To forgo a man's lusts so far as that the
unclean spirit seems to be gone out of a man; to suffer persecution (as
Alexander did with Paul Ephesians. 20. a terrible example for such a timeserver, Luke
11. Acts 20.
2 Timothy 4.14. 2 Timothy 4.14.
) to deny a man's credit, ease, health, honor, ends and life for profession
sake, is a sign of some holding out; and yet self cannot hold out ever. Thus
much for the first Reason, drawn from the nature of this woeful Self.

A second gound of this point, is from comparison with others: For From
comparison with others.
liers and swearers, despise God and all goodness, contemn the means and
scorn the light, because their works are evil: now I (for my part) am a
diligent hearer of the word, a countenancer of Ministers, a worshipper of God
in my family, and perhaps more, yea a renouncer of all open sins, and therefore
must not I needs be led by a spirit of more excellent nature then they are?
Surely if I had their spirit, I should be led to the same evils which yet now
I abhor. Nay more, when these hypocrites shall not only compare themselves
with others; Self upholds herself by false comparisons.
but with themselves, and say, such a one was I wont to be, a gross cozener
and oppressor, a cheater, a covetous wretch, unclean and base, but since I
have heard and professed the Gospel, I have abhorred such stuff, and am not
only in mine own opinion, but in the judgment of others, another man: Oh (I
say) what a shrewd argument is this, (for one that cannot or will not compare
himself with the word, and try himself by the marks of a believer) to give
sentence on his own side? which to do, (for one not converted to God) how does
it overthrow all his former shows, affections and duties? and hinder him from
true conversion indeed.

A third reason may be from Satan: whose pillars are pitched more Satan imbarks
himself more deep^y in self, then in other lusts.
then upon any other more open offender: I say upon this privy-selfe
especially: Gross persons do but little hurt, no nor such open hypocrites, as
whose shows are openly confuted by their own practice: for why? each one
stoppes his nose at them, and they themselves coming once to the touchstone of
the word, have no great color for themselves, but more easily fall in pieces,
and give up their weapons to the battery of the law and power of the word
convincing them. But it is not so here. For when Satan can so delude an unsound
heart by the sweetness of self, as to resist the dint of the truth, and
harden himself in his pretended religion and duties, against the Lord Jesus,
and the spirit of faith and grace, he sleeps securely in his den, knowing
that such an one is under lock and key, and is not like (by any probability)
to get out of so excusing and erroneous a conscience and condition: for he is
as ready to damn himself for his own ends, as for Satan's, and therefore is
under a more deep chain then any other sinner is. True it is, Satan chooses
rather (out of the excess of his wickedness to debaush men's consciences: but
if once he can be resolved by sure marks, that self bears sway above grace
(which is no hard thing for him to do, who can convey himself so cunningly
into the bent and frame of men's carriages) he knows himself as sure of such
(abiding so) as of men of more profane and odious conversation.

Lastly, how just is it with God to give over such to the hardness of Self
deludes dangerously by Gods just giving her over to her own way.
and to lurk still in their own den of ease and selfeconceit, who having
clearly conceived his will, and knowing that all who gather without Christ do
but scatter: and, except the Lord make the soul an habitation for his spirit,
all our building is but in vain, a mere Babell of confusion, and a Castle in
the air: yet shall withdraw their heart from God in the maine work of
selfedeniall, and selling all, that they might buy the pearl. (I doubt not but
there are many unsound ones, who know it not; but doubtless the number of such
is few in comparison of others.) To him that has shall be given, but from him
who has not, shall be taken away, that he seems to have. Matthew. 25.29.
And so much also may serve for Reason.

I come now (according to my order) to answer a question. A Question answered.
How may a man discover this mischief in his heart?
Since this mixed self is so dangerous a mischief, as to deprive the soul of
all her labor and hopes; how might a man come to some discovery of self, that
so he might the more easily be prepared to cast it out, and prevent the danger
of it betimes, ere it be remediless? Seeing the conceiving hereof, may make
much for the application of the doctrine following. I will a little insist in
answering the question. Therefore I say, that the nature of this disease may
partly appear in the degrees of it, and partly in the footprints and passages
of it: of both a little, and first of the first.

Adam imbarkes himself in, 1. By her degr^es.
for the avoiding of Christ and the promise: according then to the degrees of
this bulwark of flesh, and the danger thereof, Self may b^^ perceived by 3.
properties.
the degrees of this self may be. I conceive then that we may refer all this
secret mischief to these three degrees. The first in self presuming. 1.
Presumption
The second in self fearing. The third in self withdrawing. Self presuming
is that corruption which holds off Christ in the preparation of the Law and
Gospel: such as these, feeling of the soul to be in an utter strait, and in an
absolute need of Christ; mourning after him, desiring him, and taking pains
for him, with the like. These all (if they be soundly wrought in the soul)
proceeding not only from legal abasement, but also Evangelicall tidings of
peace by the good things which only Christ has purchased, cannot proceed from
any principle in our selves. Howbeit self-love is so prone to presume of that
to be wrought truly in us, which she covets and wishes to be wrought, out of a
desire of her own welfare, that she easily mixes her self with the offer and
promise, and (not staying her full time to weigh du^y the nature thereof) takes
her own pangs and hopes and selfeloving conceits to be true preparations: Now
whereas every abiding work of grace must have a principle in it above
selfe-ends and self-love, therefore, what marvel if such flashes of
presumptuous self, vanish and leave the soul, as new to begin as ever it
was? 2. Self-fearing.
A second degree is self fearing, which may befall him who has shot the
former gulf: for it lies in another extremity: and runs as much on the left
hand, as the other did on the right: thinking (though ungroundedly) that
although some work has been begun in the soul, yet seeing many have gone
far and perished, faith is of few, and the free work of the spirit, which
blows only upon some: also feeling fearful untowardnesse in her self,
darkness, dullness, deadness and unworthiness, doubting also of her
election or sanctification, that either she shall never renounce her lusts or
persevere: upon these or the like fears, she concludes she belongs not to God,
nor shall believe. Now this fear (a man would think) were rather selfdeniall
then self: but in very deed, it is often discovered, to be a more tenacious
enemy, then the former: for why? it trencheth horribly upon the simplcity of
the offer, the power and truth of the promiser, as if it would set grace at a
nonplus, and as if the Lord were a tyrant, a liar, so does it claspe to it
self, will not be beaten out of her den, 3. Withdrawing self.
nor resign up her self to God. The third and last degree, is yet most
dangerous of all, I mean withdrawing self, and may be conceived to be the
last corner of the strong fort of self in her opposing of Christ, and to
prevail with many, whom the former two could not foil. Mark it well. And it
is that woeful and desperate flinging out of the soul, and incompliablenesse
of the spirit, with the only and sound way of God to save the soul, which is
faith, comforting, pacifving, converting and changing the heart to God. Which
way, when the closeness, solemness, nakedness and necessity of it, is
presented to the soul, it finds her marvellously wrapped and wound in, with
abundance of such secret scurse of her own: that first, she begins to be
offended at the purity, spiritualnesse, and holiness of it, as far exceeding
her carnal comprehension or content, as the heavens exceed the earth: she
sees not how it is possible for two such extremities to be reconciled. And
secondly, she feels such a Law within herself, such an horrible repugnancie
of heart against this way, such an old custom of formality in Religion, ease,
sloth, restinesse and luskishnesse of spirit (as Rahel sitting upon her Idols,
and loath to stir) that this way works her to extreme unwillingnesse to
consent and obey: she wishes (from her heart) that the command of faith were
of a shorter size, and a narrower extent: she fore-casts such an utter misery
in selling her self and all, for the gaining of a promise, as the young man
did, Heb. 10. ult.
when he was bidden to sell all; and therefore concludes, The price is too
great, the commodity (as good as it is) is too dear, how shall it stand with
self? What will old froth and vanity, liberty and looseness of heart, of
thoughts and affections say to this gear? she must (for ought she sees)
consult with them, and have their good wills, ere ever she can consent: here is
the pudder, Self will not yield, her old bent, frame and stream is carnal,
or at least but mixtly, and half religious; and therefore to cast that out,
would make her forlorn and a beggar, an unsubsisting creature without a
bottom. On the other side, God will not yield, his bent and end is to subdue
the soul to himself, to bring her within his own narrow compass, to be all
in all to her (as self was before) the mere and naked bottom of her joy and
welfare: he has given his Son to purchase the soul thus to himself: He has
denied his glory and himself, that he might thereby win the soul to magnify
him in his love, and glory in his grace, and therefore he will not lose his
ends. Except then the controversy be determined, and the soul drawn up, and
overcome, to resign up and raze this fort of Self, and trust God with her
own soul for mercy, and for powerful subduing of her self: This last degree
will make her rather to choose the forfeit of heaven, then of her own will and
content. And this may serve for the three degrees of mixed or secret Self. Now
I come to the second part of the answer, touching the footsteps and passages
of this enemy, and so to end the question.

Concerning which I say, Secondly by her passages. Three. 1. Ground of Self is
flesh.
that the passages of self may be conceived in these three particulars:
First, in the ground of it: secondly, in the carriage of it: thirdly, in the
scope and issue of it. For the ground or principle of it, it is Flesh: that
which is not from Grace, is no better then flesh, seem it what it will; and
that may appear both in Legal self and Evangelicall. For Legal self, I may
say that which the Holy Ghost, Esaias 58. Esaias 58.
speaks of Hypocrites, that even in their fasting (which was selfe-afflicting,
Levit. 23. Levit. 23.
) yet they had pleasure: they kept their false measure within, and nourished
such a carnal heart, as caused their humiliation to be defiled: so is it here.
If we knew who were elect, and who not (as we cannot) we might as well discern
them by a defect of Legal, as well as Evangelicall preparations: for Christ is
Alpha and Omega, Revel. 1.
the beginning and end of the salvation of his own. So that (as common a work
as the Law is accounted) sure it is, that self has her breadth in that narrow,
and admits not such abasement as the Law works in the elect, but rather she
has pleasure, and bears off the dint, by some extenuation of her sin, or
other, even then when she should receive the sacrificing knife to cut the
throat, Both in respect of the Law and the Gospel. 1. The Law.
that is, to slay the pride and jollity of nature: she lickes her self whole
(if she can) as fast as the Law wounds. But if it so fall out, that the Lord is
purposed to break in upon such a soul with his terrors, and to cast her
down to the ground, so that she is under water, and terrified to purpose; yet
herein self appears, that either she winds herself out as soon as the
extremity is over, by indirect means, or else the strait she is in, is no
means to drive her out of her self to another, but rather to fret and rebel,
thinking she has wrong: or she grows thereby to think herself to be in a
better case, because she is stopped in her old course: or if the utmost
extremity comes she chooses rather to rid her self from it by violence, and
destroying of her self, rather then to see God in the work. But not hereby to
behold the clear way of God, to bring the soul to a condition of grace, when
she is at an utter loss and plunge in her self. For then this work should
leave her better then it found her, that is, cause her (upon a ground of the
Word) to see herself within Gods net and so to grow to conceive some
possibility and hope, which is too lively a work for self to reach unto.

2. Gospel: and that both in the eyesight,
Secondly, in respect of the Gospel, self is but flesh: The Gospel presents
Christ to the believing soul, dearly and favorly; but self fails in both her
eyesight and heart-sight of him: I mean, both in understanding and will. For
the first, self cannot see so much of Christ, as God offers in his Gospel;
she beholds only such an excellency of Christ offered therein, as is severed
from the gift to receive him with, which (upon point) is as good as nothing:
for it is but a shread of Christ, which an hypocrite may have, Romans 2. Ephesians.
4.21.
Romans 2.5.6. But a poor soul sees Christ even as the truth is in Jesus, and
as he is offered to the soul; that is, not as a bare price of pardon and
peace, but as a thing enabling the soul to buy, and receive him into her own
bosom. 1 Cor. 1.30.
Of him, says Paul, are we, who is made unto us of God, etc. Mark, not as
only as cloth, which will make a garment, but as a garment fitted for us, and
ready made: for that he serves for, both covering and defense. As the twy-light
differs from the brightness of the morning Sun upon the top of an hill,
whence a man may see all the wide sky: so does a believing soul and self
differ in beholding Christ. That which is said in another sense, Matthew. 24.
Matthew. 24.
That the Son of man's day shall be as the light which shines from East to
West: that may be said of Christ offered to the eye or mind of a believer,
that the whole light (for kind) of the Son of righteousness, Matthew. 13.11.
is discovered to him. As our Savior tells his Disciples, To you I speak
clearly, to others in Parables, that seeing they might not understand, because
they will not; self putting in a condition of her own, which God puts not:
For the Lord so offers Christ, that the virtue of the offer becomes to a broken
soul both price and Chapman; yea, breeds that in the soul which it offers
even faith to embrace it. But self puts in a condition, If I can accept it.
She would in a sort be clothed and fed upon her own purse. Now this
condition God puts into the offer, I will create the fruit of the lips, Esaias
57. Jer. 31.31.
I will take out the heart of stone, I will write my Laws in their heart, and
cause them to believe, etc. Self hears these things as the noise of many
waters: I see (says she) an excellent thing offered to such a one as can
receive it; and then she goes about to perform the condition her self, hoping
thereby to compass Christ: But this labor might be spared, if she beheld the
offer aright, as able both to prepare the soul with brokennesse and
emptiness, and also to beget faith in it. The honest soul puts faith into
Christ crucified, and the offer, saying thus; If the Lord will save me, I will
let him alone also to work faith in me, by the Merit and worth of the thing
offered; for why? God does not offer me a dead Christ, but a quickening Spirit,
1 Cor. 15.
not as a bare object of excellency, serving to enable me to concur with him
of my self, and to be a partner with him in the point of application; but as a
purchase of satisfaction to justice, 1 Cor. 1.30.
and also of faith for me to embrace it with, that he who boasts might boast
in the Lord. Oh! if self could know the gift of God, and who it is who
offers (one that can do that for us which he did for that woman, Joh. 4. and
that blind man, Joh. 9. while he talked with them) what a light would it
afford to the soul? The ignorance of this causes the soul to be in as deep a
stagger after Christ is revealed, as it was before: for why? Self is ready to
cavil, Lo, God offers Christ as one should offer an hundred pound to one for
the running of a mile, whose legs are cut off. But a needing soul, set out
of, and beyond her self, spins out all her hope and help from the promise,
trusts not to her own steps which she makes to Christ, but to the steps which
Christ makes toward her, both as her price and Advocate to apply it, 1 John
7.8. Joh. 8.22. the Way, the Truth, and the Life.

Secondly, Self fails also in the Heart-sight of Christ. And the heart sight
of Christ
For although she has some glimpse of affections toward the things of the
Gospel; yet she savours them only as things good to her self (so long at
least as that savor lasts) and promise to her some welfare. A carnal heart
must be pleased, and the Lord Jesus must serve to that purpose. But a poor
needing soul so sees Christ offered, as by that sight all other objects of
sense are eclipsed, yea dispossessed; receiving thereby such a bottom of
spiritual rest and content into the soul, as needs no other false bottom to
eike it out withal. Self so apprehends Christ as an object of good, making up
some formerly enjoyed good, not able to satisfy of it self: and so both holds
her own still as essential, and adds another to it, as only a bettering of
another, not a casting out of another, that Christ might be all in all; that
he, I say, might be in stead of Self. A pearl to one that finds it, is both
house and ground, sheep, cattle, pullen and all, makes all base, and to come
under the worth thereof: So does Christ bear down Self, and becomes to the
soul that which all wealth, ease, sports, company, pleasure and content could
be. Self soders matters of all sorts together, and makes an Image of all
metals mixed with clay, joines a horses crest and shoulders to the head of a
man. Why is this? because Christ is not revealed to the heart, as her Adaequate
and full object; she hears of him, as the Jews dreamed of release, an half
object of happiness, not as an excelling good; in comparison of which all
former are dung and dross. Satan so blindes the eyes of Self, 2 Cor. 4.4.
that this glorious sight never comes at the heart, to possess and fulfill it.

I say, Self shuffles and huddles all together, and reaches at the Lord
Jesus, with that carnal savor, wherewith she reaches at profits and
pleasures: (as a fulsome fellow, who complements with all sorts alike) so he be
satisfied with any thing, he is glad. As for discerning of things that differ,
and ascribing the maine esteem of heart, to that which best deserves it, out
of judgment and savor what is best, he is far from it, only the honest
heart sees a peculiarity of savor, gain and sweetness in Christ: and (as
once the Oracle bid them that asked who should have the Kingdom, Give it the
best) so she gives up her self, with all her content and delight, even her
Kingdom and prerogative, to the best, the true and undoubted Lord, even
Christ: she separates the precious from the vile, as if a man should
distinguish his love to a servant (both for kind and measure) from the love of
a wife or child. The odds is, as the honey which Jonathan tasted upon the top
of his rod, in comparison of eating it to fullness and strength for the pursuit
of the enemy. When the Lord does not reach out by pieces and parcels of Christ,
but throws him into the soul with his whole heart and treasure (as one would
cast his dear wife purse and all, that she might know his bounty) and gives
the soul more then she can ask or think (as Solomon to the Queen of Sheba,
more then all she desired) then the soul has an heart-sight and view of him.
Then she is satisfied fully with his image, as receiving from his fullness,
that is, his heart fully reconciled, and satisfied by his Son, that can deny
them nothing: And she beholds in this offer, as much above all goodness which
Adam enjoyed, as heaven is above an earthly Paradise. Briefly, Self fosters
two contents at once, one from a Principle of her own being carnal, the other
from an accidental and violent: so that in time, the carnal prevails against
the violent, and the violent vanishes. Some hold out and make a shift to
deceive themselves longer then others: but, except they grow to see their
error, and to set up the object of their joy above the carnal, they vanish
into misery. And this for the ground of Self.

The second general: The carriage of Self is sureable to the root or ground.
The second general point is, the carriage of Self. And mark, self in her
grounds must needs be like her self in her carriage; I mean, in those
performances which come from her. Nothing can work beyond her own Sphere: of
Self and Flesh, no act save fleshly, can proceed. She will not suffer her own
channel to lie dry. So that, what ever means she uses, fasting, prayer,
meditating, hearing, conferring, whatsoever pains she takes for a broken
desirous heart; whatsoever duties or graces she does, or makes show of, she can
rise no higher then her Spring and Fountain lies. Self keeps center within,
and acts all, as supposing there is a congruity and directive or procuring
cause of grace in her. She looks to win the Spirit of grace by the spirit of
Self, not to lose her own spirit by the Spirit of Grace. She is not sensible
of any thing save what comes from her self, and thinks very well of any thing
which she feels to proceed thence. And so will any soul confess, which the
Lord has freed from this bondage. That all his performances were nothing, save
a willing and running of their own, though (while he was in his element) all
seemed pleasant. There is a way which seems pleasant to a man while he is in
it, though when he is once out, he sees it tended to death. And as he in Job
says, There is a spirit in man (such as it is) which will be doing, and will
have one finger in every business: but it is the inspiration of the Almighty
which must give understanding. I deny not, but Self (according to her light)
admits of many degrees; yet all in one kind, but as one spoke of Usurers and
Thieves, one was less oppressing then the other, yet the best would bite: So I
say here, bad is the best of Self, she will be chief in all matters, nothing
must pass, but through her fingers; all the Corn must be fetched home in her
Cart, and some piece (at least) there must be of her, and all to keep her from
self-denial, and from a promise (which are her two terrible objects) within
her own precinct.

Which may appear in these few passages: First, in her instinct: How that
appears: v^z. In four particulars.
Secondly, her endeavor: Thirdly, her busy eagerness: Fourthly, in her
disappointment. A word or two of each. For the first, her instinct and savor
which she is carried by, is not godly, or holy, but earthly and base. As we
say, Nothing in Popery is carried beyond the savor of ambition, ease, and the
belly: so in selfe-religion nothing smells of any other save her own wisdom
and ends, as here we see in Naaman, nothing savored or relisht with his
nostrils, or appetite, save to be his own carver, and to appoint the Prophet a
way of his own. 1. Her instinct.
Assistance and aid comes not fast enough from any other fountain save her
own. As the Egyptian Midwives spoke of the women of Israel, they were not as
other women, but quick of travel ere the Midwife came at them: Exodus 1.
so is it here, it is a wearisome waiting for Self to wait in pain, till the
Midwife of a promise come to them, they can dispatch more easily then so. When
Paul and the Pilot were with the Centurion, the Centurion savored not the words
of Paul, but the Pilots. One crotchet of her own, Act. 27.
how her edge stands to such a Text, Doctrine, Sermon, Promise, and what her
thoughts are of it, is more to her, then what the instinct, scope and savor of
the Spirit aims at; she weighes out to her self Gods treasures, not
according to the Balances of the Sanctuary, and the weights thereof, but her
own (not half so big) and so she is found but light. The reason is, she is
not altered in subject, that is, in her self, but in object only. Now the
object cannot alter the subject of it self, without the grace thereof concur
therewith. And therefore in all her acts she consults with her own likings,
savor and feelings, as the Musicians ear with the tune or jarring of his
strings.

Secondly, her endeavor is suitable: 2 Her endeavor.
she loves (for the most part) such performances as are more easy, pleasing
and welcome to the flesh, balking those which are more spiritual and
selfe-destroying, preferres a devotion in general, before a special manner of
it, and hearing or reading before meditation; single prayer before secret or
continual, or occasional, or fasting, etc. And in this endeavor of hers, she
has no scruples, but thinks they shall prevail. If (says she) I do so, and
so, read, pray, deny my self in such a liberty, or do such a duty, I shall
prevail; not adding this, if I do it in or by the warrant of such a word or
promise, carrying the strength of God therewith, and look at my own endeavor
as the servant of grace only, without any strength of mine own, I shall
prosper. And hereunto add this, That she rests in her endeavor, never
harkening what God will answer, and whether he speak peace or no; but
reckoning her work for a price. This delusion is an inseparable evil from
self. As the Preachers zeal, gifts, persuasions, are as her own performances,
and as her moral weighings of matters have been, so must grace needs follow:
God must be tied to a necessity of blessing all which comes from self, whether
she set God as chief above them, or her self above him, all is one: she
examines nothing by the rule of right going to work, but rests in the deed
done; yea, let what objections will, come in their way, they are at a point,
and return to their own bent, thinking that the children of such prayers and
duties cannot perish: As those Jews told Christ, of the Master of the
Synagogue, he deserved he should heal his daughter for his good works sake.
But if self were as she ought, she should come in as that man did and tread
himself in the dirt, Master I am not worthy that thou should come under my
roof: so that in themselves they can feel somewhat to trust too, (though it
be nothing) but in the Lords promise (be it never so evident) they feel
nothing.

Thirdly, the motion of Self is eager and violent; she wants that inward
moover of the spirit, 3. Her Violence.
which should act her by the power of a sweet principle from within, and put
boot in beam (as we say) securing her of a good and safe issue of her labor.
For then she would not put forth her self so earnestly and violently by her
own strength, but calmely and quietly rest her self well satisfied in the
comfort of that spirit which can effect her desire, and subject her own
endeavors and performances to the spirit of grace. As the Prophet Esaias tells
those Jews who strove to overcome their enemies by the aid of foreign
confederates, Esaias 30.
your strength is to sit still; follow not your own violent motion, but trust
to the Lord, and let your stream run in his, run softly as the waters of
Sil^e: so I say to this violent self; stand still, behold the salvation of
God, and you shall see your enemies all scattered, not by your strength or
might, but by the power of God. We know what strife a man uses in his trade,
who has no inward principle of skill to enable him, in comparison of a
skillful workman; the one is more painful then the other, but the latter has
more ease in his work. And hence it is, that self has so continual a toil
to hold correspondence with grace: as fast as corruption rebels, she falls to
damming and stopping the course of it, but the more she dammes up the passage,
the higher the waters swell and rise, so that she must needs give them some way
and course at last, and grow weary of resistance: whereas the poor soul whose
heart is humbled and broken, feels the stream and torrent to be turned
another way, and so she needs not always resist and d^mme it up; because its
prevented by a stronger motion. And in truth selfe-violence is no better then
selfsloth in this respect; for she finds as small fruit of her strife as of
her ease; neither are blessed: when she is lazy, she is snared with accusation,
and when she is satagent and busy, she is discouraged with ill success: the
Lord aiming at this, that so she may be weary of her self. There seems (I
grant) for the present, while self keeps her motion, a great deal of zeal
in self performances: as one said of himself, that while he prayed out of
himself, he prayed with far more zeal, passion and expression, then when he
prayed by the spirit of grace and supplication: Self being very full and free
in her own element, but barren and off the hooks, if out of it: And this
violence may appear further in the frequency and difficulty of
selfe-performances; for as we see where there be fewest good and solid dishes
of meat at a table, there will be the more slight ones with their covers upon
them, as if there were some great matter under: so is it with Self, the less
substance she has, the more shows and shadows, the more pomp and
ostentation. M^tth. 23. Mica 6.
The Pharisees and those Hypocrites in Micah, were fuller of their traditions,
washings and clensings, offerings of costly and excessive services, then the
faithful worshippers; who rested rather in a little and good, viz to walk
humbly and righteously with God, then in a world of dross. As a drunkard so
long as he can use his tongue and his feet, thinks himself sober; whereas
the truly temperate suspects himself at every turn: so here: self looks at
her own motion, not how regular and orderly it is. As a boy unskilful in
writing, when his hand is led, delights still to stir it, and to move his hand
of himself, and so blurs and blots more then he writes, so self will be
stirring and doing, full of her own spirit, in praying, fasting, hearing and
the like; no man can be zealous enough to please her, Christ himself was not
good enough for a selfe-pleasing hypocrite. The Lord loves no double diligent
ones: but those who being led by the spirit of selfedeniall and grace, rest
themselves upon the power of a promise, (not to be idle, but) as abhorring to
make more haste then good speed.

Lastly, Self if she be defeated of what she would, 4. Her disappointment.
is sore disquieted and unsettled. The greater her heat and violence was in
motion, the deeper is her discontent, if crossed: Concerning which, I shall
have more occasion to speak in the next verse: Here only it shall be
sufficient to give a touch of it: When Self is held off and delaied, she falls
upon God, Oh! what a woeful fruit of all my labor is this, that God should so
long keep me from my desires and thus long cross me: hence come cavills
against God, as if he did them wrong, thus to disappoint them; self is
querulous Esaias 58. Es^y 58.
Mal. 3. full of tedious accusations, and baskings of her self (much like one
that cannot swim, who yet will beat the waters,) and this comes partly from
presumption, and partly from bondage, as thinking she should deserve better
from God, and yet feels all ill within: whereas a poor soul being beaten off
one way, yet feeling a support within, girds her self the more about, and
looking at the unchangeable faithfulness of God, interprets his delays no
otherwise, then the Syrophoenician did Christ's answers not to be cordial, but
trying her faith and self-denial: O Lord (says she) although thou beatest me
off, Matthew. 15.
thou meanest not to reject me, for that were contrary to thy office, to save
the scattered ones of Israel. Therefore (O Lord) here I lie at thy feet, if
thou kick me away, and have no pleasure in me, I can say nothing, do with me
as thou will; I am not at mine own but thy dispose, and if it seem good to thy
wisdom to defer me, I shall think it meeter for the time present, then to
be satisfied, since its ever best for me to be as thou will have me; knowing it
shall be one day as thou have promised.

And surely well may I add this fourth mark to the former; for as self has
no bounds of humility and modesty, when she is pleased with her duties and
affections, Esaias 40.
finding that fruit and success which she fancieth to her own labors, but
thinks her content and peace to come from grace; so when her sparkles are out
and gone (wherewith she compassed her self) then she grows slavish, dead
hearted, discontent; and yet (rather then she would by such experience renounce
her own crazy hold) she will return to her old course, and try what further
hopes she shall enjoy by her new attempts, till she be forced at last to lie
down in confusion, and repent of her trade too late: of this sure also is the
carriage of such, as upbraid God for his hard dealing with them, by the better
success of others who are got before them; this savors of some desire and
emulation (I grant) but it comes from many pangs of self, as ease, muttering
that they cannot have their wills of God upon less ado, also of rankenesse
and sullen unthankefulnesse, for that they have already. And although I do not
say, that all in this case of deseate, do directly give God over and quite
revolt from him, as Naaman here would have done; yet they return to their old
acquaintance with self, and so welter out their days in utter misery:
understand me in all this discourse to speak of Self (as it is unsubdued in
the hypocrite) not as it is a relic of evil in those who belong to grace.
Thus much for the carriage of it.

The third general: The end of Self, she always aims at her own ends.
The third and last point, is the end of Self, which is suitable to the ground
and proceedings thereof. The sum is, Self looks at her own ends, and ends
in her self; all her scope is, by her long trade, shufflings, subtilties and
flingings about, to rivet her self so deeply into her own way and device, that
at the last, she may be out of all gunshot and danger, and rest in her
selfe-religion without disturbance: To this end she does so much harden her
self against the conviction of the word, when she knows or may know her
estate to be dangerous; even that she might at last be wholly quit of all such
callings upon, See Hosea 10.1. Zach. 7.5.6.
and gasterings by the spirit of God and her own conscience, and so (through
Satan's malice) keep her own possession in peace, even as if she would
secretly steal away Gods grace without his consent, and triumph over him, by
having her will on him: The poor soul boasts in God, but she in her self,
and sacrifices to her own nets; till the Lord by his terrors flaite her, and
with the besome, if not of his law, yet of his wrath, sweep down those
cobwebbes which with much ado she has woven. The end of the Lord in the
manifold turnagaines and doubts, fears and distempers which a poor soul meets
with, is quite contrary, even that being tried with her own corruptions, she
might give over her own inventions and be weary of fighting any longer under
the banner of Self, and cast themselves upon his promise, and so put the Lord
in the stead of self, to be all in all with them, and return no more to their
old trade: I say, the Lords aim in all his, is this, to make self stincke
unto them, and (as the proverb says, the corruption of the finest matter
stinkes worst, so) that the fi^er more subtle and wiredrawne self has been
in deceiving the soul, the more the soul may abhor her after a divorce once
made. But as for self, she is most deplored and desperate in that wherein a
poor soul is most happy, that is in the end of her course, by that time that
the latter is at rest, the former is come about to most u^ter misery: For
though she be where she would be, yet because she is deceived in that she has
chosen, she must therefore feed upon ashes instead of bread, and vanity as a
whirlewind must carry her away, as the Lord by Esaias speaks of Idolaters.

A barren principle can bring forth no other fruit; Esaias 57.
all labor so taken is as a stone rolled upon the hill, violently returning at
length upon the roller: if she would have subjected her self to be led by the
spirit of grace, she should have obtained the same ends which the Lord seeks
from a saved soul, that is to adore the wonderful and inconceivable glory and
riches of his grace in Christ, and to swallow and drown self in this stream.
And as once a wise man hearing a proud fellow boast of his land, brought him a
short map of Athens, and bid him show whereabouts his lands lay, which abated
the high thoughts of the young Gentleman exceedingly: So does the Lord show to
his own people the Map of his glory, which is the whole ground, way and end of
saving lost mankind; which when they wisely behold, self vanishes and finds
no place; for if that which moved the Lord so principally to pity fallen man,
was not the good of the creature, (for then the more saved, the more his end
should have been fulfilled) but the magnifying of himself, and of his sundry
excellencies, which else must have been concealed; and had it not been that
God had respected this, man had lien still in his woe; how can a poor creature
behold this gulf, but of necessity the thought of it must make self and her
ends to be despised, as not worthy to be named the same day, much less to come
into competition with God, and to forestall him of his due, that self might be
clothed with his spoils? Oh! the very image of such a base conceit is
loathsome in such an heart, as knows that while God is served, she must stand
by and be content to wait, as happy if this waiting of hers upon Gods ends
may bring her to be happy at last in him and with him; as counting it happier
to perish in glorifying him, (if it could be) then to be glorious in her self.
And so much for the answer to this question, viz. how the nature of this enemy
may be perceived in her degrees and steps: now I come to the use of the whole
doctrine.

The first is, to admonish all who would not lose their labor and travail
Admonition.
to discover and abandon the concurrence of self in that weighty business:
And this I urge upon two sorts: First, To the unregenerate. Three particulars.
1. Behold the tricks of self.
seekers, Secondly, obtainers: First, behold the tricks and fetches of this
enemy; Then consider the danger and sad consequence of losing all our labor
for the sake of it: And lastly, resolve in both respects for ever (through
mercy) to renounce it. For the former, infinite are those subtilties which are
in the bugit of this traitor: I will name two or three by which a wise heart
will guess at the rest, and especially at her own. One is this, Self will
not only deny much for grace, but even deny her self (in some kind) and yet,
all to uphold and strengthen her self in another and more beloved way to her
self: wherein self resembles the novices of subtle Jesuits, who for the
obtaining of an higher self, which is salvation and Canonizing for Saints,
dare attempt the murder of Princes themselves, with the hazard of life and all.
How will self serve her self into the most close and powerful ordinances of
extraordinary nature, as fasting and prayer, denying the ease of many common
and formal professors; 1. Self denies her self in lesser objects to purchase
her self in greater.
and all with a rotten and unsound heart, that they may imbarke themselves
(though not into oppression and rapine, as those gross hypocrites in Esaias,
yet) in the strength and persuasion of their zeal and soundness of heart, and
hatred of sin, and love of the welfare of Gods Church? whereas no sooner these
duties are over, but they meet with the same poisons of heart, abiding and
reigning in them with woeful impurity and defilement of conscience: I will not
here mention the base counterfeit selfe-abstinences of Popish hypocrites, in
their masked selfe-denialls of marriage, money, converse and trading in the
world, soft apparel, lodging and the like liberties; that they might hereby
win heaven with greater self-love; and that they might nouzle up themselves
the more unsuspectedly in their secret uncleanness, hoording up of treasure,
and fulfilling the lust of their flesh: neither will I insist in the
self-denial of time-servers, who sometimes for the strengthening themselves
in promiscuous lust, deny the benefit of marriage to themselves; or to climb
up to preferment, abstain from common drunkenness, and open uncleanness, or
with Absalon, conceal their horrible pride for a time, (if they find it may
commend them to the world) that it may be thought they are courteous, fair,
and of loving and gentle demeanure: all which, (when once they have gotten what
they would) they lay aside and return to their natures: But I rather instance
in secret passages of this subtilty.

As, when a man denies his proud heart her scope, lest it should bring him to
ill report and reproach; or, I would deny my self in my liberty, for prayer
and duties, that I might stop the wound of my conscience; or, I would take
pains in the office of a Magistrate, or Minister, or Townsman, to see order
kept, Religion maintained, poor relieved; I would give much to good uses, and
the like: but why? to purchase to my self the repute of a zealous, a pious, a
merciful man: Thus Ananias and Sapphira were content to deny a chief piece of
their estate, Acts 5.
that they might enjoy a far less part of it, with great honor in the
Church; or, a man will do all which belongs to an outward professor, to the end
he may retain himself in that last evil of unbelief, or unreformednesse of
heart: So of the rest. Consider now what incredible subtilty this is, to do
much more then a man need to do for the nourishing of some privy evil, which
it shall not boot him one pin to reserve, and (for ought he shall gain by it)
he might practice it and all other openly and fare never the worse. This for
one instance. Another may be this: what subtilty and close cunning is this, 2.
A second instance: To mask sin under holiness. 1 Kings 21.9.
to do that under color of Religion, which might well enough be conveied by
the foulest means? who abhorres it not that Iezabel should commence her cruel
murder of an innocent under the pretext of a fast, and by suborned
instruments, which might better have beseemed the most villainous cutthroat in
a Country to have done? And yet this is the subtilty of self, to mask a
proud, vaineglorious heart, an heart full of hollownesse, worldliness and
treachery, with the cover of Gods choicest ordinances: what is this but to hold
God at the staves end of his own service, and then to be deepest in duties,
when yet the heart aims at cloaking her self and her deepest licentiousness
and falsehood? What is this but double iniquity? What is this save to capitulate
with God, to be godly and proud still, worldly and religious, devout and
vainglorious, and that under privilege? If such scurfe were only colored
with base Popish varnish, it were a less evil: But to set such base wares
forth upon Gods stall, which were too base to be vended upon the basest stall
in a market, how odious is it? and how wicked a thing is it for one that might
as good cheap be an open malefactor, to choose religion as a stage to act it on?
Nay further, what is it but to be vile in mere villainy and cool blood, when a
man might be godly better cheap then he is wicked? When a man chooses rather a
perpetual vexation of heart, and a misery of condition, never quiet, always
forced to live by shifts and subtle devices, rather then a settled peace and
content? Oh! that there should be such scurfe in the soul under hand, that it
should redeem the loathnesse and difficulty of being once converted to God,
with the dear price of perpetual self-slavery to no purpose!

What subtilty again is it for a man to defile himself in the things he
knows, as S. Jude speaks of those false teachers? 3. Instance: To defile it
self in that it knows.
To nourish such an incurable and insensible love of a beloved lust in the
heart, as he knows to be so, and yet dare live in the practice of it, under a
pretense, as base and confessed? Would not any laugh at the hypocrisy of
Balaam, Numb. 22.19.
who would needs go with Balaacs servants, under color of doing no more then
God would permit; and yet, even the bare going with them was against Gods
command? Was it like that he would have denied his gain to please God, had
not God overruled him by force from cursing his people? This we all detest;
but the subtilty of self in our own way, we discern not: and yet we are
content our eyes should be blind-folded, that we might sin securely. Who
abhorres not that debauched Jew, who being loath to miss the opportunity of a
ship, and yet afraid to break his Sabbath, was content to be such a fool, as
to hire one to thrust him into the ship by violence, that so he might be
blameless? and yet self is as subtle and debauched, and we will not abhor
it. Endless it were to speak of all. What falsehood of heart is this, 4.
Instance: Pretense of preferring God, yet seeking our selves.
to pretend that Gods glory is chief with us, when yet (the occasion being
offered) we choose rather God should want his glory, rather then we crossed of
our wills? That either he must be honored our way, or by our selves as the
instruments, or else we care not whether he be honored at all? What is this
but selfe-esteeme and pride? Whereas we know, 2 Chronicles. 22.9.12.
David blessed God, that (seeing he might not build him a Temple) Solomon
might build it, not looking at the doer, so God might have it built? And Paul
would have Christ preached any way, rather than not preached; by any as well as
by himself, rather then not at all: yea, chose rather to lose his own
happiness, then Israel should not be saved.

To draw to an end; what subtilty is this, 5. Instance: To offer to God more
then he asks.
to imagine that the offering of God more services then he ever commanded,
should discharge the conscience for breaking such commands as he expressly
enjoined? What else was the religion of them, Micah. 6. save to baffle Gods
eyes with their self worship? And this is a true mark of Self, to outbid
true worshipers in the multitude of our devotions, that we might be dispensed
within our underbidding of the price which God calls for: why is this, but that
we might be spared in the maine work of selling self and all? our out bidding
the Lords own asking, is no mark of our self-denial, but rather of
subtill-selfe, which would teach God to pitch a new price upon Christ, but not
offer him that price which be demands: when the Lord bids thee bring nothing,
will thou bring him thy cost? and when his price is thy self, do thou offer
him other things to keep back that price? what is an handful of brass worth
to him, when he demands a dram of pure gold? why do we loath Popish
superogations, save that they come short in their kind of that which God
asks? within the kind, offer to him the least dram of self-denial and
soundness; but else out of kind, no performance is welcome, seem it never so
plentiful: what shall thy subtilty do thee good, when thy issue and Gods issue
will not join? thou bring in prayers, tears, duties, devotions,
abstinences, affections; and he called for none of them as his price, but thy
will, Prove. 26.23.
thy wisdom, thy conceit, thy self? give him his asking, and as for the
other, thou shall be in them all, as a defiled clout, and they shall be no more
unto thee (in point of Christ) then if thou have never done them. And this may
serve for the first branch.

of Admonition. See the danger of Self.
Now I add two or three things to the former. And first to urge that maine
danger in the doctrine mentioned: That it threatens to deprive the soul of
grace it self when all is done, and to throw down all the false building
thereof at once, as if one should with his foot dash a little child's house of
oystershels which it has built with much labor. Esaias 55.2. 2 John 8.
Now what a sad thing were this, to lose the good things which thou have earned
with much travail, so that thou should never enjoy the fruit of all thy
toil and labor under the Sun of Gods ordinances, Self forfeits all her
labor and cost in worship and dut^es.
nor eat of the work of thine hands, what a misery were it? if it were but to
lose the cost of thy plowed field, thy compass and husbandry, the cost of
thine orchard and garden, planting, graffing, setting, sowing, how unpleasing a
thing is it? But then what is the loss of a few bushells of wheat, plumbs or
apples, berries or flowers, to the loss of Christ thy eternal crop? Self
will come between thee and home in this kind, if thou prevent her not. The
Estrich lays her eggs in the sand, Job 39.13.14.
(as Job says) and leaves them to their lot, to the feet of beasts to tread
on: but why? God has denied her understanding to lay them in secret, and to
hatch them: Art thou destitute of understanding to value so meanly thy cost, in
hearing, in questions, in travail, in trialls, in duties, as to forget what
they cost thee? If a Scholar should see all his note-books and papers; a great
rich man, all his silver and gold, his evidences; a Farmer all his corn and
grain to be consumed; would it not sting him? Are they not the fruit of his
travel, which every man naturally more priseth, then a thing that befalls him
which he never took pains for? when the ship makes shipwreck in the haven,
what says the merchant? It grieves me as much for the loss of my voyage, as
for my ship; is this the issue of my three years sailing over the seas? my
adventures, my exchange of wares, mine escapes of rocks and quicksands? so
should thou say in this case: Oh! it grieves me as much for the loss of so
many sweet Sabbaths, Sacraments, Communions, Ordinances, as for mine own
soul, shall I thus lay heaps upon heaps and die for thirst? Judge. 15.16.18.
how much better had it been that I had never traveled to beat down some
foreign enemy of lust and profaneness, then that this inbred elfe, this self
and self-love as a viper should eat out my bowels and defeat me of heaven?

To what end should I come up to the City as far as the suburbs, to lie down
there and die for lack of heart to enter the City gate? Thus have thou done (O
poor soul) thou have given fair onsets and hopes; Thou have felt thy self
lost, mourned, prised Christ, labored and held out longer then many of thy
companions; here thou have left some behind thee, sticking in the deep slow
of the earth, others have turned back having the wind, the sun, the storms
of persecutions, crosses and enemies in their face; others in their pleasures
and lusts which have overtooke them; and shall a bosom enemy do thee as much
hurt as these? and shall thou for all thy twelve hours toil fare no better
then they who came in at the last? Oh! consider how desperate thy case will be,
and what a world of regret loss of heaven will be, when so narrow and small an
odds must deprive thee: Oh! it will sting thee as fire, to see that such an
offer of an invaluable purchase was made thee, which thou biddest fair for and
forsookest at last in a tech, that thou would not give a penny more, whether
have it or lose it: This parting penny shall sting thee as much, as now it
troubles thee little: Oh! there is but a little odds between thee and home,
think that now the loving heart, the heart blood of the Lord Jesus, wooes thee
in this manner, saying, one thing yet remains; besides all thy preparations,
add but this, let none of these be thy Christ, mistake them not, they are but
sparkles coming from my fire, that only can put life into thee, deny these,
let me and my promise be thy pardon, thy peace, thy strength, and thou have
bought the pearl: I say, do but consider the mischief of this self, which
causes in thee this sad mistake, and will work in thee so remediless
repentance.

Besides in the second place, The surviving nature of it.
the surviving and outlasting nature of this but they lose it in none of them
all, it returns as it went, and out-lives them all. Alas! no wonder! how
should a body of death be destroyed by shadows, except that body of life, or
rather that quickening Spirit, be brought in to cast it out, how should it give
place? What wonder (if after all vows, Bare offers and ^mp^ements, or means,
cannot encounter a body of death.
and experience of the contrary) still Self of uncharitableness, privy
revenge, censuring, unmercifulness, selfe-ease, self in the creature,
survives in the soul, and out-lives all affections of complaint and dislike,
so long as the stronger man is not really sought unto to cast out this strong
and to bear it down by his promise and power, with head and shoulders? This
would make the soul resolute and cordial, to say, I am resolved indeed to be
rid of it: for I would not else have done that I have done to cast it out, I
would never really have admitted the Lord Jesus into me to do it: for he comes
strong, and will throw him out ere he have done. He that does but wish a bad
and noisome Tenant were out of his house, Luke 11.21.
may hold him in and lose his rent all his life long: but if he get a writ of
(ejectio firmae) and bring the Sheriff in person to throw him out by force and
arms, he may be believed, that he would have him out. Do then in this case as
the poor Shunamite in the case of her dead child, 2 King. 4.30.
coming and moaning to Elisha, when he hastily sent Gehazi with his staff, to
lay it upon the childs face; that would not serve her turn: she caught the
Prophet by the feet, saying: As the Lord lives, and as thy soul lives, I will
not leave thee, and lind not, till she had brought him to the corpse, where he
found the work to be of more hardness, then the laying on of a staff by
Gehazi, himself by the omnipotency of God was only able to do it.

The closeness and inwardnesse of Self.
consider how secret and scarce discernable it is: Take one or two instances
for many: in the use of spiritual communion of the Saints, how difficult is it
to discover the closeness of this Self? and how privily it scrues it self
into such fellowship; not for the true and spiritual ends thereof: but for
some by respects, as the admiration of holy persons, contentation to a
selfe-loving heart seeking her credit, or perhaps some knowledge, or the like.
Oh! how hard is it to find out this, that the scope of the soul is merely and
simply to draw up (as with the bucket of an hungry empty heart) that grace and
understanding which is hidden in it? Again, so close and secret, is self, that
it is a great difficulty to discern selfe-joy, selfe-content coming from the
creature, from entire and sound content flowing from Christ. It is as hard as
to separate confused sorts of corn mixed together: Not but that the difference
is great, but earthly Self so scrues and mixes it self with religious, that
oft-times the soul marks not the difference; so she may fare well, and
please her self, she does not so discern the principle whence it comes, but
either preferres the content of the creature, or else mixes and confounds it
with the best content, till the creature creep in too far, the heart wax
wanton and defiled; yea, so snarled, that it must cost her the vomiting of her
morsels, ere she can recover a clear appetite again; so closely, and as it
were betweeene the marrow and the bones, does this lurking enemy lodge within
us. So much for the danger.

Now from both these considerations, be we admonished, to conceive of, to
abandon and cast out this enemy (I might call it as Paul calls death) this last
enemy of our peace. Overcome this, Pressing of the admonition. 1 Cor. 15.
and all other shall give place: as we would obtain that we run for, so (in
Gods fear) let us beware of this enemy. Let us not be as that fool in
Solomon, when all is said, Though we bray him in a mortar, yet will not this
Self depart. It is even as Saul was, whom as Samuel found, 1 Samuel 15.
so he was faint to leave with this woeful mark, Honor me before the people:
so says she, Forgo not thy self; but if the doctrine be true, she will be
that last foe which will keep thee from conversion: Then either renounce her,
or else say as that woeful wretch said of his harlot, I will have her, though I
go to hell with her. So it must be, whether thou say so or not: therefore
renounce not thy Lord Jesus, and his free grace, to melt, to soften, to save
and change thy heart for the sake of her with whom (if thou will needs keep her
in thy bosom) thou can not possibly have a soft, a tender, a repenting
heart: thou can not thrive to heavenward, she will lie in wait for thy
precious soul, she will be as a canker to thy growth and prospering: thou
shall toil and moyle, but she shall blast thy labors, and (as once one said
of the cankers of a state) what is become of all our great Treaties, Voyages?
Nothing: so I may say here, what is become of all my strife? how chance I grow no
faster? Surely nothing: Thou art as thou were, if not much worse, heaven is
further off, an hard heart nearer the door. Oh thou art smitten, and yet
know not who smote thee. But now thou do prevent the blow! I may say of
this Self, as we say of Simoniacall contra^ts for Benefices, that such Simony
creates a lapse. Will any Minister having a living freely offered him by his
Patron, choose to contract for money? Is he not well worthy to lose his living
by lapse? The Lord Jesus is offered thee freely by thy Patron of Heaven, the
Lord Almighty: will nothing then serve thee but Simony, and to come to it by thy
self? Thou deservest to forfeit him, and to be cast out by lapse. Thy money (O
Self!) perish with thee; Act. 8.
because that thou think by thy price to obtain such a gift: Lo! thou have
no fellowship with this business!

I conclude therefore, lay not out thy silver for no bread, Esaias 55.2.
nor thy labor for that which profits not: eat good things, Esaias 52. end.
and let thy soul delight in fatness; enjoy the fruit of thy travel, and
refuse no pains to cast nest and nest-egge on the dunghill. Trust God upon his
bare word for a principle of strength from Gods fountain, which will hold out
both Winter and Summer, when the Brooks of Tema shall be dried up. Cease
joining Self with Grace: Do not think it so desolate a work to hang upon a
promise, except thy self have a finger in the work, and feel some warmth from
thine own feathers. Bad digestion in the stomach is not bettered by
concoction: such as thy root is, such the branches will be: and an error in
the foundation will meet thee perpetually in the building, so that either all
must be pulled down again (which is tedious) or else thou must rush forward
with an uncomfortable spirit, and upbraiding conscience. False mixtures are
odious to God, and he who forbad the field to be sown with two grains, or a
garment to be made of linen and woollen, meant another thing (for what are
these to him) but abhorred the soil of the soul should be sown with self
and Christ, and the back apparelled with Christ's robe upon an inward garment
of thine own: 2 Cor. 5.5.
Thou chusest to be clothed upon, but God will have thee naked, for what use
is there of covering one that is covered already? The mixing of diverse heaps
of corn together mars both; pease or tares are good in their kind, if
several, but if mixed, tares are soil in wheat, nay the wheat is marred by
them. Duties and affections, if considered, as fruits of Christ and his
promise, are good things; but if they mix and incorporate, then they prove
soil and mar all. Filch not from God to bestow upon Self; feed her not with
Gods dainties, rob not God to satisfy her, and to nourish up thy base heart
against the simplicity of grace; beg of the Lord, that he would teach thee to
discern copper from gold, and to show thee the face of this Self in his
glass; to take out of thine heart, this slavish, base, unbeteaming and
underbidding nature: be afraid lest thou should undergo thy self in
purchasing the pearl, looking more at the one bird in the hand, then two in
the bush, and being so pennywise to detain Gods due price, and to keep self
with her brats, selfe-pettishnesse, worldliness, ease, sloth, selfe-credit,
self-will, wit and instinct; that thou are pound foolish, and deprivest thy
self of a pearl worth both all that thou forgoest (with an hundred fold
gain) and heaven it self at last. Hate Self for her self (in point of her
enmity and contrariety of Spirit to the Lord Jesus) and then her branches will
soon wither and lose their sap and life. And this may serve for the former
branch of this use of Admonition.

to the godly.
The second branch of this watchword may reach to the godly themselves, who must
know, that although they have escaped this gulf in the maine point of
believing (a mercy deserving the thanksgiving of their whole life) yet she is
not quite expelled from being an inmate and daily prick and goad in their side
while they live a perpetual Peninnah. Self a perpetual enemy to the
regenerate.
Let such then wonder, that the Lord should ever bring them out of the endless
maze of this self, and give them broken, humble and plain hearts; to avoid
the thousand turnings and doublings of a base spirit, 1 Samuel 1.
and to tread the true path of wisdom, leading to life. Oh! (should they say)
how loath would I be now to hazard my soul upon the success of former
labors? how loath would I be in this barren world and base heart, to have the
matter put to a venture? Oh! I would not for a world, be to begin again; a
thousand praises to him that has not put my soul to such a peril, and not so
only, but, be warned also to beware, lest when this devil cannot deprive us
of heaven, yet it should defeat us of our other hopes, to grow in grace, to
joy in our possession, to live by faith, to be sound in our worshipping of God
and duties, to be fruitful in graces, to serve our time, to bear our crosses,
to persevere in our course, and to be ready for Gods coming. What is it but
this woeful inmate that hinders in all these? what but this self and presuming
of our selves causes grace to be so unthrifty and to hang down the head? what
but ascribing to our selves in our means using, makes them so unfruitful?
what but our utmost taking of our liberties, pleasures, ease and denying our
selves nothing which has but the least color of lawfulness, causes
Christians to be so full of sorrow and repentance? what is that which glues us
so fast to the creature that we are loath to part with it, for peace of
conscience, or the attaining of heaven, loath to die and go hence? what caused
Job so much sorrow save the cure of this disease, Job 42.2.
to teach him to abhor himself? what save Self in the creature, wedding our
selves to our next hand props of children, wealth, means, welfare, causes the
Lord to cut off these members altogether, that (as in the body which has a leg
or arm cut off) the spirits might not go to that which is dead, but that
which lives, even from the stream to the fountain? That we may learn by
experience, if the base creature be so sweet, in which so small a dram of the
Lord is, what is then the God of the creature worth?

Why should the Lord afflict the godly with so much sorrow, save this, that
they will not be brought to improve the Lord for his strength to subdue their
lusts and corruptions in special, to make good his promises, to be
alsufficient in outward blessings, to uphold us in our straits? But we content
our selves in this, that we have found him good to us in pardon and
reconciliation; thinking the danger to be past, and our selves free from taking
care for the subduing of this woeful Self in the course of sanctification: I
might instance in twenty particulars, take it in these two: what should so much
sting a poor soul as this, that out of her own doors an enemy should come
forth: even this Self, (lurking in the secret corners of the heart,
unmortified) self in revenge, in unmercifulness, in deadness of spirit,
security and pride, wantonness and unbelief, which should dishonor that God,
and wound that Spirit of grace, which has so lovingly vouchsafed to rid us of
our first guilt and fear of wrath, that we might be his own redeemed ones,
and not serve our selves? Again, if Self be so dangerous as to hold off the
unbeleeving soul from faith: how dangerous is it, in stopping the passages of
our comfort daily from the promise, or in threatening us some mischief, ere we
finish our course with perseverance? Could he that has run a long and fair
race toward the prise, and is well near come to it, endure one who should
stand armed and by force stop him from getting the silver bell? how should
that enemy (even this wicked Haman) be abhorred by us, that should defeat us
thus? yea, if it were but the making of that door of heaven, more narrow in
the entrance then it need be, 2 Pet. 1.11.
whereas the Lord has set it wide open to receive us after our poor
pilgrimage is ended, how odious should such an adversary be to us? But I
return to other uses of the doctrine. This may serve for both branches of
Admonition.

A second use is Terror, and that in two Branches: First, to all profane
Terror in two Branches. 1. If Self in the most forward professors be so
dangerous, what shall become of the loose libertine and ungodly wretch?
Look about ye, and be afraid of your condition* if such as are so fair for
salvation, and have passed through so many steps toward it who both in their
judgments of others, (and perhaps in their own deluded opinions) are out of
danger, yet fail of their purposes, because they strive unlawfully, where
shall such as you appear? Oh ye libertines joviall and merry companions, who
make Religion a veil for your looseness, and your civility an excuse for your
ungodliness! did ye never duly weigh this doctrine? woeful creatures, (who
care for no Religion, but so far as it will stand with your lusts) what face
will ye behold the judge withal when ye shall see thousands of all sorts, both
Ministers who have preached Christ in the streets and cast out devils; Matthew.
7. Psalm. 12.
others who have abode the heat of the day in Gods vineyard, yet for lack of
self-denial to lose all; and yet you have hated the Gospel as a snake or a
toade, because it threatens your liberties, yea swear that ye will be curbed
by none of these Preachers, your tongues are your own, and no Lord shall
control you: Tell me I pray you, what confusion of thought shall cease upon
you in that day? you shall stand in the forlorn rank of the battle, and
shall be as stubble for the fire irresistible! you shall have the convincement
within ye of a thousand witnesses, and yield to damnation, as speechless, and
hug the devils, and say to hell thou art my portion, and to the damned you
are our companions: Job 21.33.
As Job speaks of the wicked, who rejoiced in the earth, the clouds of the
valley are sweet to us; so I say to these, That which ye have sought shall be
your reward; destruction shall be your end, because you sought no better.

Oh! let me add one word: (Oh, that I could persuade you!) perhaps you will
fight against me with mine own doctrine, of Terror. Pharisees terrified.
Matthew. 6. Romans 12.1.
So much for the first Branch.

Secondly, this no less chokepeare for all pharisees and formal hypocrites,
whose Religion rests in their duties: of these I have spoken in part before;
the less may serve here. Except your righteousness exceed the righteousness
of such, ye shall certainly perish: Self will destroy many that go beyond
you, and their error must lie down with them in the dust when all is done, as
Job says, Chap. 21. It must be a reasonable, a spiritual sacrifice of
subjection to God, which he will accept: deal not with multiplication but
subtraction; keep your sheep and sacrifices to your selves: Psalm. 40.
The Lords are the Sheep of a thousand hills: he needs none of such offerings:
say with the Prophet, A body thou have given me, Lo here I come: but come
without thy Self and confidence therein, and cast out old enmity of
corruption, acknowledge and kiss the Son, for his sea only can sweep away
thy dunghill and dregs: away with thy morality and moral swasions, bring them
to the Spirit of Christ, and he that shall drown them all in his sea; Psalm. 2.
ult.
and this shall breed thee more pe^ce in one day, then thine own course all the
whole year, which (the longer thou tradest with it) the sadder fruit it shall
breed thee, and at last the worst of all. So much for Terror.

The third use of the point, is instruction, and that in sundry particulars.
Instruction.
and Self exceeds op^n evils in her delusion and ^^f^ction.
nor any such lust can defeat us of our last hopes, but this Self may and
will: Reckon up thine enemies, (perhaps thou will say, thou have many, no man
more then thou;) some that seek thy shame, some thy goods, some thy life, and
all these thou complainest of, no man need bid thee be revenged of them, or
watch them a shrewd turn; but I tell thee, an enemy within thy bosom, counted
thy darling and close friend, one called Self, is a more deadly enemy, and can
do thee more hurt, then all of them together; hereafter rail not upon the
evil world, thy cruel Landlord, thy false friend, bankerupts who have run
away with thy goods, or thy bad wife that stings thee with her tongue, thy bad
children, ill neighbors, thy persecutors; not one of these but may set thee a
step forward to heaven, none can deprive thee of it: but Self can and will;
world, devil and his instruments, could not hurt thee, were it not for this
traitor, which sets open the door unto them to tempt, to defile thee: See
Naaman here, in what a wildred case he is! except the Lord had made him see his
enemy, and undo all his cross selfe-willednesse, and waywardness, and to
stop to Gods way, yea and glad to escape so too; unto what a perplexity had he
brought himself after, besides his pudder for the present: even so, know thou,
that when thou have run into thy long error, thou must come back again this
way of self-denial, or else the further thou go, the worse will thy case
be: Oh! it is a tugging crying sin, it wearies ten Preachers to denounce
against it: Oh! to what a sweet peace had the Lord brought many an hearer of
the word had it not been for this: Beloved, we have had some faithful
servants of Christ, both living and happily dead among us, who have confessed,
that by this Self and her means, they have spent forty years ere they could
come to believe, and do we look to make it a short cut of forty days?
therefore mutter not at thine enemies, much less at the Lord, but at thy
self, and say, thy perdition is from thy self; God is enlarged, Hosea 13.9.
but Self has hidebound thee and straited thee in thine own bowels; count
that Sermon which has taught thee this lesson one of the best that ever thou
heardest. Luke 5.
There were many lepers in the days of Elisha, but he was sent to none, save
to Naaman the Syrian, and he had been sent to him also in vain, if Self
might have borne sway.

A second Branch of Instruction is, of Instruction. Be not offended with
crosses.
to stay that impatience of our spirits, Hezekia says) By this, man lives.
And Job, cap. 33. Elihu tells us, Hereby, even by the corrections which he has
sealed (such as he there mentions) consumptions, Esaias 3.8.
fevers and diseases which take away stomach and the like, the Lord hides the
pride of man, which is self: he brings to the pits brinke of the grave that he
may keep the soul from hell, even the nethermost pit. Oh! when the bladder of
Self, and Pride, and Presumption, is pricked, and the bubbling froath, and
windy puffing thereof, is let out, a man comes to see himself as he is, a
forlorn creature; then his duties, affections, hopes, sorrows, desires and
performances vanish: no man can so basely think of him, as he conceives of
himself, then he is vile, and dust and ashes in his own eyes! Who is more
free from all arrogating to himself and his own righteousness, then one that
lies all pale, and consumed with pain and sickness? When we do meet with
one, (except some desperate blind Pharisee) who in his extremity dare trust to
himself? where is then his vainglory, his boasting of devotions, fasts,
prayers, and alms? Alas! the image of them is despised, the pride of life is
cracked, and the great stomach is broken: and then his high thoughts, which
exalted themselves against Christ, and an humble heart, quail and come down.
Crosses are great means to let out Self out of the Soul.
Then if an interpreter come, one of a thousand, to declare his righteousness,
how welcome is he? When the heart is empty of Self, then does the Lord
commonly fill it with good things; and when it despaireth of selfe-hope, then
the Lord says: Deliver him, I have received a ransom.

Hence it is that Job, cap. 10.12. says: Thy visitations (O Lord) have
preserved my spirit. And the truth is, it is well in these dead times, if any
thing will do it! As Paul Phil. 3. says, If by any means I may attain it.
The word (without some afflictions upon men's spirits, or name, bodies or
posterity, and that in some stinging kind) pierces not; the spirit is
straightened. Sometims after long struglings and wrastlings of men with this
Self, hoping to pick somewhat out of their own strength, they are tired and
wearied in their way, and their former fears come upon them a-fresh, so that
they can find no rest in their bones: Then they begin to consider seriously of
it, and conclude, There is a pad in the straw: still they cross the work of
God in one kind, as fast as they further it another: Surely they resolve an
heart of hollownesse, sloth, unsoundnesse and loathnesse to renounce the
creature, or their stoutnesse, and sullen heart, or the warmth of their own
feathers, their zealous affections. These or the like oppose the nakedness and
simplicity of the promise, and keep the conscience in snares and defilements,
and they cry out, Miserable men! who shall deliver us? And sometimes by other
affronts, the Lord is feign to sharpen the point of his convincing ordinance,
that the Soul may think the Lord is in sad earnest, when she finds him to
hunt her out in every corner, and give her no rest till she can be content to
be saved any way, so she may be saved: A very Papist in his straits will
disclaim himself, and say, It is safest for the avoiding of vainglory, to
cleave only to mercy, and shall we that profess none but Christ, come short
of them?

To conclude then, as we read Heb. 12. My son, refuse not the chastening of the
Lord, Job. 7.18.
nor grudge at his visitations, as Job once murmured. Why do thou visit him
every morning, and try him every moment? Why do thou set me as a mark
against thee? But in the issue of that great trouble, he was of another mind,
saying, cap. 9.31. My very clothes defile me: And cap. 42.4. Now have I seen
thee; therefore I abhor my self. Let us do likewise, and abhor our own
murmurings at our crosses: for although they are irksome to the flesh, yet they
are wholesome for the spirit; as we say of the body, that when the spleen is
smallest, that is best: So, the body of grace is at best, when that Spirit in
us which lusts to envy, to self-love and carnal ends, is brought lowest.
Rejoice therefore, and attend closely to this work of Gods visitation. Jam.
4.4.
Say as once one answered to him that discouraged him from New Englands voyage,
by the wants and affronts which he should meet with there, and in his journey,
as lack of diet, good lodging, and the like: Oh (says he) what know I, but by
this abasement, the Lord will crucify me to this world, and the contents of
it, marriage, pleasures, traveling up and down, belly, gain, and the like?
What shall I lose by this bargain? David in his heavy affliction of spirit,
Psalm. 51. could say, My sin is ever before me! yea, the sin of his Nature,
and that Self, the seed of all evil, was then terrible: whereas before in his
jollity, neither murder nor adultery was sensible. Look up to God, and
beseech him, that in this glass of conscience, affliction I mean, thou may
behold the thief that does thee all the hurt; that Grace by little and little
may drop in, and Self go out, that thou may partake his righteousness, who
emptied himself of all, may learn obedience by sufferings, and behold that
venom which has drunk up and wasted the spirit of self-denial and faith,
and marred all thy hearings, and use of means till this hour: only this
caveat I add, Let no man ascribe more to crosses then is their due. They cannot
work of themselves, save in and by the Word: But where the seed lies under
the dry clod, this storm may possibly moysten and break it, and cause the
seed to root and grow up. So much for this use. There is yet another use of
instruction remaining: But I have already been too long: I must refer it with
the other uses which follow, to the next Sermon. Here therefore an end for this
time. Let us pray, etc.

THE SIXTH LECTVRE CONtinued upon the eleventh Verse; and so forth on to the
verse following.
VERSE XI. VERSE 11. But Naaman was wroth, and said; Behold, I thought thus with
my self: Surely, he will come forth, and stand, and call upon the Lord his
God, and strike his hand upon the place, and recover the Leper.

VERSE 12. Are not Abana and Pharfar, rivers of Damascus, better then all the
waters of Israel? may I not wash in them and be clean? So he went away in a
rage, etc.


2 Kings
WE labored as we could (beloved) to come toward an end of this maine point
of Self in the last exercise; but were feign to break off in the of
Instruction.
Therefore no further to trouble you, we come to the third and last branch of
it. And that is to teach us what the reason is of so much irresolution and
staggering in the spirits of many Professors: Staggering and unproficiencie of
Christians in the fruit of Self.
why their faces are all so pale, and their hands are upon their loins and
sides, as a woman's whose pains are upon her, the fruit being come to the
birth, but no strength to bring forth? Where almost are there any other
now-a-dayes to be found? (except we mean such as never came to feel
themselves in a streit at all:) sure it is, their number is great, who
(although in measure they affect the best things, and to set such a price upon
them, as that they are loath to go without them at last: yet) still profess
they can attain small setlednesse, and rest upon the promise with persuasion
and comfort. Surely the reason is, because (although as they conceive) that
desire which is in them toward God, comes from the Word which has convinced
them of their need; yet either they are ignorant of that which is able to
settle them, viz. the freedom of the promise of forgivenes coming from the
heart of a reconciled God in his Son: or else will take no pains to digest
and rivet it in their own hearts; but choose to wanze away in their own
inconstancy, being glad when they feel any affections stirring in them; but
when they are cold and dead in their spirits again, then their hopes turn to
fears; and leave them so conceited, as if there were no way left for them to
recover any settling or confidence. This policy of Satan to hold hearers upon
this rolling stone of their own bottomes, is no other, save that he
blind-folds them with this Self and self-love. For why? so long as they were
merely carnal, and led by profane Self, they confess, God might justly cast
them off. But when once they find their minds and hearts to be truly bent,
and set heavenward then they conceive themselves as other manner persons, and
think that no man can blame them if they look for some fruit of their labor;
and wonderful difficult it is to draw them from a carnal savor, even in the
most spiritual things of God. Wherefore (say they) have we zeal and feelings,
and hopes by our hearing the promise, save that we should ascribe somewhat to
them, and think our selves in better case then when we wanted them? And whence
are they, save from the word and the glad tidings of the Gospel? To whom I
answer, I grant all to be true which you have said: but what then? Is there no
difference (think you) between the news of salvation offered to a needing
soul, rejoicing to hear that one lying in the dungeon may come out and
resting in some hope that it may be his own portion, and between one who is
actually drawn out of it, by applying those cords to himself, which God has
laid before him, I mean by believing the promise to be his own? Are there no
degrees of the work of the Gospel, save only to fall in love with it, because
it pleases us? Put case the Lord is content at first to draw us with the cords
of a man, that is by an object which is welcome to nature, while we are
incapable of further things; shall this satisfy the soul, and make it by and
by to think it self in good case?

Is there not a condition of the offer, as well as some preparations wrought by
the offer? or shall some pangs of hope, jealousy, sorrow, loathnesse to forgo
the promise, be set by as much as the promise it self believed? No surely, for
so the Maid should be preferred before the Mistress, and those passions of
the soul which God uses for the pulling of her closer to himself, in the
embracing the offer, shall be equalled with faith it self, which were most
absurd: For why? faith is a work issuing from the digestive power of the
Spirit, so urging the faithful meaning of God, reconciled to a sinful wretch
in Christ, that he is willing to put away all enmity, and become a father to
pardon her and set her at liberty: whereupon the soul so fastens, that finding
such properties in her self, as belong to such an one; she with holy and
humble boldness, takes them to her self as her own portion never to be taken
from her. To apply the answer, the cause of such staggering is self-love. That
which you feel to agree with your selves, and to come easily, pleases you too
well, and causes you to dwell upon it too long, and to withhold you from
better things. The remedy of your disease must be, to ascribe no more to your
selves, but to the glory of grace, to abase self, and to exalt mercy, to
renounce all selfe-reflex from duties and endeavors of your own, because they
cannot shed any meritorious blood to save you, and to claspe to that promise
which is established upon a satisfaction to justice; which though it be out of
your selves, yet is (after a sort) made your own by him that promises;
because faith is his gift, and he has covenanted to give it you for that end
and purpose. What skils it how little grace you feel within, when as he who
offers you mercy, only seek such as want it, that he may have the glory? Or
what shall it boot you to think you have less sin then others, when as he
who calls you to forgiveness, cares not how great it be, so it hinder not your
believing in him, Read this wisely.
who seeks the superabounding of grace where sin has abounded? Accept then
such grace offered, as those in whom nothing dwells toward any grace; Grace
best accepted by such as of themselves are emptiest of it.
and as if ye had stepped no one step toward it, more then the vilest publican
and sinner have done.

Be content to gird your selves and serve grace, and let not grace attend you,
as if you had wrong if it be not laid in your laps, but come under the banner
and authority of it, the ends and honor of it. It is something that grace
runs in your stream, but your staggerings shall never cease, till your
stream be dried up and turned to run merely in Gods stream, to be carried,
both whither, how soon, how and how far it shall please him: Use all means,
walk so in the way, as making use of all encouragements; but still look
forward to the price of the high calling of God: boast not your selves, as if
you had put off your harness: But rather think thus, if it be so joyful a
message to hear of a pardon, how much better were it, to sue it out, and apply
it to my self? and how woefully should it sting me, if any things should come
between cup and lip, to defeat me of it? Remember, that all preparations of
grace serve only to testify to the soul, that the Lord has been at work,
not that it should rest in a taste of absent, but press on with
unweariednesse, to obtain the fullness of a present and enjoyed happiness,
and betrust it self wholly to his workmanship, who would never have begun,
if it had not been in his power and will to finish. Stand therefore at his
courtesy wholly, as disabled in thy self to cooperate with him, much less to
have him at the bent of thy bow: bind Self to the altar with cords, and
turn thy active meddling spirit, into a mere passive and waiting spirit upon
the work of God; not as a slave, nor as a loyterer, but as a self-denyer, and
one whose strength is to sit still, and behold the salvation of God. Oh
(beloved!) that I could so follow this council of mine with effectual prayer
to the Lord, that through mercy it might become a mean to put to an happy end
those endless and innumerable complaints of staggering consciences, and to
settle them in some tolerable measure, with comfort and quietness: And so much
may also serve for this third and last Branch of instruction.

Examination.
I say not the being of it (for he that would be rid of it, must go out of
the world) but the reigning and defiling and deceiving power of it, to keep
the soul from Christ: I need not be large in this: I have prevented my self
already in all which I have said before, to describe this thief by his marks:
But what shall it profit you (brethren) to say, they are laid down in the
opening of the doctrine, if ye let them lie there and apply none of them to
your selves to find out your own let? What shall it avail, that I have told
you what gross Self is, and what this secret and wyredrawne Self is? To have
showed you many instances of it? The steps and degrees of it? The carriage of
it, both in the ground, the proceeding and the scope of it? The reasons of it,
both from the cursed nature of Self, the curse of God, and Satan's advantage?
What good will it do you to hear the danger of it described, by the
naturalnesse, subtilty, closeness, violence of it? If none of all these will
stir ye up to cry out and ask, Am I the man O Lord? or with Rebecca feeling
her twins to stir within her, to go to God for counsel? Alas brethren! To
this end all serves else, all is as water running over in a full vessel; some
of ye perhaps will say, there is so much said of this, that it fills your
head, so that ye know not where to begin? I answer, If it be so much, it may
make some amends for the little or nothing which most men will speak of it
(and oh! that it might occasion others to speak more:) But to answer you, I
say, take any one of these, and try your selves by it; especially cull out
such instances and marks as you think sort best with your condition: let not
plenty make you barren.

Who knows what is in the spirit of man save the Lord and it self? Or rather
the Lord searching the heart by his own Spirit, Jerem. 17.
and teaching it to dive into the depth and secrets of sin? Self requires
good and deep search^ng.
Who can judge whether it be gross Self or privy and subtle Self which
pesters the soul, and disables the promise? Who knows whether ease or pride,
fear or presumption, conceit or error and ignorance hinder most? Try therefore
thy self; know thou not that Self must stoop, if Christ enter: do not
think that because here thou may find some marks of this else, therefore
by and by thou have snatched him; no, no, thousands who know their diseases,
carry them under their privy garments as running sores, till they destroy them;
especially remember, if Self be so deep an evil, so natural a twinne,
eating, laughing, and living in thy bosom with such familiarity and
bewitching; what, save the infinite wisdom and power of God can work the
discovery or resolvednesse of heart to cast it out? Therefore, not to urge any
thing already urged in special, I do only in general urge thee to make use
of what has been said already of this mischief? Go aside, hide thy self in
thy chamber, Esaias 26.
power out thine heart to God, beseech him to help thee with faithfulness in
the search (else thou will end as thou beganst) not to spare thy self, but
desiring that the spears point which pierced Christ sides, might let out the
thoughts of thy heart in this kind, or rather that the sword of conviction may
open the bowels of it and shed them to the ground; do not this work when thou
art otherwise occupied, and have other business to do, thou shall find this
work enough alone, if not too much for thee, and do it by frequent meditation,
which is nothing else save making the truth of God thine own; and that which
thou can not find thy self guilty of at one time or perhaps capable of, or
able to lay to heart, to abhor or to find sweetness in the doing of; go to
it another, go on where thou leftst (praying God thou may not be new to
begin) and thou shall find, that at another time the second or the third,
thou shall obtain it: Thou shall not repent thee of thy labor, in thus
preventing and cutting short that enemy, which would else have prevented and
cut thee off from grace: only resolve of this, that till the Lord has grounded
thee in the truth of this doctrine, a principle of practical Catechism) it is
impossible for thee to thrive in grace or use of means?

Further pressing of the trial.
Say therefore thus to the Lord: Thou know the pains of thy servant in the
use of means; thou know how poorly I have thriven under them, how little my
faith, my comfort, my obedience is! how ready I am to deceive my self in that
I seem to have, to take up my rest therein, that so I may not be molested any
longer, but soke my self in the dregs of my ease and will, not to stir one
inch off my own ground. Now Lord, if thou will be pleased to show me, wh^t
has done me all this hurt, I should infinitely bless thee! I am not so
foolish (I thank thee) as to trade for religion, and yet cross mine own
ends, in wilful holding any evil within my bosom, which should deprive me
of my hopes! I am willing to be informed and hear of the worst; yea, to
unbottome my self of my old rotten mixtures, and false grounds, for the
bettering of mine estate, rather then to sleep in death, and lie down with them
in the dust! Lord, therefore, now (before my heart be hardened in custom and
security) bless mine examination to the true ends which it serves for.

Here I thought to have ended the use: but there comes one objection to my
mind, Object. Do all see this Self who are truly converted
which must be answered: For some will say, You make a great discourse of this
Self: What think you? Are there not many Christians truly converted to God, who
never discerned this disease, as you have described it, and yet are unfeigned
and true converts and believers? Quaere proceeds not from self-cavilling, The
grace of election working a greater measure of humiliation and tenderness in
some poor souls who want this knowledge, supplies this want sweetly.
but from simplicity) thus: Many poor souls have through mercy obtained from
the Lord a great measure of brokennesse of heart, and humbleness of spirit,
more then the common sort of Professors either have or seek; and by this means
(their helps in both public and private, being few, and their
discouragements many) the Lord beholding them in the grace of his election,
supplies all wants by his own Spirit, keeps them hungry, abases them in the
sense of their many infirmities, puts in a spirit of perpetual jealousy over
themselves, and works them to a marveilous plainness of heart to loath all
falsehood as they can discern it; and so perfects the work of faith in them
secretly far otherwise, then (in such poor creatures might be expected:) of
these, I say, that although perhaps they hear not so much discourse of the
name and dangerous marks of Self, yet they feel the realnesse of it within
themselves: and are better acquainted with it, then many who hear more of it.
And these persons if it should please the Lord to bring that home in doctrine,
use and admonition unto them, which I have spoken would be foremost in
acknowledging and blessing God for such truth, and make better use of it then
the most do.

the truth then ever: and as all Arts, so this art of Self, serving into the
truths of God, (by the counterfeiting and deceiving of men) is grown rife and
perfect; Satan more prevails with this subtle world then ever. Ephesians. 4.14.
therefore needs the more exact and careful countermining.

Thirdly, the Spirit of God under constant means works leasurely: and
therefore corruption is not cast out all at once, but by long discipline and
discovery of it, by the word: and in the multitude of helps (such as Much need
therefore of urging this doctrine in these our days.
Much more need therefore there is of this doctrine to be urged in these days;
that such as are the Lords, and yet held under this snare may be pulled out and
saved, and those who are not, may be left therein, because they would not
receive the truth in the naked love of it.

Lastly, to end this use, this I add, That although the Lord should Rabel with
children, or else she dies. And her daughters having lost their children by
Herod's sword, would not be satisfied, because they were not. See an example in
those fugitives, Ierem. 43. They would go into Egypt or else all is marred. But
the humble, lowly heart, is glad to stoop to any conditions. The former is a
dogged, stout, invincible heart. The other is a broken and yielding one; it
will endure any terms of self-denial to abase it self. Will God have him
poor, in mean account, suffer loss of goods, liberties for him? He is
content, lays hand upon his mouth: not a word my soul, God will have it thus.
Will God have Paul preach? He stoops to it. Will he have him not preach in
Bythinia, but in Macedonia? He descants not. Will he have him go from
preaching to prison, to banishment, to the sword? He is content: If Michel
mock David, he will yet be more wise: If Sheme^ will curse him, he will not
revenge: If he must lose his Kingdom, let the Lord do with him as he will.

The second Trial, Judge thy self not in cool blood, but when thou art put
to it: Then Self will most recoile, and self-denial will most appear. Then
is a soldier tried for courage, when his enemy is upon him, as Sampson. When
temptation is absent, a fool is wise, a froward one is patient, an unchaste
one is chaste. But try him and he will act himself, and show his metal: In
a good and peaceable time, it is little to be good, but to be so where Satan's
throne is, is somewhat: in the midst of an adulterous generation to shine, is
some sign of self-denial.

Thirdly, try thy self-denial, by thy forsaking of gainefull sins. Saul
will kill the refuse of Amalek, but the King and the fat cattle and the best
of jewels he will save. David will not kill Saul, to hasten a Kingdom. When
two plead at the souls bar, gain and conscience, only then is thy
self-denial searched. Then look to thy tacklings. When Self is not
importunate, one Self may cross another. But if in importunity, the soul be
rough and resist, it is a sign of denying her self. Observe narrowly on whose
side thou give sentence, when Christ and Lust plead together, as the two
harlots. If the sword of the word decide, all is well. If Abraham will renounce
himself in his dear affection to Isaac, God may trust him for ever.

Fourthly, Try thy self in point of free willingness to search out the
express will of God in a case of doubt; without shuffling and crooking the
rule of God to thine own bent. Thus did Balaam cosen himself with his
consulting with God, and speaking against an house full of gold, but taking an
handful and going with the messengers; he had light at a key hole to tell him
he must not go, yet he quasht it. Iohanan and his men prayed Jeremy to consult
with God: but still hoping they should have a grant, but being told he refused.
There is no halting before the Creeple: The Lord knows the meaning of the
Spirit. There is a light in the mind, but the inspiring, the straitning of it
is from God. Good wares will abide the light; Bad will not: And truth seeks no
corners: But Self does; and will say, I would not put my money to use; but that
it is against a Commonwealth to keep it. I would be strict in a Sabbath, but
that it is too Jewish: such figleaves our nakedness will sow together. So much
for this.

Again, let this doctrine of Self, teach us wisely to try our
sanctification, and the truth of it, as well as our justification, and the
effectualnesse thereof. Self remains in the best to defile their holiest
endeavors in part: But in hypocrites it defiles both persons and actions
wholly. So that it should make us wary how far we ascribe to our
sanctification, except we can prove our principle to be sound. Self will
deceive us with false colors of holiness, if we be not wary; for there be
many things which carry a strong show of it, and yet come from a false ground:
All is not gold that glisters: distinguish therefore our sanctification, from
all false principles which do make semblance of it to deceive others and
especially our selves. An easy thing it is, (as I once read in a godly man's
writings) for an erroneous heart, to go forth in the strength of false
principles of Self, assisted with education, Self in natural parts, Self in
lusts, Self in the power of Ordinances or Evangelicall light, Self customs
with many such like as these, Self fear and bondage examples. To give a
little taste of a few of these, that by the paw we may judge of the Lion, and
perceive how far sanctification lies above Self. First take natural Self
to task, both in her affections, abilities and conscience. Natural affections
may deceive thus, Abraham would needs have Ismael live in Gods sight out of a
natural affection, Isaac would have Esau enjoy the blessing against the
promise. A woman has a sick child which she earnestly desires to live, and
goes to God for it, though without faith, being a natural woman. Christ is not
the strength of the prayer, but nature. See Hos. 7.14. Affections are good, (as
we see in Hanna) if under faith. But this error is thus discovered: when the
object is spiritual, and the motive spiritual, the affection is sound; but
when the soul is not carried beyond a natural object, (as when a woman having
her child recovered, prays no more) it is a sign of mere nature, See Genesis
20.24. in the Shechemites. Again, when natural affections only carry the
soul, then mere softness of nature acts a man, but not tenderness of heart:
softness of nature will yield both ways; it will pity an offender being
punished, as well as an innocent, it will be courteous to all sorts alike,
without respect of grace or desert: why? Because it is only general, nature
proceeding always one way. Softness will yield in the Church to counsel, and
out of the Church to ill company. But Josias his tenderness yielded but one
way, that is to the Law of God; but was opposite to Idols, and destroyed them.
Mourning women hired at funerals, or stageplayers weep for good and bad.
Jeremy weeps for Iosia, the breath of their nostrills, Lam. 3. and for the
Church Ierem. 9.1. So much for this.

The like I say of natural abilities; They often come in the room of Christ and
Grace: The lackey rides, and the Prince goes on foot. Natural Abilities, are
wit, expressions, memory, judiciousnesse and the like; in prayer, conference,
repetitions of Sermons etc. But the error is discerned thus: Abilities do not
humble or change the soul, as true sanctification does, but puffes up the
heart rather; Grace with gifts, abases the soul. See for this Acts 3.12.
Revel. 9.10.21. Faith the nearer it comes to God, the humbler it makes a man;
it is an emptying grace of Self. Again, parts will not keep a man from sin
as grace will. Abilities will not reach to suffer for God, though they seem to
act for him, if suffering come, Self rages. But Grace goes forth in Gods
strength, Psalm. 84.5.6. They went through Baca, Psalm. 84.
yet from strength to strength. Love is wanting to only-Abilities: Abilities
only look at themselves, as their own excellency: but grace makes God her
excellency: only a natural man beholds the Minister in his parts, not his
spiritualnes. 2 Cor. 4.7.


So I say touching natural conscience: Romans 2.14.15. The heathens by natural
conscience, accused or excused themselves. But this is easily discerned,
because such a conscience acts a man only in a natural way: As they of Listra
thinking the Apostles to be Gods, brought their Bulls to sacrifice to them:
many a drunkard taxes himself, but his taxing is weak and vanishes; but a
spiritual conscience is firm and overpowring: Again, a natural conscience
can be but moral at most, as not to lie, swear; but a spiritual embraces
supernaturally revealed things, as faith, regeneration. And put case such a
conscience have some light of the word added to it, yet without grace by the
word, corruption is not subdued, as it is in a man who looks into the mirror
of the word: See 2 Cor. 3.18. So much for these three Branches of Nature.

The second trial is of education: It is with many Christians as with
Empericks they have learned some receipts from able Physicians, but want grounds
of Art to minister physic themselves. So many have had good education with
Ioash under Iehoiada, and act accordingly. But the discovery of these is, that
they are soon weary of Gods work (I say not only in it, for so may a good
man) but of it; because their principle is outward: but the sanctified soul
being inwardly stirred from the Spirit, is unwearied. See Esaias 30.31. They are
carried in Gods arms. But the other walk as a creeple forced to go by some
external mover: now forced motions cannot be perpetual, as the motion of
legs strengthened by sinews and joints. Again, a man only acted by
education, has two motions, like the orbs of heaven, moved by their own
circular motion, and yet retrograded by the primum mobile: But a sanctified
motion is uniforme in it self; if he be in a good family, he moves only
according to the good means thereof, not according to his corrupt motion. And
when the party is furthest off his Parents or Teachers, the falsely principled,
are most sluggish and at last faint utterly: not so he who is acted by grace;
read Judge. 2.19. Judge. 4.1. As the glass which yields reflection, no longer
then it is backed with steel. A stone will fly a while so long as the strength
of the arm abides in it, but no longer; because it is acted contray to the
principle. Examine thy self about this now; one day thou will else rue it:
Believe not every show. He whom Christ has traind up, drinks in his rain,
his instruction, is carried as I may say upon his shoulders, is cared for by
him, blessed and upheld by him, though his natural parts be never so weak,
feeble and poor, whereas the counterfeit is abhorred by God, let his gifts and
trainings be never so eminent. So much for this second.

Thirdly, again, a man may think himself to go forth in the strength of
Grace, and yet be merely acted by some lust; as Diogenes coming into Plato's
house, and seeing costly silk cushions, trod upon them; saying, I trample upon
Plato's pride. But Plato told him, he did so with a double pride: so Esaias 58.
those fasters went to work in the strength of their covetousness and lusts.
But an holy heart will make a natural object, spiritual to it self: as a man
may do evil in the strength of a good intent (for lack of knowledge) so much
more may a man do good in the strength of a lust. How many will reprove others
in the strength of carnal indignation, as the other Disciples did those two
sons of Zebedee? Or of a sullen, froward, censorious humor? Lust is contray
to some lust, grace only to all lust: Some preached Christ out of envy, a good
work coming from a lust, but the discovery is easy; for such a man obeyes
not, because he is commanded, Psalm. 119.6.
but for his will sake. Object. But I do as I am commanded, therefore I am
sanctified. I answer if thou do simply so, it is well; else thou may do a
command, and yet use that as a color to varnish thy action, as a Apothecaries
color their physic for a luster sake, not to amend it. So a lust may be the
principle, but yet a command may be a stalking horse. So much for this third.

Fourthly, a man may cosen himself about his obedience, by the common power of
the Gospel, and the gifts which issue from thence; and yet come far short of
grace; as is manifest in Judas, Alexander, Hymenaus, Demas and others. And this
is the subtilest delusion of all the former. As the lower element of water may
symbolize with the higher of Air, in an inferior quality of moistness, though
not of heat: so may an hypocrite partake of the lower qualities of a believer,
but not of his grace. As the Master is, so is the scholar; if the Master can
but read, the scholar can but read; but if he be able to teach Grammar, then
the scholar learnes that: So an ignorant man can read the book of the
creatures without, and the book nature within; but an hypocrite can read the
book of the Gospel, and yet may be far from believing it. True it is, both
natural and divine gifts do agree in some respects, as that both are infused,
the one by nature, the other by grace: both leave some positive work in the
soul, but natural gifts rather by substracting some evil: spiritual by
adding some real qualities: both give some liberty of working Godward; but the
former give no freedom to the will in working, the latter does; for whom the
Son makes free, he is free indeed: Object. But by this it might seem that
the difference stands only in a degree? Answ. True it is, there is a graduall
difference between the good grounds, one brings forth thirty, another sixty, a
third an hundred fold: but the good and bad differ substantially: For mere
common gifts of the Gospel in hypocrites, first are inordinate; as Judas seeing
the box of ointment broken, thought of the poor, but inordinately; and Saul's
saving the fat cattle of Amalek, was inordinate and irregular: So Ananias and
Saphira, Acts 5. Lust must live, where it is not mortified, if not under open
prophannesse, then under board. Secondly, an hypocrite may shun a sinful
lust, by putting it aside as when uncleanness is justled aside by ambition or
covetousness; or an hypocrite may be for Christ in opinion, when the wind
serves, but not when it turns, whereas a good heart is set that way, as the
needle touched, stands to the Northpoint: or thirdly, hypocrites may do much by
their conviction of understanding: but a believer works by the divine habit of
grace put into and dwelling in his soul: moreover, true grace and moral
differ in this, that the moral makes only a change of accidents, as the fire
makes iron hot and burning, but changes not the iron from his nature: but
grace changes the whole nature also: for example, it does not only make a man
pray, and be zealous, but it turns his worldly froward heart, into an heavenly
and meek. Lastly, know it by this, A true Christian moves toward God with a
most kindly and inward instinct of spirit, as the smoke moves upward and the
stone downward; an hypocrite moves by a forced motive of passion, fear or the
like violence: life always has a naturalnesse of moving, as the ey-lid always
moves to keep out dust; so grace has her instinct: The Law of God is written
in his heart with the pen of a Diamond; therefore as only nature teaches
Bees to fly home from a far: so Grace sends the soul to God in her revolts,
arms it against enemies, succors it in troubles, inclines it to good: But not
so in the other; whence comes that deadness, variableness, dullness,
wearines, and other disorder of spirit, in all unregenerate ones: Beloved,
these differences are weighty: lin not till you can truly try your selves by
them, that not Self but Sanctification is that true principle which works in
you. Do not as common folk in a crowd, who wait for the King, they think each
Officer and Courtier is the King, but he that knows the King by face, will
not be decieved by his followers. I deny not but all these particulars are good
for followers, so the King be chief. All the pieces of silver are good which
make up the sum, but yet come short of good pay. Christ is the life of the
soul, the treasury of it, the strength of it: The Angels could not foil Satan
save by the strength of the Lamb. Lean your selves, roll your selves upon him,
as the Spouse in the Cant. upon her beloved; and so you shall not be gulled in
your obedience by any false principle of Self. And so much be said touching
this last Branch of this maine and principal doctrine of self: one of the
chief points intended in this my book. The Lord give a blessing to it for his
names sake.

Exhortation to two sorts.
Thelatter to such as are converted already. The former of these I chiefly
aim at in the doctrine, (though the latter be a necessary consequent upon the
point, and of great importance. 1. To such as are yet to be converted.
) First then for the former of these; and that standing of these two Branches:
One is, that fithence this Self threatens the loss of so many men's endeavors
for grace, therefore let all (who would save this loss, and hold that which
they have gotten,) add this one duty to deny themselves, and forfeit this
Self, which else will make them to forfeit heaven: empty thy soul of it and
turn it up side down, as one would do a dish which he would make clean
within and without. If any will be my Disciple (says our Lord Jesus) let him
cast the hardest before hand, Matthew. 16.25.
Denial of Self urged.
(and not the easiest) let him deny himsefe: That which our Savior there spoke
of one kind of Self, wealth and welfare, health and life; that (in another
kind) I say of this Self, privy and inward, deny and abandon it, if thou
mean to be Christ's Disciple. Let the obtaining of the Lord Jesus to
forgiveness of life, make thee willing to part with and sell all, which might
hinder the bargain. Men sell bargains for great sums of money; the Lord
sells for no money or price: Silver answers all things in common markets; but
here it availes nothing: emptiness of Self, is that only condition which the
Lord looks after: It is with this commodity as with the jewellers purchase of
a pearl; It is worth all he has, though he should set all to sail which he
could rappe and rend, his lands, leases, his moneys, movables, to the very
clothes off his back, all too little to make a sum of sufficient price. Now
then mark: As it fares in the one with the jeweller, so it fares in the other
with the soul. A fool that is but a common Goldsmith and wants deep skill,
when he meets with such a choice pearl as cannot be bought without selling
himself out of all shop and plate and bables; shrugs at it, Oh! (says he)
though it is like, the pearl is somewhat worth, yet for me to put my self out
of stock and custom, and to sell all my ware wherewith I was wont to make
such a fair show to my chapmen, for a little thing which I may put in a box,
and carry about me (without feeling it) not knowing what I shall make of it, or
how to put it off to my mind, what a fool were I to do it! But when he has
refused the offer, then comes it to a wise Merchant of jewels, one that has
skill indeed in such a pearl; what does he? Considers it apart, duly weighes
with himself what it is worth, even Lordships and Manors, and a whole Town of
land and wealth: it is but the denying of his present humor, and the
conveniences of a present dwelling, fine rooms, and a pretty seat, and
contents, and perhaps some old gold and jewels, which his Ancestors left him
for a remembrance. The question is not (with him) what it will cost, but what
it is worth, and what the regret of the forsaken offer will be: money must be
had and paid presently, the owner has need of it, and will not forgo such a
thing upon trust. What follows upon this sad demurre? Surely, rather then he
will reject the offer, he will sell all to his shirt, but he will have it.

Here offers it self a fine Summer house, with Orchards and Gardens; there a
delicate lot of ground, Meadow or Pasture, and bids him, sell not me. His brave
walks and ground next his dwelling, step forth, saying, Sell not us, sell thy
out-lying pieces, such as are no eyesore for thee to part with; but part not
with that which as soon as thou steppest out of thy door, thou go into.
What a narrowing and straitning of thy self were that? Then perhaps it comes to
his mind, Oh! if I sell off my livelihood, the world will count me a bankrupt,
all will know what I sell, but no body knows what I have bought. And perhaps,
some long kept Jewel will tempt him and say, How can thou part with me,
which thou so often joyest thy self in? So that here be lets on every side, and
Self steps in to mar all. But the skill of the Merchant over-powers all,
he tickles himself with the thoughts of this Pearl, the less it is known
the more it is worth, and the greater is his vantage: and (all things
considered) it is no great self-denial to sell all for so infinite a gain,
to lose a present little for a future unknown estate: therefore his eye will
not spare, he will abondon all his worth, and gage his credit too, but he will
have it, and so he makes it his own. But having so done, will not take twice
the worth of it again, Oh! do thou so (poor Soul) and prosper, sell all, self
and all: for though it be not worth in it self, the parings of thy nails; yet
because opinion and error, and a corrupt heart of self-love, do set such a
price upon it, he Lord is content to take it as a price of the Lord Jesus. (As
David thought a pot of water upon such terms as the hazard of three Princes
lives, a meet offering for God:) so I say, Offer God self and all, it is
scarce worth a pot of water of it self, but as it is the price of life, so it
makes the self-denial precious to God. Skin for skin, and all that a man
has, will he give for life: but even this precious life and all will a
sinful soul give to save Self.

Oh! what is every man save his mind? Each man's will more dear to him then
the world.
The mind of every man is the man: the spirit of the Miser, the mind of the
Drunkard, the conceit and opinion of a Papist, an Heretic or Schismaticke, the
will of an Adulterer, (though all of them are as vile as dung) yet they are
more precious to them, then life it self! They will engage all, rather then
their will and self. Even so fares it with corrupt self: The Lord offers to
the soul, the Lord Jesus, the fruit of his blood and satisfaction, to pardon
and save it: But upon what terms? Surely these, that the soul sell all:
Alas! what is all she has to sell, worth? She has nothing but bare walls
within, and a dunghill without, he that should carry them away to have them,
should take them at a dear rate: for what is old Adams wealth, but misery and
nakedness? Oh! but there is a further thing in it, the soul thinks her self
rich, and full. This conceit must be first abhorred: the offer of Christ seems
to be too hot and heavy: carnal wisdom, reason, wit, ease, fear of losing
liberties and all other self resists it: yea, she so likes the Pearl, that
she will yield a devotion, a religion of duties, of costly service to redeem
this price of Self: the half of the Kingdom she can forgo, and the other
half she will yield to Christ, and so save her stake: but to sell himself
wholly to the skin, that Christ may be all in all, ground, money, gold,
apparel, meat, drink, and all, this is death. But even this God must have, or
nothing. For why? This will lay grace, and the thank of the soul under feet:
which God cannot endure; Therefore this price the Lord will have, or nothing.
Oh! give it him freely: One piece of Self will plead, how can thou spare thy
darling? Another, to live at ease in an opinion of a safe estate to God: How
can thou part with it, being thy Idol? thy bosom delight? But if thou be
this merchant royal, who is able to weigh the worth of the Pearl offered thee,
peace of conscience, and an happy death and happier life after; I advise thee
put it not off for the sake of a thousand Selves, except thou will bring such
sorrow upon thy self after, as all thy will cannot make recompense for, when
the bargain is rejected. As the Mariners in Jonah would have rowed to land to
have saved Ionahs and their own lives; Jonah 1.
but when no way would serve, they threw all into sea, Wheat and other
provision. And when nothing would do, they cast Jonah himself in: so let this
last enemy, Self (as perverse as Jonah in his own device) be thrown
over-boord, rather then the precious soul should be in jeopardy.

Ministers must be the foremost in self denial. Josu. 3.15
And let us Ministers of God (like the Priests that first stepped into Jordan
when it gave way into Canaan) be the first that tread out this way to the
people of God: for it is a way, which though it be trodden out plainly enough
in the Scriptures, yet had need of lively practice to teach it before men will
believe it. These sheep are much led by the eye, as well as the ear, by
beholding the examples of their Shepherds, I mean, as well as by doctrine.
Oh! when they hear us declaim against Self, and plead for self-denial very
stoutly with our tongues; they lay their ear to our practice, and hearing our
Lute strings to jarre, and seeing us wire-draw and cast about every way, rather
then we will part with any thing for peace of conscience, or glory to God, not
only not our livings, but not our passions of wrath, envy, contention,
vainglory, not a brass farthing of our gains, not a dram of our pride,
ease, idleness, pomp and jollity, will and stomach, pleasure or preferment
for Christ and his Gospel: they have the measure of our foot by and by, and
resolve to give us the hearing, till our tongues be torn; but till they see in
us more self-denial, they will never believe that we speak the truth for
Gods cause, but only as Parrets for fashion sake. Oh! the infinite prejudice
which we our selves (brethren) by our close cleaving to our selves, have done
to this great cause of God. And this I can say, That such of Gods Ministers as
have hazarded themselves most for God, and purchasing advantage for their
Ministry, have obtained more room in the consciences of their hearts, then
many of such as have stood out to the uttermost, and would not abate any ace of
their own, for the winning of reverence to their doctrine. And yet, I would
also exhort Ministers to be as instant in the teaching of this truth, as in
lively exemplifying it in their practice. And rare it is to see it otherwise:
that those who have found by experience, the life of this truth of
self-denial in themselves; can keep hot coals in their bosoms, but must
needs utter themselves to their people in a serious and painful preaching of
this doctrine.

There was a Statute we know of Mortmaine, The true Mort-maine.
which was feign to be enacted since the times of superstition in this our
Kingdom, to cut off the validity of such gifts as were given to the Clergy for
Popish ends. This Statute should every good Minister enact in his own soul
(if ever he look to do good to others) first to cut off, and make Self a
Mort-maine, a dead hand (for God does so) if it shall dare to bring any gifts
to God for Christ, and to count them as absolute forfeits, as if a Popish
fellow should give moneys and yearly gifts to a Priest to read Mass or
Dirigies for the weal of his soul after his decease. And so the people, let
them be exhorted also to exalt free grace, and mere Christ in the promise,
not muttering that they find not that fruit of their self-denial, that they
expect: but counting it their chief work to wait at the posts of grace (not as
foolish pilgrims do, at the gate of the Popes entrance, knocking with a
golden hammer, till he bring them his Jubilee blessing: but with patience
attending the promise, till the Lord shall stir the dead poole of their
hearts, and quicken them with hope, confessing that it is mercy they may live
and breathe in Gods air, much more by the air of a promise: (although not yet
so established in their hearts as they could desire; yet sufficient to keep
them from grudging, to make them lay their hand upon their mouth, and to be
dumb, Malac. 3.
till the Lord bring healing in his wings, and put an end to their waiting. But
as for esteeming themselves for their common gifts of knowledge or zeal, to be
ever the nearer to God for which thousands are in hell) abhorring it, and
choosing to be the poorest doore-keeper in Gods house, then the highest
Pharisees in the Church, who need no righteousness of another, because they
boast of their own.

Therefore in all matters of God deny thy self, and cleave to God. God is the
first cause, and therefore the true end of our being, actions, service. All
Rivers run into the Sea. For us to make our selves our own ends, were to
make our selves God, independent, and to make God an Idol. To deny our selves
is to distinguish our selves from the ungodly, who make themselves and the
creature their happiness. We look to better our selves by our self-love,
but indeed we destroy our selves: Self is our disease: self-denial is our
cure. Whether is it better for us to yield to? but we infinitely better our
selves by denying our selves, even an hundred fold as Christ tells us. Object.
But who ever hated his own flesh? Does not God himself persuade us by
selfe-loving arguments? As by profit, pleasure, peace? I answer, yes, Self is
a plant of Gods planting in our nature. But it is one thing to destroy an
horses good metal, another to rectify and subdue it; so it is one thing to
destroy Self, and affections (with Stoics) another to regulate and direct
them: Love thy self and spare not; so the Lord by his word may order thee in
it, and take off thine exorbitant Self, as in the love of thy wife, seeking of
learning, wealth, honor, favor, etc.

For the better persuading of thee hereto take some motives and some means.
First, for motives. Till Self be denied, thou do in vain enterprise to be
religious: thou opposest a desire of thine own against an whole body of death;
for Self is overspread in all the lims and faculties of thy body and soul, as
the form is over the matter, and the Call over the inwards. Thou will be tried
with self resistance, except the principle be first removed: Flesh will so dog
thee with her askings, that thou will be weary with refusings. Till the soul
be thus prepared, there can be nothing done: The first husband must be dead,
ere thou can marry a new; at least in the rectified intention and preparation
of thy soul. The flesh of the Virgin had been a clogge to the second person,
except first separated and purified by the holy Ghost. Else Demas might have
clave to Paul as well as Silas; the ten spies to God as well as Caleb and
Iosue. But they were of two spirits. No agreement between two cross
principles.

Secondly, God will never stoop to thee, his will is not to be bowed to thine,
nor ever will while the world stands. For his will is the rule, thine the
string out of tune: What should order a crooked thing, but a straight? Neither
can they both stand together: take whether you will, both you cannot have; you
cannot have your will and swinge in your contents of world, lust and liberties,
and Christ too; no man can serve two Masters, nor drive two such trades at
once, as a Fullers and a Colliers; the one sullyes as fast as the other
whitens: nay, of the two, there is more to be made of following Self alone
without Christ, then Self and Christ: by the former a man may at least get
himself a worldly happiness, though he lose heaven after. But by the latter,
a man makes him wretched and distracted, so that he can neither enjoy the one,
nor the other. Skin for skin and all that a man has he will give for his life.
The heart of a Christian is single in respect of his object, only God and his
favor no mixtures with it. Either deny nature in her inordinatenesse or else
give God over, for both cannot consent in one degree of eminency; who cares for
a wavering minded man, either to make him our chapman or friend or husband? For
still he seeks not us, but himself: Let no sweet morsel be kept in our
palate, to cause God to be out of relish with us. Better key-cold, then
lukewarm.

Thirdly, it is equal that Christ and God be chief, because they have bought
us with a price, to be theirs. We should do him great wrong who has bought
a Captive, if he should do his own work. God has not only bought our
service but our selves. Except then we never made such a bargain with God,
we must be for him, who has so dearly bought us. To be sure, God will be
revenged of us as well for not making that bargain, as for not keeping it. 2
Pet. 2. Some hypocrites are said to deny Christ who bought them. A servant is
his Masters money.

Fourthly, The soul feels a heaven in self-denial. What inward content
(think we) had Abraham when he had denied Isaacs life? And Moses and Paul when
they could prefer God and his Church, before their salvation; to suffer
afflictions with Israel, rather then to be a Prince in Pharaohs Court.
Contrariewise, what an hell carries that man in his soul, who for base ends,
denies God and conscience? Let but a man deny one base lust of revenge, wrath,
and what an heavenly heart does he carry with him to prayer.

Fifthly, Think what an emptiness there is in thy self, thine own aims and
bents of heart, and in those creatures and objects which thou judge so sweet:
Wells wanting water and cloulds without rain. As one says of the Pagan Gods,
why did men choose so many save that each one was emptiness? When the eye of
Self falls down from one clear Sun, it thinks it sees three or four, but
they are all but fancies. The fullest creature is but a brittle glass full of
water; give it but as a crack and it is gone. If we were convinced hereof, who
would seek vanity? Who would deceive himself in eating ashes, Esaias 44. and
hold a lie in his right hand? It is mere inconsiderateness, and want of
weighing things, as he says there of the Idolater.

Sixthly, Either be armed strongly to deny thy self, or else thou art foiled.
For Self is as the wife in the bosom. It is hard to deny a friend a
neighbor, (especially if importunate, as him in the Gospel, who came by night
for loaves) how much less a wife? Nay Self is yet nearer unto us then a wife:
It comes always with a bribe, a gift in the hand, sweetness of lust, is as
butter in a Lordly dish: This bribe unhappily prospers wheresoever it goes;
except thou deal harshly with it, as he with Iehorams messenger it will
prevail. Stop thine ears as the Adder. In vain is the net laid for that
which has wing. Dally not with her, as Eve with the serpent, Sampson with
Delila. If she fell in innocence, how will thou stand in corruption? Peremptory
folk are best in a good cause; and she is the most chaste wife, who has the
most denying behavior.

Seventhly, There is enough in God to make amends for denying Self. That which
Self falsely promises, God both justly and duly promises and peformeth. To
join any thing with God is to join a candle to the Sun, or water to the
Ocean. And (as has been said) it is the way to make us hated of God and men:
of God for lack of integrity, of men for lack of wickedness. In things
confused no man knows his own. To expect reward from two Masters, is to lose
our labor from both. So much be said for motives.

To add some means of getting self-denial. First then, labor to make
somewhat else thy self, beside thy self; else thou will never deny thy self:
For Self cannot oppose Self, in the particular of opposition, no more then
Satan can Satan. If once grace come in place and stead of Self, then all old
Self, life and the comforts of it, shall go for new Self; else God and all
shall go for house and land, favor of men and liberties, lusts and will of
the flesh. So Paul calls grace himself: It is not I, but sin in me; q. d.
a stranger, an excrement. No matter what become of flesh, if spirit once be
Self. Get this sound judgment, what deserves to be Self, and all is well:
the old house shall down, that a new may be set up.

Secondly, be armed with sound resolution against the strong error of the
world, which maintains godliness to be mere loss. True it is that
persecutions follow Christianity; howbeit even with such persecutions and
afflictions, Ma^k. 10.
a Christian shall have an hundred fold. As God can fill the soul with
bitterness in abundance; so can he fill with joy and comfort, an heart which
wants, 1 Cor 1. When my afflictions abounded, then did my consolations abound
also. As a man may be in Paradise accursed, so in prison an happy man. Ruben
what got he in defiling of Bilha? Surely shame, he lost both birthright to
Joseph, Kingdom to Judah, and Priesthood to Levi: He was strength and
excelleny, but lost all. And what got Solomon by denying himself in his
petition? Both that he asked, and that which he asked not.

Thirdly, consider what ever it be which thou seek without God, cannot do
thee any good. When God bids honor, wealth, any creature do thee good it
shall, else not: They are instruments, and works only by the agent, as the saw
by the hand of the mover. They comfort us only by a borrowed comfort. And so
on the other side, nothing can hurt, no not Shemei, except God bid him; and
when the curse is gone forth, yet it shall be both causeless and fruitless,
except God send it. Those that do so Idolize the creature, yet find it often,
their snare; yea the favor of Princes, proves their snare, and so they are
forced to say, If God had been chief, this or that had not been.

Fourthly, stir up sundry graces of God in thy soul: First, knowledge;
secondly, faith; thirdly, the love of God. For the first, consider God in his
worth. We use to say, Let such a friend speed, he is worthy; only knowing of
God and his gift will make him prized, and Self despised. See Psalm. 73.20.
They that know thee shall love thee. 1 Cor. 1.12.13. See the place. Secondly,
faith: see that catalogue of selfe-denying Saints, who refused to enjoy
pleasures in Pharaoh's Court, endured the spoiling of goods, etc. How came they
by this? By faith they did it: Faith Conquers Self by the same power whereby
she overcomes the world; for the world within is the chief world. See 1 Timothy
4.10. Thirdly, love: When Paul was so dissuaded from Suffering, he answers,
What do you rending my heart thus? I am ready to go and to suffer loss of
all for Christ: all is dung and dross to him. The love of Christ compells us;
the Greek word is, hemmes us in as in a pinfold, that we can go no way out of
it, 1 Cor. 13. Love is bountiful, she seeks not her own, but Christ's: she
suffers all things, endures all things. And to these add, Stir up wisdom,
and be able to conclude, that in denying thy self, is true safety, peace,
gain: in the contrary is nothing but sorrow, repentance: if not here, yet in a
season unwelcome. See Matthew. 16. end: viz. when Christ shall come with his
Angels. Self shall prove thy plague, thy bane, if thou yield to it, as Amnon
to Tamar, there will be no end of yielding.

2. Branch of Exhortation. Get the Spirit of grace.
The second branch of exhortation is this, Labor to get that Spirit of grace
which God has annexed to his covenant and promise, that it may not be naked
and empty, but accompanied and mixed with efficacy and power in the hearts of
the hearers. This Spirit opposes Self in all the elect, and suffers it not
to make the word to go without effect, and to defeat them of their hope. It is
such a spirit in the soul as takes them off from their own spirit of Self,
presents so really the good things which God has given us, 1 Cor. 2.
that it causes the soul willingly to relinquish all home contents, and (with
Caleb Numb. 14.) to turn the greatest iron charets, Anakims and difficulties
of believing, into encouragements and persuasions. I might (save for envy)
compare it with the spirit of New England (not that all who go that voyage
deny themselves; for among many that do, some seek themselves) but I say, to
the spirit of such as go thither. For as many of them are discontent with the
conditions of Old England, thinking it a burden to live here, where they
cannot hire one acre of ground, but it must cost them money; but there they
imagine, they may be rich the first day, and occupy as much ground as they
please, and live contentfully. In a word, here they find abundance of sad
affronts and discouragements, which there they hope to be rid of. Now (having
in their intentions) knocked off themselves so resolved from the Old Englands,
their native soil, and apprehended strongly the new, Simil.
as their Paradise, who should speak one word unto them to praise the one, and
disgrace the other, but presently their spirits rise with indignation, and
conceive so much the more content in the new, by how much they hear the old
commended. Oh! they will make histories of their beloved, which their heart is
set upon! there is elbow-roome and liberty, no enemy to hurt, no fear of
prisons, suits pursutes at Law, wrongs or discouragements, no difficulties to
conflict withal, in comparison of the good things which they look for: The
strength of the object carries them captives, pulles down all objections, and
subdues them under the authority of their own desires, and the excellent
things there to be had. As for Seafaring by the eight or nine weeks together
in danger, ill diet attendance, lodging and rest, want of wife, children old
kindred and acquaintance, pleasures and pastimes, tush all these, shall make
for their good, and make their new English shore the more welcome to them; they
hope God will weane them hereby from all the superfluous liberties,
sensualities and carnal affections; and as for the defects of the soil, or of
money, or other contents, they will wait, seeing that nothing can be perfect
at once; and when they are come thither, they will not return to the Old
England which they forsook, upon any terms which can be offered them: Oh!
brethren, let me speak to you without offense, shall a poor, conjecturall,
fading and earthly object, so possess the souls of men, that it sets them in
an ecstasy, and shall not the promise of God wash and be clean, be reconciled
to God, prevail much more, to ravish us and set us beyond all Self and
self-love? Yes surely, when Christ, shall thrust Self out of place and become
Self and all within us, and do that and infinitely more then that for us,
really, which Self promises us deceitfully.

But here a question may be asked,

And least any should ask me what I mean by the Spirit of grace? I answer the
same which Zack. Chap. 10.12. means, to wit, the Spirit and effectual power
of the Lord Jesus his satisfaction and intercession, whereby the Ministry of
the Gospel is enabled to persuade the hearts of the elect to believe and
embrace the promise of forgiveness and life, What this Spirit of Grace is?
This Spirit is contrary to that spirit of Self which resists grace: the one
from heaven, pure, savory and divine; the other from earth, carnal, sensual
and divellish. The first mark of the Spirit of grace is, that it is against
Self and that in sundry respects. Marks of it. 2.
First, Grace strives to enlarge if self to the uttermost of her graciousnesse:
Self strives to strengthen her self by the plentiousnesse of Grace; waxes
wanton through Grace, so content to enlarge Grace, that therewith she will
enhaunse her self; and will get up by the stirrup of Grace into the seat of
Christ and make her self checkmate with him: as an ill Steward or Bayliffe to
a great Lord, will seem to do him great service, and look to his grounds and
cattle; but so, as himself may have a stock of cattle going upon the same
grounds, so that he seeks his own and his Masters advantage both under one; he
cannot beteame to promote his Masters with the loss of his own. But the true
sight of Grace, throws Self out of her own possession and ends: The fullness
of Grace empties the soul to the bottom. Ask thy self then; has the view
of this Grace and of the truth as it is in Jesus, emptied thee of all thy
gifts, duties and religious performances? Then it is a true Spirit and
destroies Self. There is no true godly Spirit, but it is the more humble,
lowly and vile in its own eyes by Grace. Self gathers false courage to her
self by the Grace which is offered, grows conceited, confident and full of
her self; she thinks she cannot want enough of it; whereas all runs over and
leaves her barren. The spirit of Grace, so shows the fullness of Grace, that
it exhaustes her own fullness wholly, as those sterven Egyptians beholding
Joseph's store of corn, were more abased for their beggary; and the Queen of
Sheba beholding the depth of Salmons wisdom, became a fool, all her own
spirit of questioning and cavilling sunk down. If thy spirit crouch and
creep to Grace and be quite battered in her self, it is a good sign. As the
Spirit of grace arises from glory to glory; so self falls from shame to shame,
Jer. 14.8.
to set up Grace. what shall I say to thee, Oh thou Savior of all flesh!
surely nothing! be confounded and say, who is a God like to our God!

It is nothing but the spirit of presumption, which prides and pearks up it
self; Mica. ult.
but the Spirit of grace quails the heart, and causes it to fall low as Naaman
after did, even to snatch and catch at Grace, as one sterven for want of it. As
Peter Luke 4. beholding Christ's glory, cried out, depart from me a sinful man!
There is a legal whining baseness and unworthiness, aiming at this, that she
might be worthier: But there is an holy sense of unworthiness, when the savor
of Christ's fullness, drinks up the Spirit and leaves it empty. As when a proud
boy hears a good scholar talk, his conceit of himself turns to abasement;
Oh, how his comb is cut! what a fool and an idot he is in his own eyes! If the
Grace ye seek does humble ye, and not puff ye up, it is as it should be; I
profess (brethren) it would make one tremble to think how little of this
Spirit is stirring in the world; I see but few poor ones among us, by this
plenty of the Gospel; take heed the Lord let us not blood of this pleurisy:
The truth is, we do but fat people by this pasture, we bring no leanness
into their souls: As if Christ served for nothing, save to make men their own
Saviors in part, and give over his own honor; it would do ones heart good
to behold some few poor souls, how humble their knowledge of Christ makes
them; they stand as an empty bucket by the well side: but it would cut ones
heart to see how many bold, bog, and saucy ones there are instead of a few
empty ones! Oh! pull pull down your peacocks feathers! If Christ be a
fountain, be you a channel dried up! If he be a Magazine, be you bare walls!
If he be so rich a dole, come you to it as orphans! be fatherless and
motherlesse, Hos. 13.3.4.
that you may find mercy! rest not in thy law humiliation, to lose some of thy
jollity only, but let fullness of grace cast out self and all to the bottom.
Every one cries out, alas! What have I to be proud of? Note.
But humbleness stands not in confessing there is no cause of it; but in
casting it out. So much for the first Branch.

A second respect wherein Grace resists Self, is this, 2. Ma^^e.
she subordina^es all to Grace: I say, all Self and her branches, carnal
Self, hypocritical Self, mixed Self, all now are quasht, and the soul dare
seek no other credit, respect, commodity, ease to her self, then the Spirit
of Grace will allow her. Grace in a poor soul, is as the power of Reason is
to the inferior faculties; when once the soul is infused into the Infant, this
supreme one of Reason subordaines the other faculties of vegetation and sense
to her self; all come under her authority and name: Look whatsoever Self
has formerly aimed at above Grace, the Spirit fetches it all under it self.
As Peter's trade of fishing, and nets were vile in his eyes, when he saw the
glory of Christ upon mount Thabor. Even all Self and folly comes behind the
Spirit of Grace. Oh! what a blessed liberty is this, to be rid of the bondage
of Self! what cause of rejoicing! Oh (brethren!) to love the Lord Jesus for
himself, and all other things for his sake, what a check is it to Self? Good
brethren note it, and try your selves by it; if those contents which were
unlawful, be cut off wholly, and the lawful seasoned and sweetened by Christ,
if those delights which formerly were either savored for themselves or without
Christ: now we cannot relish, but in and through Christ. it is some sign that
Self is brought under the subjection of the Spirit of Grace. And to this may
be added, which differs not much in substance) that the truth as it is in Jesus
and the Spirit of Grace, is the supply and furniture of the soul in all the
wants and difficulties of it, so that it need take no further thought, it takes
off the soul from all those proppes which she formerly trusted unto, and
makes a rich supply of them in Christ really. Excellent is that speech which
Joseph bid his brethren utter to Jacob when he sent for him into Egypt: Take no
thought (says he) for your household stuff and implements which ye use; for
lo, all the fullness of the land of Egypt is before you count all your
furniture not worth the carrying, Genesis 45.20.
for ye shall find in Egypt such store of all necessaries, that you shall not
repent you of the leaving of them behind. Surely if the promise of Joseph were
so well worth the trusting to, what is the promise of Christ worth? And if the
store of Canaan were so superfluous in Egypt, what is the supply of Self worth
to one that is in Christ? If this were thought of beforehand, how lythe and
cheerful would the soul be in going to Zoar out of Sodom? How far would
she be from looking back with Lots wife, as loath to depart from her old
treasure? The heart called to Christ, hankers and hangs off, here catching up
one rag of Self, there another, loath to go naked, fearing lest there should
not be enough for all uses and turns in Christ; but when she hears, Take no
thought for any of these, Christ shall afford all meet ease, credit, content
and worldly convenience: Oh it is well content to leave it for who so will: let
them take it that know no Christ. As the lame man hearing Christ calling him,
threw away his cloak and crutches, saying, If Christ will give me my limbs, I
take no thought for these, either I shall need none, or have them better
supplied from a fountain.

Brethren, weigh this mark well. Self cannot digest it. All the whole sea of
Christ is no content to her, except she can eike him out with somewhat of her
own: she hangs in the air without a bottom, like a stone, till it be upon
her center. But Christ is a sufficient store to a poor soul in the vacuity of
other things. Though there were no calfe in the stall or bullock in the flock,
Heb. 2.
yet Christ were enough. Try your selves: you may as easily judge by this
mark, as what meat your stomach stands to. If only you can be satisfied
with Christ, while your ease, credit, health and welfare last, then (upon
point) Christ is not these, but these are Christ. When Jacob saw the charets,
he had enough; if you cannot say so, when you behold the promise, all is not
well: Only an insufficient Christ causes such patching. A good new garment
needs no shreds to piece it; Christ is to a poor child of God (as Elkana told
discontented Hanna) more then ten sons. 1 Samuel 1.
Till there be enough felt and tasted in Christ, who will forgo his other
proppes? Who will flit out of his dwelling, to lie in the street? The true
mother cried, let her have all the child, rather then divide it. So the soul
that is guided aright, 1 King. 3.
loathes to divide Christ; he had as leave have none. Beg of the Lord to reach
you out the Lord Jesus in his full supply of all wants, and seasoning of all
mercies, that your soul having this boot in beam, may be indifferent for
other things, as knowing they shall either not be needed, or else cast in.

The third branch of the Spirit of grace in opposing Self, is, the subduing
and subjecting of the soul with equalness and contentedness of mind to all
those terms and conditions upon which grace may be obtained; The third Mark.
It subjects the soul to Christ, upon his own terms and conditions.
refusing no difficulties, neither use of means, nor forsaking her old
contents, but thinking grace a rich pennyworth, whatsoever she cost. There is a
baseness and closeness in Self, whereby she causes the soul to shrug at the
conditions of Grace, as wearisome and costly: this humor the Spirit of Grace
removes and causes such a cheerful willingness in the soul to stoop to any
terms of Gods imposing, that she thinks her self well, if she may so speed.
When a man lies sick of a disease without danger of death, he will send his
state to the Physician, and give him a slight fee, but he is loath to charge
himself deeply for the matter: but if sickness increase, and danger of life
appear, then the desire after health, and the fear of danger concurring, make
him devour all charges, then he will have the Physician come to him, and give
him any recompense, being glad of health upon any conditions. So it is here.
Coy and queazie Self, that feels no danger, and reaches at Grace as a good
thing in general, can beteame no great pains, nor deny her self any wonted
liberty, nor submit to any great abasement of her self for the matter; if it
come easily, she is content. But if once the Spirit of Grace show her the
danger of forgoing it, of delaying to get if, of an indifferent, remiss heart,
lazy, carnal, and willing to go to heaven with all her will and liberties; if
once she present the necessity of it, and the true sense of utter perishing
without it, lo then, the case is altered, John 10.10.
then (as Peter on the sudden would have Christ wash him throughout) so she
grows resolute to bear down all self, lets, disswasives, fears, losses,
discredit; then (so she may have Grace) she will have it any way; let all go
she cares not, so she may enjoy that precious thing she loves: she tramples
upon her pride, ease and all that hangs on as a clog without, or as a let
within, glad, if with the forfeit of all, she can purchase it. Heb. 12.1.
Mark this (good brethren) let the Spirit of Grace prevail a little, and it
is strange how it subdues that loathnesse of Self to yield, the rebellion and
fierceness of the Spirit! Oh! it causes the Lion and Lamb to feed together,
it tames the soul and carries it captive, bound hands and feet, content to
abase it self to the lowest and poorest terms, to be taught and directed in
the way of God, by the most despised instruments, which before she disdained to
learn of. Curiosity now, and choice of Preachers, and accepting of the Grace
of our Lord Jesus, in respect of persons, is base and unsavory. Now she sees
Grace is only in the hand of God to give or restrain, now it is a dainty
commodity indeed, and bears prick and prise in the soul; any thing will be
given for it, if God will now sell it her, let him but ask and have, and
whatsoever before was in high esteem, shall now be vile, and as dung unto it!
Oh! (beloved) try your selves also by this mark, and if ye find the least
dram of this geason work of the Spirit in you, dampe it not nor quench it,
lest Self return and set such a deep price upon it, that perhaps ye will
never recover it again. If a spirit of frequent and unwearied hearing,
travel, conference, meditation, questioning, consulting with such as can
resolve us, a spirit of wisdom to devour sinful bashfulnesse and modesty,
and coins in revealing our doubts, be given unto us: if we feel an heart in
us loathing that lither, listlesse, dead spirit which was wont to withdraw us,
beware we lose it not, nourish it, and although all the world should mock us,
and our own base spirit should tell us we shall be noted for our labor, let us
make never the less of it, nor be discouraged.

Fourthly, 4. Mark. Spirit of Grace resists those special pangs of self, in
every soul.
the Spirit of Grace resists those particular and personal pangs of Self and
self-love, which the soul especially is distempered with: Self is a stock of
many branches, even original antipathy to Christ and Grace at every rate; but
some appear in one, some in another: as in the body some humors settle within
the intralls, others break out into sores and swellings. So here: In some
there appears a base lither heart, in some a spirit of the world, lusting to
rake and scrape, in others subtilty and hollownesse to color over their own
corruption, in some a barren deadness of heart, in others secret pride and
resting in their gifts, in some self-conceit of their own way, in others
revenge, pettishnesse, 2 Cor. 10.4.
frowardness. Some incline to the right hand of selfe-confidence and content
in their own hopes: others to the left hand of fear and slavery. Now the
Spirit of Grace, In some stronger, in in some weaker.
is as fire, devouring that corruption which is next hand, and searching out
the peculiar distemper of the Spirit which bears most sway against Grace and
Christ: It descants not about other men's lets and maladies, but looks at her
own in special, saying, I doubt not but others find their own home and
bosom hindrances, let me see to mine own, for other men's shall not hurt me. I
feel a very stout heart loath to take a reproof, blustering at any that
should tax me! what? Do they know what I am, my parts! or thus, I feel a very
froward spirit, God himself must not cross and unsettle me, lest I fly in his
face! or thus, I feel a stiff heart of Self, loath to do good, to
sympathize the necessities of others, (so I may fare well my self) by
visiting, by advising, admonishing, instructing them. I say each one has his
peculiar ails and humors, which take off the edge of grace in him, and all
because there is not that meekness, tenderness and brokennesse of spirit,
there wants the power of Christ to bear down such distempers: But the Spirit
of Grace encounters every special disease, discovers to every man his own,
abandons that spirit which reigns in an hypocrite, who can make a pretty
shift, till his own baseness be found out, but then he buskells and takes on
like a mad man. Not so here: For the Spirit of the Lord Jesus is a Spirit of
sagacity and search, never linning till it can follow her self by the sent and
footings, to her very den, and there strives to drive her out of her hold by
violence.

For why? It presents to the soul the safety and happiness of
selfe-discovery, This mark cleared.
and the infinite danger of the contrary; causes it to delight in the
convincing of her conscience, and to be loath to foster in herself any such
michiefe, as might destroy her own hopes. She sees how hypocrites do exchange
Self with Self, but purge it not out wholly; desires to resign up her chief
fort and freehold to the Spirit of Grace without tergiversation or shifting.
And so, she cries out heartily to the Spirit of Grace, Lord how long shall
this close enemy of mine maintain her self against thine authority, and try
masteries with thy Spirit? Have thou not yet a further strength to cast down
this bulwark? Oh! if thou shall cast out this defilement to the bottom, so,
as I may feel a sweetness in thee to supply and equal it, how sweet a mercy
shall I count it?

Beloved, search your selves by this. Can you say of all these dregs of Self,
Oh, that I might be rid of them at once! Oh, when shall that happy day come!
When shall I feel the Spirit of Grace thus working to put all out of question!
that which is the bane of the false heart, is the chief joy of a sound one!
when shall I feel my soul as sensibly sustained by the Word, as ever I have
been by Self? Oh! if now the hour were come, that all the unclean pleasures
I have taken in my own bottom and selfe-ends, were quasht, how should I
rejoice! And yet I know well what I must forgo, even that which has been my
meat and drink and pastime: but I speak advisedly and in cool blood, I
should be glad of it, and hazard all, and I know they should be as dross to
me! if thou can truly profess this, thine estate is comfortable.

And hereto I may add this, as a fifth mark, that the Spirit of Grace settles
and compounds all those objections and cavills whereby Self labors to rivet
her self in the soul; she passes sentence against Self, 5. Mark. It
answers all objections of Self.
and when Self has spent her self in all she can say to hold the soul in
her chains, yet the Spirit of Grace is stronger for Grace, then Self for
corruption. Notwithstanding all her ease, loathnesse to part, advantage to the
flesh, difficulty of believing, pretenses and colors, yet so it is, Grace will
bear the sway and persuades the soul to cast her out. She is as those men of
Juda, whose words were stronger for David, 2 Samuel 19 43.
then the words of the men of Israel. So that let Self dispute what she can
against mercy, yet mercy is that which at last the poor soul must betake her
self to, sooner or later; and better at first, while the heart is tender and
willing to take pains, then at last, when she is sapped and soked in Self.
Grace is the thing she aims at, and although she have had many turnagaines and
discouragements, yet till she rests there, and sets down her stafe upon the
promise, she shall have no rest or peace in her spirit, and therefore, bearing
down all difficulties, cavills and pulbacks, she resolves upon Grace and the
freedom of mercy: This cannot an hypocrite reach unto: for, either he is
resolved to be as he is, or else proceeds on in a continual staggering: If the
former, then he is hardened, and will be as he is, if he be in an error, he
will live and dye in it, he will not change his estate for any man's, he
desires to be in no better case then he is. If the latter, then he is always
devising of one shift or other to delude his own conscience when it checks him
for unsoundnesse, making it his trade, to daube it with untempered mortar.
Contrary to both, the Spirit of Grace causes the soul to be informed of her
own danger, to be content to hear of the hardest, to amend any errors which
have misled her, though with much pain, searing or lancing, medicines or
plasters, she is willing to undergo any hardship for a cure, and will refuse
nothing, so she may be rid of an unsafe condition: and although she knows this
devil will not out without foming and raging and much opposition, yet she does
as the husbandman does, Eccles. 11 4.
who knows if he should observe wind and rain, he should neither sow nor
reap: So the Spirit of Grace waits not while the coast be clear and all
objections of Self be answered (for she holds her own and will not be answered)
but breaks through the host of all cavills, to come to the bare promise, and
when she cannot untie each knot by picking it, she takes her sword and cuts
them in two at once, that the soul may be at liberty. Zachar. 5.11.
And (as the Prophet speaks of carrying the Ephah into the land of Shinar) so
does the Spirit of Grace carry this resistance of Self far away from the
soul, whence it may never return any more to pester her in the maine point of
resolving to cast her self nakedly upon Grace and Christ.

Sixthly, Grace opposes Self, by setting Self against Self, 6. Mark. It sets
Self against Self.
and thereby wearing her in her own way, that she may forsake it and take a
better. Hence it comes to pass, that when the soul has long traded with her
own affections, devotions and duties, satisfying her self with the warmth of
her own feathers, the Lord sets another Self against them, that is, suffers
some moral distempers to rise up in them, as peevishness, wandering after fond
and frothy vanities, an inconstancy of spirit to unsettle them, contenting
themselves with the creature, any shred of it, eating and drinking, padling in
the world or about carnal objects which formerly they despised: and why these?
Surely that they might be gastered by the worse from the better, and being
beaten from Self in both kinds, might resolve to fasten upon that which might
bottom them upon Christ. I have observed it in sundry, even of tender and good
affections, that through fear and weakness could not be persuaded to cast
themselves upon the only free and unchangeable truth of the promise, there to
settle and to rest in Christ's bosom without strugglings or distempers of their
own base distrust; therefore the Lord has suffered them to be exceedingly
disguised and burdensome to themselves by the contrary qualities of sloth,
ease, wearisomenesse, deadness, formality, wrath and other baser evils. Their
former love of the word has turned to indifferency whether they hear or no;
their painful hearings, meditatings with some life and savor, praying with
devout hearts and fervency, with like care and jealousy in their other course,
has wanzed and waxed wearisome; and those evils which I named, have come in
their room; and when they have felt these pricks in their flesh to buffet
them: Oh! how sad and unsettled have they been? As a bone out of joint, fit
for nothing? Yea, how sullen with God, quarrelling, as if they never had any
good wrought in them, and sometimes ready to give over all in a tech and mood:
Why, (I pray you) does the Lord leave such painful souls to such
disguisements? Has he delight to cross them, to break the bruised reed, or
to quench the smoking flax? No doubtless. Try your selves (good brethren)
whether or no this has been your condition? And if it have, know that the
Lord is just to deal thus with you (although ye have not perhaps provoked him
by an ill conscience, by running to evil or wilful rejecting of the means)
even because you still rest upon your own bottomes, and ascribe to your duties
and affections: he would pull ye off from these, and draw you to set your
souls upon better objects.

I know what objection you will make by and by: That you have also (as much as
in you has lain) strove against all resting in any affections of your own,
truth: is there not within you a secret loathnesse to give up your own
bottom, hopes and hold, to the mere freedom of eternal mercy? Or have you
not kept a false measure within you, that is, to mix your selves with mercy,
being loath to deny your selves, your feelings, zeal, labors and devotions?
Have you cast these out, and come under the power and authority of the Word? I
fear there is such a pad in the straw; If there be not, it is some sin against
conscience which has wasted you, which must be abhorred: but if it be as I
have said, alas! poor souls, then wonder not that God has crossed you: for it
is for good, even to fasten you to himself, and above all means, to acquaint
you with his own power, who in the midst of these distempers of yours can
forgive you, can embrace you with mercy, and find in his heart to love you:
(even then when perhaps you could bite your tongues because you are so bad:)
and this, if you can believe it, will carry meat in the mouth, when all your
own mixtures must vanish. Try your selves by this mark, whether the Spirit of
Grace have so wildred you in the best and most pleasing ways of your own, Esaias
26.
till he have driven you into your chambers to hide your selves there under the
secret of the Almighty, under that free, infinite, full covert of the promise,
till the evil be overpast. Tell me (brethren) when you can feed and revive
your spirits at this feast, and warm your selves at this fire, is it not high
holy day with you? Find you not a difference between this and your own
sparks? Be content then, resign up your souls to this work, and say, the
Lord has done you no wrong to weane you from your own breasts, that you might
suck at his promises.

Seventhly and lastly, the Spirit of Grace opposes Self in all her errors and
subtilties. For the former, Self is a great blinder of the eyes and causes the
soul to sleep in a whole skin: she does so baffle her self, with her own
shows and forwardness, that she doubts not, but her estate is good. She
says with Iehu, 2 Kings 9.
Come and see the zeal which I have for the Lord of Hosts. But the Spirit of
Grace is a Spirit of discerning between error and truth, it seperates between
the precious and the vile, gives clearness to the eyes of the simple, Psalm. 19.
causing them to judge according to the grounds of the word, which cannot
deceive, and to distrust, her own conjecturall and slight bottomes. Truth is
able to approve both her self and her contrary: whereas error can comprehend
neither truth nor her own vanity. And secondly, she discovers those subtilties
of Self. It were endless to mention them: by a few judge of the rest.
Sometime she is so slye, that when her affections and duties forsake her, Ezekiel.
14.
and her Idols from between her breast: Therein she is as she was. Again a
third subtilty is, that she will spare her own lazy skin, and cut her self
off from those more convincing ordinances and more pertinent and seasonable
means for her own good, by putting herself upon such as are lawful and good
in their kind; as to avoid close attendance to reading of the word, by singing
of a Psalm; also prayer by reading a Chapter; instead of secret and private
prayer, she will choose to pray with others, or in family, or upon a book;
instead of extraordinary duties, she will content herself with her ordinary
hours; and all to show, that she is glad to put off the Lord and save
herself harmless with as small a pittance and as poor measures of spirit
and courage as may be. And commonly when Self pitches upon her course, this is
her property, she is loose with God in the best means.



Second general. How the Spirit of grace that it serves wholly for Grace. In
three things. 1. In discovering the mystery of it.
Now for the second general; a second mark of the Spirit of Grace is, That it
serves wholly for Grace: And that both in the discovery of Grace, in the
effects of that discovery, and the end of it. For the first of these. The
Spirit of Grace is all for Grace, in the discovery of the mystery of it, the
amplenesse, largeness, height, depth and length of it to the poor soul, that
it may appear in all the excellency and fullness, freedom, bounty,
unchangeablenesse and well be teamingnesse thereof; that no corner of it may lie
hidden from the heart of a sinner, so far as may further him in the bottoming
of the soul in mercy. This is a singular and peculiar act of the Spirit,
tending to this end, that the soul may not stagger about the sufficiency of
Grace which God offers unto her; but may behold the power of the Priesthood of
Christ, once offering up himself as a complete and spotless sacrifice and
satisfaction for the sins of the elect, needing no more to be offered; able to
procure from the Father endless well pleasednesse and acceptance, also a free
offer of reconciliation, and to create in the soul alone and of it self,
(without any antecedent free will, liking and cooperating of Self) a most
sufficient clearing of conscience from guilt and fear, yesterday, Heb. 10.3.
Heb. 13.8.
to day and for ever. This cannot sink into the heart of an hypocrite; he
cannot be persuaded that there is enough in the Lord Jesus alone, to discharge
him in the Court of heaven; the offer and promise are empty notions with him,
to sway all his strength upon; neither dare he rest thereupon with peace
without a further addition of his own feelings. But the Spirit of Grace
grounds the poor soul in this, as the maine work of all, that so all the
building may subsist thereon; and makes sure retreat and refuge for her in the
midst of her distress, that her foundation may not be shaken. I wish that the
method of that Epistle to the Hebrews, especially in the 7.8.9.10. Chap. might
well be observed to the understanding of this act of the Spirit.

Secondly, the Spirit of Grace does not only offer such a light to the Esaias
5^.19.
to claspe upon this gift of mercy; and includes this gift in the offer, as
knowing that it were in vain to offer the one, without working the other. And
hereby he causes the soul to lay hold upon his strength and ablity to save,
(as having received a ransom sufficient:) which is no other, saving the
writing of his covenant in the fleshy tables of her heart, Esaias 27 4.5.
prepared by himself for the nonce.

And moreover, that all this he has done of his own free will and motion,
without any former principle acting him to intend it, or concurring with him to
create it: I say, he has done it of himself, as judging it meet for himself
to do (whatsoever we be) and for the glory of his Name: No entreaty of men or
Angels, no difficult terms of persuasion caused it: but it flowed naturally
from him, as most honorable to his Majesty to do.

Romans 10.
belonging to her, not to be rejected, or thrust away from her, except she
will perish. These, together with the infinite benefit of receiving it, and
the endless loss in forgoing it (as being the only remedy) do marvellously
stablish the thoughts upon it, and ravish the affections with it, so that lays
a most sad charge upon the poor soul (upon pain of forfeiting her peace for
ever) not to pass it by slightly, deadly, and formally; but to view and
meditate of it savourly, deep y, unw^ariedly, with admiration, till by this
mirror of beholding the Lord with open face, she be transformed to the
gloriousnes of this grace, and carried, 2 Cor. 3. end.
yea left in the stream thereof by the Spirit of the Lord. This for the first
of the three particulars.

The second, is the effect of this presenting work of the Spirit. And that is
union: The second work the effect hereof, viz. Union.
Whereby the Spirit of Grace shows the soul into what a condition she is
translated by faith in the promise. That is, she is made one with the Lord
Jesus thereby, and really partaker of all his good things, true peace,
contentment in blessings, crosses, all conditions, freedom from all former
garboiles, fears, enemies, joy in God and his salvation, never to be divorced
from him any more. This causes the soul to shake off that wearisomenesse of
Self, never settled; that bottomelessenesse, never grounded; that inconstancy
and vanity, never at rest: and why? Because it had no real good to fasten
upon, and to determine those restless desires of hearts: But now, the Lord
Jesus himself both in his present grace and hope of glory to come, runues in
her stream, or rather turns hers into his: so that look what Self was to
her before, emptily and barrenly: now Christ is in her stead. Christ is the
Self of the soul; he is all in all to her, acts her, comforts her, stays
her, quickens her, guides, upholds her in all straits and troubles. As Self
was a body of death in her before, easily besetting her; so is Christ now a
very real being of Truth and Grace, a very life of being and welfare unto her.
Now the soul is willing to shake off Self, because she has a better thing in
possession; which frees her from the old yrkesomenesse, vanity, bondage and
unsubsistence, which before she was disquieted with. Oh! it is a wonderful
privilege to a poor soul, that whereas before it was tedious to her to muse
of the promise, to deny her own hopes, flashes and pangs, to cleave to the
bottom of another out of herself: now all these are become sweet unto her,
because Christ is now instead of Self unto her, even all in all. Before it was
a violent work to apply the soul to meditation; for she was out of the
element of Grace; but now she counts it familiar work, because the presence of
Christ has made it so: a mercy more worth, then all the world beside, when
she considers duly of it. Before she was haled as a Bear to the stake, to
the word, to the sacraments, to other ordinances, duties: now she has
fellowship with them as her own, even as she is Christ's: before she knew not
what to make of herself, her affections, her desires; but now she is able to
discern what God has done for her and her affections, mournings and duties,
stand not up in the room of Christ, but flow from him safely, and return to
him, as the waters to the sea, whence they came. Oh! what odds is there
between the dead life of Self, moving the soul heavily, as Pharaohs charet
wanting their wheels; and the living life of Christ, always affording some
warmth, vigor, breath and motion to the soul, and assuring her that is not
from herself, but from a principle without, which will not fail her: Oh! this
second Adams quickening spirit, is as far above that dead principle of Self, as
a living creature is above an Image.

Thirdly, the Spirit of Grace draws the soul to the end of Grace! The third
is the end.
to behold the purpose of God in declaring the riches of that mercy, by which
he saved a sinner: that he might purchase more glory to himself, then good to
the soul. Of this I spoke before by another occasion: only note this, that the
Spirit carries Self out of the soul hereby. For when the soul is ravished
with the view of those excellencies of God manifested by redemption, she loses
herself as in a stream, as being ashamed to think that she should so basely
struggle for that, by her own strength, which only the Spirit of the promise
can conduct her unto, for the ends of the promise, serving to make the Lord
admirable in his Saints: Oh! how is the soul ashamed, yea confounded for her
own folly, that she should go about the fadoming of so bottomless depth,
with her own bucket! I conclude these three branches with renewing my
exhortation: Try your selves by these, whether the Spirit of Grace be in you
or no; for if it be, it has the promise of a full bottom to stablish the
soul upon, it has brought realnesse of comfort and peace into it, and it has
carried it into the sea of the riches of grace, so that it can make songs of
the Lords deliverance, with more admiration, then if the inheritance of a
Prince had befalne it. I cannot insist now any longer. So much for the second
mark, that the Spirit of Grace is for Grace.

To make an end, a third and last mark of the Spirit of Grace is, The third
mark is, The calm proceeding of this Spirit of Grace.
that it goes forward calmely and softly in her pursuit of the promise,
without any carnal striving and violence of Self, much less fretting and
distemper of spirit upon Gods delays. She teaches the soul to wait upon the
Lord and harken what he would say to his Saints, for he will speak peace to
them, that they may not return to folly, their old selfe-staggering,
unsettlednesse or bondage: The Spirit of Grace is much like the Temple of
Solomon; it loves not to hear the din of Self to disquiet it, Psalm. 85.8.
as hammers and tools might not be used in the building of the other. 1 King.
6.7.
While he is at work, he cannot endure Self to disturb him: he will raise up
the frame himself, we must only say, Grace, grace unto it, but he will both
lay the foundation and corner stone, Zach. 4.7.
and set the building upon it, and it shall prosper in his hands. Suffer we our
selves orderly, and by degrees to be led from step to step, without turning off
on the right hand or the left, meekely and patiently attending his leisure in
our innocence; and use of means; and foist not any secret weights of our own
into the balance, as if the Lord were not alone able to perfect his own
work: only let there be no stops in our own spirits, to set back or quench
this Spirit of Grace, under the pretense of our quiet and patient waiting: 1
These. 5.
A point which no hypocrite can discern. If he be bidden to rest, he leaves
his diligence, and waxes idle; whereas true stri^^ and true rest go together;
and a poor soul so rests from his self striving, that yet he continues his
selfe-denying diligence in the use o^ means: Esaias 30.
Try your selves also in this; but I remember I have touched ^o^ part before,
when I spoke of the violence of Self. This shall therefor suffice to have
spoken touching the marks of this Spirit of Grace, and the several branches
thereof.

Now in a word, for the other piece of the question, how this Spirit of Grace
may be attained? Quest 2. H^w this Spirit of grace may be attained.
I answer briefly, First, be earnest in prayer to God for it (for the Spirit of
Grace and supplication are joined together, Zach. 12.10. That both the Lord
would cast down this strong castle of Self, and raise up the strong fort of
his own salvation upon the ruins Sampson to David would never cross Adonija
from his youth, and that made him such a good one) but abridge our selves of
our wills even in some lawful liberties, 1 King. 1.6.
and abstain from many things which others permit to themselves: diet our
selves daily as those which run for a prize; and that may somewhat inure us
to deny our selves in this great work of 1 Cor. 9.25.
Tie our selves closely to the duties of our places and callings, and be not
too indulgent to our backs, bellies, companies, travells, and the like sensual
recreations and contentments: many men affect such a bre^th in the uttermost of
their liberties and jollitie, that their very garb bewraies them to be men
who savor not much of denying themselves: go to the Lord often with this
thorn in thy heel, and bemoane thy pain unto him, 2 Cor. 12.6.
till he ease thee! as Paul did, and ceased not, till the Ieconia (long after
his obedience to the Prophet Jeremy, Jerem. 52.31.
to yield up himself to the King of Babel) was so honored by God, as to
become of a vassal and captive, a favorite, and to be nourished from the Kings
own dish, to have a portion of meat from him daily: meditation of the Pearl,
Matthew. 13.44. caused the Merchant to sell all and buy it. How does Paul Phil.
3. heat his heart with the Lord Jesus, till he cast out himself as dung?
D^vid Psalm. 73. recovers himself out of his temptation of distrust and
impatience by meditation, and then breaks out, Whom have I in heaven but thee!
Luke 2.51.
Mary bred Christ in her soul, by pondering the message of the Angel against
her fear and doubting. Nothing a greater nourisher of Self then unacqaintance
and slothful neglect of the promise.

Again, behold the practice of the Saints, both in Scripture and experience,
both living and dying, Heb. 13.7.
how they have molded their souls into the truth of God, and have been content
to hazard their own salvation, thereupon saying, if I perish, I perish: Let
also (as I touched before) the afflictions Jam. 4.4.
discontents, either with men, or with providence and Gods administrations,
that please us not: for these moral distempers will defile us spiritually, if
we be not aware of it. Seek not honor, repute, respect and acknowledgement
from men, let God alone with these, Joh. 5.44.
and let us not for such base scurfe (yet highly set by in the world) destroy
the work of God. Oh! beloved, consider what I have said of this weighty
argument, and the Lord give us understanding in all things! for mine own part,
I have cause to mourn, that notwithstanding all I have spoken, I have so small
hope to prevail with men, because I go against their edge, and speak
riddles, to men of another metal! What are we but signs and spectacles to men
and devils in preaching these doctrines? What serve we for, save to harden
their hearts? For they will fulfill the doctrine, and Self is like to quash
their hopes when all is done! The Lord prevent it in you for his mercies sake.
And so much also shall suffice for this whole use of exhortation, to them that
seek conversion.

Now concerning the latter branch of Exhortation, 2. Branch of Exhortation.
Gods people must practice self-denial in their conversation.
to them who (through mercy) are converted already: Let me urge this upon them,
so much the rather to deny all for Christ and his name; by how much they have
already obtained favor to count all as dross in respect of pardon and
reconciliation: If in the former respect that of our Savior be true, how much
more in the latter; He that will be my Disciple must deny all, (if the case so
require) take up his cross and follow me: And the truth is, such are the times
we now live in, that I am (in a manner) forced to add this point of use to the
former. For, you must know, the former is secret from the view of men (though
one day it shall be known to men and Angels) so that we should do men a
world of wrong, if we should judge them to be other then selfe-denyers and
believers. Matthew. 16. end.
But indeed, there is another self-denial a consequent upon faith and that is
an outward renouncing of our selves, and selling our selves out of all our
profits, pleasures, ease and liberties for the name, the truth of doctrine, the
profession of Christ in power; That rather then we would betray these to the
enemies thereof, neither liberties nor lives should be dear to us: Now herein
what do men? Alas! they show that either they never knew what it meant to cast
out Self, to receive Christ, or else they have found a narrow distinction
between bark and tree, to save themselves harmless: viz. That although they
deny themselves inwardly for him never so, yet they have a dispensation, so
that outwardly they will not lose a dram of wealth, credit, maintenance,
ease, love of wife, child, will or appetite for his sake. And at this plat the
world of our professors now fall off: Causes.
They love Christ with their hearts, but they will Why most men so little deny
themselves for Christ?
To deny a man's self for Christ, requires a better bottom then they have any:
The Lord Jesus never denied himself to the death for the redemption of their
souls, never gave himself as a price to wrath for their pardon and peace: The
Apostle Romans tells us, Doubtless for a good man one would be content to dye:
Christ has not been a good Christ to them, for if he had, they would deny
themselves to the death for him. They are upon their own bottom still: their
own ease, will, health, pleasures, life and liberties are too dear to them;
they love them as pretiously, as a zealous Christian loves Christ; therefore
they will part with nothing for him. If Christ were their Self, their inner
man, their joy and content, they would cleave to him as their natural and
beloved object; The truth has not made them free; for if it had, they would
forsake all for it, and buy it whatsoever it cost them, but not sell it,
whatsoever they might have for it.

Besides, they know not what spirit they are of; while peace lasts, then they
must quite make forfeit of. If they knew whom to trust for amends, or could
believe that hundred fold requital for God and his Gospel, which is promised
to all that lose any thing for him; Oh! it would lithe their hearts exceedingly
to suffer any thing for him! To Elisha asked Gehazi, Is this a season to
purchase olives and vineyards, and menservants or maidservants? They consider
not what poor

And sithence it fares thus, let all whom it concerns, Counsels to help
this. Exhortation.
to approve their faith and fidelity to the Lord Jesus (as it does concern all
who will not prove hypocrites) now in these woeful days, strive for the
holding up and preserving the entire honor and esteem of Christ and his Grace,
his truth, profession and Gospel, both in their own souls with sincerity, and
before men without shame or cowardice. Consider (poor soul) by whose strength
thou stand: do not look too wisely upon next hand examples of staggerers and
timeservers, though perhaps thou have admired them for their zeal and gifts:
know them by their fruits; stagger not at their revolts: But look to Jesus the
author and finisher of thy faith, Heb. 12.2.
who for the hope set before him, and the love to thy soul and salvation,
despised the shame, and endured the cross: Behold (if examples do so much
affect thee) the patterns of those faithful ones, who in all ages have borne
witness to Jesus, and not esteemed their credits, or goods, or lives, so that
they might vindicate the glory of Christ, and discharge the trust which in
baptism, and much more in their conversion to God was committed to them; to be
faithful soldiers, and to contend for the truth, against Devil and his
instruments, the world and their own fleshly self-love: The Lord has had in
all ages some who have though it a business of importance to stick to Christ
and his honor, whatsoever it cost them; although thy strength be small, the
trialls of the malicious sharp and fiery as darts; yet if thou can deny
thine own self, humble thy soul, be little in thine own eyes, be above
thine own ends and sensuality: Then that God who has suffered thousands of
subtle selfe-loving hypocrites to fall on thy right hand, and thy left, shall
keep thee safe in the midst under the covert of the wings, and shadow of his
Almighty power. Psalm. 92.7. Counsels.
And to this end and purpose, first, get faith in Trialls, (more precious then
gold,) and look not to suffer for Christ by thine

David's servants, and apply it to truth, thou art worth ten thousand of us,
if we fall, there be others to raise up in our stead; but if thou fall, how
irrecoverable is thy loss? And say not, this truth or that, I could suffer
for, but such and such I dare not; for if thou honor not God in denying thy
own cavils, and suffering for any truth, perhaps thou shall be so left to thy
selfe-shifts, and snared by thine own treachery, that either God will deny
thee an heart, or the honor to suffer in greater truths, if occasion serve.

Thirdly, know for certain, God will have a day to try thee, what cost those
who are firm to him, and bear him hearty loyal affection, from the hollow
and false. If Abraham, Hezechia, Jonah, Peter, wanted not their trialls, (of
whom some stuck to God, others warped) shall thou escape? Nay if God would try
Saul and Jeroboam and Iehu, so deeply, will he pass thee over? No be not
such a fool as to think that thou shall escape in a mist; swim always in a
calm sea, and run a smooth course; for as verily as God is true, thou shall
be tried, yea perhaps many ways, one after another. Resolve thy self, it is
no slight thing in Gods esteem to try his: if he should leave them without
trialls, (whereof all sons are partakers) they were bastards: Heb. 12.8.
it is dross and no oar which is not worth the trying: easy duties of
praying, hearing and worship are no trialls for Gods close people in these
days, he will have other trialls for them; and although perhaps thou had
escaped many winds and blasts, yet he will have some direct and opposite wind
to try thee to the quick, ere the Lord have done with thee. Self had need
have trialls as Gideons soldiers.

Upon these considerations, apply this exhortation briefly to thy self.
Application of all in two duties.
Be for him that has been for thee even the Lord Jesus, be for his glory and
honor to thy uttermost. I will commend but two passages to thee. First in the
fear of God (my beloved) be sure that you deny your selves for God in the
point of doing for him. Secondly, 1. To do all for God.
in the matter of suffering; in both which thy whole obedience stands. I urge
no exactness but such as the Gospel both promises and affords to a believing
soul; only I exclude treachery and falsehood. For the former, aim at God, and
deny thy self in thy doings and duties, in thy worship and use of means, in
thy special calling and condition of life. This will inure thee to the latter
self-denial in suffering: Throughout thy whole conversation of life toward
God and man, thou shall find, that (from the center of self-love) the Devil
will teach thee to draw lines of crookedness and obliquity, warping from God,
and tending to it self. The soul cannot endure to be under the authority of
God, either commanding, promising, or threatening; it has a breadth of her own,
in the narrow of God, See Hos. 10.1.
and where she can fleece away ought from him and his ends to herself she is
safe; yea where the duties are strictest, she bewraies most a false heart,
which being pincht in the point of her own ends, is ready to cast all in the
dirt. In fasting, what pleasure can the soul find to herself, instead of
soul afflicting? Esaias 58.3.4.
Much more then in ordinary duties she will dispense and seek herself. In
men's buyings and sellings, how do they foist in a dreg of seeking themselves,
loath to lie close to the rule, to do as they would be done too? In preaching
the solemn truths of God, what a deal of selfe-honour and men-pleasing
creeps into the duty? What duties, means or graces are there, which are void
of this dead fly? Witness the innumerable dispensations which this libertine
age seeks to herself in all her ways; in fashions, attires, recreations,
worldly dealings, lending, letting, hyring and borrowing: In the duty of prayer
how scanty, seldom, carnal, are we? Looking sometime more at them that hear
us, or at the setnesse of our sentences, edge of our own affections, then at
Gods awful presence, our own abasement, or the special ends that concern
us? What causes so little mourning and fasting for the sins and sorrows that
are upon us, or hang over us? Self-love; every man looks to his own matters,
his own griefs, losses take up all his tears and desires? What causes
Magistrates to be so partial and connivent at offenders, at drunkards,
breakers of the Sabbath? Self-love, they are afraid to be noted to be
precizer then needs, they seek their own bribes or ease; men are loath to
disquiet themselves for God or conscience: Whence comes our murmuring under our
crosses, or our sottishness and insensiblenesse under them? Both from
self-love; either tenderness to our own skin, or loathnesse to be at any
cost to search out the causes, to humble the soul, or to repent: loathnesse (I
say) to lay any thing to heart: What is the cause of so many jarres and
janglings among Christians, for mere trifles, to the dishonor of God and
their communion? Self-love, that seeks her own ease and profit, little
looking how others fare; Christians in general will profess self-denial,
yet take pritches, discontents: Endless it were to mention all: learn we to
seek God in all we do, and whatsoever we find our conscience to accuse us
of, as an excrement and superfluity of our own, beware we nourish it not in
our selves, lest it poison the carriage, the bent and stream of our endeavors
with singularity, hypocrisy, and self-love. Shake off conceits, rash
surmizes, tetches, enmities, sullen froward humors.

2. In suffering.
Lastly, be not only willing and well content to bear for God, (if we be
called to it justly without thrusting our selves upon troubles) but especially
labor to quite our selves well in our sufferings. True it is, to shun God,
and seek our selves, our own ease and welfare, betraying our conscience, is a
fearful treachery; but yet, there is a further mischief then this to be
shunned; and that is, be we sure that we suffer for God, and have him that
knows our hearts to bear us witness, that (setting aside humane frailty) the
sincere aim of our hearts in suffering, is, the promoting of the glory of God,
and the entire and tender respect we have to preserve his truth inviolable:
There is a white devil corrupting us in the bent and aim of our sufferings,
as well as a black, to dissuade us from suffering at all: one Devil (under
two colors) aims at this, either at the loss of our souls, when we wickedly
seek to save our selves from suffering, or the loss of the honor of our
sufferings, when we lose our reward, through our base and hollow seeking our
own selves. Such as suffer in these days for Christ, had need be well
bottomed, and carried upon such grounds as will bear us out and save our
stake. For, such as suffer out of a proud, presumptuous singularity of their
own, to be thought some body, hoping they shall be able to lick themselves
whole by some outward encouragements, or otherwise rush upon crosses in their
heat and rashness; are like (in such a world as this) to meet with a wrong
match of it. And we have seen some examples before our eyes to verify this by
woeful experience, Note this experience.
that others may learn by their shame and harms, to beware of their
selfe-heate and rashness. The Devil getting ground, and the cause of God
losing exceedingly by such Merchant venturers, not to speak of the shipwreck
that such make of their own peace. Suffer therefore for Christ; and suffer so
for him, that thy conscience may stand by thee for the sincerity of thine
intentions; and the Spirit of glory shall rest upon thee, and with Stephen, he
(whose cause thou suffer for) shall discover himself unto thee, not only
in his allowing of thee, 1 Pet. 4.14. Acts 7.55.
but his crowning of thee both here with the honor of suffering, and hereafter
with glory for suffering, as 1 Pet. 4. end, and in neither respect will he
suffer thee to repent or be ashamed. But I must not here (in this use of
addition and by consequent) run out into a common place; some other fitter
occasion will offer it self for this purpose. Thus much shall serve for the
whole exhortation; and so for the whole doctrine of Self, so far as the Lord
has given grace. Now what shall I say, (brethren) for conclusion, but press
us all to seek God, who suffers not his raines and dew to return in vain,
Esaias 55.9.
but to fructify his truth in the hearts of his own people, that he would not
withdraw his blessing from this doctrine, which we have at large insisted on
in this and the former Sermon? Let us pray, that with Paul's planting, and
Apollo's watering, God would give increase.

THE SEVENTH LECTVRE upon the words following in the twelfth Verse.
VERSE XII. VERSE 12. Are not Abana and Pharfar, rivers of Damascus, better
then all the waters of Israel? may I not wash in them and be clean? So he went
away in a rage, etc.

VERSE 13. Then his servants came near, and spoke unto him, and said, Father,
if the Prophet had said some great thing, etc.


2 Kings
IN the former verse (beloved in the Lord) we have examined the ground of
Naamans distaste of the Prophets message: and that was (as we have showed) a
prejudice or pre-conceit of a way of his own devising, The clear ng of the
coherence, and sense of this verse.
without bottom or ground of truth. Touching the which, as we noted whence it
came, even from the root of Self, so we raised a general ground of doctrine
from it; and have said what God has suggested unto our thoughts, concerning
the reasons, openings, and several uses of it, repeating nothing thereof: let
us come forward to this twelfth verse. For although the holy Ghost does omit
sundry passages of this story (as the thing was carried) yet he will not have
us ignorant of any material thing, which might profit us: And therefore here
he relates the amplification of Naamans distaste, from a second allegation of
his; and that is, from a supply of Self, by carnal reason. No two friends in
the world are so ready to succor each other at a pinch, as carnal reason is
at hand to succor Self. The more is said, the worse the disease rankles; but
yet that which sound reason cannot make good, lo, carnal reason must be feign
to supply. A poor help (I grant) but a poor one is better then none with a
corrupt heart. If the former answer and bottom of his distaste had been as
good as it was large, he had not now needed to have multiplied so many words as
he does: but being crazie in them, he must make that good with words which
wants substance: and therefore he now comes in with an argument of another
kind to stiffen himself in his former conceit, drawn from the nature of the
message it self; to wit, that it was unlikely, ridiculous, and in truth (upon
point) impossible: And therefore he did well to turn away and be angry, as he
was.

The words come to thus much, as if he had said: How he ba^keth one evil with
another.
There was cause enough to reject the Prophets answer, because it crosses mine
expectation; my thoughts were far otherwise then his message, I looked he
would have come himself and dispatched it; therefore I had reason enough before
to recoile from his answer: But now, put case my conceit be ungrounded, and I
my self faulty therefore; yet, let me but examine the message it self, as it
lies, and there is great cause to distaste it, in that regard also. For why?
What sense or reason is there in it? Forsooth he bids me go wash in Jordan?
And what likelihood is there that Jordan should heal leprosy? When was it
ever heard of till now? What need Israel have one Leper in it, if Jordan will
heal him? And, sure I am, if waters were able to do it, then much more would
better waters do it. We have two famous rivers in Damascus, Abana and Pharfar
by name, far purer streams, and (in repute) better waters, then either
Jordan, or any other waters of Israel whatsoever: And, if they never healed a
Leper, much less (I trow) can Jordan. This being thus, who should blame me for
rejecting this message? Yea, for distemper and anger? Can flesh and blood
endure to be sent for to a Prophet, and to be thus mocked? I conclude
therefore, his meaning is nothing less, then to cure my disease: he does but
try my patience, and put a trick upon me, and so my labor is lost. This is the
view of this verse. Now, what does all this amount unto? Surely (in a word) to
confute and outcavill the message, by carnal reason, and such absurdities as
might grow thence. For why? He disputes thus; This message is against common
sense, unlikely, yea impossible to reason, therefore ridiculous and false; the
consequence of it makes it absurd: for (I say again) if waters would heal,
what need any to be Lepers in Israel? And why may not better waters much
better do it? Therefore, away, talk no further to me of it, leave me to my
self, no man shall beat out my brains, or ever persuade me to that which common
sense does so notoriously contradict.

But, O Naaman! whither will thou? The absurdity of his reason.
Is it not too much for thee to be mad with Self, but thou will also be mad
with reason? In thy former answer thou playedst but the fool: for what
although thou thoughtst so and so? Was the Prophet tied to thy thoughts? Or
could the Prophet do more or less without warrant from God? Came thou to a
Physician with a fee, or to God for a miracle? If to God, why suffer thou
not him to cast the skole, and to work his own way, and to confute thine? And
now in this latter answer, thou will be mad with reason. For why? Put case the
way of washing in Jordan be irrational and nonsense to thy wit and reason;
and what though there be still so many in Israel unhealed? And what if Abana
be a purer stream? Do thou come to the Prophet to be cured by plasters,
and by skill of a man, or by the power of God? If this latter, why art thou so
mad as to tie a superior cause to the inferior? Or to judge that to be the
health of thy disease, which is but a sign? Or to run to the creature from the
Divinity and Omnipotency of a Creator? Or, what have thou to do to run to
other Lepers? Or to compare Jordan with other waters? Look thou up to God,
whose power exceeds all thy sense, who seeks the honor of his own work, not
of a creature, and be content to be cured against and above all reason and
sense, so thou may be really cured: It is thy privilege above all other
Lepers in Israel, to be thus cured by Elisha. Cavil not therefore against thy
privilege: it is not Jordans water more then any other (by any virtue of it)
which must heal thee (for then indeed Abana might do it as well or better)
but the God and ruler of Jordan and all creatures to serve h^s will, so far
as seems best to his wisdom. Thus Naaman should have said in stead of his
cavilling. So much for the opening of this verse.

Two things then we see in this verse: First, the carnal exception here taken
by Naaman against the message, which set him further off the remedy, and
wronged him more and more of his own hope. The second, the issue and effect of
both the former answer, and this cavil: he concludes that the Prophet mocks
him, and therefore in stead of holding the former reverend esteem of his
person, now he falls downeright to rage and rail upon him, to fret and fume
at his defeat, and to turn his back homeward; rather then he will give up his
two weapons, he will needs depart and go home, a most nasty Leper as he came.

Naamans exception, and the frivolousnesse of it, I might stay the Reader upon
this meditation; How full and fertile a base heart of corruption and unbelief
is of stoppes and bars to deprive it self of welfare and happiness; yea, as
one wave follows another, Corruption is full of tricks and devices to hurt
it self.
so does one cavil back another, and all to deprive it self of any blessing
which is fairly toward it. And how manifold arguments one upon the neck of
another, it can invent and devise of all sorts, to strengthen it self in her
own once conceited error? Rather then Naaman here will seem to shrink one
jot from his former hold, mark what cavils he devises against the way of God,
and his own welfare: so peremptory, so resolute, so witty and wise he is to
do himself hurt! but as for doing himself any good, to guess at any
intention of God, or the Prophet in this thing, or to call himself off from
his humor, to more advised thoughts, we see it is far from him. So true it
is (not only in Heathens) My people are wise for evil, See Jer. 4.22. Reason
of it.
both to do and to defend it; but for good, exceeding silly and sorry. For
why? Not only it is our lot to be deprived of God, and all his goodness, but
also we are depraved in all our abilities and powers of soul and body, from
coveting any recovery of it; yea more, we bend all the force of our
understandings, judgments, memories, wills and affections, to the riveting and
establishing of our spirits in that dangerous estate in which we are: There is
not a drop or dram of any propensity in us, to use any faculty of reason in us,
to any other end or purpose, save to overthrow our selves, and to implunge our
selves more deeply in our own evil: But to dream of any out-gate of misery,
or to harp upon any string of invention, art or device how to break the snare
and get out, it is a gift which is denied us, so far as unregenerate. A sign
most evident, in how well pleasing a frame and stream we conceive our selves
to be, when as all our wisdom serves for nothing else, save to devise
reasons to hold us; yea, wedge us still more desperately in our unhappy
condition: and to wrangle against whatsoever might whisper or sound toward the
fetching us out of that thraldom. Ask but a man whom God has overpoized and
persuaded by the Spirit of grace, and he will tell you, through how infinite
many cavils, objections and disswasives of flesh, the Lord has brought him to
the condition wherein he now stands: and, ere he could ever feel the stream
of his spirit framed for God, and the embracing of the message of salvation.

How many thousand fears, doubts, carnal exceptions are there in a corrupt
heart against either the t uth in general, or such or such truths of promises
in special, or the simplicity of their meaning to himself personally? As it
is said of Peter, Act^ 12.
that the Angel gave him a bunch on the to-side, and then his chains fell
off, and then he groped for his Cloak and Sandals, and then the prison gates
flew open for him to pass through, and then he was carried to the outward
gate, and the inner gate (iron doors) and till this he was not set at
freedom, nor awakened to see himself delivered. So does the Lord bring his
through manifold obstacles, objections, temptations, and the whole Army of
corrupt Arguments, which both within and without beset the soul against the
naked truth of the promise, before ever he set them at liberty.

And the truth is, only the work of regeneration is able, both to drein away
this spring and flood of contradiction, and to dry up her streams, that they
may not so abundantly flow out to bear down all the force of truth in us, or
persuade us to conversion. And the same spirit it must be which must turn our
stream to run another way, and take off this rolling door of our corruption,
from the old hinges, to open and move a contrary way.

Only Grace must consume all our base inventions which man has found out
against God: as, Eccles. 7.29. Civils against Religion: sundry of the^ named.
That this Sect of Religion is everywhere evil spoken of: If once a Christian,
ever a slave, a beggar, a fool: These Preachers tell us many tales of a tub,
against sin, and of the judgments of God, but the best is, we see not
thunder and lightning to follow and say, These Christians are so sad and
melancholic, that I am afraid I should die of no other disease, save of very
thought and care. Others Machiavil said) then to make us sound at heart, and so
cost us much pain.

To dispute for God, is a great work of grace.
And much more must the Lord turn the stream a contrary way, ere the soul wax
resolute against all such objections: and be turned to dispute for God, to
hold close to the promise, and to devise as many, as strong, and as witty
reasons for her owns salvation, as before she did against it.

Some instances of disputing for God.
To argue thus is not common: The Lord has his number, and will ever have: and
they are such as (leaving his secrets) cleave to his revealed will. Such as are
laden with their corruptions, mourn after ease; not for ease only of their
fear and guilt: but to take the yoke of Christ upon them in stead thereof:
Such (if any) may claim the promise: And such an one (through mercy) I am. Few
indeed shall be saved; but then as few lament after God till they find him:
and many glorious lights fall away; but then their light was in themselves,
they were not humble. True it is, the elect are known to God: but yet such as
will first believe, shall in time know themselves to be elect. And why should
I think my inducements to believe to be so weak or few? Nay rather, why
should not I, (if I be lead by the Spirit of Grace) turn disswasives into
perswasives, and sway all objections to the naked promise? Surely Caleb did so.
And Gods reasons are many and strong. Number. 14.5.6.
Me thinks it is a strong motive, that the Lord will leave none, but such as
forsake him first: His meaning seems very cordial unto me, when he bids a
sinner be reconciled. For why? There is bottomless patience in his heart to
forbear smiting; he has mercy cut off his own plea: he has neglected no
means to satisfy his own justice; he that would not refuse to forgo his
only son, will not lose his cost, surely he means well to a poor wretch.
He has received a ransom, declares himself to be appeased, wishes us to be
so; threatens us if we refuse: His Spirit is annexed to his offer: he allureth
draws, encourages; and yet he urges nothing at our hands, but himself
promises strength to perform; he can and will subdue the hardness of an
unwilling heart, by an irrestible prayer; he promises to rebuke Satan's subtilty
and malice, to do all our works. It is his own glory which he seeks, why
should he lose it? And why should he do that which he has done, except he
meant to perfect it?

I say thus to argue in truth, is not every ones measure, but theirs only to
whom it is given, to answer strong doubts, and to quench fiery darts: To say
with Mano' as wife, we shall not dye; Judge. 13.23.
if the Lord had meant to slay us, he would never have so far have declared
himself to us, as he has done. To say with that rare pattern, yet Lord the
dogs may eat crummes etc. so answering the objections of her Savior against
her: Matthew. 15.
To say with Job, though thou kill me, yet will I trust in thee against all the
terrors with which thou affrightest me: I say, it is the Lord who only can turn
the heart to be wise to salvation: And to be sure, as it should humble all such
cavillers, (who are always proudest of that wit which damps them most) as feel
this nature unsubdued in them; so it should raise up a special spirit of
thankfulness in all them, whom God has plucked out of all such snares,
causing them to turn their Satyrs into songs; and their invectives into
admirations: and to bless him, who has put their souls out of those
questions, which (if they were now to resolve) the greatest question would be,
whether ever they would be resolved. This I have briefly said of this point
generally; whereof much more might have been said, save that my text pitches my
thoughts upon the special cavil of Naamans carnal reason; unto which I
hasten, hoping that in this instance I shall satisfy them, who are desirous to
hear more of the general.

The second point then out of this answer of Naaman is this: Carnal reason a
great enemy to faith.
That carnal Naaman, and so it is to all, who lean thereto. For the better
conceiving of which point, first in a word, I will show what I mean by carnal
reason, what sorts of men, and in how many respects and instances it resists
the word. Secondly, I will prove the point by Scripture and sundry reasons: And
lastly, come to the uses, and therein answer one maine question, how far
forth man's wisdom may be admitted to have any thing to do in the matters of
God. Carnal reason what.
For the first, by carnal reason, I mean not the power of reasoning according
to rational and sensible grounds; nor yet the exercise of that power, in such
things as are objects of reason, I mean humane matters, which sense can judge
of. For to deny such things, were to make men mere idiots, and to disable them
from capablenesse of Religion: But I mean that carnallity of reason, which
judges and disputes according to sinful, corrupt and depraved reason, and
calls Gods holy and mystical truths, (which are only judged of by a superior
power of spiritual reason and understanding) to the bar or balance of an
unregenerate, See 1 Cor. 2.15.
that is an inferior and disabled reason and judgment, which has lost the the
gift of discerning truths, by the error and corruption of old Adam. Three
steps of carnal reason.
Now this erroneous judgment has three steps and degrees: For first,
carnal reason buys and sells God and his actions according Psalm. 78.19.
then she allows him. Thus the Israelites when they were in the wilderness,
because they saw no real second causes or means, of a supply of meat and
drink, deny it possible that they should be furnished at all, concluding that
they must of necessity perish. Can the Lord (say they) spread a table in the
wilderness? They would allow the Lord no more power, then the mere possible
or probable means would afford. This is carnal reason in gross; somewhat
like the gross condignity of Popish merit. This was Naamans reason here in the
Text.

A second step is, when although light out of the word, and common Luke 7.4.5.
Thus the Jews thought it a very meet congruity that Christ should heal his
servant, who had built them a Synagogue, and loved their nation, as if Christ
were tied in doing miracles to gratify his benefactors: and so his mother
herself, Ioh. 2.4. when she saw they wanted wine, would needs forestall him,
saying, Son thou can do a miracle, and thou can not do it at a better
season then now, to supply their want of wine; as if our Savior served only
to attend men's opportunities by the power of his Godhead! indeed he did the
miracle, but not upon either the ground or end which she framed: This as with
them: and uses means only for other causes, not for his, but our better
help and convenience. So that this base carnality plays her prises one way or
other, and dares act her part upon Gods stage; so that no one mystery,
administration, work or ordinance of his can pass her

In this first branch I would further have it considered, What subject carnal
reason dwells in?
in what subjects or persons I conceive this carnal reason to reside, when I
say, it is an ill judge, and a great enemy to the matters of God. I do not
here intend Atheistical reason, such as that of the Epicurean sect was, who
thought the world to be eternal, both before and after, because there could no
reason be given how a workman could atchieve it, or perfect it: where (say
they) are his tools, his leavers, his hammers for the nonce? Neither mean I
the carnal reason of profane Esau's and libertines, whose belly, back, pride
and ease of the flesh, wholly sway them, and who have dashed out that dim
light of moral or natural notions left in our decayed nature (through the
prevailing of their lusts: Even professors of Religion.
) but I mean them who ordinarily profess Religion, whose knowledge of
Religion added to their natural light, does curb and overruled in good
measure the excess of carnal reason in her grossness: For why? Education,
training up to knowledge, and observing of truths taught in the word, will
easily moderate the baseness of this carnality; though grace and
sanctification has not yet subdued, either their minds to the true sense, or
their hearts to the savor of Gods matters, as in the regenerate. Nay further, I
would have all to conceive the doctrine in general, as belonging to all
carnal reason without exception, wheresoever it be found; insomuch, that the
very godly themselves, (so far as unregenerate, Yea the godly themselves in
part.
and especially Satan by infidelity tempting them) are carried this way
dangerously: as those many instances of Scripture of Moses, of Samuel, of
Gedeon, of Sarah, of others, witness, who when they heard of, 1 Samuel 16.6.
Number. 20.10. etc.
or went about Gods messages or matters, presently they cavilled by carnal
reason, saying, Should all the flocks of the mountains, or herds of beasts be
slain, to feed this people? Should Sarah at this age give suck? If the Lord be
with us, why are these things upon us? Is not the Lords anointed (Eliab)
before him? Meaning these things to reason seem impossible, therefore they are
so; or this or that seems likely, therefore it is so: whereas (when they
speak as believers) they look at another principle, thus or thus God will, or
will not have it, therefore so it is and must be: God will and can do this or
that, therefore done it shall be, whatsoever flesh cavills to the contrary.

Ere I leave this first general, I will add some instances of Gods matters,
Worship of God.
wherein carnal reason prejudicateth and hinders the soul from conceiving
and believing: For although I might only speak in general, and say, it
hinders in all both moral (especially if truly understood, as the hallowing of
a Sabbath, the ruling of the thoughts and affections in secret) and especially
mysteries revealed in Christ: yet it will better satisfy the mind of you that
hear (beloved) to name some special branches, by which carnal reason may be
guessed at in other kinds. The instances are these. First, in matter of
Religion and worship, and the special ways of God to us, as in commands,
promises, threats, or our service to him in self-denial, faith,
mortification, and the like. For religion and worship, how does carnal reason
judge? Surely, not according to the nature of it, which is a powerful uniting
of the soul to God, and restoring it to the integrity of nature according to
creation: But it conceives confusedly of it, as a due which the creature owes
to God, that the inferior worship the superior, never looking either at the
right manner, or true ends thereof. And therefore, although it grant a worship,
yet it judges of the frame thereof, according to the pattern of corrupt reason,
and thinks that God is best pleased with a blindness of devotion, a
superstitious zeal, such a worship as astonisheth the sense with some carnal
abstinences, rites, or ceremonies of man's devising, or some outward pompous
rites, and glorious shows of Piety, in decking of Churches, in golden and
silver ornaments, precious vestments, costly Temples, and rich furniture: But
as for spirit and truth of soul, attending the Lord purely in those ordinances
which himself has invented, altogether senseless thereof. As we see in Popery
at this day, to what point it has brought the worship of God. That worship
which bites not the Spirit, is most specious to the eye, working upon the
carnal part, and putting it in hope that God will be as well pleased with her
service, as she her self is, that agrees best with carnal reason. That
preachers speak smooth, quaint, pleasing things, tickle the ear, displease
not corruption: That the Sermon be short, and of quick dispatch, that we cope
all our Sabbath devotion, yea all our religion within the Church walls, and
savor little of it within our own houses, callings and government; but live
by comparison of our selves with the profane, who care for no worship at all:
this pleases flesh alife.

For Commands.
So for Commands: so far as they go in reasons stream, as to live and be
painful in our callings, to beware of bringing our names into discredit by
lewd company, drinking, swearing, and pot-companionship, to keep our state from
decay, to be no spend-thrifts, and so become burdensome to our friends, or the
Town. These and the like commands, because they borrow authority from carnal
inconveniences, please carnal reason well: But to obey in suffering as well as
doing, with the loss of credit, estate, life; to trust God in all these, and
live by faith, that God will support us in our endeavors, this is foolishness
to carnal reason. A man who suffers for the safeguard of his conscience,
seems a stark fool to a worldling. Matthew. 16.20.
Tush (say men) he may thank himself, this needed not to betide him. For
Promises.
So in the matter of promises, carnal reason loves to hear that men shall
fare well for their trusting God, and obeying him: But how? They savor no
spiritualnesse in a promise: So their Cow may not cast her Calfe, Psalm. 17.
so their bellies may be filled with the treasure hidden in the earth, Deuteronomy.
33.
enjoying the blessing and influence of the Sun, Moon, and heavens, that
they may abound in Corn, and Wine, and Oil, and feel no lack in their
health, bodies, names, children: so long, I say, they are for promises: They
can allege, that God has promised no more to drown the world: Genesis 8.22.
That Summer, harvest, seed time and harvest shall continue, these they lot
upon, and snatch at: but as for the promise to ease a laden soul, to restore
to it life and immortality by the Gospel: This and the like are gibbridge to
them: He that should press them to get the favor of him that dwelt in the
bush, were as one that told them a tale of a tub, Deuteronomy. 33.16.
or spoke in Hebrew and Greek unto them. So I may say of Gods threats: Perhaps
in terrible thunder and lightning they will run into a hole: But they behold no
power nor Majesty of a just and revenging God in any of them. For why? Their
sin lies deeply bundled up in them, in the bottom of a deluded and secure
conscience; and therefore they fear nothing, they are settled upon their
dregs and a rotten peace: but as for the instrument whom God uses to
denounce threats, him they fly upon, outface, and bear down with a stout
heart, thinking him to speak out of ill will, spite and hatred; as Iezabel
conceived Iehu to be a traitor like Zimri, 2 King. 10.
and further she looked not. But if the threats of God be so terrible, that
they pierce, or bring some real judgment after them, then the best fruit is,
some bodily abasement and bowing like a bul-rush; no meeting of God, nor
preparing to meet him with true contrition and faith: and so the threat still
hangs upon record, and is not prevented, as we see in Ahab his case.

I have been too long in this instance, I must be briefer in the rest. A
Administrations of God.
wherein the judgment of carnal reason is this, That if the moral and
virtuous be blessed, and fare well, and the vicious be punished, Eccles 9.11.
if race be to the swift (as the wise man speaks) and battle to the strong,
and wealth to the provident, and poverty to such as struggle not for the world,
if the good live long, and the bad be soon dispatched; then they feel their
blood to run right in their veins, God is alive, and judges the earth: But if
God vary from their course, and they meet with darkness and disproportion,
that Princes go on foot like Lackies, Eccles. 7.
and Pesants ride on horseback and be exalted, if the righteous Abel perish in
his righteousness, and Cain prolong his days, if the malicious prosper as a
green Bay tree, Psalm. 73.
and the like: Oh! then God is not so wise as he might be, here they are
puzzled, and at a nonplus, they fall and break their shins at this threshold:
then they cavil, and think they may justly challenge him; nay more, they
think with them in the Prophet, Mal. 3.
they have served God in vain, and washed their hands in innocence to little
purpose: for the bad are at as good terms with God as the good, and so they
wax careless, profane, distrustful and dissolute, as if there were no God.
Alas! great reason, for the mystery of Providence is a riddle to such.

A third instance may be in Crosses which God dispenses spiritually,
Providence. Job 33.13.
neither will he give account to man of all his matters. But carnal reason
will prescribe and limit him in this kind. When she beholds crosses to befall
any, she goes down right in her judgment, and concludes, either that there
is nothing to be made of them. They come upon all alike; 2 Samuel 11. Eccles.
9.2. Esai 53.9.
and (as David told Ioab) the sword devoures all alike: or else, they censure
such as are afflicted, as the world did Christ, Esaias 53. as a man afflicted of
God, and humbled for his deserts. Thus the Jews deemed those upon whom the
Tower of Siloam fell, and those whose blood Pilat mingled with their
Sacrifices, Luke 13 3.4.3.
to be greater sinners then others. And so, if any live at hearts ease, merry,
and without any bonds in their lives, and go down in peace to the pit, these
they esteem favorites of heaven. Thus the Papists at this day measure the
Church of Christ, by the mark of prosperity, and success, and succession.
Psalm 17.13. Simil.
As dead fish go always down the stream, so do these men; whereas Gods
living fish can swim against it, and discern the love of a father by
chastisements, arguing by spiritual reason.

A fourth instance may be, about the persons of men, and their difference:
Persons of Men. Proverb.
Solomon speaks) and whereby he is more excellent then his neighbor: But
either they slight goodness wholly in a man, preferring wealth and honor
before it; or if necessity put honor upon some for their shining graces, yet
they will look more upon some outward respect, Jam. 2.2.3.4.
(as those in Saint James looked at the gold rings and rich attire) and set
their mark upon a Christian for his outward accomplishments, as if his
learning, sweetness of nature, courtesy, usefulness, esteem with great ones,
seem to equal his Religion, they especially honor him for the by, more then
the maine: whereas a spiritual man discernes a secret worth within, which no
poverty or outward defects can stain.

A fifth instance may be about the actions of men: And these carnal reason
Actions of men. Joh. 7.27. Joh. 9.24.29.
and thinks as those Jews who stumbled at the works of Christ, and when they
could not deny them to be miraculous, yet seeing no state or birth, education,
or learning in him, they thought them too good for so mean an one to do; and
were offended in him: For why? He was but the son of Mary and Joseph the
Carpenter, and bred among them. If he had come from a coast unknown, or had
been bred up among Pharisees, they could have magnified him. So when a valiant
Captain attaines great victories, carnal reason wonders not, because there is
a proportion: But for Rams horns and pitchers to beat down walls and armies,
Josh. 6.
it is savourlesse to them. And so again, that which agrees to the custom of
the time, and the course of the multitude, passes for current with such; but
that which they see but few do, they suspect as singular and schismatic;
for they stand not to the bar of the word, Act. 18.14.
but the world: As Gallio looked at law, and common right between man and man,
but abhorred all Religion as faction, so these: open and noted offenders they
shun to be, but closely to be false, to lie, to do a man mischief, to be
unchaste, to do evil for evil; they think these no disgrace; they fear men,
and the loss of their favor and repute, they fear no censure of Gods eye; to
quite themselves of their enemies, as well as they can, put up no wrongs, to be
angry when they are provoked, to strike in anger, to love friends, and hate
enemies, this they think beseems them.

A sixth instance may be, the mysteries of faith and regeneration; Mysteries of
faith and repentance.
Thus Papists conceive it an unlikelyer thing, that a man should be justified
by a righteousness really out of himself, and in another, (as a man to be
made rich with the supposed imputation of another man's wealth put upon him)
rather then a righteousness inherent in him: It seems absurd to carnal
reason, that the detracting and renouncing of that we have, should please God
more then that which we add to our own, keeping our own stock still: It is
unsavory to such, to hear that cleaving to a promise, should be of greater
account with God, or the denial of our own best duties and devotions, then
outward real forbearances of sin, abstinence from liberties, or services of
Religion: carnal reason says, so much as thou esteemest thy self, others
will.

Seventhly, let us see what carnal liberty judges of lawful liberties:
Lawful liberties.
thinking all to be lawful to them at all times, in any measure, with any
circumstances, without respect of offense or expediency: nay rather such
liberties, games, pastimes, they count lawful, as their carnal sway leads
them to, except some great let hinder them; they look neither at rules, nor
ends, but think all serve for man's content, and can go as well from one as
other, to their devotions; sobriety and mediocrity they regard not.

And lastly, for their common converse with men in buying, selling,
Conversation with men.
eating, drinking, and other passages of life and conversation, carnal reason
either thinks them quite besides the bounds of Religion at all, or else goes
to work by no rule in them; but conceives in these, each man left to himself
without any control; their tongues, their passions, their trades, and all
their civil dealings, they count arbitrary matters, and so that they be not
debauched in any notorious kind, as in oppressing, wronging, or foul
excesses; they suppose it is free for every man to get what he can, to shift
for himself, and to seek for the best gain, who shall be jolliest, bravest,
and live at the best terms for the flesh. This be spoken for the first
general, to show what this taint of carnal reason is, how bad and incompetent
a judge it is in Gods matters, forestalling the soul from cleaving to his
truths. As the oil in the hand cannot be hidden; so it is easy to discover
the nature and behavior of this humor: as she told Peter, so I may say to
every rational and carnal man, thy very speech, thy garb, and outside,
bewray thee what thou art; Matthew 26.73.
for thou will have one finger in each of Gods dishes, his word, sacraments, or
whatsover.

I come now to the second general; Proofs of the doctrine.
to prove the point by some texts both of truth and examples, and then by
reasons. For the former, note that 1 Cor. 2.14. The carnal man savors not the
things of God; for they are spiritually discerned: Such as the man is such is
his reason. And again, The wisdom of the flesh, is enmity with God: It is not
subject to Gods matters, neither indeed can be. They that are after the flesh
mind the things of it: And to be carnally minded is death: and so many more
might be added. So for examples, the Scripture is full of them, both of grosser
and finer spunne stuff in this kind. When our Savior, Ioh. 3.5.^. discoursed
to Nicodemus of being borne again, what said he? Shall a man then go again
into his mothers womb, and be born a second time? And yet what a great Doctor
of Israel was he? His great Mastership could read no lecture against carnal
reason. So again, read the example of the people which came to choose Saul
King; 1 Samuel 10.27.
when they saw what he was for mean breed and parentage, the text tells us,
they despised him, Shall such an one reign over us? Can he save us? So the
Prince whose arm the King leaned on, when he heard the promise of God, that
within one day the famine should be turned to plenty, made this answer, If
there were windows made in heaven, could this be? 2 King. 7.3.4.
I will never believe it! It repugnes to sense and the present state of things.
So those Jews, who saw and heard our Savior preach, and do miracles,
despised him, Shall this man save us? When the Messia comes, no man shall know
whence he is: But as for this man, we know him, and whence he is, Joh. 7.27.
a poor man, Joseph and Mary's son, of no breed, training, or outward glee
to the world-ward. So those false teachers (of whom Paul writes in all his
Epistles) were carnal ones, and led by the reason of the flesh, despised Paul
for his mean preaching without eloquence, 2 Cor. 4. and 5 chap.
and for his mean presence and person, being (as it seems) to outward
appearance, of no great stature, nor glorious utterance. And those Corinthians
(although not so deeply tainted) yet had a dregge of this poison, when they
esteemed of Preachers according to the fancy of the man: 1. Cor. 3.4.
some would cleave to Paul, some to Cephas, some to Apollo, some to others, as
their humor led them. Who cannot by these examples perceive, what an ill judge
carnal reason is in cleaving to the truths of the word? As Naaman here was
held from Gods purpose to heal him, by his Abana and Pharfar: so each of these
examples were hindered from embracing one truth or other, by the obstacle of
their own reason.

Nay, the Scripture rests not here alone, but brings in the Saints themselves
(with infamy) for their being fore-stalled against the truth hereby. Moses is
taxed for distrusting God at the waters of Meriba: See Texts before.
Gideon for cavilling against the Angels message, Samuel for inclining to
Eliab, Sara for laughing (which I named before) all of them being let by
this enemy, from cleaving to the truth, because they felt nothing within to
favor it, carnal reason foisting in this cavil: Tush! What likelihood or
proportion is there between this truth and thee? Thou give suck, and be a
Nurse at ninety years old, and so of the rest. So much for proofs.

Adam, from that holy purity of Reason, Soul bereft of the purity of reason
in her first creation.
whereby it could conceive, digest, and understand the matters of God, as their
proper object (without mistake or errors) as the eye or ear can discern
colors, or sounds. This holy power of created nature, is now turned to a mere
privation; sinking paper being as able to contain the distinct impression of
the letters written thereon, as corrupt reason can distinguish or discern the
stamp or notions of holy things. It cannot reach them: for it fails as the
short arm of an infant cannot reach a thing above it, it cannot retain them,
for it vanishes in them as sense does in dreaming. They are above the capacity
of the soul (as she is) even as Hebrew is above the reach of an idiot: no man
wonders that he rejects it with indignation, as exceeding his faculty: Gods
matters are reached by a superior power to that which a natural man has: as
a tale told is reached by a faculty above that which the beast has. The
substance of the understanding is as it was; but the excellency of her faculty
is lost.

Reas 2. By base and lewd custom, it has contracted an habit of a contrary
quality, Base custom has marred right reason.
which is saplesnesse and unsavourinesse of mind, which she gathers up in the
world, by the base customs of it, seen and heard: and so lickes up scurfe, as
the Spider does venom, or the sink gathers dregs daily. False prejudices and
misperswasions are imbred in the soul by this means: I say, by the error of
the wicked, those false opinions which the common multitude have taken up, and
put on as a garment, against Gods clear truth. These are carried from hand to
hand, as wares in a market, by Traders and Chapmen: and they wax more defiled
by the carrying: For why? Principles of truth being naturally loathed and
abhorred by men of corrupt and perverse minds and will, they muse as they use,
they report them as they like them, and so breed in each others minds hateful
thoughts and conceits of them, as of God himself and his Attributes, Religion,
and all the mysteries of it, the lovers of it, the power and practice, the
administrations of God, his worship and ordinances. As Hemlocke or Cockle seed
multiplieth by shedding on the ground; so the Dice-play of men, as Paul calls
it, Ephesians. 3. does infect the degenerate world, and increases, till as a leaven
it has sowred it through, and festred it to the heart as a canker. As a leaf
of paper all over written on both sides, near and close, admits nothing else
to be written in it, without confusion: so the minds of worldlings being
wholly possessed with the scurfe of lewd opinions in these matters, admit no
interlinings of truth, but abide erroneous. It is said by Matthew, that it was
given out by the Scribes and Elders, that Christ rose not again, Mar. 28. end.
but was stolen away by his Disciples: and that error passes for current to
this day. So do errors in Gods matters root and settle among the ignorant and
unstable. The strength of false principles, which corrupt time has raked on
heaps, to harden her self against the purity of Truth, Acts 13.8. Exodus
7.11.12.
are as those Inchanters were to Pharaoh, and as Elimas to Sergius Paulus, to
avert them, and detain them. Custom makes error to be thought truth,
fore-stalles it, and takes up the room of it, so that it can subsist no where.

Reason 3. The soul thus doubly infected, is chained by Satan with Judas by
the sop, Satan rules strongly in the soul by carnal reason.
so does he into the soul by both these traitors. And being entered, imbarkes
himself more strongly against the evidence of all divine truth, infusing his
errors and lies into the soul, as first he did into Eve, when he drew her
from the simplicity of obedience. He enlarges carnal reason exceedingly, and
puts into the soul most unsanctified and erroneous thoughts against all truth
and savor of goodness. He puffes up the mind with conceitednesse and pride,
setting her up with him in his throne: so that she becomes wiser in her own
opinion, as Tyrus in Ezekiel. then Daniel, yea then seven men who can give a
reason; so that she waxes impudent and refractory in her own way, so that
there is more hope of a fool then of her. Oh! (says Satan) thou may well
stand upon it: Exodus 28.3. As he falsely, so here truly, Much carnal reason
makes thee mad.
for thou art counted a jolly wise fellow indeed, worth ten of these poor
Puritans, pity that an hundred of such should bear down such an one as thou.
Oh! this adds drunkenness to thirst, and makes folly mad, so that as the
Adder, she stops both ears against the charm of truth (be it never so
powerful) through pride and prejudice.

Reason 4. Lastly, the Lord leaves all such to Satan's blind-folding, The Lord
infatuates carnal men justly.
and because they hardened themselves against the naked truth, would not believe
it, nor yield up this strong fort of carnal reason, to the obedience of
Christ, the Lord suffers them to be led captives to their own erroneousnesse,
denies them grace to look in, and reflect upon themselves, to see by what an
unsound principle they are led, yea carried to hell: and some are justly given
up from a carnal sense to a reprobate sense, that they pride themselves in
their shame, ridiculous unsavorinesse, and cursed misprisions of truth; so that
the corruption of carnal reason grows from an error, to a confirmed disease,
and to an habit of wilfulness, and rare it is to see such subdued and
captivated to the obedience of Christ. In all these four respects, it appears
to be no wonder, that carnal reason should hold off the soul from cleaving to
the truth, or judging aright of the matters of God. So much for reasons. I come
to the use.

Examination. Conv^ction of carnal reason by many particulars.
Ere I proceed to any more uses of either admonition, comfort, terror or
instruction, let this be weighed, that it may appear who are the parties of
whom I speak. I have said enough before in those instances which I named, and
need add no more: yet because the matter is weighty, take two or three more,
and go to work narrowly, for no disease is so dangerous, so incurable:
Natural savor.
how happy were it? Perhaps by this means God might pluck off this cover of
darkness from our faces! Esaias 25.
Try thy self by this first, viz. Thy natural carnality and savor: Thou
know what it is, not to savor and relish meat and drink in a deep cold;
what it is to love or not to savor this or that dish of meat: The self same
discover in Gods matters: Can thou relish a bargain, a game at cards and
dice, any base talk of the world, (though never so long) any idle tale,
Carnal reason described by the savor thereof.
or gigge of a geering, gibing wit, or any merry conceit and discourse, or
matters of the belly, back, purse and commodity; I say, can thou judge
perfectly how these taste? But if thou come into a religious company, where
there is speech of a promise, of faith, the sacraments, any mystery of
Religion; any commands or threats of God, then thou feel that the savor of
these is as the taste of the white of an egg without salt: It is a woeful
sign of a carnal wretch, that has no salt of God in his Spirit to season
him, Mark 9.50. Luke 14. ult.
but is still saplesse and dry, infatuate and unsavory: Thou have lost the
comprehension and savor of God, and art as a vessel without a bottom; thou
can not endure the talk of such things, 1 Cor. 1.20. Matthew. 16.21.
they are an offense unto thee: There is a piece of the Jew and Gentile in thee
as yet, Gods matters are a stumbling block and foolishness unto thee; and
thou art as yrkesome and fulsome a creature to the appetite of God and good
men, as a potion is to a sick stomach. Try thy self I say, by thy taking up
the customary errors and speeches of worldlings, as thus; what make ye of this
preciseness? What? Think ye there was no Religion in the world, ere these
singular fellows came up? What? Will not indifferency and reason serve men, to
be honest and no medlers, to pay all men their due as quiet folk should do,
but men must pester the world with so much zeal! As for these Preachers what
are they? Mean fellows, such as the world might want, yet subsist; few of
them have any learning, and they are bad for a commonwealth: And as for these
young hotspurres let them alone but a little, and by that time, they have wife
and children, to look to, and feel what the hard world is, we shall have the
wind in another door: then they will be less in their heat, and fall to
their business, as other men. By my faith and truth, or as God mend me, I love
Religion well, so that too much of it make not men mad; I would I were dead or
hanged if I love not an honest man with my heart, so it be with reason! Ah! thou
saplesse and barren wretch, thy language of Ashdod betraies thee, and that
exceeding emptiness of good, utters it self in thy very speech and carriage!
thou art weighed and found light.

Secondly, try thy self by thy Protestant carnality, which is an addition
Protestant common savor.
whereby carnal reason is somewhat alaied and abated, but yet the old
principle abides still, and Religion prevails no further then carnal reason
will admit. Try thy self about this also: Do thou drive two trades, a
spiritual and a carnal? Do thou hear, pray, receive, and profess, with
thy carnal savor and sent still unpurged? So far as thy wealth, credit,
money, pleasures, and worldly appetite will suffer, so far thou will be
Religious, upon condition thou may lose nothing by Religion, but keep the
breadth of carnal jollity, ease and content still, nourish thy old thoughts and
affections close, sanctify a rest upon the Sabbath, so far as will stand
with thy business, taking money, hireing workmen, paying rates, debts, and
recknings; maintain so much Religion as will keep thee from open
profaneness, but as for conscience, alas! there is little, thou would
please a carnal husband, wife, friend, rather then God, and lose thy repute
with God, rather then thine ease, credit, living and maintenance in the world,
and yet think thy self to have as good an heart to God as the closest
worshipper in spirit and truth? To equivocate with thine own conscience, to
flatter, to lie, to cog, and play the timeserver, thou carest not, so it make
for thine ends; and yet Religion shall be the stalking-horse all the while, and
that shall be the soder for all cracks: examine thy self; is this thy
condition? Then is thy state as bad as the former, and in this respect worse,
because thou art a subtle hypocrite, further from sincerity, then a
downright carnal person! thou art just of the temper of the times, and if a
Religion of bowing to altars, to images and pictures of Saints, and our Lady,
and the crucifix should be obtruded, or a worship of blind devotion or Popish
pomp, void of all sap, lo, thou were the man most like to embrace it! For why?
Since that a mediocrity best contents thee between Atheism and Preciseness,
what were more like to agree with thy humor, then such a medly?

Nay thirdly, try thy self by this: Perhaps the Lord is so full of thy Gods
leaving of thee to the savor of the flesh.
that he has secretly given thee over to the sway and swinge of thy carnal
reason, so that thou bewraiest thy self what thou art, (as the rat behind the
painted cloth:) Try thy self by this also: Is thine heart, thy tongue, thy
pen, thy carriage let loose so far, that no Preacher, no persuasion, can
unsettle thee from thy dregs, but still thou hold and wilt hold thy base
principles, they grow from a twig to a strong arm and bow of an oak past
bending: thou would pull out the throat of any man that should rob thee of
these whelps, and as a chaste matron is to an harlot, so is a spiritual
Minister or Christian an offense and indignation unto thee: Do thou say as
once a Pharisee did, Wife, let our children go to our Parish Church (so they
go no further) for they are green and raw, but as for thee and me, we need it
not, we are not now to learn the way to Heaven, it is tedious to our old age
to keep our Church, we may do as well at home in reading upon a book:
verily, many such there are, who thus lie in their mire, and there (like old
jades) dye, and will not come out! Art not thou such an one? Nay art thou not
grown so rooted in thy carnal reason, that it makes thee little better then a
politic Atheist, swaying all thy course by it, sitting at the helm of it,
and adoring it as then Idol? Achitophel was a worshipper of God too, 2 Samuel
16.21.
but a villain, who for his politic ends would have Absalon spread himself
a tent, and defile all his fathers concubines, to make all Israel to know,
there could be no reconciliation! what? Was not such a thing against God? Yes;
but what is God to a politician? Tush, tell ye him of selling Church livings,
of following his lusts and pleasures, of serving the times, and framing his
conscience to the Religion of his betters? Is not that the way to be quietest,
to have the favor of men, to have our lusts, and to be furthest off from a
Puritan? As Machiavel was wont to say, truth of Religion is hard and needless,
a form is easy, and to as good purpose: I say, examine thy self, perhaps
thou have overlived thy hope and accomplished thy destiny, being now grown to
measure all by thy own fleshly meet-wand, and to count gain and lust
godliness.

Thomas be brought to believe no more then thou see? Art thou one of them
that judge the goodness or badnesse of things by outward success? Do thou
take foul scorn that the Minister of God should teach thee the right carriage
of thy self in thy calling, the married estate, thy buyings and sellings, as
well as how to keep the Sabbath, to pray, or receive the sacrament? Do thou
cavil and say, thou art as able to teach him in such experimentalls, as he can
thee? Have not thou an opinion that because men judge thee wise in a worldly
business, therefore thy skill is as good in matters of God also? Do not thou
disdain them who are seely in the world, as if they were unworthy of thy
company or commendation?

By all these, and by all other marks and symptoms, which either I have or
shall deliver, of this disease, I advise thee to thy thy self: If any of these
three cleave to thee, thou may seem wise to thy self, but thy wisdom is
earthly, sensual and divelish: Jam. Matthew. 16.
yea as our Savior said to Peter, Get thee behind me Satan, for thou
savourest not the things of God, but of men: And know that God and his matters
are not more yrkesome to thee, then thou to him: lukewarm water will not
sooner provoke vomiting, then thou do the Lord to vomit thee out of his
mouth. And so much may serve for this: according as thou find this use to
discover thee, so let the other uses following affect thee.

Secondly, let this be an use of Admonition, consisting of sundry caveats
Admonition.
And first beware lest they be item, Math. 11.6.7. Blessed is the man that is
not offended at me. Disesteeme not your God, Religion, choice and portion,
because ye see the jollity of carnal men cannot brook it, or stoop to the
means thereof. Ier. 2.9. The Lord taxes his people for their forsaking him; by
sending him to Chittim and the heathens, saying, Do the heathens change their
Gods? So say I, change not, nay, be not ashamed one jot the more at your
Religion, Be not ashamed nor weary of powerful Religion.
because of the deep prejudice and disrepute which the world has it in. If ye
be not yet resolved to be sincere, let not the opinion of worldlings beat you
off: If you be resolved, then much less let them cause you to be ashamed, or
to shrink in your horns ever the more. If the truth of God be not able to
back ye against such cavillers, you have tasted but small love from God or
sweetness in it: If you think it hard to suffer, to bear indignities for that
which ministers so unspeakable peace of conscience unto ye here, and must bring
ye to heaven for ever, do ye not requite her well for her labor? No, say
with our Lord Jesus, Matthew. 11.29. I thank thee, Oh Father, that thou have
hidden these things to the wise, and have revealed them to babes! My heart is
more knit unto thee for thy honoring poor souls (who have nothing to take
too, save thy self) with so rich a Pearl as Christ and Faith; then it can be
offended with thee, that there be so few great, noble or learned ones to
profess it: Alas! They have greater matters to attend, and while they carry
their heads in the clouds, they fall into the ditch; their bellies are filled
with their earthly treasure, Psalm. 17.
and their spirits are puffed up with their great wisdom: But we look low and
creep upon the earth, that thou may power down thy heavenly riches upon us;
and shall we having a feast in the mountains, envy their diet of the valleys?
No, if the Lord has given thee any insight into the mystery of Christ and
regeneration, what frame and bent of heart the Lord delights in, Oh hug it.

Be not troubled with the verdict of carnal reason, for as the root is, so is
the fruit: Men do not gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles: Matthew.
7.17.
Alas! If you see the world love her own things, so love you the Lords, and be
not ashamed of him before Princes: Let the same affections be found in you,
when you are compelled to be in the company of worldlings, which you bewray in
the company of zealous ones, (due circumstances observed) and abhor the least
wry, base thought, word, or behavior, which should cause them to think, that
you are dashed one whit out of countenance in your Religion for their sakes. I
am not ashamed (says Paul, for chains and prisons sake, or for false teachers
sake who rejoice in the flesh) of the Gospel of Christ, for it is still (as it
was ever) the power of God to salvation: Romans 1.16.
and so Phil. 3.16.17. There be some (of whom I told you before, and tell you
again weeping, enemies to the cross, whose God is their belly, whose glory is
their shame, who mind earthly things. But what of that? Shall my conversation
be ever the less in heaven? Psalm. 73.20.
No: so David Psalm. 73. was troubled at the jollity of such, till he recovered
himself, saying, such a fool was I, yea a beast in thy sight! 25.26.
But then he adds, I have none in heaven but thee, or in earth like thee! Thou
shall make their image despised! And it is good for me (do as they list) to
draw near to God! Oh! if thou would cling to God, he would make such to
come and worship at thy feet, and to choose thy portion! and so they shall when
God shall visit them, so little cause have thou the whilst to flinch for them.

Despise carnal reason, as fast as she despises the simplicity of grace.
Despise you their carnal reason as fast as they disdain your simplicity: Say
of it as Ahab of Micaia, I hate him, for he never speaks well on my side. And
do not consort with them in their way, to seek approbation and allowance from
them, in point of any complement or endowment, whereby your hearts should be
drawn aside from sincerity. Perhaps when you see the world esteems you for any
outward gift in you, you will (with Hezechia) pride your selves in their
allowance, Esaias 39 2.
and so forfeit conscience. But as Solomon says, Taste not of their dainties
Prove. 23.2. Prove. 23.2.
for they are deceiveable meat. In the story of our Church we read, that many
of the Martyrs were highly prised for their parts, some for curious singers in
a Quire, as Parsons at Windsor, some for dexterity and dispatch, as Marbeck was
admired by Gardener for his English concordance, Smith for his skill in
painting, Hawks for his personage and parts of wit and expression, Julius
Palmer for his neat and ripe wit and learning: But Oh! their purity and
holiness, these stained them. What cared these holy men for their approbation
of one, or abhorring of the other? For their parts they esteemed all as dross
for Christ, our Master Christ was scorned for his baseness, because he was no
Prince of the world, but rode meekly upon an Ass. But did he care for it? No,
If my Kingdom were of this world, Joh. 18.36.
my servants would surely fight; but since it is of another, let this go. Oh
brethren! one great cause of our disguisement at this day, and of our
degenerate profession, is (as I suppose) the peize and weight which this
carnal world hangs upon a Religion of form, whereby (with common consent) they
exalt it on high, as that which has prevailed against uprightness. It is an
ey-sore now a days to our jolly Christians, to be over precise, and to cross
with the sway and stream of the world; and therefore now, all strain their
wits to seek out some liberty and dispensation against preciseness, that they
might temporise with such. Beware (some of ye) lest you lose your Religion in
carnal reason! I can tell you, it will soon overshadow and deface the power
and vigor of it, if ye look not the better to it. Nothing is such a
choakepeare to Religion, and such a pillar of Satan's Kingdom, as this carnal
reason! And dare we be ashamed of our spiritual by a carnal? Do we begin
in the spirit, and end in the flesh? Gal. 3.2. 2 John 8.
Look we well to our selves, that we lose not the good things we have swet
for: know it! Gods apples will not swim in one stream together with this
dung of carnal reason: be content (if it must needs so be) to be counted
absurd and irrational: Say with him, that had thoroughly learned his lesson, by
that which you call heresy; Act. 24 14.
I profess to worship God; by this my Religion of spiritualnesse, I most
honor him! If I be deceived, so it is. I abhor the coleworts and unsavory
salt of carnal reason! Oh! what thoughts of heart does it cause, that many
Christians formerly of special note for zeal and holiness, should forget of
what note they were, and become of the concision; Phil. 3.2.
be ashamed of their circumcision! Oh! that men should now count Religion which
was wont to stand in the renewing of their minds, now to consist in their
transforming to the present world! As in Peter's time, so now, Romans 12.2.3. 1
Pet. 4.4.
men count it absurd, that we run not with them to the same excess of riot:
And as Micol, so all her children, 2 Samuel 6.23.
(for she is not barren of these) count David's and dancers before the Arc,
fools! But I tell the (O man) if thou fear God, thou hate the very garb
and outside of a carnal worldling, as the next step to arrant profaneness and
revolt! Be ashamed of no part of spiritual Religion, but count it thy Crown!
say not, I will be as I was in heart, but to please my Master and to shun
scorn, I must now and then drink, be of the common cut and fashion, and game,
make up my bargains at the Alehouse, wear long hair, bolt out petty oaths,
and say some prayers in family, as these rational men do.

Mark what I say to thee, As I do not bid thee carry thy self as a fool
among such, venting whatsoever thou think, and crossing shins with every
profane fellow; so yet, if, for thy wise, holy and spiritual worship of God,
thou be disesteemed and nicknamed, and thereby art ashamed and discouraged, woe
be to thee! Thou art ashamed of him, 1 Pet. 4.16. Matthew. 16. end.
who will (one day) be ashamed of thee, before Angels and men! Gods people are
indeed and must be counted strange ones, odd, absurd; none but strange men,
pilgrims and strangers, 2 Cor. 9. end.
abstainers from the diet of the common world, can go to heaven: Rational
carriage simply not condemned. Matthew. 11.19. Psalm. 73.9. Sam. 6.22. 1 Pet. 4 21.
No rational carnal ones shall come there: I speak not this to cause thee to
distaste reason and wise proceedings in thy business, or to affect some guise
which others do not, as if Religion stood in such affectation, (for the
commonest is best, if modest) but to teach thee as a child of wisdom, to
justify wisdom, and not to condemn the generation of the righteous, for the
sake of a multitude who are led by blind reason: I conclude this point, If thy
Religion should cost thee some disgrace, scorn and descant, yet if a
spiritual one, be not ashamed in that behalf: If this to be vile, be more
vile, and hang these reproaches before thee as thy glory, committing thy self
to him in weldoing, who will requite thee an hundred fold for that thou losest
for him. so much for this first branch of this use of Admonition.

A second branch of Admonition to Gods people, is, of Admonition.
That they beware either hurt their own souls, hinder the power of the word
in them, set God himself against them, to purge them by unwelcome medicines,
or cause Gods people to be jealous of them, Nourish no such dregs in us, as by
which carnal reason might be supported.
for their overmuch propensnesse and inclination to this carnal reason. Still
I prevent any objection which might arise, let none think I debar Gods
people from either reasonable and wise courses in their affairs or policy (so
far as warrantable) in Religion it self. No, in no wise (as the woman of
Abel spoke to Ioab) but there is a traitor, 2 Samuel 20.21.
carnal reason the son of old Ad^m in the City, which makes all the
confusion; throw his head over the wall, Sundry of these noted.
and I have done. Many professors defile the ointment of sweet Christianity,
with their overmuch policy, carnal fetches, and this dead fly, Eccles. 10.1.
Matthew 10.
makes all stink. They put more of the Serpent, then the Dove into the
confection: their wisdom is not subdued and well prepared, as the Apothecaries
use to subact and kill the poison of that serpent, whereof they would make an
antidote: a man may perceive, they are more reaching, subtle, temporising and
equivocally reserved in their courses, then truly humble, harmless and
innocent: their traffic, their company, their liberties, their family
worship, their whole demeanure bewraies them: that fear of men's displeasure,
shrugging at the least stir of danger, or the like, are above plain naked
simplicity of believing or obeying with them. Prove. 30.34.
Christians, (so they walk as wisely as they may) should strain no blood out
of the nose of wisdom, nor seek to go too far in their carnal
circumventions; but leave all to God, let him see to them, Psalm. 119.93.
and say, I am thine Lord, save me; I desire to walk in thy way: Stand
between me and my harms, so that I need not for any straits, be put to an
ill conscience: Psalm. 37.5.
I commit and roll my ways and ends all upon thee, do thou all my works for
me.

Carnal policy causes breaches among professors.
I see (brethren) an apparent difference among you in this point: That the
simple and well meaning dare scarce trust many of you (who yet would seem as
forward professors) because they see such shrewdness, such tricks and
policies in bargains, and performings of promises, such hard dealing,
savouring too much of worldly wit, and every man laying in for himself, to
save one: Others have smooth tongues of their own to defend their ill
qualities, even by lying and shifting defenses, others can keep their own
council, and make the world believe, that they are forward men in Religion,
but all is to bite in their own minds and conceal that deep ignorance which
they know is in them, or else worse evils, which they count deep skill to
hide from such as might teach or admonish them: whereas others are naked and
glad to be open hearted in confessing themselves each to others, that they
might shame themselves. And so the one aims at avoiding shame, the other at
getting grace: Genesis 49.21.
Others have an excellent gift at giving good words, with Napthali, but they
will be sure to spare their own purses, their charge and travel to avoid
expenses, yea such as by their own consent are laid out for their behoof;
others will be as little as they can in good conference or in extraordinary
duties, for fear; loath to let theit neighbors see them forwarder for the
Gospel, or in loving the ministry, then they are, lest they should be
censured: others are very zealous for the Gospel, with a squint eye to their
shops, their trades, custom, good marriage and takings: Others will in no sort
displease their Landlords, or superiors, very Nicodemites, doing that they do
by night and by stealth, for shame, or fear, wanting faith and courage, to
carry them out: Joh. 3.3.
Others covet to be thought well of by all sorts, and so carry a very eaven and
smooth course, rather void of vices, then truly virtuous in Gods sight; and
fulsomely salute all sorts with equal love and courtesy, good and bad, so that
a man cannot see conscience to sway them.

Others have such a dark and doubtful behavior, that no man can tell what to
make of them, like those Scepticks, who were ever considering; so these walk
as staggerers, neuters, nonresolved ones, as if their Religion were still to
choose; and these affect the name of very wise ones, because they will utter
themselves no further, then (if need be) they may keep their retreat safe, and
have the wind on their backs. Others are very carnal in seeking their own
praises, and advance their own gifts, merits, and good deeds, not so much for
Gods ends as to blaze their own worth and to be counted benefactors. Others
will smooth and side with the bad and corrupt in a Town, lest they should
displease, and so betray good government to their own self love; cannot
endure to see any of their own kindred to be punished (much less their
children) for open crimes; eager to maintain their own greatness, sway and
elbowroom, in their places: Others will always go with the stronger side, be
their cause never so bad: Others are so dangerously worldly, snigging and
biting, usurers, hard and oppressing, or defrauding the simpler in their
bargains, cannot abide any should go out of their fingers without a nip:
Others affect good Preachers for some carnal ends, and professors for their
natural parts, love the richer sort, Jam. 3.3.
cleave to Gentlemen and great ones, such as wear velvet and satin and rings,
but bid the meaner sort sit at their footstool: Others fall to compare
Ministers, and who shall go for their money: Again, to end, how many are there,
who will be all in all to them whom they are beholding to, for their gifts,
favors, lendings, and gratifications, despising others? Infinite it were to
mention all. I have (I doubt) wearied you already: For some are yet worse, and
will sit at table and hear godly Ministers and others depraved by vile
tongues, and scarce give them their breath to latch the blow, lest themselves
should be thought too forward: Not to speak of those large breadths which
they take to themselves in their profession, for their attires, pleasures,
hair, companies, and the like. Shall I praise you in these? I praise you not.

I fear rather that this carnal reason and corrupt heart of yours, Carnal
reason eats up grace.
has betrayed you to him who is the father of cunning and subtilty; and truly
since this new found Religion of worldly policy and shifting came in, the
simplicity of godliness has been thrust up in a narrow room. And I tell ye
plainly brethren, I fear that these time serving qualities do but lie in many
of your bosoms to betray ye, when times of trial for the truth sake shall
come! then (as thick as now ye stand up to our very mouths and pulpits
crowding for room) when ye shall see some of us suffer for the truth we preach
or practice, we shall see you come as behind hand and scanty: Professors
unsound in peace will be so much more in persecution.
Tell not me, I will never believe it; he that cannot walk sincerely toward
the Gospel in peace, he will never abide one brunt for it, by persecution; I
look to see this place thin enough one day, by many of you, who (I doubt)
think full little of it, and say, Am I a dog that you presage such things of
ye? 1 King 8.13.
No, I judge you not as dogs, but God give you and me, the properties of
children, to be more ingenuous, cordial and plainehearted: These Eagles
feathers mixed with others, devour and mar all: One Barbara Rogers.
Start at such mixtures of carnality, as once an holy woman of this assembly
did, who being inclined to the dropsy, and consulting with the Physician, (who
bad her to bestirre herself and be angry with her servants, and fly about
their ears lustily) answered, Oh! this will breed a worse sickness in me,
your remedy is worse then my disease! As she durst not offend God by carnal
wisdom for health, so neither grate you or go against the edge with
simplicity of conscience and conversation, either for fear, favor, flattery,
liberty, gain or ends of your own; but join with a comely and lawful
prudence in your ways, the simplicity of Doves; Proverb.
and you shall find that he who walks plainly in his course, and deals
faithfully in reproof of evil, shall at last have more peace in death, and be
more honored then all crangling and worldly wise brains, who have so many
ways to the wood.

The fox and the cat were talking of their tricks, but when the hounds came,
the cat knew one thing, worth all the foxes skill, for she leapt upon the tree
and was safe, when the other was torn in pieces. Death or the cross will try
us who has best skill, either the subtle or the simple: As he once said to
the Crabfish (which he had always observed to go backward, and to gather up her
joints) when she was dead, and lay open and spread abroad; Oh, so you should
have lived! So say I to you, to such as one day shall wish plainness, Oh, you
should have loved it all your life! Do so still, it is never too late to
amend, if your hearts be not hardened: Oh! turn your swords into mattocks, and
such of ye as have delighted to be perilous and shrewd fellows, affect
plainness, fly with Doves, as birds of that feather; let the little child play
at the hole of the aspe: Call not in question the truth of your Religion,
affect not dark, close and doubtful carriages, but be as little children void
of guile: And so doing, as Peter says, 1 Epist. Chap. 2.1. casting off all
guile and falsehood, come (and welcome) as newborn ones to covet the milk of
the word: It would never trouble me then to preach to you: but now I fear you
defile the truth, (or your selves rather) with that you hear. An eminent
pattern.
There comes a thing to my mind, really done, of which I will tell you: Once a
simple minded traveller upon a poor horse was overtaken by two or three
swaggerers well mounted, who asked him whither he would, and how far he went
that day? He told them to such a place, twenty or thirty mile off, and he hoped
to reach it if God let him not: They scorning him and his poor horse, pransed
away, (having a journey also to go) but at next Alehouse or Tavern they
stayed an hour or two upon their tobacco and wine, and having so done, to
their geldings they went, and put hard on; by that time the poor man was
gotten a good way forward, keeping still his plain course and race; and being
again overtaken, was again mocked by these gallants; but in fine, so it fell
out, that their often turnings into the Tavern at each five miles end spent
their day, and kept them from their journeyes end; whereas the poor man's eaven
and honest pace, overtooke them and cast them behind. Walk plainly and hold
on with simplicity, and that shall bring you safer home, then all the
flourishings of carnal men, though now and then at a start, they may seem to
outstrip you. So much for this second branch of the Admonition.

A third caveat may serve from hence, Admonition. Gods people must so shun
carnal reason, as yet not incurring the just aspersion of folly.
to teach Gods people to shun Proverb.
and makes a man to stand before his betters; Proverb.
however it is the counsel of the wise man, establish thy thoughts by
counsel, and by counsel make way. And Saint Paul says, Be not slothful in
business. Romans 12.
Some men are like those who bend crooked sticks; they cannot mend one
extreme, save by bowing the stick to a quite contrary bent, till they break
it: Some to avoid one rock of sensual and worldly reason, rush upon another
rock of rash incogitancy and precipice, running headlong about their matters.
Act. 20. end.
Right reason may be kept (as the Townclarke told them of Ephesus) though
carnal be abhorred, which is but the dregs and lees of the other. God has
(not for nothing) planted understanding in the mind of man, to be as the
Pilot to steer the motion and course of our ship, through this vast seafaring
life of ours; and therefore he will have all his to ponder their way, and tells
us, Proverb.
That the eyes of a wise man are in his head, as the fools are in his heels.
And therefore as in divine especially, so in humane matters also, it becomes a
Christian to walk as exactly as wise, not as fools. It is the part of a wise
man to think thus, Ephesians. 5.17.
I make conscience of contention and quarrels, goings to law: Therefore to
prevent ill report, reproach, loss, and repenting too late, it behooves me to
go wiseliest to work of all: Wranglers and lewd ones, if they have overshot
themselves, will help themselves many ways: but a Christian must forfeit and
lose that which by discretion he prevents not. Therefore deal and bind sure,
if thou will find sure; leave not bargains doubtfully and rawly: require
bills or bonds in matters of weight; take not things upon trust, men's bare
words and promises, saying, neighbor, you and I shall agree, take it, or let
me have it: But take witness, Jer. 32.10.
rest not upon bare meanings, and forgotten covenants, which breed many
differences in the upshot, unwelcomely, and suits needless and unkind.

There is I confess diversity between men, religious and carnal; Sundry
instances of folly in the dealings of Christians.
but let not that forestall discretion. I have dealt (says one) for so much,
with my friend without script and scroll, and I hope now we shall not disagree:
yes, it comes in a day, which falls not out in seven year again; and death
may cause as great difference between the best, as the worst. Abraham would
not take Ephrons shuffling words; Genesis 23 15.16.
What is that between me and thee? But weighed him out the silver and took
witness. And David, when Arauna would have given him his floor, would not so
slightly go to work, 2 Samuel 24.24.
but paid him his price. Oh! it is not the speech of wise men, 1 Cor. 6.2.
not to be able to manage his own business? Not to stop a breach with the
cost of a shilling, which after may prove a ruin and cost a pound? Not to be
skillful in his trade, in knowing the seasons of sowing, tilling, reaping and
husbandry in their seasons? What a shame it is, Romans 12.
for him who should be fervent in spirit, serving the Lord, to be sl^ck and
lazy in his calling, and by improvidence, to become himself a burden to the
Church, a reproach to the wicked, and a tempter of God to suffer the seed of
the just, to beg their bread? How is this prevented, save by serving providence?

Abraham; another to call our selves, when God calls not, but rather our own
spirit deceives us: And yet it is a common thing with such, if they be taxed
for such rashness, to say that men speak like worldlings from carnal reason;
what? Must not God be trusted? Yes, but not tempted. Paul and the Pilot Act.
28. differed, yet Paul would not beat out his brains, nor cast him overboord,
but rather guide him in his government.

The third and maine.
But the worst of this folly is, when it disguiseth Religion herself, and
causes that which is wisdom it self, to be counted foolishness. How many
men pull upon themselves unseasonable and needless trouble, strong and cruel
enemies, fines, censures, imprisonments, for their ungrounded zeal, rash
judgings of their betters, without a calling, (for then I grant they serve the
Lord who will bear them harmless) mixing their own passions, invectives,
upbraidings and distempers, with the cause of Christ, who needed no weapons of
such warfare: And hereby bring upon themselves either uncomfortable sufferings
(if they stick to it) or else base recanting of their follies: How many private
persons run themselves a ground, by meddling with abuses and corruptions, to
which they are not called, going against the stream of those evils which it
is bootlesse to exasperate, and so are drowned in that gulf which they cannot
shoot? How many neglecting their callings, under pretense of zeal, run from
place to place, mispend their time, borrow and pay not again, open the mouths
of the vile against them to say, these fellows rail upon us for our carnal
wisdom and worldliness: But surely we had rather follow our work hard, then
hang upon each bush, and run our selves into debt, and pay no man.

Again, how many foolish and rash women, by their unseasonable crossings of
their carnal husbands, cause zeal in hearing sermons, to be ill spoken of,
through their want of subjection? 1 Pet. 2.12.
And few there are, who have learned to walk wisely toward such husbands,
Masters, parents, neighbors who are without, that so their liberty be not
restrained, and their commodity be not ill spoken of, by their abusing it to
fleshly ends? How many zealous Ministers lack wisdom, moderation, and
observing of season, manner and measure of their reproves and censures, but
disable themselves as much one way, as they think to do good another? But it
were endless to dwell upon all. Let the conclusion be this: By how much thou
seem to abhor carnal reason, by so much be more careful to be guided by
right reason, and true wisdom, which may cause thy Religion to be honorable,
and prevent that offense and aspersion thereto, which else cannot be avoided:
This for the third branch of Admonition.

I conclude this use with the fourth and last caveat, of Admonition, direct to
sundry objects.
somewhat more Ministers in sundry respects.
Please not your selves in your invention, preparation of your selves, when God
suggests variety of thoughts, aptness of discourse or fine phrases, good
proofs, uses similitudes and applications; do not feel your own warmth, take
it not for granted that you cannot now choose but win the spurs: but know, Gods
matters must be done under another banner: As he said, not words, but strength
and money must help in the war: So say I, Esaias 36.5.
not your strength, nor might, nor wisdom, but my Spirit (says the Lord) must
effect it. As the Lord said to Iehoshua and Zerubbabel, Zach. 5.7.
although you be weak in your selves, yet I will enable you to lay the
foundation, and to make the roof of my Temple: So, let God be chief in your
work and deny your own reason, lest God confound ye, and make ye ridiculous
to them whom ye would sell your selves unto.

Again, draw not on your people to carnal admiring of your parts, Jam. 3.1.
and to destroy the spirit of self-denial and simplicity in them.

Vent not your own singular conceits and fantastical private opinions, to
enhanse your names among the vulgar and ungrounded multitude,

Peter converted not three thousand at once with such preaching! Be wise unto
sobriety: I deny not but among the learned, or in controversies handled among
them, there is good use of tongues and arts oftimes: 1 Cor. 14.21.22.
But to the simple idiot, ye are but signs of Gods wrath, no instruments of
Grace.

Again, affect not moral subjects alone in your Ministry, (though there

People in diverse things.
but in all simplicity, embrace such, and all such with an indifferent spirit
(according to the proportion of their gifts) who are meet to do you good: God
has made them all yours to serve your souls: be not so base as to embondage
your selves, and cleave to such or such persons or parts, neglecting the maine
scope of common edifying: occasion not jealousy and distaste among Gods
Ministers themselves by your folly; (as ye must needs do, if they be not the
wiser) but cull out each man's special gift, and make use thereof as given you
to the supply and furniture of each part of the body, with most apt and meet
grace and ability, for her need. Discourage not Gods Ministers who are
faithful, by balking theif Ministry, and cleaving to strangers, and perhaps
inferior Jam. 4.
Much less be drawn away from sound teaching, to carnal jangling, that so ye
may learn an easy way to heaven, forsaking that one way which is truth and
life. Affect not pompuous words, great shows, such as set forth themselves with
carnal complements and ostentation: admire them not: perhaps because you would
feign come from Church with as whole a skin as ye brought, loath to be galled,
because your conscience is crazy, therefore ye seek to such. And just it is
with the Lord to plague people for this carnality of yours, with Ministers just
like themselves, lips and lettuce, cup and cover agreeing, that each may be a
stumbling block to the other. So that although you live as ignorant and blind
as blocks or bats, yet you shall glory in the flesh of each other, saying, you
have one of the Belwethers of the Country, as good, learned, peaceable, and
good a fellow as any in the Kingdom: Oh! how does Satan infatuate the world
with the golden cup of formal devotion, through such! that he might cry down
the power and sincerity of the truth. Furthermore although Joh. 5. end.
least otherwise Satan buffet you in the time of trouble, that you never
distinguished persons from things, and the demonstration of truth, from man's
excellency.

Again, catch not at new points, (forsaking old grounds) nor at 2 Cor. 3.1.
But so let men think of us (says Paul) as the dispensers of the mystery of
Christ, (whatsoever their infirmities, errors, and wants be) and of the
manifold graces of God, as messengers of reconciliation, as helpers of your joy
(not to domineer and play Rex) but to feed the flock, and to seal them up by
the promise, to beget them to travel again of them till Christ be formed in
them; which things if they were looked at by the people, alas! that unsavory
and carnal eye wherewith they behold the Minister would be turned into a
spiritual; their feet would be beautiful, they would give them their very
eyes, Romans 10.
and count them as men of ten thousand. Job 33.
Men weigh not their gold in large hoppe scales, but in small ones for the
nonce, and so they weigh truly; so let not the Minister of God be put in common
and carnal balances, but in the weights of the sanctuary: Then the Minister
should be a Shekel indeed, and have double honor and maintenance; and be
received as in the name of a Prophet, above a common man: you whose souls are
engaged to him (as an instrument) of your salvation, Matthew. 7.
can tell what I mean. Such say with Paul, 2 Cor. 5. I know no man now
according to the flesh, but according to their grace and spiritual use. Inure
your selves to it now, and at sickness and death it will be sweet for you to
hear God in him, (I mean your Minister) losing upon earth, that which he has
formerly forgiven in heaven. But I see that I have broken my bounds: I must
break off abruptly, and leave that which remains both of this and the other
uses, to the next Sermon, if God will. Let us pray, etc.

THE EIGHT LECTVRE still continued upon this twelfth VERSE.
VERSE XII. VERSE 12. Are not Abana and Pharfar, rivers of Damascus, better
then all the waters of Israel? May I not wash in them and be clean? So he went
away in a rage.

VERSE 13. Then his servants came near, unto him, and said, Father, if the
Prophet had said some great thing etc.


I Could not (beloved in our Lord Jesus) finish in the former exercise, 2 Kings
that which I intended concerning the doctrine of carnal reason. I repeat
nothing, but call to your mind, that in the fourth branch of admonition, I
first spoke (by way of watchword) to the several conditions of my hearers. And
first I entered upon caveat to Gods Ministers, and so proceeded to the people.
Let me now come to Parents and Parents and governors, beware of it
Masters and Guardians, ye commit the education of your children: Carnal
reason looks at carnal ends, where children may not be back and belly
beaten, where they may learn their books and trades, and have their stocks
restored at their years end; and this I dislike not; so be it, that ye neglect
not their souls (which else will cry out against you) and leave them to
themselves; so be it, you plant them not under Masters which are content (so
they do their work) to give them their liberty upon the Lords day, to drink,
to game, and to keep company with them, by whom they may soon be carried into
the depth of Satan, and grow debaucht in their manners all their life after.
Worldlings make but a mock of this I grant, and say, so they may have their
children taught to behave themselves civilly, and learn their occupation, they
care not greatly for preciseness, or to have them more Religious then
themselves: but when they see this narrow scantling will not be kept, but
irreligion teaches them to grow drunkards, unclean, swearers and the like:
Oh! then they wish they had been brought up with Puritans! Oh, ye husbands
Husbands and wives.
humoring them in their vices for peace and ease, teach them the common
religion of the times, swearing, cogging, deceiving, breaking Sabbaths, geering
and squibbing at those that are better then their selves: I tell you, look what
Characters are in your seal, will soon be seen by your wax; they shall have
cause to curse the day that ever they saw your faces; nay perhaps one day your
own consciences shall rend you in pieces for that you see the fruit of your
government appear so fearfully, and shall say, it was I that nipt this
blossom on the head, I corrupted my wife, I tainted my children in their
youth, I shall pay the shot of their souls ruin.

Physicians
take heed of the disease incident to your profession, even to be haife
Atheists, and that by ascribing so much to natural and second causes, and too
little to God: Philosophy and Physic will reveal no better, except Divinity
teach you to ascribe all to the supreme cause, and be content to stoop, and be
at a set in your cures, when providence will have it so. Teach your selves and
your patients who is that great Physician that rules your Art; and take not
upon you, to keep that key of success, those issues of life or death, which
are under divine custody, who can kill by a disease not mortal, All sorts.
and can save when the disease is deadly. Magistrates.
boast not of your skill in the law, but fear God, and say, it is the Lord who
subdueth the people unto us: you scholars S^holars and students.
set up the Bible above your other library, and prayer above your studies, and
the Lord above your wits; tie your boats to his ship, to be led according to
his motion; follow the star till you have found out the babe Jesus, and do
homage to him with the first and best Tradesmen.
say not to your hands, you have made us rich: ye rich men Job says) to Rich
and poor. Job. 32.16.
because you see few friends; say not, God give me health or else I starve, for
more then I work for I look not for: use industry, but set up God above,
adore his providence who all this year hitherto has so provided, that yet ye
are not starven, make him your God alsufficient: Midwives. Jona 3.9.
but bid them say, salvation is of the Lord. And thus would I speak to all
sorts if they were present; cast out that carnal reason whereby ye feel your
selves most tempted to distrust God.

2. Branch of this fourth Admonition. 1. Prejudice an abettor of carnal reason.
And to these former, let me add also other caveats in a word, against those
evils which nourish this carnal reason in you. As first, one prop of this
sin is prejudice and forestallednesse: Such as those Jews, Acts 28.
bewraied, who when Paul made his defense told him, This sect of Nazarens is
every where ill spoken of, and from this carnal ground, they renounced his
apology and cause. A second, is scandal at the power of Religion; Oh! it is a
pinch and a check to their carnal liberties, men cannot endure such chains,
Psalm. 2. and will have no Lord to curb their lusts. A third is, offense and
stumbling at the means of Christ and Religion: Do any of the Pharisees follow
him? 2. Scandal at Religion and her meannesse.

3. Base fear of man.

Luke 1. Tradition.


None save these people who are accursed, embrace him. A fourth is, base fear
of man, more then God. My grandfather, father, friends, favor not this way; I
see it breeds loss, danger, trouble and pursuit. A fifth is, the tradition of
men: As Zachary disliked to name his son John, because none of his family
were so named; rather they choose to be irreligious still, then to change the
custom of their forefathers: And the threats of parents to their children do
deter others, saying, if I thought thou would be one of these zealous
ones, thou should not have a foot of my land. A sixth is, lewd counsel
Lewd counsel.
of such as egg away the younger sort and tell them it is the next way to
reproach and beggary. A seventh is, base flattery of superiors, Oh! there is a
slavishnesse in some men's spirits, that so they may be taken up with their
betters, they will forfeit their Religion; they will lose God, rather then the
company and countenance of the great. An eight is, base ease and formality Ease
and formality.
of profession, it is an Idol universally received, and spit out of the mouth
of carnal reason, the Mass (as we say) bites not. A ninth is policy,
Equivocation.
when men equivocate with their own conscience for their safety sake: as those
in Queen Mary's time, who would come to Mass to spare their skin; and now
adays what dare not men do, to save a living?

Here perhaps it might be expected, that I should say somewhat about
Jesuiticall equivocations. But if men of their own side might be heard speak
against them, Papists against Papist, I need say nothing: Josephus B^rnes.
for sundry of them have written in the open disclaiming of such villainy. It is
sufficient, M^lderus Episcopus Antwerp.
that in such equivocations the heart thinks one thing (by reservation) and
speaks another, and that to deceive: What is lying if this be not? And whereas
they say, that is for lawful evasion: I answer, it is indeed for evasion, but
that which is by a lying way cannot be lawful. A Papist is asked, art thou a
Priest? He answers no; he reserves this, not a Priest of Baal, or not a Priest
to utter it to thee; herein is a lie both for matter and manner: for matter, in
that he utters; for manner, in that he means, that is to deceive. They object,
the whole proposition made both of the expression and suppression is true: I
answer, That only which is expressed, is the proposition, which is a lie; not
that which is concealed; if that were uttered, the whole were true, but so
there were no cosenage. To think a truth, which in word they gainsay, is a
lie. A lie properly respects another; by declaring his mind by words, which
serve to that end; no man is said to ly to himself, but to another. If I
should say the fire is not hot, meaning by an heat external; or a man is no
reasonable creature, meaning as an Angel: are not here lies? He that denies,
denies whatsoever is contained under the sense of that he denies. He therefore,
that so answers and swears, is perjured; and so all sound Divines affirm. Let
what tricks be used, that can be, God takes the oath not as he intends it who
makes it, but as he who takes it: oaths must go according to the common use of
men. To swear, is to call God as witness in things doubtful: but who doubts
whether a Priest be a Priest of Apollo? Truth is an act of righteousness, not
to be esteemed by conceits, but words. See Jerem. 9.8. 2 Cor. 4.2. It is
objected, they maintain not such answers always, but for uses to shun danger,
death, etc. I answer, that which is naught, must never be done. He that says,
I saw not such a Priest, reserving in his mind (at Rome or Venice) does not
qualify his lie, because he does it to himself only; another cannot
apprehend his mixture or limitation: Such therefore are of Saint James his
double minded ones: It is objected, that which is concealed, is but only a
desperate thing, not contrary to that which is uttered. I answer, yet it is a
lie: for if I affirm that of Plato, which is only true of Socrates, it is a
lie; yea this is a double lie, because it is under the color of simplicity.
Again, an oath is the end of all strife Heb. 6.16. But by these oaths,
controversies are never ended, but endlesly multiplied: they object, the judge
is incompetent; or they are asked of things under the seal and secret of
confession: but then we must not lie, but shun such a judge, or deny to
answer: for what is so false, but may be made good, if we may reserve what we
list? A written lie, borrowes no truth from him that reads it, nor a spoken lie
by him that hears it; a lie it is because it is so in the writer and speaker:
Truth must be to us as David was to his soldiers, worth ten thousand of
them; so worth our life, goods, liberty and all. The speech of a woman; I will
not therefore deny a truth, lest I should die; but I will not lie lest I be
damned. Tell me, what laws could bridle liars, if this course were lawful?
How foolish were the Martyrs who lost their life for want of this trick? Whose
testimony should be current in Court? These equivocators object the lies of the
midwives, Abraham, David, Rahab etc. But one sin excuses not another. When 1 Samuel 16. the Prophet said he came to sacrifice, he was not asked the question,
he spoke the truth, but not all, neither needed he, Christ seemed willing to
go further, but did not; and why? Because he was dissuaded by others. Other
examples which they bring, are not words which require a reservation to clear
them from a lie, but have an entire truth in them being aright understood. The
conclusion is, the trade of equivocation is divellish.

Ambition.
A tenth is, affectation of honor and preferment, for which it is easy to lose
a good conscience; he that can lose a little pomp, may purchase a great deal
of peace. So also to end, schism and singularity, these and such like, Schism
and singularity.
are oil to this flame of this corruption; cut these off, intercept these
succors and through mercy this carnal reason may be starved and vanish for
lack of nourishment and fuel. But I insist no longer: let this serve for the
fourth branch, and so for the whole use of Admonition.

A fourth use may be confutation of Popery: It is a mere dunghill raked
Confutation of Popery.
All the world itcheth to go after them. Those that fear God should say as
Peter answered Christ, Joh. 6. Will ye we do but gugge and tire most men with
our preaching of self-denial and faith: Alas! one carnal Popish fellow would
draw more after him, then ten Preachers. As one says, The Devil never shed
drop of blood for us; yet he boasts that he can have ten to one more at his
beck then Christ. Popish Ambassadors have pulled away abundance of London
professors to their Mass; they stablish their throne upon these two pillars of
pomp and devotion, both carnal; and by their Circe her cup, have made drunken
the Princes, Peers, people of the earth from the highest to the lowest. Those
divelish devices and pretenses of theirs, their antiquity, universality,
visibility, without interruption, of succession, their consent: Their goodly
shows, rich vestments, ceremonies, golden Temples, Altars, Images, and
Crucifixes, their allegation of Fathers, patching up old garments, with the
shreds of man's testimonies, have set such a flourish upon their Religion in the
eyes of fools, that they have infinitely scrued themselves into the affections
of our libertines and carnal Protestants; Eccles. 7.26.
I have touched this point in one sermon before, I will here be short: As
Solomon says of the harlot, so say I of all their painted Religion; He whom
God hates shall be caught by her: And it is just that so many in this land
are left to tickle after this Religion of theirs; The Lord leaves them to be
deluded hereby, because they never cared to receive the truth; to be gulled
with pebles, because they loathed Pearls. And when error has gotten once into
the entralls and bowels, it pleases so well, and is so rooted, that they
hardly return to their former diet any more: Genesis 8.12.
The Dove cared not for the strait Arc, when as once the face of the earth was
dry, and gave hope of large liberty. The only soil for Popery are the loose
moulds of carnal reason: There she roots and prospers: besides this, they
mightily insinuate themselves by carnal reason in another kind. Their great
promotions and preferments, which they profer to their adherents, do mightily
prevail with ambitious minds, and has drawn aside many pregnant wits.

Another trick of carnal policy in Popery is this, That they have always Sinons
and factors among our selves, to bring in the Trojan horse among us, under
pretense that our Religion and theirs, our ceremonies and theirs, do not so
differ, but that wise Cassandrian spirits, and men of moderation might
reconcile them together. In opposition whereof, one of our worthies wrote his
Reformed Catholic, and showed, that (notwithstanding their blanchings) we
must be as irreconciliable with them as light and darkness. To this end was
that cursed Interim in Charles the ninth, and Luthers time, even to eat out
the marrow of the Gospel, and to choke all that were unsound at heart. The
like to which, was that Possiack Synod in France; and still to this day, do
they keep their possession among us, by the mediation and negotiation of such
agents of theirs who (abhorring the power of truth) uphold Popery by their
distinctions, and by consorting and complying with the Papist to the uttermost,
that he may be pleased, whosover is wronged. And thus the cause of Christ from
age to age loses ground, and Popery enlarges it self, as the sea incroaching
upon the shore. As our worthy Martyr John Rogers once told those Anglo-Germane
exiles, if they still resolved to maintain this Popish Pandora, and not to
establish pure worship, abandoning their trash and formalities, all would go
to wreck, so we find it.

Origin, notwithstanding all his Allegories of the text, yet made a gross and
literal construction of that text concerning Eunuchs; making himself one
corporally, for the desire he had of virginity: But such tricks and devices of
men the Lord abhorres: I confess that himself for a time permitted a pedagogy
under the law, (when the light of truth was dim) consisting of such carnal
rites and abstinences, clensings and humiliations; but withal he confined them
to their space and period, and meant not to have his Gospel and the clear
sunneshine thereof to be darkened with such blind devotions of superstitious
brains: No, Gods art is able to invent ways often times more efficacy then
such as these, which indeed have a show of Religion, in not satisfying the
flesh, but are brought in to oppose the power of Christ, Col. 3. ult.
who is a stronger man to cast out Satan, then he is to hold his possession:
But Satan will never cast out Satan, for then could not his kingdom endure. I
conclude therefore upon these grounds, that till carnal reason and religion
can be reconciled, (which is as hard as to yoke the Unicorne to the plow)
Popery and Christian Religion cannot stand together. So much for this third use.

Terror to all that cleave to carnal reason.
Brethren, behold not your own baseness only in some few pranks of carnal
reason, as in devising of excuses and shifts to defend thy sin, or in
rejecting Gods counsels and commands, or in cavilling against the promises:
But take this mirror of thy cursed nature, thy perverted and degenerate reason,
and see what an ugly hiew thou art of, in the sight of God; a very natural
idiot is not more yrkesome unto thee, and unfit for thy service, through his
perverted brain and cross foolishness, then thou by this depravednesse and
reason of understanding, have made thy self yrkesome and odious to God, and
unmeet for his service. Consider of it sadly, although some relics of reason
are left in thee for thy natural and civil courses and ends, yet in the maine
respect, and in that wherein thou were more excellent then all creatures, and
barest Gods image about thee, I mean holy reason and pure understanding in
divine matters, and for heaven, thou art most wretchedly debaucht of all other.
Reason was set up in thee by thy creation, as a Queen in her throne, with her
Scepter in her hand, furnished with all excellency, to conceive and judge,
affect and savor Gods righteousness and will, abhorring all other. But by old
Adam, lo, she is fallen into the hands of thieves, who have rifled and robbed her
of her best jewels; she has not lost a few spangles and ornaments of her
attire and dress, but is deposed from her royal estate, and the sway she bare
over all the powers of the soul, will, affections and conscience, (which were
as her Peers and the Nobles of her Court) and above all the members of the body
(which were as her subjects of lower rank) but both under her authority,
going, coming, and doing what she pleased, in a most beautiful and comely
agreement: But now she has lost her government, they rather sway her with
their violence and impetuousnesse: For why? She has lost her subjection to
God, her dignity is gone, and now in stead of spiritual clear insight into
Gods mysteries, she is left blind, erroneous and perverse: Not as a sick
Physician who has all his skill still, save that he is let from the
exercise of it by accident; but bereft both of power, will and skill altogether.

Come hither ye Pelagians and Anabaptists, and visit this Iezabel thrown down
by her Eunuchs from her Tower, and dashed in pieces, so that none can say this
is she: Behold this widow sitting as Tyrus in the ashes of desolation, and yet
having no sense of her loss, she misses not one of her jewels, nor
eare-rings, she feels not the loss of her Crown and Scepter: Oh! woeful
creature that was wont to be enriched with such choice pearls and goodly
jewels, as all the earth had not the like, shall all the world, all the
creatures, shall God and the Lord Jesus, and his Ministers and servants,
bewail and weep over her, saying, Oh, that thou saw what thou art stripped
off! And shall she be senseless of her poverty and nakedness? Beloved, give me
one carnal man or woman in all this assembly, that ever was troubled for this
their misery, and I will recant! Even as a poor man cuts his meat with the
same rusty knife wherewith he does his work, so one tool serves for all
business: Carnal men handle Gods matters and their own with the same tools.
look with what instrument they bargain and buy and sell in the world, the
same they go to work withal in the most curious and holy services of God: By
it they judge, esteem, affect, practice; and all these they do perversely,
mistakingly, erroneously; and condemn all which sorts not with them: Nay
besides this cloth has taken a deeper dye and tincture, she is plagued with
other false principles of worldlings which make her brutish, profane and
Atheistical, so that if we could see such a one, Pelagian, Papist, or
Machiavilian, in their true colors, we would think we saw the Devil in the
flesh: Who would not tremble to see such a sight? Who abhorres not Esau
despising his birthright for his red pottage? Who loathes not a Papist in his
carnal worship? And yet carnal reason (the root of both) who trembles at?
Who is moved to see sots and swine to trample these Pearls of Religion under
feet, at the trough of their own draffe, profits and pleasures? Who thinks
such wisdom sensual and divellish? Who says with Christ, Get thee behind
me Satan? Thou savourest the things not of God, but of men? Those savourlesse
wretches, whose God is their belly, and whose glory is their shame, Matthew.
16.24. Phil. 3.18.
whence came they, but out of this womb? Nay (brethren) who think themselves
such jolly ones as these? And yet (as wise as they are) to hear them talk of
regeneration, Christ and faith, were a spectacle more ridiculous then any
Pageant!

Let therefore (I beseech you) this terror sink into all your hearts, and
carry rottenness into your bones, Application of it.
who are sick of this disease: you shall not need the fever, dropsy or plague
to destroy you; your bane is in your bosom: And will you cover it over with a
fair suit and not see it? Then I wish ye to look upon that curse of God
which commonly haunts such persons. How did that woeful Spira by the counsel
of the Popes legate and carnal reason, deny the truth? What made the halter to
hang Achitophel? Did not carnal reason? Oh, (says he) thy counsel is
forsaken, David will prevail, prevent death by murder! How does God leave
many a civil and moral fellow (that stood upon his carnal bottom) to
reproachful sins? To strike and kill in their wrath and so come to shame: To
commit rapes and unnatural lust, and so come to their ends: What examples have
we seen of this in our Country? As if the Lord from heaven would be avenged
of all despisers of Religion! How many of your moral and good natures are
daily seduced to uncleanness and drunkenness? Oh! well may we say, where is
the Scribe? 1 Cor. 1.16.
Where is the wizard of the world, that lays up for a rainy day, and says,
soul take thine ease? How suddenly is he pulled down from all, God be fools
carnal reason.
and dies like a fool? How does God scatter the imaginations of such as could
make themselves merry with disdain of Religion? And what fools does he make
them? How many of your ambitious ones, dye beggars? How many of your reaching
heads, engrossers of farms, trades, and such as have many irons in the fire,
come to the state of banquerupts? And then, Oh! Puritans are wise men, for
keeping within their bounds! But till sad experience come, they will either
have all, or lose all. Here some of them are encumbred with suits at law which
ruin them: Others defeated of their ambitious hopes, and being frowned upon by
their betters, run mad, or prove beggars, having lost a hundred of pounds for
moone-shine in waters; some hang themselves: Sad presidents.
Others meet with potent opposites who crush them; others looking after
gallants, get harlots into their bosoms; small matters are too base for them,
therefore great things must bane them: As Saul falsely of David, so may I truly
say of this, they have chosen her to the confusion of their own face! How are
Herod's crossed and beaten down in magnifying their parts? Some Scholars at
University losing their wits for their proud aspiring spirits: Others thinking
to win the spurs, have been disgraced by God in their Pulpits, their acts,
stricken dumb, their wheels taken off, and they made ridiculous, to teach
others to be humble, and make conscience the foundation of their wisdom and
learning: As that woeful and cruel King of France in his ruff, would needs
force one of his Nobles to take a staff and run a tilt with him, and so one
of the broken splinters running in at his eye, pierced his brain and killed him:
So does carnal reason put one weapon or other into Gods own hand, by which
they run with him till their own throat is cut, and they destroyed. Oh! be
all such abased in your selves, and become fools that you may be wise; and
that in time, before God prevent ye by his wrath, and so you wish it too late.
This for Terror. I will add some counsel after Reproof.

Another branch therefore, may be bitter reproof to all sorts for their
Reproof in diverse respects.
I have touched some particulars (by occasion) before; Practice of carnal
reason reproved in all sorts.
I will add a few more here: I say, it should convince the consciences of us
all that are before the Lord this day, for our arrerages of carnal reason: We
should say as Pharaohs butler, Lord this day comes much of my sin in this
kind to my remembrance: O Lord, the branches of this stock are infinite! How
often has my base heart stumbled at the pureness, the closeness of

Oh! when I have found unkind, unthankefull and base usage at the had served
an ill master who will conceal the labor of my love. Oh! ye Headburrowes,
and Officers of Towns, let this truth of God convince ye: how do you look
at pleasing men, David's spiritual reason, that blessed God for giving him an
heart to build a Temple, and prepare stuff for it, although it were the lot of
Solomon to have the name of it? So God had it, how little cared he by whom? So
Christ were preached, how little did Paul envy, or care by whom? And so
again, what is the common speech of men? If I had ever hurt him, it would not
have grieved me to be ill

Therefore I beseech you in Gods fear, let this be a special mean to humble
us all for this our base enterfeering with God in his holy ways, Application
of it.
by our carnal reason. Oh! you who have been so ready to be led from God, by
fear of parents displeasure, loss of favor of betters, repent and break
your hearts: Ministers who have betrayed the cause of God by base time-serving,
and pleasing men, loathnesse to suffer, Oh! repent of your carnal reason, and
recover Gods losses ere ye dye. Oh! you that have chosen to save your livings,
or lives, rather then Gods honor, consider how small your gains have been, in
losing your souls for a molehill of earth.

Repent, O carnal wretch! who would never be brought to more religion then
lay in the lap of thy carnal reason, not cut off a lock for God, not forgo a
petty oath for him, not lose so much love of an husband, a Landlord, as is
worth two strawes for him. Repent and be humbled, O thou that have fleerd and
laughed in thy sleeve at the sincere! Thou who have made Gods worship and
profession to serve thy turn, and sold thy self by it, to credit, to custom
in shop, to good marriage by it, thy self being bad. Come out, O thou
hypocrite, who (like Absalon) have openly spread thy Tent, for the attaining of
thine own ends! Ye politic projectors and cunning plotters for your own
gains, enhansing above others, though with an ill conscience, and oppressing
of the silly, humble your selves and be ashamed! Take God and his people to
witness this day by your tears and mourning, that it is so. You that have
come, and are still coming to the Sacrament with carnal hearts, for custom,
and to prevent the Court, or reproach, rather then conscience, who have your
hearts on the left hand, saying, I see nothing there to be had, it is no likely
thing Abana can heal me, and Jordan can cure my leprosy! Me thinks I fear I
shall go home as I come, and lose my journey! Oh! above all others, repent ye
of this carnal dispute! Naman repented: repent you, ye have sinned with him,
repent with him on Gods name. The Lord from heaven (beloved) shower down
blessing, and convince your spirits of these and all other declension^ of yours
by carnal reason.

And to conclude, Counsels added. 1. Let not the conceit of your Religion
deceive you.
lest ye should think (any of you) that your disease is incurable, be staid
with a word or two of counsel. And first, beware lest the conceit of your
religion blindfold your eyes, that ye should not see how carnal ye are: it
is not that which can save you harmless. The ground is naught, and your black
color will take no other dye. What boots it that now and then you hear the
Word? That will not alone mend you, as long as this bosom Orator lodges
within, which will in one night undo as much as God has done all the week.
Offers, and wishes, and prayers, vanish where this Devil is harbored. Judge.
20.8.
Little Iether cannot kill Zeba and Zalmunna, great Giants. What is hail shot
to shoot down a Fort? Or a spear to the scales of Leviathan? As long as thou
lie in this ship, thy going up and down stops not her motion: thou art
carried by it nevertheless. Carnal reason is no torrent, soon up soon
down; but a gulf which only the Spirit of God can exhaust and dry up.

Secondly, consider well the nature of it: it is enmity to God, 2. Counsel.
Consider the nature of it. Enmity to God.
and perpetually opposite to his matters. The more spiritual the object, the
more contrary is this. Till it be searched to quick, it is smooth and quiet; but
then it will fly in Gods face. Gamaliel advised his fellows, Act. 5. to
desist, lest they should fight against God. Carnal reason dares do it; either
at long sword, or with a pocket dagger: Be afraid therefore lest God turn
again and fight against thee! Acts 23.3.4.
As Paul said to him that perverted the Law, so I to thee, Take heed God smite
not thee, thou painted wall, that opposest his pureness and spiritualnesse.
Acts 13.8.
Paul seeing Elimas the Sorcerer, bent himself against him, and said, Oh! thou
full of all malice and subtilty, how long will thou pervert Gods way? Stoop
therefore to God, and prevent the wrath!

Thirdly, 3. Counsel. And the penalties attending the custom of this evil. 1 Samuel 4.9.
consider whether Gods hand be not upon thee by some either spiritual penalty
of a dead, hard, impenitent, scornful spirit: or else temporal judgment upon
thee, according as thy sin lies. When thou see God really come against thee,
play not the Philistin, to fight against him the second time. God can vex thee
even by them thou have scorned: He can force thee to consult with a poor
Minister for ease, scaring thy conscience. If he do so, resist not. God
delights to resist the proud, and by mean things to beat down mighty. Be not
as the Drunkard on the top of the mast, who being beaten, felt not. God aims
(by conquering of thy masterly carnal reason) to pull down twenty more jolly
fellows. Once I knew one who was converted to God by an holy servant of his,
and his conversion brought the whole Town into order under Gods beck. For
why? as Ahabs childrens guardians trembled at Iehu, when they saw two Kings
could not stand: so these seeing one tall Cedar fall, and stoop with all his
wisdom, fell down flat. Oh envy not the Lord this honor! 2 King. 10.4.
make him and thine own soul this amends! Entertain but a suspicion at
least, that God will be revenged. Brethren, Gods market grows low, this ware
lies upon our hand: let us take some handsell this day of some of ye; we will
take any thing rather then sit still. If I could but draw a jealousy and fear
that all is not well with some of you; I should go home with gladness. Oh!
Does God say, 1 Cor. 1.12.
Not many great, learned, and wise are called? And do not I tremble? O Lord am
I one of these few? Say not, if there be but three at Church to day touched, I
will be one. It stands not in boasting. Oh! that this needle might draw the
thread after it.

4. Counsel.
Fourthly know, that as hard as this leprosy is to be cured, the Lord is able
to do it. Look upon Naaman in the 13. verse. Yea, by the despised remedy of
preaching, even a foolish way to flesh. See those prophesies, Esaias 25. ult. He
shall pull away the cover of darkness, and pull down the lofty ones. So Esaias
24. Read also Ezekiel. 28. Though Tyrus sat as a Queen, thought herself wiser
then Daniel, having increased her wealth and jewels; yet God says, he would
pull her down. Labor that this pulling down may be in mercy. But more of
this in the use of exhortation, and the means there prescribed. Thus much for
these fourth and fifth uses of Terror and Reproof.

Exhortation.
and so conclude the Doctrine. And Give up our weapons of carnal Reason to
God. Job. 42.2.
I exhort all Gods people, that if formerly carnal reason, distrust, and
cavilling of heart have dogged them in matters of God: they would now at last
(being thus convinced of the truth of God) startle and shrugge at it, and say
with Job (in a like case) I have once spoke, but I will hold my peace, and lay
mine hand upon my mouth. He had long jangled and cavilled with God, alleged
for his own innocence, and seemed to call God to the Bar of his own
carnal reason And as his friends one way had cavilled against his uprightnes,
by the misery that was upon him: So he on the contrary, cavilled against the
justice of God, by justifying himself. But the Lord approved neither of both,
but sent Elihu to be a moderator between them: And the Lord steps in him self,
and convinces them both; till at last Job yields with confusion of face, and
comes in with abhorring himself, and silence. Oh! this is (up and down) our
base spirit: we have long lived in an habitual contradicting of God, not only
in his crossing of us, but in his ordinary walking toward us. Oh! how should it
humble and tame us! Oh! how should we abhor our cavilling spirits! The very
Papist himself is not more carnal then our spirit is: They cavil against a
spiritual presence of Christ in the Sacrament, and plead the words (Hoc est
corpus) tooth and nail: They cry, Is it not the word, the very Text? (They can
cleave to the Text when it seems to serve their turn, but else they make it a
nose of wax) And how eager are we against them for it, calling them Capernaits
and Carnal? But mean time we see not that carnal reason within our own
breasts, which fights against Gods spiritual government and administrations.
We cavil saying, If God were as he promises, we should hear some real
voice from heaven, or see some glimse of his presence in an outward manner:
Surely he would declare from heaven who are for him, and who against him:
Carnal reason wishes old ways in stead of a promise.
His enemies should not flourish and have their wills as they have, Goats
should not trample upon sheep, surely he would judge the world in equity, and
not suffer things to be so darkely carried. Indeed we have the word, and his
promises sounding in our ears, and his threats, but he follows them not
really, with blessing the godly, nor destroying the wicked. Oh! those were
happy times, when the high Priests Ephod answered cases, when God spoke with
voice and by miracles, visions and Prophets! This scurfe is lodged in our
bosoms, and we little ponder that, Heb. 1.1. that now God speaks by his
son; as if he should say, this manner of his revealing himself, exceeds all
other to a believing soul. Faith can make a real presence (though no carnal)
both in sacrament and in word preached, and in crosses, and in the most hidden
administrations of God in the Church: But it is this cursed carnal reason,
which darkens all, and causes every object to be like the glass through which
we behold it.

To return therefore, if thou have been a man given to thine appetite, put
thy knife henceforth to thy throat, and stand not to defend or maintain it
against the Lord: Bestow no more wit to cavil, but fight against thy
infidelity: Sarah laughed behind the door at the message of the Angel, but
she was ashamed of it, Heb. 11.
and she is said by faith to conceive seed, she had cast out carnal reason,
ere she could breed by the promise. If thou see a difficulty in the promise
which thou can not match, yet turn thy struggling against thy self, and give
glory to God in shaming thy self, that so thou may give him more in
believing. Oh what should it boot me to hear men say, I have as moral a
people as any are; except it may be added, as spiritual also, what joy can be?
moral and carnal civility, and rational Religion may well agree: truly this
taint is deeply festred into most of us: You of this congregation look to it.
No congregation (for this fifty years) has been so beaten and staved off from
carnal reason, a life of sense, and unbeleefe as this; and therefore look to
it, Satan will more rejoice in your flesh, then in any other: if he can rule in
you by the scepter of carnal reason (as truly he does in most of us) Oh! how
will he crow upon his dunghill, and exalt himself above the truth of God so
long preached! Give over this strong hold, forsake and surrender this castle
for God, stick no longer to it: say thus, If I cannot believe as I would, yet
I will set my mark upon Gods word, I will honor such as can: Gods truth ceases
not to be faithful, because I am unbeleeving! God keep me from being
unfaithful, that it may be true to me; Alas! if God spoke never so really from
heaven, what were it without faith? Joh. 21.
And when Thomas put his finger into Christ's sides, what had he gained by it,
if still unfaithful? God has made himself clear to me by more expressions
then to many; I have had more patience, deliverances, blessings, redemptions,
then many; I have touched and tasted the Lord, and groped him with hands, and
yet unbeleefe has made all unsavory: So that I see it must be faith and not
carnal reason which must prevail. For then Israel in the wilderness had
never been barred from Canaan by unbelefe: Oh therefore! I am weary of this
woeful enemy: I could put ten cavillers to silence, ere I could set carnal
reason at a nonplus; she has a fountain within her springing up to death, and
is never weary. But Oh Lord! pardon what is past, and through mercy for the
time to come, I shall turn a new leaf! Oh! that I could (nay the Lord)
prevail but thus far with you! I dare not leave you here; But Oh! that you
who are not come so far as this, might at least attain this!

Exhortation. We must be Gods fools ere we be wise to salvation.
that thou may be made wise. The sun never rises, but ye shall perceive a
dimnesse and blackness cast upon the air, though the moon and stars shine
never so brightly before. So where the light of divine wisdom approaches, it
causes all the wisdom of flesh to vanish as smoke before it: And this the
Lord of purpose effects in all whom he converts, as he rehe did to Naaman. He
will make all flesh to be as grass, and all the beauty of it as stubble, that
he may shine only in the soul, and that the Kingdom may be the Lords. It is
(I confess) as ridiculous to us, Joh. 3.5.
as that a man should enter again into his mothers womb: But such a change
must there be; the fruit in the womb undergoeth not more alteration, ere it
see the light, then carnal reason must do ere the soul be begotten to God:
It must be with it, as with a scholar that would learn a poor trade; he must
lay down all his learning, and stoop to be an idiot in that science till he be
taught it: It must even be as the Jesuits novice is to his superior, whatsoever
he teaches him, or enjoynes him (be it never so repugnant) he must submit, he
must have no understanding, cavills or objections against it, but freely suffer
himself to be led into the stream of authority, and captivate all fears,
unlikelyhood, dangers, to the blind obedience of governors; he must say the
Crow is white, and the Swan black, yea even suffer his senses and brains to
be knocked out, that he may be a true novice, a wise Catholic: no Jesuit will
else have to do with him, if he say not yea to his assertions, and nay to his
denialls, if he be not ready in all things to assent. This I affirm of them as
most unnatural (for Religion expells not reason, but rectifies the carnality
of it) but yet (in a sort) the Lord requires no less in point of carnality,
then they do in point of reason it self.

The Lord will triumph over it, and say, where is the Scribe? The wise man? 1
Cor. 1.15.
He will cause this wisdom to become very madness, ere ever he commit the
seed of true wisdom to it, and the soul hearing principles of Christ and
faith, must chain up cavilling, and thrust her eyes into Gods bosom,
professing to know nothing in any mystery of Religion, save that which truth
reveals; and having (as Jonathan by his honey) received sight, Psalm. 73.15.
he must cry out, Oh, fool that I was! Oh, beast in thy sight, Oh Lord! Oh,
now I appear a very fool to my self, and perceive that darkness cannot
comprehend it self, till a light of God be held into the dungeon, and then it
falls down as Saul with that light which shone about him, Act. 9.
and says, what will thou have me to do? I am as thou will have me; 1 Samuel 3.
my wisdom, my wit, shall be thine, speak Lord and thy servant hears: he
that formerly should have persuaded me of this, might as easily have forced me
to say, it is light at midnight; But Lord now I am a fool in my self, merely
empty of mine own sense, and wholly thine, addicted to swear to thine edicts,
and if thou s^^ak the word, I lay hand upon mouth, and have done: This is to be
as a little child whom ye may win to say what ye list: Oh! this is the next
way to make thee wise to salvation! This is to be unto Gods wisdom as the
Queen of Sheba was to Salomons, even to have no spirit left in her: Oh! thou
must say with David, My fingers shall forget to play, and lose all cunning.

Thirdly, thou must so be stripped of all thine own, Word of truth must cast the
seed of God into the soul, when once emptied of her self.
as yet thou must Paul's did, that thou may see clearly those things that
concern thy peace: All the fogs, mists, and cavills of carnal reason being
scattered: Oh! let her interrupt the Lord as she will, yet the soul knows
whither to go for deciding the question; she will not forfeit her bond, by
which she is bound to stand to the last decision of the word.

Fourthly, get the spirit of the Lord Jesus into thy soul, The fourth. The
Spirit of the Lord Jesus must create holy wisdom in the soul. Joh. 1.18.
who is the active worker of true and sanctified wisdom in the renewed soul:
According as the Apostle tells us, He is made unto us of the Father wisdom
etc. He enlightens every one that comes into the world with true light, being
that light which the soul must come by to the Father, whose light cannot else
be approached: By the flesh of the Lord Jesus the soul is made capable of this
light of the word; else there is no capablenesse: And the Spirit of the Lord
Jesus works the soul into this light, because it reveals him unto it, in the
mystery of reconciliation and forgiveness: For why? Till the soul be made
wise to salvation, all her wisdom is only in the brain, and will not hold: The
Spirit of Christ therefore lets into the heart as well as the head of the
believer this light, and conveies the goodness, warmth and sweet of it, into
the soul, and that it is, which causes it to dwell in the soul, and to be an
immortal and un^^ caying light, which shall abide to eternal life, till the
soul see light in Gods light; else the light of the Hypocrite, is but a
violent and dim twilight, caused rather by a necessity of conviction, then a
powerful persuasion. Therefore apply thy self especially to such helps as
may bring Christ into thy soul; The sight of his salvation to thy soul is the
quintessence of spiritual wisdom; this will cause thee to grow in all light
when once thou art enlightened in the mystery of acknowledging Christ to be thy
Savior: Ephe. 1.18.
For why? This will teach thee that Christ is all godliness in a mystery; all
the whole truth of God is lapped up in him, as his infants body was lapped up
in clothes and swathbands: Else all knowledge is but a guessing and
conjecturall thing: count it then thy chief wisdom to be wise in escaping the
snares of death, and in believing unto salvation: Oh! who shall bring me where
I shall hear a Sermon of Christ, to pardon me, to reconcile me to God! If
faith in the Lord Jesus once turn thy stream, and carry thee with a fuller
sway to heaven, then all thy worldly wit carried thee before, to thy cavills
and objections, there is hope, thou have well quitted thy self of carnal
reason.

Faith the true eye to behold the mysteries of salvation.
Fifthly, look with the eye of faith into all the mysteries of godliness, to
bear down carnal reason: No mystery can be understood without faith. The
Spirit of God works faith first, as that instrument, whereby the soul is led
into all the secrets of God: Faith by a promise will make carnal reason stand
by as a very fool. Hence it is, that the spiritual man is said to judge all
things, even the hidden things of God: And yet to be judged of no man: 1 Cor. 3.
Why? Because the light of faith, is the highest light: All other lights are of
a lower kind: And hence it is, that a carnally wise man coming to hear a
poor soul to speak (by the light of faith) touching the matters of God,
stands as a man astonished, and as a fool in the presence of a wise man. For
why? The Spirit which revealed the promise of salvation, reveals therewith all
other promises, and all parts of the will of God: So then, I say, in the fifth
place, let faith subdue thy reason, and show thee a real sensiblenesse, savor
and wisdom in all the matters of God: By her eye, judge of the Sacraments,
discern the real presence of Christ there, (though not really carnal) behold
a sacramental union between him and the Elements, for the carrying of the
soul into an union with him and all his graces: Faith in the promise of the
ordinance, will as well give thee a spiritual savor in Christ sacramental,
as ever it did in thy reconciliation: Both being planted upon a word of God,
whereto the Sacrament is an inseparable and sure seal: Let carnal reason
judge of a Sacrament, and what will it make of it? A piece of bread, a cup of
wine: She believes no more then she sees: What wonder? A man may draw water out
of a deep well without a bucket, as easily as a carnal man can gather sap or
savor out of the Sacrament, except Christ be his wisdom and righteousness:
Spiritualnesse in the first promise, tasted by faith, gives a relish to the
soul in all other parts of the word: And so I might speak of each part of
sanctification. Faith only can get a spiritualnesse out of each promise of
God, to purge the soul of her corruptions: To guide her in her way: To answer
her doubts, her fears, her objections: To support her in her crosses and
straits: To season her blessings, and to preserve her unblameable until the
day of her salvation. A carnal man savours no more of these, then a dog
savours a chip; for he wants that whereby such privileges are spiritually
revealed. She harkens not to the word, (as the Pilot neglected Paul, Act. 27.)
But Paul had the revealing of the safety of the ship which the Pilot wanted,
and therefore slighted the Pilots judgment far more then he could do Paul's.

Sixthly, I exhort thee to savor spiritual things, Savor spiritual things.
and to be able to prove thou do so, and that thou art made truly wise for
spiritualnesse. Quest. How may I prove it? Answ. By these few marks. First,
such Sermons, Ordinances, Ministeries, as savor most of spirit and life,
affect and ensue; such as savor of flesh and baseness, form and carnal
reason, reject and detest: Read and hear the word, with seeking out the true
scope and true savor thereof, prying into it, as the Cherubins into the mercy
seat, not resting in the bark and surface: Bless God for any wisdom to weigh
and judge aright of holy things, and their difference; cleave to a spiritual
worship of God, and abhor a carnal serving of God: Hear the word with
humility, faith, attention, obedience; for to the humble and trembling at his
word God reveals wisdom, Psalm. 25. Esaias 28. Prepare thy self reverently to
the sacraments, with faith, repentance, love and hunger: whatsoever savours of
flesh, as pride, pomp, ease, self ends, world, pampering of the body, suspect
it not to be from God. Learn with Paul, 2 Cor. 5. to accept Christ according
to spiritual, not carnal respects. It is death to the spirit to be carnal,
or the flesh to be spiritual, but to the spirit, it is life, Romans 8.

Secondly, love simplicity: It is a companion of spiritualnesse; 2. Love
simplicity.
get the one, and the other will follow. Affect not a subtle, overreaching,
close and worldly-wise conversation. It will justly cause Gods people to
suspect thee: Let not a double, winding, shifting heart and practice be found
in thee, either to God or man-ward. Wisdom I dislike not, seasoned with grace
and meekness, but carnal and politic wisdom of the world abhor: we are
called Protestants, Professors, be not ashamed to be according to our name:
let us be without welt or guard, not bordering upon defense of evil, or
cavilling against the reproves of the word: Be not simple only in point of
Religion, but also among the Religious; Be not ashamed of God, or of Gods
faithful ones, for their meannesse. Better is he that walks in his
simplicity, then he that perverts his way and is a fool. Condescend to mean
things, Romans 12. Gods precious ones come out of cottages, yea sometime caves
and dens of the earth.

Thirdly, labor for heavenly mindedness, Phil. 3. Col. 3.2. 3. Labor for
heavenly mindedness.
Our conversation is in heaven. Let your affections be above, where Christ
sits: Resurrection of the soul with Christ, and an holy activenesse of
spirit with fruitfulness, is a step to the souls ascension with Christ, and
converse with God. This world full of carnal occurrences of profits,
pleasures, companies, earthly courses and delights, will make the most savoury
Christian forget himself, without great grace. Be armed therefore against this
temptation: Know these things well and behold them aright, they are nothing,
happiness is not in them, they promise, but keep not touch; use them therefore
as if thou usedst them not, as wings upward, not as clogs; let them be as
water, and grace as oil, which will swim aloft; pass through them as that
fresh river is said to go through the salt sea, without taste or
brackishnesse: If grace be chief, she will be a true moderator between
these things and the world; but if the world be chief, she will so bribe and
bewitch thee, that the best things will lose all savor and welcome in a short
time.

4. Prefer the words verdit.
Fourthly, hear the word, before the judgment of reason in all the promises
and governments of God, personal or public: Censure not God as unrighteous.
It came from God that Absolon should prefer the judgment of Hushi, that he
might overthrow both him, and Achitophell. Say of carnal reason, as he did,
the judgment of it is not good in case: And when Achitophell has counseled,
then call for Hushi, and say, I dare not trust carnal reason: Is there never a
Prophet of the Lord, Baals Priest are too pleasing to be faithful in this
case. So much for spiritualnesse.

5. Be wise in all thy course.
Lastly, be wise in thy whole course. Quest. How shall I try it? Answ. If first
thou have the properties of a man truly wise: As first to choose the one thing
necessary: To discern between things that differ: To be ready for the
hardest: To make safe thy retreat. Secondly, true wisdom is planted in Gods
fear. Eccles. last Deuteronomy. 4.6. Thirdly, shun the ways of error, to discern
between the way of the fool and the wise. Col. 1.9. Fourthly, practice
wisdom, both in deliberation for God, and in determination. Psalm. 119.57. More
fully be wise for thy soul and self. Matthew. 6.23. Redeeming the time, Ephesians.
5.18. Project and plot savourly, seasonably and wisely for God and his glory
and ends. Romans 8. Savor the things of God, and be wise for God, are all one in
the Greek word. Use all watchfulness against all enemies, especially
spiritual. Mark 13.34. Meddle with our own business, finding still enough
to do at home, 1 Thessalonians. 4.12.
2 Thessalonians. 3.10. else we be inordinate and busiebodies, as Peter, Joh. 21.21. Be
sure in all cases of doubt, to cleave to things holy, pure, of good report.
Phil. 4.8. A comprehensive rule. Of two moral evils choose not the less, but
abhor both: Of two evils, the one of sin, the other of sorrow, choose the
latter though great, rather then the former though less. Romans 3.8. Let things
of profit and pleasure yield to things honest. 1 Timothy 6.6. Trust not men upon
fair pretenses, but first try them. Be neither stout to believe nothing, nor
credulous to believe any thing. These may serve for a taste, lest I digress
too far. Thus much for the use of Exhortation.

Silly ones have an advantage about carnal reason.
poor, mean in wit and parts, that though they be cast out as Ipta Judge. 20.
from their brethren, and as the poor blind man, Joh. 9. Yet the Lord Jesus
will not forsake them: They want excess of wisdom, but they also are thereby
rid of much carnality, and savor of the flesh; and so their enmity to God, is
the less. Defects have made many happy; they had perished if not perished. A
reverend man of God, once said, it was well for him he was lame on his hand,
for else he had never (in show) been either Minister or Christian. Many
husbands who have wives, and wives who have husbands of less pregnancy and
parts then others, let them know, that in this defect, they have a blessing,
they have the less carnal opposition to encounter in each other, and the
Devil has the less color to tempt them to shrewish, discontented and
churlish behavior. I know that silliness is a want in nature; yet I say,
weakness in parts (if there be any competency of understanding) may as soon
attain grace, as greater abilities: I dare not say, that in silliness it
self there is any praise; for the silly lie open another way to be seduced
both by too much credulity, and levity in mind and manners. But this I say, if
God please to work, the fort of carnal reason is more weak in such, and
sooner shot down. As I say of them whose wealth, credit, learning, birth and
dexterity is small, and cannot greatly commend them to the world; so I say also
of these, both the account they are to make to God is less, and their
obstacles to believing are not so strong as others. Is it not a cause of
blessing God, that he has removed those brazen bars which do so hold out
faith in others? Although then (poor souls) ye are slighted in the world, yet
if ye cast up your recknings right, you may say, Lord seeing it is no better, I
thank thee it is no worse: Except I saw more of the witty and wise to prove
Religious then do, I think it is well enough as it is; I see the least dram
of grace is so precious, and great parts do need so great a measure of it; I
cannot but set mine heart at rest, and content my self with my portion. I know
Lord thou art not an hard Master to gather and reap, where thou neither
strawest nor sowest; Thou requirest no more then according to the abilities
thou give; If I have poor gifts, yet I bless thee for fewer lets: In this
respect, I can digest my weak apprehension, judgment, memory and parts, and
withal the disrepute of the world; I would not for all the worldly wisdom of
the ungodly, change that simple facility of my heart to stoop to the word, and
to submit to the truths of God.

So long as I see Religion to consist in the denying of somewhat, Religion
stanus as much in denying of somewhat as the enjoying of it.
rather then in the addition of any thing, I shall not murmr, that I have
bought some vacancy of distempers, cavillings and resistings of grace, with the
paring of some superfluities which may be spared, counting them happy deffects,
since thou will have it so. I see although no excellency of man can resist
thee, if thou will abase it to the simplicity of Christ's, 2 Cor. 10. yet not
many such are called, 1 Cor. 1. but rather such as have little to lose, and are
glad that Christ will own them, Matthew. 11.6. Mutter not at the worldly wise,
their portion and jollity, for you know not with what lets they are encumbred.
Alas! they must first consult long with their carnal wisdom, and if that
gainsay, they must obey; and how long will it be ere your stout hearts and
stomachs will come down? God must take them as the she-wilde Ass in her
months, when they are in straits, if he will have ought from them: Oh! they
must have the good will of their jolly and gallant wives, or husbands, or
kindred, they must consult with their greatness, and what carnal
inconveniences follow the profession of the Gospel: If these consent nor, they
cannot come: If old customs, gamings, companionships, meriments, their proud
wives, usurious courses, great business in the world will not stand with this
simplicity, they must not meddle. Agrippa was in more chains upon the throne,
then Paul at the bar in this kind; Act. 26.
he was almost persuaded, but his clogs of state and bravery pulled him back:
A world of Lions is in the way, no hope to overcome them. The lands of Elimelec
they would have, but Ruth they will not marry; Ruth ult.
one objection or other is against it. And therefore I conclude, you that want
these pulbacks, bear the more indifferently some defects: They who will not
sow till weather be good, may stand out altogether; but your coast is always
clear: Bless God, wonder at your lot, and say, Lord why should such a plain
Jacob be chosen, and Duke Esau refused? A poor limping, halting creature be
preferred to such a Potentate! A poor David chosen from the sheep, and a tall
Eliab rejected? The rich guests excluded, and poor beggars under hedges and in
high ways welcome! truly because the Lord has chosen them to confound
greatness and carnal reason: Oh! I bless thee (O father) for it, even so it
is, because thou pleasedst so to have it.

Thanksgiveing due to God for freedom.
and press them to bless God, that they have shot this gulf: God has not
done little for such: How many have been left drowned in this whirlepoole, your
selves escaping? It is a token, God means to impart himself yet more
familiarily unto you, and come in and sup, yea dwell with you, (being humble
and broken) because he has taken down such a veil of separation, a wall of
defiance in you: He has cast down your high things, that you might stoop to
the obedience of Christ: Return with Naaman and be thankful. No patient
owes so much to a Physician for his cure in a desperate case, as thou to the
Lord: yea by this cure of carnal reason, believe and get experience with David
for time to come, He that saved me from the Bear and Lion, will also save me
from this Philistin: Get hope and confidence that God will cast out those
remnants and roots of this poison which yet abide; hold down your corky,
bubbling flesh daily, your spark wits, ripe heads, experience and abilities;
Implore still the same sad hand of the spirit to suppress them from pearking
up, you shall find, it will not quite leave you till death; but be not
discouraged; It had the birthright first, and birthrights hold long. Jacob had
recovered the right of birth, when Isaac blessed him, yet it was five hundred
years ere he got possession; in the mean time Jacob was a prisoner and slave
in Egypt, a pilgrim in the wilderness, and in Canaan, no Lord over Edom, till
David and other Kings subdued it. But seeing it was Jacobs by promise, he got
it at last; and so shall thou at death, though the whiles thou be held down
mightily by thy enemy, as Hannah with Peninnah. Trust God, that neither thy
own corruption within, nor yet the world and error of the wicked without, with
all their carnal jollity shall pluck thee from thy sincerity: That which has
been the bane of thousands, zealous Ministers, Magistrates, Gentlemen,
Courtiers, Citizens, Lawyers, Students, and others, yet shall not be thine, if
thou will cleave to God! Oh! beware lest Satan conspiring with thy carnal
heart disguise thee not, and make thee a time-server! When thou see so many
of thy time and parts, education, disposition, kindred and family, still to be
left to their cavills, descants, and the stream of unmortified reason,
loathing and scorning to stoop to the conditions of Christ either to do for
him, or to suffer: Oh! be thankful and think thy state happy, whom God
pulled as a leg out of a Bears jaw, or a brand out of the fire; and consider
how much better it is to bear now and then a squib for thy Religion, then to
be made a booty to the Devil for thy revolting. Thus much for this and the
rest of the uses belonging to this doctrine.

Now I must not forget my promise (beloved) and by so fit an occasion I must
answer a question, and that is this, Answer to a maine quaere.
May not carnal reason in Whether carnal policy be unlawful. Answ. Yes: As
appears by the particulars. 1. Politic and crafty shifting.
how far may policy be admitted with safety of conscience, and in what
particulars? For the first; carnal reason if convinced so to be, (for sometime
lawful policy may seem to be carnal, and yet is not) is simply unlawful. As
may appear by these particulars.

First, politic shifting with an officious lie, or an handsome sudden
evasion, though against truth. Thus the midwives made a lie to avoid the
murder of the Israelitish women: True it is, the Lord covered it in mercy,
because the scope and end was holy, and tending to charity; and it said, the
Lord built them houses, yet not for their lying, but for their mercy. The like
I say touching the woman that concealed Ahimaaz and Jonathan, saying, They were
gone over the brook, when they were in the Well: So Rahab hid the spies, and
is commended for it, Heb. 11. but not for her lie, saying that they were gone.
I say not, that they ought to have discovered them, nor do I say it is easy
to answer the question, what should be done in that or the like cases (the Lord
keep us from straits and from horned occasions and hard exigents which are
both ways difficult) but I say, these things are not lawful, we leave the
dispensation and issue of such things to God, to whom only mercy and pardon
belongs, when the soul has offended by a kind of necessity. But to affirm
that God may be, or is pleased by a lie, or needs it, were horrible. Now then
if a shift or a lie for a good end, a weighty and holy end, yet cannot be
maintained as warrantable, what shall those carnal shifts be counted, which
wicked men use to conceal themselves, when their own lewdness has brought
them into straits? As Ieroboams wives policy to disguise herself going to the
blind Prophet, and making herself another, because she feared Ahija, for her
Idolatry. So Saul's disguising himself when he went to the witch, and making
himself another, lest else his wicked purpose had been defeated. And the like
may be said of the ordinary lies and mannerly shifts used to serve men's own
turns, when there is either a denial of a truth, or affirmation of a
falsehood: As when a servant for some respects does answer shiftingly to any
that shall call for his Master, and ask whether he be within, or at home; and
shall either deny it, or further add, he is gone to such a place, being yet
false; of which sort are infinite other tricks in common use among men, and
counted venial toys; as in promising to go to such a place, to do such a
thing, to come to a friend (no limitation set down) and yet fail, etc.

Secondly, politic closeness, darkness, 2. Politic closeness and
neutrality.
and reserved neutrality to go no further in Religion, then we can come off
fair and make our own retreat safe, without endangering of our selves in any
kind: obeying the commands of men, by disobeying God. This is a real falsehood
of heart and practice, which we call temporising, coming from a base
deceitfulness of the spirit to Godward; and is a deserting of God and his
cause; yea though it be through fear or frailty, as Peter's denial, and the
revolt of many that suffered in time of persecution: But much more when either
no danger, or not so great is to be feared. Suitable whereto is that cunning
temporising that looks at the displeasing of men more then God, Gal. 2.
as when Peter at Antioch ate meats forbidden by the ceremony, (as confessing
an abrogation) and yet when there came Jews thither, he withdrew and abstained
from them, to avoid quarrelling.

3. Politic carnal equivocations and reservations.
Thirdly, politic reservation of conscience in the actual committing of an
evil: As in Queen Mary's time, many would go to Mass with their bodies,
pretending to keep their consciences entire and undefiled: Suitable whereto is
the practice of our Jesuits in their equivocations, whether in their oaths or
other actions, when they swear in word, but say they reserve themselves
mentally unsworne and meant it not, or by some trick of exception which they
suggest to themselves, viz. That such a one went not this way, pointing to
their sleeve; or that they were not in such a place of company, meaning to
betray it to others, etc.

4. Politic self-love.
Fourthly, politic indirectnesse of course, swerving from providence and duty,
for a man's own indemnity; as when David fearing the Philistines, (who
discovered him to be their enemy) and distrusting Gods protection, let his
spittle fall down upon his beard, and scrabbled upon the doors, 1 Samuel 21.13.
so that he was thereupon taken as a mad man by Achish, and so escaped. So the
Papists have a trick which they call good guile (much what the same when we
call an honest thief or knave, who is not altogether so bad as others) and
say, thereby they do great matters both for public and private good ends.

5. Formal policy.
Fifthly, formal policy, when men ( proforma as they call it) or for their fee,
will plead a bad cause, or having been retained on the one side, will
afterward speak for the other, which is the sin of Ambodexters, Sycophants,
and flatterers, who speak on both sides for their vantage.

6. Politic profaneness.
Sixthly, politic profaneness, as Achitophel, who for the making way for his
Masters purpose, played the traitor against his liege, besides the horrible
impieties committed against God.

7. Politic Religion.
Seventhly, politic Religion (which I touched before) when men devise out of
their own brain, a way to devotion, as if Gods course were insufficient, as for
persuading of chastity, to debase marriage under virginity: To teach men
diligent use of the means, by overthrowing the absoluteness of Gods decree;
(as if these two were incompatible) To provoke men to liberality to begging
Friars, by affirming Christ himself was a beggar: To draw people to punctual
confessing of sin, by enjoining auricular confession: To avoid looseness of
lust, by commanding penances and fasts beside the word: To put an heretic to
silence, by falsifying a text, as one of the Fathers to stop the mouth of the
Manichees, affirming two contrary principles of good and evil, out of 2 Cor.
4.4. answers it thus, In whom God (the true God) has blinded the eyes of the
unbeleevers of this world transposing the Genitive cases, and marring the
sense; so putting out both Gods eyes, to put out one of the Devils: 8.
Politic blanching.
So to maintain a carnal point with blanching it over with many rules and
caveats; which rules will never be observed, but the evil will soon be done:
as in point of scandalous games and pastimes: a mere fetch to maintain either
pride in our own abilities, (as if we saw more then common folk) or to
establish carnal liberty: Is not this to choose to be naught with much ado,
rather then to sit still and be honest? Goodness rather desires to be
innocent with jealousy, then guilty with distinctions. And thus I might be
endless. I conclude, what ever reason is carnal, and what ever proceeds
thence, word or deed, is earthly, sensual and divelish. And so much for answer
to the first question.

The second question arising hence is this, whether any policy and What policy
may be used?
though perhaps there may be some appearance of humane mixture in it? Whereto I
answer, that in some cases it is lawful for a Christian to use such policy,
although perhaps to some simple minded ones it may be thought subtilty: for the
matter rests not in the judgment of men (who are ready to censure whatsoever
they cannot comprehend) but what the word allows. For he is allowed not whom
man, but God himself approves. Romans 2. end.
And it is an error in many weak ones, that under pretense of simplicity of
conversation (which God expressly requires of us, 1 Cor. 1.12.) they cry out
of all policy, as circumvention and subtilty. True it is, this wicked world is
full of shifts and subtilties, and sometimes Gods people themselves are too
much given to break their bounds (as I have already showed) but yet, we must
neither condemn the righteous, nor justify the wicked. The Scripture it self
affords us examples and proofs of the lawfulness hereof: Matthew. 10.16. our
Savior tells his Disciples, he sent them forth as sheep in the midst of
wolves; and therefore wills them to be wise as Serpents, and innocent as Doves;
so far as simplicity and pureness will admit, policy is not only lawful,
but also necessary, both for the honor of the truth, and the safeguard of the
godly, their names, estates and persons, God himself justifies policy.
as also for the countermining and opposing of Satan's wiles and policies, and
the malicious plots of his instruments: And the Lord himself does justify it.
For, not only in extraordinary cases, as the borrowing of the Egyptians
jewels and gold, that they might rob them by their sudden departure: But
also in an ordinary way he allows policy: For he taught Joshua policy, Chap.
8. to use a stratageme and circumvent the men of Ai, by dissembling a flight:
and David, 2 Samuel 5.23. bidding him to go against the Philistines by a way
unlooked for. And sundry patterns we have in Scripture of the practice hereof
with commendation. The respects therefore wherein it is lawful must rather be
understood by us, then the thing in general condemned: and they are these.

First, when it repugneth not to a word of God, Upon what terms it is lawful.
manifest or by just consequence deducted. For whatsoever is against the word
cannot be well done, with all the coloring in the world. As for a man in any
case Esaias 8.
or forbear the denial of an untruth, agrees well with the word. Secondly,
when policy trencheth upon charity, and is against mercy, compassion, love,
good report, justice and honesty. Phil. 4.
As Paul says, Finally brethren, whatsoever is just, good, Paul, Col. 3. to
the glory of God the Father. In this respect (as I take it) some of the chief
Martyrs imitated them, Heb. 11.38. who refused to be delivered when they might:
not simply unwilling to be safe: but lest their escape might possibly be an
occasion of insulting to the enemy, and an imputation to their cause, and a
reproach to them for deserting the truth, whereas perhaps setting this regard
aside, some private persons might have fled to one City, being persecuted in
another. For nature it self seeks her own safety; and it is a sin to bring
needless trouble upon our selves.

Romans 14.
The reason is, because whatsoever is not of faith is sin; not only against
knowledge, but without knowledge. For as in the former respect it is most
horrible to go against the light, though the world should judge it never so
glorious and goodly, as Romans 3.8. although good should come of it: so when the
thing is either done against light, or doubtfully, (though in it self the
policy may be lawful, yet) to the doer it is unlawful and a snare; as we see
in the cases of some weak Christians, that because they did but doubtingly
cast a little frankincense into the Idols fire, (without any purpose of
worship) for the safeguard of their lives, although at the present they saw not
so much evil in it, yet afterward, seeing the dishonor to God accruing
thereby, they were so wounded, that they were never well, till they had
reversed their act, and lost their lives. Still I say as before, that we may in
some cases of extremity, pity humane fear or frailty, but that makes nothing
for the allowance of that policy.

In what cases is this policy lawful.
I answer, it is not easy to make an induction of all particulars; yet to
satisfy the mind of the Josh. 2.4.
Thus Rahab in concealing the spies by all her skill and policy had not done
amiss, if she had not used an indirect mean also to save them, to wit a flat
lie: (which yet the Lord did mercifully pardon to her) and so I say of the
other examples before mentioned. But commonly (through the bordering of these
two so nearly) we are very prone to mix the one with the other. 2 Samuel 17.8.
Hushai did well to conceal from Abs^lon the weakness of David, yet it was
hard for him to keep his bounds, and to affirm that of him (for strength and
courage) which as the case then stood, was out of David's power to perform, if
he had been suddenly surprised with such an army: yet the Lord was in the
counsel (not allowing any untruth, but) ordering it to his purpose of safe
conducting David. So to carry our selves aloof from the ungodly by any art of
concealment, to defeat their malice and intents, so we flatter them not, or
wrong the truth, is lawful. For defense of an honest man, it is lawful to
present what we know by him, which might blem^sh the accusation cast upon him,
but to make a lie in his defense is unlawful. Special is that of Zedechia,
consented unto as lawful by Jeremy himself, Jer. 38.36.
where the King (to prevent the suspicion of the Nobles, that the Prophet and
he should talk of surrendering the City) instructs him to answer them by a
concealment of truth, yet with truth. Tell them (says he) that thou
besoughtest me that thou might no more be cast into the dungeon; and that
was true in it self; but neither all the truth, nor that which concurred with
their thoughts: But yet their error was no sin in Jeremy. It is a sure rule
dissimulation by negative concealment is lawful, but no simulation.

A second instance: It is lawful for good ends to use this policy, viz. Act.
26.8.
Paul used this policy in praising Agrippa (a Jew who believed Moses and the
Prophets) for that particular, and that he was a meet judge in the cause; and
(for the present) taxed him not for his incontinency with Berenice (wherein he
professedly lived) although perhaps this, by Agrippa's sin, might possibly
harden him in his course: yet because it had no direct ill on Paul's part, and
made for a good end, it was lawful.

A third instance may be this: It is a lawful policy to use the unavoidable
Paul, Acts 23.6. who seeing the two strong factions of Sadduces and Pharisees
bent against him to overthrow him, used policy to set them together by the
ears. I (says he) am a Pharisee, and the son of one, and am accused this
day of the resurrection of the dead: All this was true, although more was true
also: But he foresaw that this speech would set a quarrel between them, and
so it did, and thereby himself escaped the dint of their fury, and drew the
more potent side against the other from himself. Some might think it a shift
and a subtilty not caring what became of others, so he might escape: But he did
lawfully use the unavoidable sin in which they both lived, to wit faction and
discord, (although simply it was not a sin to hate an heretic) and which it
was not in his power to hinder, for his own safety; he only sought (I say) to
disunite them justly (who were now unjustly combined in a bad cause) that
himself might escape.

Paul although he do not teach us to borrow proofs of men to justify Gods
truth, which needs them not, yet) to convince the Heathen who acknowledged no
other truth, does allege their own writers against them, both the Athenians,
Acts 17. and the Cretians, Tit. 1. So our Savior himself, Matthew. 12.27. asks
the Scribes, If I by Beelzebub cast out Devils, by whom do your children cast
them out? Many of their children took upon them without warrant, but if they
held their call and warrant good, why should they so slanderously accuse our
Savior for his casting out, whose call (they knew) was more unquestionably
good? He equals not their warrant to his, but by a confessed thing, he
convinces them of that they would not acknowledge.

ex. gr. I intend not to punish an offender in such a course of proceeding as I
use against him; yea perhaps, although I would, yet I cannot, nay more, perhaps
it were not lawful: yet for the attaining of a more excellent end, I may make
semblance of it, threaten him with it, and cause it to appear unto his sense,
that I may and will urge it; and all to break his heart to bring the truth to
light, and to turn him from his evil, which else (of himself) he would in no
wise abandon. Somewhat like to this policy, was that fact of Solomon, 1 King.
3. to the two harlots: When the question was whose the live-child was, (both of
them stiffely maintaining to be hers) God put this wisdom into him to call for
a sword, and make them believe, he would cleave the child in two: A thing not
only terrible and wrongful to the true mother, but also cruel and unjust:
But by this means he came to discover the affections of the natural mother.
But the common course of men is, to make semblance of some punishments which
(although they are both lawful and necessary, yet) out of base Pity or
cowardice, they neither do nor mean to execute, and so harden others in their
sin. This is ungodly.

Sixthly, It is a lawful policy for us to restrain our selves in the measure
Paul preaching at Ephesus two or three whole years, Act. 18.
contented himself in general to discharge his conscience, and to inveigh
against Idolatry; although in special he abstained from opposing of Diana, and
the Idolatry committed with her; because, either as yet he saw not the people
sufficiently catechized in that point, or because he saw the stream of the
City wholly and irresistably to go that way; and therefore he chose rather a
little to correspond with the necessity of the time, then violently to oppose
it with the overthrow of his Ministry. But this must not warrant us therefore
actually to do any thing in maintaining the stream of such evils, when we
may avoid it. For a negative omission of a thing unseasonable and bootlesse for
us to attempt, is not as a positive doing of that which might snare our
conscience, and strengthen that which is too strong already. As for example,
perhaps in times of persecution, to forbear an open inveighing against the
Mass, whereupon both the ruin of our own persons should ensue, and no hurt
at all done to the Idol, (except we could prove our selves called to it) were
most frivolous: And yet we ought else to give no negative allowance to evil:
But because we cannot in wisdom trust God for protection in opposing of the
stream when danger is unavoidable, therefore we are not called to it: To serve
evil times is policy; to serve the evil of them is treachery.

Seventhly, It is good policy to keep our selves within the compass Deuteronomy.
7.25.26.
But to rush out of our own places and callings without public authority or
sufficient warrant and safety, to attempt the defacing of them in an open
manner, where our privatenesse cannot extend, were foolish, and a rash casting
of our selves upon danger not easily remedied. In such a case, the Lord holds
us excused, when we do that which lies in our private power to do by
mourning, prayer, and abstaining from the least concurrence of evil, though we
proced no further: If we prevail not, then to rest patient, bearing that which
we cannot reform. In both these two latter respects, to be over just, and over
busy, is not lawful, as Solomon says, Eccles. 7.15.16.

Lastly, It is lawful for the avoiding of a slander and imputation cast Paul,
Acts 21.24. was persuaded (though some blame both him and them that set him on
work) and that safely to purify himself, and take upon him a vow, as being a
ceremony imposed by God, and then also such an one as had least evil in it, to
stop the slander of those Jews which accused him for an opposer of the law of
Moses: That slander disabled and endangered his person among the Jews: The
ceremony therefore having not wholly breathed out her last, at least among the
Jews, he was content to yield unto. And the like I may say of his circumcising
of Titus, a thing which he was otherwise loath to do, save in the former
respects, for he knew it might be some occasion on ^he other side to provoke
those Gentiles among whom he had preached the overthrow of Moses his law. And
the like may be said of the edict which the Apostles made, Act. 15.
and sent by Paul and Barnabas among the Gentiles, who still were pestred with
the opposition of Jews, resisting their Ministry; no doubt had it not been
such a thing as they saw very material for the present stopping of
controversy, and also that the things they enjoined had as well an natural
evil and baseness in them, as a ceremonial, as to eat strangled and blood,
or a mere unlawfulness as to eat meats polluted by Idols, knowing them to
be so, or to commit fornication, which the heathens thought to be a thing as
arbitrary as eating and drinking: They would never have once forced any
ceremony upon the Gentiles: But the light had not as yet discovered the
abrogation of ceremonies to all sorts: And therefore for so weighty respects,
they permitted that for the present, which afterward no doubt, they would have
abhorred. The Jews no doubt, did hereby think him to concur with them in
the esteem of ceremonies; but their error was nothing to him, whose end was to
confute slander, for whenas he came among such as opposed the doctrine of
Christ, by urging the necessity of ceremonies he was as strongly against them,
as he was yielding in the other, where no such danger was: For, neither was he
so hot against the Jewish ceremonies, when they were used for conscience by the
weak and ignorant, and not with opposition to Christ in the point of
salvation. Nay rather then, he was all in all to all, that he might win some,
and gave way wisely to things not confessedly abrogated for a better end.

And to these instances many more might be added, but I see the time (beloved)
is more then past. The conclusion of all is, let us abhor all falsehood and
subtilty, let us try and examine the colors of good and evil, let us keep
that which is sound, and abhor that which is contrary, suspecting always our
base nature, which seeks her uttermost liberty, and through self-love easily
believes that to be warrantable which it desires. And so joining an equal
caution, the simplicity of Doves with the wisdom of Serpents, and wholly
resigning up our selves to be guided by God, and not seeking our selves, the
Lord will mercifully bring us out of both sides of extremities, Eccles.
7.18.19. Which that he would do, let us beg heartily of him, as all other
graces in the name of his Son: To whom with the Father and the holy Ghost, be
all glory and praise both now and for ever. And so I finish this doctrine also
of carnal reason, the first of those points which I propounded to speak of
out of this twelfth verse; purposing to proceed in the next Lecture with those
that remain.

THE NINTH LECTVRE still continued upon this twelfth VERSE.
VERSE XII. VERSE 12. Are not Abana and Pharfar, rivers of Damascus, better
then all the waters of Israel? May I not wash in them and be clean? So he went
away in a rage.

VERSE. 13. Then his servants came near, unto him, and said, Father, if the
Prophet had said, etc.


I Have already (beloved in our Lord Jesus) dispatched those two former points
which I gathered out of this twelfth verse, 2 Kings
both arising from the cavil of this poor leper Naaman, at the unexpected way
of the Prophet to effect his cure. The former point was, How full and fertile a
base heart of unbeleefe is of cavills and exceptions against the clear truth
of God. The latter was, carnal reason is a great caviller and enemy against
the word and promise. I dwell no more upon either. It is time now for us to
hasten forward to the second general head contained in this verse: And that in
a word is Naamans distemper upon, both the defeat of his erroneous conceit, and
the heresay of a new (senseless to his reason) and unlooked for direction. In
this second general, (through providence) we will insist in this order: First,
enquiring into the root of this distemper of his and discontentednesse:
Secondly, The Second general head (...) this verse. Naamans distemper.
handling the distemper it self. To leave the latter to his place, and come to
the former: The root of his distemper, was a maine error or mistake of the
Prophets message, and a false opinion of his own way of curing: If this had
not been, all his pudder had been spared: If he had but admitted one true
principle before hand, that God must be left to his own way and course of
working a miraculous cure, and it is not a meet thing that man should be both
chapman and customer, to pitch his own price upon Gods commodity or bind God
to his own invention, but leave him to work freely as him pleases, being
glad that he will work any way for the relief of a poor distressed creature:
I say, had Naaman but stooped so low as to suffer free mercy to utter it self
freely and been thankful for it too; all this distemper of his, (which
doubtless expressed it self in more passages then the text mentions) might
have all been prevented: Then his cavilling with the message as foolish; then
his discontented receiving it with wrath, then his proud and coy heart, that
could no longer forbear to wait at the door, then his scorning of the
Prophet (as being of a great friend become an enemy) then his flinging away in
a mad humor and desperate rage, (not caring to return home as he came and lose
his labor) then his fiery indignation and railing upon all the occasions of
his defeat: all and every of them had been forestalled, and he brought on to
the cure with ease and content. But now we see how this one error causes a
world of sorrow, not easily redressed, except the same mercy which this silly
orphan cavills at so much, had even pitied him in his kicking against it, and
had enclosed him in her arms, and not suffered him to be miserable, who would
not be happy. But of that after.

Doctrine. Admit but one e^ror in Gods matters, and infinite follow.
This being our bottom to ground upon; let the point (brethren) be this, That
the yielding to one erroneous principle in the weighty matter of grace and
salvation, or in any matter of Religion, causes a great deal of danger and
distemper to follow thereupon: It is as a breach in the sea, which at first, a
little cost if foreseen, might have stopped, but after is hardly recovered.
Jam. 2.
As S. James speaks of the tongue, so here, Behold how great a fire a little
sparkle kindles. Proofs of the point.
I will prove the point first God willing, by Scripture, reason and experience,
and then (which is my maine aim) will apply it. And for the first, take these
texts, Psalm. 73. David had forgot his rule, That the wicked though they prosper
never so much, yea though they live an hundred years, Eccles. 8.12.
yet it shall go never the worse with the righteous: For a sinner of an
hundred year old is accursed: And there is no discovery, either of love or
hatred certainly by outward administration. Now what comes of it? Oh! says he,
my feet had well near slipped, (nay he had slipped indeed and fallen too) I had
almost condemned the generation of the righteous; he began to bless the
wicked, and to wish their portion; to be weary of his choice, his hopes, and
that he was anointed King. And why? Because the wicked flourished as the green
bay tree, their paths were anointed with butter, and all prospered with them?
Such a fool, so disguised, yea a beast in Gods sight, he became by one error
committed in the admittance of a false ground; which when once removed, the
eclipse ceased, the coast waxed clear again, and he recovered his former hold
again, as the end of that Psalm witnesses. See again, Psalm. 43. wherein the
absence of one principle caused David to grow into deadly dumps; and that was
this, His troubles were so long that he began to think God might repent him
of that free grace wherewith he had once embraced him: This caused exceeding
distemper in his spirit, so that he thought himself cast off: So Hezechia in
his sickness, Esaias 38. So Jonah in the whales belly: And so the Church in
captivity, Lam. 3. thought herself forsaken, and that God had forgotten to be
merciful. Hence the heart grew hardened, the peace of it declined to fear and
horror, then the word and promises grew unwelcome, then the ordinances grew
unsavory, then the practice grows secure and loose, and so all goes to
havocke; which might all have been prevented if the soul had kept herself to
the rule, That whom the the Lord loves, Joh. 14.1.
to the end he loves them.

Read moreover, Lam. 1.8.9. where Jeremy describes the woeful downfall and
sorrow that Jerusalem was fallen into, and how she was come down wonderfully by
steps to the lowest abasement: And why? Sure the sad error lay in the
foundation, she thought God would keep covenant with her, though she brake with
him; she thought that to lie close to God, and keep covenant was no such great
matter, but that she might try conclusions, and so by a little deceitfulness
of sin the heart grew defiled, the conscience crazy, the spirit hardened by
custom, the soul impenitent and secure, grew to care for no threats, to
reject commands, to distrust promises; and so came Jerusalem down wonderfully:
All which had been prevented if either she had kept close to the covenant, or
repented betimes upon her revolt. Besides, look upon Heb. 3.12. Take heed lest
there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief to depart away from the
living God, and so wax hardened by the deceitfulness of sin. How do many who
begin zealously, yet wax weary of weldoing by an evil heart? Upon that how
does Satan increase delusion, and tickle with his temptations? How does the
error of the wicked added thereto, draw away more by example? Psalm. 50.18.
Then perhaps God is patient and smites not, so that the sinner thinks him
like herself; then looseness grows, then a conceit that former practice has
been too precise, less will serve: Then grows a mean esteem of the word
especially, if powerful and coming close: Then perhaps sin having kindled
thus far, makes the life of faith unsavory, the baits of sin sweet, makes us
think it easy to repent at our pleasure, and so we grow some to embrace one
lewd pranke some another, some to take their ease, neglect prayer, good
company, nible at the Devils baits, pleasure, company, gaming, petty oaths,
dalliance with women, base fashions, to concur with the world, and at last to
waste the conscience (with Sampson and David) so far, that a man is snared
and grown to a falling sickness: and cannot recover himself: All which might
have been prevented, by holding the rule, keep well while thou art well: Be
not weary of weldoing, and the like. It were endless to dwell any longer upon
proofs.

Reasons are many. First, because Religion is a condition of life, much
Abimelec slain by a millstone under the wall? How was Vria and other worthies
destroyed by a desperate affront made by Ioab? How were the Benjamites enclosed
between the two armies of Israel, the one burning their City, the other before
their face? How easy is it to fall upon privy ambushments suspecting no
danger? In point of contention between couples in marriage, or partners in
trading, or others in worldly business, neglect but one rule in marriage to
forbear, and give place to wrath, what a fire is kindled? Neglect but often
recknings between men, how endless and confused grow the accounts? Admit but
one tetch and conceit (without due pondering the matter) and how endless
contention follows, blows upon words, suits upon blows, and the ruin of
each other by suits: So fares it in all other kinds. Let there be but an error
in the digestion, and what can mend it? Nothing, the blood must needs be bad,
the concoction cannot amend it, and so all diseases attend the ill stomach,
both in the head and parts of the body: Is it so in all things, and must it not
much more be so in the chief affair of all other, which is the matter of
Religion? Must not one radical error there, cause an infinite pudder in the
consequences thereof? Yes verily, no remedy of it.



Religion is like an harmony. Eccles. 10.1.
As a song sung or lesson played in music, let but one disproportion be in
the tone and voice, one string jarring in the instrument, the whole melody is
marred: one dead fly marres the whole box of ointment: So is it in Religion;
each part affects the other by consent; an error in one, makes a jarre in all,
either there must be a sutablenesse in all, or else there is a disorder in the
whole. If then a string amiss be enough to spoil music, what is an error in
the instrument, or musician himself, if the one be naught or the other
unskilful? But I cease reasons.

Matthew. 16.25. In not denying our selves.
the first shall be in that rule of our Savior, which I have so much beaten
upon, He that will be my Disciple, let him take up his cross and follow me. If
a man begin aright with this rule, what a sweet easy trade does he find
Religion to be? But let a man go to work with a contrary principle, as most
men do, and what a woeful pudder do they m^ke of it? How do they wish they
had never begun at all? They bury all their labors and money in the grave of
emptiness and vanity: Esaias 55.2.
Their pride and self-love so overtakes them in whatsoever they go about,
that alas! they are discouraged: They cry out upon God with those hypocrites,
Esaias 58. that they have heard, fasted and worshipped God day by day, time out
of mind, but still they come to nothing, they want peace and comfort: And why?
Because they carry that within themselves which takes up the room of Christ
and mercy; they will not feel themselves orphans and fatherless, but trust to
their own bottomes, and lusts, or vanities, or at least supposed goodness,
they will put water into Gods well, and then with this bucket, they will draw
up some grace: Hence it comes to pass, if they meet with deep conviction out
of the word that tries them to the quick, they are feign to shake it off with
all violence to save their skin whole; he that will not have a good conceit of
them, but reproves them, is counted their enemy: Nay those that used all means
and cost, to get in a Minister into their pulpit, let him but once touch their
freehold, must never after look to have him their friend: once out, and ever
out. Oh woeful plague! and yet (mark it who so will) Beloved, there are some
among us who live under our Ministry, and will not keep one day from Church,
and yet have the Minister of God in so deep a prejudice that he loves them not
(for no other cause save that he touches their tender plat when he little
thinks of it) that from seven year to seven, they live at secret odds with
him; Pritch against the Minister.
they are ready openly to cry out of him that he is their enemy, and cannot
look too rights upon him. Alas! it is from a root of Self which will not
out, in that they have not cast down their crown at the feet of the word, as
content to be smitten, and to count it balm: Thus, they bear often laying
heaps upon heaps, and dye of thirst: All they do, Judge. 15.16.18.
they aim at themselves in it, to get themselves some good opinion by their
zeal, bounty, good deeds; and why? The running sore of Self will not be
healed, and that causes all to become impure. The increase of the spleen is
not more apparently the decay of the body, then their error, the cause of their
not profiting: and so by custom they wax hardened in it, so that when they do
perceive it is past cure, as they say of some diseases as that of the lungs,
that while they are curable it is hard to discern them, and when they come to
be discerned, they are past cure. And to conclude, all the life of such is but
as the stopping of a water course, which costs great toil, and yet the stream
will have her course when all is done. Surely he that will thus hold a lie in
his right hand, shall to his cost find, that Gods rules are no idle things;
and an error committed in the ground, is helpless in the building.

Let a second instance be in the point of marriage. The Apostles rule In point
of marriage not wisely forbear each other. Judge. 14.
Tush say they, must we live single, till we find a godly husband, or wife?
Then we may sit long enough. Why? Do you think this rule so slight and
needless? Yes verily, they are of Sampsons mind, Give me her, for she
pleases me well: And how do they fare? Does it go well with them? Surely for
the most part, as it did with him: After a short skeaming off a little of the
sweet of their will, the Lord so plagues them with the fruit of their error,
and so vexes each vein in their heart, with the profaneness, disloyal
carriage, contentiousnesse, wastefulnesse, and other distempers of their
companions, that some are ready to poison each other, others to run away into
other Countries, never returning, others to filch and steal, to maintain
themselves in their beggary, and a thousand other sorrows attend their error.
Duties of Gods worship and family are neglected, children for ever spoiled by
lewd example, callings either forsaken, or used for necessity, communion with
the godly cast off, and in a word, there is no end of their misery; And at last
they cry out, Now we see it is to some purpose to cleave to a rule, and one
error in the ground, grows to be remediless in the consequence. Oh! that we
had married in the Lord.

Proverb.
till men have tried the experience of the contrary; and then Oh! what a piece
of wisdom it is to keep their tongue? When they see that the giving reine to
a slanderous, censorious, and uncharitable tongue costs them repentance at
leisure, sets their betters against them, creates suits of law against them,
shrigs their purse, brings them to shame, to recant their rash words, subjects
them to the courtesy of their imbittered adversaries, so that both they and
theirs feel the smart of it, then they cry out too late, would they had been
wiser! Behold how safe it is to stop evil in the beginning, and to rule our
tongues! It never hurts us to have been silent, but to have spoken at randon,
has undone many. I know well, that there is no remedy against the mischevously
and maliciously minded, let a man rule himself never so well, the best use of
his tongue may bring forth sorrow enough; but in such a case, a man may suffer
with quietness, and commit himself to God in his innocence; in the other, he
brings a needless cross upon himself. I might be endless; but the Lion may
be easily guessed at by his paw.



Psalm. 17.
And whereas some of them (as Job and the Psalmist speaks) seem to die in
peace, yet that peace is accursed: for though they force to themselves a
wilful peace, there is none to them, they go down to the pit with such
peace, as a drunken prisoner goes to execution: Esaias 57. ult.
But this does not infringe the doctrine, because although some live and dye
lawless and senseless; yet the case of the greater sort is otherwise: They
rush without due consideration upon their matters, and accordingly meet with
sorrow and repentance: only the godly who fix their eyes upon Gods stable
bottomes, provide best for themselves; he that walks soundly, walks
safely, and although through unbeleefe, Esaias 26.2.
weakness or temptation, they are often appalled, it is to teach them to
cleave better to their grounds: But ordinarily they walk by rule, and find
peace: when trouble befalls them, it comes not by their closing with, but by
warping from their rule, and when they recover their grounds, they recover
their peace. So much for answer to this objection.

Now the uses follow. First, Instruction to teach us the wonderful
Instruction. Religion is grounded upon most solid foundations.
It is grounded upon most weighty and material bottomes. No man would suppose
the Lord to be so infinitely wise as he is, till he set himself seriously to
try his conclusions. Few men think there is any great matter in living by
faith, in shunning appearences of evil, in cleaving to the company of the
good, in pitching the soul upon a truth of a promise, threat or command: But
by that time they feel the sad fruit of their errors, then they grow to look
back, and behold a most hidden excellency in Gods principles: when their
peace is lost, and themselves cast upon hideous sorrows, then they begin to
applaude them that go to work by knowledge and discerning of things that
differ: as Scholars never grow in love with an Artists principles, till they
have examined them, and find out their exactness; then they behold the misery
of an inartificiall and ungrounded course of study: So is it here: Art has no
enemies save idiots; no more has Religion.

Secondly, it teaches us, It is a singular favor of God to any, when they are
bottomed soundly.
how great a favor of God it is to any beginner Esaias 63.14.
the help of some one principle is as much as a man's soul is worth! What a
mercy then is it to be led on by knowledge in all our course? To shun all the
snares of death: Oh! be thankful and say, It is not my carnal wit Lord, it
is thy lore and word which has made me wise, to frame my course! so that I do
now esteem welfare not to stand in wealth, or favor of men, but in the loss
of all these, yea (although persecution and the cross should betide me for thy
truth and name, yet) so long as conscience and peace abide, and I am privy to
it, that thou have lost no honor by me, I count my state happy: Look upon the
snares which the proud, ambitious, covetous, flatterers, and servers of the
time pull upon themselves, and then judge whether it be not a favor to be kept
by a principle of truth, from such sorrow and repentance! The world boasts of
her many tricks and policies, but thy one is worth them all, and shall preserve
thee, when they with all their inventions, shall be intercepted.

Admonition. Be well grounded upon the unchangeable principles of truth. 1
King. 13.
to ground themselves carefully upon the principles of God, and to eschew all
false ways and inventions. Be earnest with God, to remove far from thee all
ways of error, and to turn thee out of all cross paths of deceit: Remember
still, one error in the ground, produces infinite many dangers in the sequel.
Rehoboam had better have given half his Kingdom, then to have split himself
so irrecoverably upon the rock of his ill counselors; What sorrow did it
work him all his days? Stripped him of three parts of his Subjects at once!
What a misery did one error create to Saul, to wit, his own carnal wisdom, 1 Samuel 13. and 15.
rejecting Samuels charge? What one quiet day had he thirty years after, in
all his whole life, but perpetual vexation, till he was feign to consult with
a witch, and to fall upon his own sword? Nay consider what Gods own dear
servants have purchased to themselves, by one error and trick put upon them by
Satan! As David's lust, what a world of sorrow did it procure? So let it warn
us to abhor the incurring of such a praemunire with God, by embracing any
principle of error or vanity, as being once bred in the bone, will never out of
the flesh: Beware we either of instilling, or of drinking in any base error,
into any, or from any of special note for parts, learning or authority: Let
such as are men of place, whose example if bad, would like poison, pierce into
the bowels of silly ignorant ones; I say, let such look to themselves, lest
after in hell they cry out of them, and say, woe be to such examples! had not
their authority been stronger with me, to draw me to formality, to ambition,
to pleasures and lusts, then the word to dissuade, I had never come here!
Beware of such offenses! Woe be to the world because of offenses! Matthew. 18.7.
both in laying blocks, and stumbling at blocks! It is just with God that one
should destroy the other, because neither cared for the truth, nor to be
principled upon better bottomes; Therefore they have met with snares.

Beware also of being irresolute upon the grounds of God, either in judgment
or practice: Irresolution in matter of Religion as dangerous as utter
blindness
Stagger not, admit not doubtings and demurres upon principles formerly
confessed: Some by Satan's injections have consulted with flesh, after their
conviction by the truth of God, and have fallen to dispense and distinguish upon
them, and (as those that seek interpretation of Statutes, when they feel them
too strict) to alay and adulterate truths, as being willing to procure credit,
ease and security to their own estates and lives: But what has it wrought
them after a short time, save endless accusation and torment? And no doubt,
many feel a sad heart within, and keep their conscience at a bay, from
breaking out, although they make fair weather of it, and set the best side
outward: Others for love of preferment have been weary of truth, and have
fallen from being Protestants, to be Pelagians, then Papists, then Neuters and
Atheists. The woeful example of Francis Spira seduced by a Popes Nuncio, to
renounce his profession, and of others (whom I name not) are still in fresh
memory. If we will needs change, change for the better, and prevent an
endless vexation, as Luther, Vergerius, and that worthy of eternal fame
Galeacius did, by renouncing their false principles. Again, refuse not to
amend any erroneous grounds which have broken into thy course; admit any
information of truth; Be not stubborn and resolute to maintain any evil in
thy course, but mend it.
discover those manifold offenses and evils which have molested thy conscience
and life, while they were undiscerned; and when God has once discovered them,
beware of nourishing them; be it never so great vexation to thee, to undo thy
former errors and mistakes, yet if God reveal better grounds, and rectify
thee with better principles, fear not the worlds aspersion and censures, but
redeem a perpetual inconvenience, although by a present mischief, (as the
Proverb says) pulling down a bad chimney with some cost, rather then enduring
a perpetual smoky house, and sore eyes. Look up for courage and grace to the
Lord, and know that it is the high way to credit and peace. Augustines books of
Retractings and Recantings of errors, are above all his other works, because
above himself; he was not forced to it, but of his own accord chose it, to
avoid such inconvenience as was else like to have ensued.

Finally, beware of all special errors, Beware of special errors.
such as threaten the perverting of thy peace: As for example, If thou find
any rooted lust, any seed of loose liberty, in the secret of thine heart, as
the bitter root of uncleanness, love of the world, pride in thy gifts, or
what ever it be; do not let it alone, because perhaps for the present thou
can bite it in, and feel not the sting of it to molest thee: Thou perhaps
do not directly favor it, nor nourish the flame of it with oil, rather thou will suspect thy self, and speak against such evils: But yet thou consultest
not with the truth as it is in Jesus, to cast out such a lust, Ephe. 4.21.
and to defy it (as one that would pick a quarrel with his enemy, that he
might go to law with him and undo him,) that thou might never more hear
of it; and what does this breed in thy course at length? Surely as coals under
the ashes, burn out in time when all are asleep, and burn down the house,
so does such a lust salute thee suddenly, when a fit object is offered unto
thee, 2 Samuel 12.4.
(as a stranger is said to come to David when he killed his neighbors sheep)
and then thou and lust will feast together, and break out to thine
unspeakeable sorrow: How might thou have prevented it with seriousnes and
sadness in time? and what sorrow will a Delila dallied with, create at last?
Say not, shall I cast it out, and shall I renounce it, but deny thy own
strength; and as in another case thou would do in going to the Sheriff of
the Shire, so go to the Lord, and persuade him thou meanest it, and he shall
cast it out for thee: else, beshrew thy self in vain, when it is too late; a
little matter would have done it at first. Remember what Paul told the
Centurion and Pilot, Acts 27.21. in the midst of that confusion and fear of
shipwreck: Sirs, says he, you should have hearkened unto me at first, and
have stayed and wintred at Candy; it was no season to go to sea at such a time
of year, so should you have saved all this loss and pudder: Oh! this loosing
from Candy, this forsaking the harbor of Gods safe principles, is the cause of
all our wreck and sorrow: now therefore at last, hear Paul, and take counsel,
and cast out all your old tacklings, rudders and mast of your own principles
into the sea, be led by Gods truth, and although perhaps you may lose your
ship, some comfort and peace which else you might have kept, yet be content to
pay that penance for your folly and will, and (so ye may escape safe to heaven
with your souls) count it a blessing of no small value, and beware of the like
afterward.

Exhortation. Lay good grounds at first for the well ordering of our life.
to guide your selves by, both in the life of faith, and the race of
conversation. It is no easy thing I grant, to be well grounded; it will cost
some pains to deny Self and old errors, and to be set as a door upon new
hinges: But the fruit of peace will requite it abundantly; and a work well
entered, is truly said to be half done. Think not much of it therefore, it
will quit the cost, and make thee a gainer. Remember the rock out of which thou
were hewn: even our grandmother Eve, who in her innocence, (abusing her
freedom) chose to run into an error which proved deadly to her posterity;
how easily then may thou do so, being compassed about with darkness?
Again consider, If mere mistake and ignorance can bring in such confusion (as
a witty, though wicked heathen, tells us, that the mistake of a glass turned a
man into an Ass) what then may a chosen, a purposed error bring to pass? In
these respects, be thou choice of thy grounds, whatsoever thou can get by
hearing, reading, catechizing, conference, experience, store it up as in a
treasure: Men show this wisdom in carnal things, how choice are men in their
seed? How will they pick it? What money do they grudge to give for it?
Choicenesse of men in outward things to have good principles.
What choice sienes will they get for their stocks? And what breed will they
buy for the stock of their cattle? But come to the principles of their
Religion and conversation, and there the most refuse stuff, the most base
opinions of the vulgar, the errors of the wicked, their own conjectures, self
sown corn, and the seed which grows upon their own soil will serve, seeking
out no further: whence it comes to pass, that their fruit, their corn, and
their cattle prosper, but their souls and consciences, their spiritual peace
and growth in grace, comes to naught: In other matters they find no pudder,
only in their estate to Godward, their fears and distempers are
unspeakeable, and for the most part, remediless: Oh! be choice then in your
grounds and principles: Search the Scriptures, go to the Law and Testimony,
get Gods heifer to plow with, deny your selves, and (to conclude with this
example of Naaman) ascribe this honor to God, that he is meetest to rule in
his own element, and therefore do not forestall him in his own way. Thou
would hearken to each man in his own element, (it is a maxim of
experience) as to a mariner in the judgment of the winds, to a plowman about
oxen, to a soldier in point of battle; and shall every one be preferred as a
Counselor for Religion, and heaven before God and his word? Pray and use all
means for the spirit of thy great Prophet, the Lord Jesus, to advise thee how
to pass all thy matters, establishing all thy thoughts by his counsel, that
happy success and blessing may follow thee in all thy ways, Psalm. 119.
and thou may be free from the miseries of error.

Advices for the well ordering of our course.
One word of advice, and so an end. It may be here demanded, what principles
should a man get, for the managing of his course? To which I answer, It were
needless here to number, or instance in particulars: It must be the habit of
wisdom, which must prompt the soul in such cases as fall out, only these
three I would briefly commend to all who would cut off sorrow from their life.
The first concerning God himself, the second, touching men, the third, our
selves, yet all tending one way: And these three are faith, righteousness and
contentation. No three vices create so tedious a pudder in the course as
distrust, unrighteousness and discontent. For the first, see Heb. 13.5. 1.
Faith in God.
Let not your conversation be in covetousness, for he has said, he will not
fail. I do not give this rule to the poor only, but to the rich; not only
this Preached in the years 1630. 1631.
dear year, but always: Oh! this one error of distrust, what a flood-gate of
sorrows does it let in! when charge of children, debts, dear prises,
unthankful, unmercifull world, pinches a man, then at the hardest to have this
bond of the Lords in a corner to sue, what a stay, what boot in beam is it?
Oh! when a man can say, my bond shall be as good as money at all times! I hold
upon all sufficiency, I have that I have from a fountain always running, which
shall hold when the deepest lake shall dry up: But let a man want this
bottom, this center to draw lines of supply from it, and what is a man's life
but vexation, causing the heart to be endless in flinging about, coasting and
sherking every where; and what then? Indirect courses, snares and endless
unquietness, defeat and disappointment of expectation, and lying down in
sorrow! Oh! ye rich men in these hard times, if God be able to satisfy you as
well in spending as sparing, and provide you rest in the midst of other men's
carking, who think when all is done, they shall dye beggars, what shall ye
lose by releeving the poor and starven ones?

Secondly, righteousness is a brestplate, armor of proof, 2. Righteousness
to man.
to keep out darts and stinging vexation. See Ephe. 6.14. As faith fences the
inward man, so does this the outward: Oh! go out, walk abroad in the world
with this corslet, and it shall repel all reproach and odious disdain of men!
It will make a man shotfree, (as Charles the fifth rushing into the battle
said, a true Emperor was never shot with a bullet) it will harnis thee against
all fear, what any man can cast in thy teeth: whatsoever courses others take,
raking and scraping tooth and nail, by hook or crook; yet thou go on
quietly, servest providence, make no more haste then good speed; and hereby
perhaps thou thrivest faster then great sticklers with all their irons in the
fire: But say thou should not, yet thou can say that, 1 Samuel 12.3. Acts
20.33.
which they cannot (with Samuel and Paul) whose ox have I taken, whose silver
have I coveted, whose blood have I sucked, whose face have I ground? Oh
brethren! This dear year I doubt, may call the sins of many oppressors to
remembrance! The poor shall curse thee, Oh thou regrater, thou engrosser of
corn, and raiser of prises from seven to ten shillings, or a mark in the
bushel! And shall not the Lord hear them? Will not the example of that corn
cormorant who hanged himself the other day, sting you! A sad example.
will it not cause all thy false weights, cut measures, cheats, tricks and
cunning to vex thee! then is the more behind, and one day, this error of thine
will gugge thee to the quick, and cause thee to cry out, away with this mammon
of deceit, I am choked with it!

Thirdly, contentation is a sweet ground to settle upon: Phil. 4.6. Let your
moderate mind be known to all men, the Lord is at hand: Be content with your
present state, 3. Contentation in our selves.
as Heb. 13.5. Oh! what a world of sorrow do they incur, who begin their
course with unsettled discontent! Oh! the present, is of all other most
unpleasing: They are going up the craggy hill, looking at last to get to the
top, and there to find a Paradise; but they meet with a Purgatory: A quiet
mind sitting at the bottom of the hill, is much better, beside the trouble:
Get the ground of your content within, for without you cannot; it is safer to
bring your mind to close with your means, then make a coat for the Moon,
that is, to draw them to an equipage with it, for it is endless: Oh! men's
hopes and hurries are their life! And what comes of it, pudder and vexation?
The root of the error is never amended in the progress, but grows worse as a
fore that rankles: House must be joined to house, land to land, farm to farm,
trade to trade, riches will not come in fast enough: Alas! to trade with a man's
own stock is simple, men must occupy with three parts of other men's stocks to
a fourth of their own: They gape at their commings in, but at their charges,
housekeeping, servants, toil of body and spirit, ill debtors, usurious
payments, they look not: They look to clear all, and prove rich men: But in
the mean time, their principle being bad, corrupts their whole course, and
blasts their hopes, For he that loves silver shall not be satisfied
therewith: And so at last they get moonshine in water for their requital; and
is it not just, that such should meet with many snares, and pierce themselves
through with many darts, who will needs have it so? They should have kept the
safe harbor of Candy, and hasted no further, and so they might have saved all
this loss; either all or nothing, proves nothing indeed at last: Esaias 30.
Oh! your strength had been to sit still, not idly, but contentedly, and so if
your gain had been little, your loss had yet been but small. 1 Timothy 6.6.
Godliness is a great provision with contentment. I know not how I am slid
into these discourses, these hard times cause it, but they will help you
always. So much for this doctrine.

Now having ended the root of his distemper, we come to the distemper it
self, which although in part, beloved, offered it self unto us, in the former
verse; yet we have reserved the handling thereof wholly to this place, because
the end of this verse is fuller for it then the former. There it is said, that
Naaman, (at the hearing of the message) was wroth, and moreover, that he takes
upon him to set his own thoughts against the Prophets, in a queazy and coy
pride of his own worth, as if such an one as he were highly wronged, and the
Prophet deeply forgate himself to handle one so scornefully, who at home was a
Prince, and a great man's favorite; and here in this verse, he is so far from
being ashamed, that rather he is worst at last, then at first; for now his
tetch is turned to a rage, he went away, says the text, in a rage: All the
matter amounts to these two points: The former, his coyness and pride of
heart: The latter, his breaking out into wrath and rage both in speech and
carriage. Let us begin with the former, in which I will be brief, that so I
may come to the latter.

Touching his pride therefore, he that compares his carriage in the ninth
verse, with this in the eleventh and twelfth, might justly wonder at the
sudden change of Naaman For there he crouched like a Lazer and beggar, and
stood at the gate, as one glad to dance attendance: First part of his
distemper. Pr de and coyness.
But now hearing the answer to jarre with his own way, he is as much in the
other extreme, and now he turns mad, frets and rages at the Prophet, thinking
him so disdainful, that a King would use him more courteously then he. But lo,
in this taxing of the Prophet, and falling out with him, there is much more
pride found in his own bosom, and that really, whereas poor Elisha was still
as humble as before, setting aside Naamans conceit. The point then is this,
Self if it be put to it, is most coy and proud; Doctrine. Self is p^oud and
coy, if defeated.
although being quiet, she seem very low and humble: And hereof there be many
reasons.

First, because the heart still abides unclean, where Self is chief, Tit.
1.15.
much more then show of crouching humility, may break out into pride and
blustering. There is a generation which seems pure in her own eyes, (as
selfe-deceiving hypocrites) but they are not washed from their uncleanness.
They are like those Idols, Deuteronomy. 7. whose corruption is still in them, till
they be quite defaced; no washing with doctrine, with means upon means, no
melting, no turkeising could do them good till they be defaced. As the house of
fretted leprosy was past scraping, it was to be demolished. These types served
to show that Self of it self is incorrigible. And the truth is, the Lord
would have us know, that only faith is able to purify the heart.

Secondly, till conviction come, sin lurkes as a snake in her hole. A John
Baptist and the Lord Jesus came? How did they crouch? But no sooner came the
one with his thundering voice, Oh ye generation of vipers, how shall ye escape
the wrath to come? And the other, Woe be to you Scribes and Pharisees
Hypocrites! But then they began to bluster and show themselves in their
colors; which would not have been, if their outward painted crouching had
been laid in the oil of humbleness indeed. It is true of this spawne of
sin, which Paul, Romans 7. says of the whole corruption of nature, That sin
without the Law is unknown: But when the Law came sin revived. When once the
power of the humbling Law of God came upon the soul, soked and confederated
with sin, as her partner and inmate; then began the union between the
soul and corruption to break, and then began sin to bluster and be proud
and mad: So is it here. When Self is crossed, and her own way rejected, she
is as proud and mad as Achitophel that went away and disdained and hung
himself, because that he was not preferred by Absalon, before Hush^i. 2 Samuel
17.23.
While Self may run in her own stream, feel her own heat, and find as
she looked for, that her devotion, duties and gifts are accepted, and that she
can fetch water of comfort, from her own well, she is well appaid, applauds
herself, and thinks she has scrued herself into the grace of God, with
finer ease and slight, then a sound and honest heart could do; But when her
mufflers once be plucked from her face by the Lord, and she is crossed of her
own way (for why? Flesh cannot inherit Gods Kingdom, 1 Cor. 15.
and a regenerate man is not borne of flesh, nor from man, but from God) lo,
then she sees all her house of oystershells falling down, then she waxes stout
with God, and froward with herself; Then she scorns the Preacher, if God
stop her not, and rather then she will learn a new way to heaven, she will
perish in her old: Oh! she can tell what belongs to heaven as well as any
Preacher of them all! she is not now to begin; she has so long heard the
word, and better Preachers then any now are, have approved her to be sincere;
till these curious fellows came into the place whom none can please, nor be
good enough for them, they were thought such and such! Thus Self crossed of
her own way, prides herself, and waxes so coy, that except she may enjoy
herself, she scorns all men.

Luke 16.3.
she will fall to an easier course, she will resolve to shift, and be still
unjust as before, returning to her trade with more boldness.

Col. 2. end. Gods people must beware of the f^lse boasting of ungrounded
hypocrites.
let it be instruction to teach us wisdom, that we be not gulled with the
glory of Hypocrites and Pharisees, whose Religion stands in show of humbleness
of mind, and not sparing the flesh; causing all men to gaze at them, and
wonder at their humility and devotion: Oh! If such and such be not in the right
way, that be so lowly, and so full of prayers and Religion, God help us! But
Oh poor wretches! They domineer in their kingdom, and have none to control
them: outwardly they are painted tombs, and seem to crouch and buckle: But
discover them never so little, and put them out of their way, they are as proud
and disdainful on the other side, and no man can stand before their envy. What
wonder? There is nothing more humble, low, base, double diligent, then Self in
her own way: But put her out, and nothing so proud; blood, they say, out of
her vessel presently putrifieth: Hold with a Papist in his own course, (as
alas! ignorance must do so!) and what shall ye not draw them unto? What may
you not have at their hands? They will pull out their very eyes to do you
good, they will lick the dust of your feet: But why? Alas! that by your
consent and allowance, they may stiffen themselves in their error, and draw you
into the fellowship thereof: all is, their selfe-way, selfe-religion of the
flesh, which is proud of Gods colors, Self in her own way, j^lly, but if put
out of it, mad and raging.
and that she can prick up herself with her own feathers; But let truth once
convince a Papist, give him no hope either of countenancing him any more, or of
coming to his Religion, and behold, he will persecute you to the death: Then
will his spirit break out! Thus those in Mica 6. would give God thousands of
Rams, ten thousand rivers of oil in their own way; so that God would let
them alone in their way, they would fine for their Religion, and undo
themselves, yea offer up their children in sacrifice: All this was to make God
beholding to them, to make all wonder at their bounty; still Self lay quiet,
and gat warmth in her nest. But when the Lord comes in with his way, Oh then!
when he requires the soul to be lowly, when he cries hear O man, what he has
said, and what his way is: Then begins the sorrow! will she then be so zealous
to embrace Gods way? No, Mica 6.
then she is sad, and out of all sorts, she will do nothing: See whence all
that excess of cost and bounty of impopery has proceeded; even from men's
pleasing themselves in their own way: But cross them never so little, their
alms and good works perish in sullenness of spirit, and then all amort: Oh
trust not outsides.

There be many professors of the Gospel like to these: Hold with them in their
way of hearing, of duties, of compassion, etc. Oh! you shall have them as tame
as lambs, they will do any thing for you: But let the Minister deal sadly
with them and say, These moralities of yours you ought to retain, but the
other and greater things of the Law you ought not to have neglected; and then
suddenly they become your enemies for telling them the truth. Take an example
or two. In the 14. of the Acts, those men of Lystra, were so low and base, as
to set up Paul For Jupiter, and Barnabas for Mercury, to make Gods of men: Thus
they could be humble in their own way to rob God of worship: But when the
Apostles persuaded them to turn from Idols, to the true God, Oh then! they
were soon turned from adoring them, to stoning of them: So these falshearted
Jews who could outwardly magnify Christ for his miracles, hoping that he
would become some great man, could set him on the Ass and proclaim him a
King; who yet when they perceived his Kingdom not to be of this world, gave
him over and cried, crucify him. Beware I say lest we be deceived by such, See
Matthew. 21.9. and 27.22.
and let us know no pride is like to the pride of a crouching Pharisee: A
Monkish and Fryer-like votary, has more pride in his bare neck without a
band, and in his shirt collar, beggars habit, and seeming self-denial, then
all the gallants and swaggerers in the world: Oh! try men's spirits, ere ye
trust them: If their humility lie in Gods way, then esteem them; but if it lie
in their own way, abhor it: For Self (as the Prophet speaks of those
Idolaters) will abase herself to hell, and cares not what she do, Esaias 57.9.
to make her seem that she is not, and to play her parts under a canopy; and
the more that she multiplies humilities and abasements, one upon another, the
more she seeks to establish herself and to eke out her own short garments: A
dram of humbleness in a truly broken heart, and in Gods way, will go beyond
all such patchery.

Secondly, this should be Terror to all such Hypocrites, as turn away The truly
proud always most ready to tax pride in the innocent.
and inveigh against others for their pride and singularity. Note it, there is
not an hypocrite or wil-worshipper, if he be convinced by the Ministry to be
upon a bad bottom, but he will condemn that convincer to be proud,
censorious, uncharitable, factious, none are good enough for them: But Oh! thou
woeful man, whether of the two is the more proud, he that reproves an
ungrounded worshipper of God, and convinces him of his ignorance and
self-love, or he that scorns a reproof? He who never thinks himself
sufficiently settled upon the bare truth and love of the promiser (being
himself destitute of all good,) or he who boasts himself of his own
goodness: Matthew. 7.5.
Therefore (with our Savior) I say, Hypocrite, first cast out the beam that
is in thine own eye, and then thou shall clearly see to cast out the mote that
is in thy brothers: He may have a mote, but thou have a beam, and that does so
stop and put out thine eye, that the more self-love thou have, the less
thou see in thy self: If ever the Lord truly cast down thy soul, thou
shall tremble with Naaman, to see what a world of pride was hidden in thy
counterfeit crouching and hypocrisy: Levit. 13.45.
Thou shall cry out with that leper and say, Oh unclean! Oh proud wretch! I
was humble in a way of mine own, while I had my will, while all was well
taken: But when the Law came and convinced me, that all was from and for my
self, then as Cain, so did my countenance fall, then I was mad and rebelled
like a Tiger: If I had been truly humble, I should have counted him my friend
that would reprove me, and his wounds to be as balm: my kicking against the
pricks, argued what spirit I was of: Oh! let this gaster all such in Gods
fear! And brethren, if there be any such here, let them beseech him (who can
turn all to the good of such at belong to himself) that he would turn all
their rebellion, and pride, and coinesse, to the glory of his name, and the
making of their souls doubly meeker and humbler then before; for so it is,
sin is out of measure sinful, both in guilt and rebellion; but grace is out
of measure gracious to humble the soul for both: else the word will prove the
savor of death.

Admonition to all sorts not to claw this itch of Self.
It is good to search the spirits of others: But far better to try our own
in this weighty case. It is good for a Minister of God to beware of flat^ering
men of this humor, (for Self is proud and coy, because she would be soothed)
But it is far better to abhor fl^ttering of our selves in this false
humbleness of our own. If Elisha should have come forth and soothed Naaman in
this humor of his, whiles God had him in taming, what a confusion must have
followed? No he left him to chew upon Gods bit, and so his heart came down
through mercy: But flattery had puffed him up to destruction: Oh thou Minister of
Christ, Ministers beware of it.
or poor Christian! wheresoever thou see this itch, claw it not, sow not
pillowes; But above all beware of humoring ^hy self in it, and consider this,
If thou can be so willing in a way of thy own to take such pains, and to
seem so low and vile in thine own eyes, when as yet the Lord and thy soul
know, all is but to serve thine own turn, and to keep a secret breadth in thine
own loose heart: Oh! I say, if thou can take such pains for naught, how wise
were thou in season to convert thy pains to a right object, I mean the way of
God! If thou should say unto me, so I would, if I could discern my self: I
answer thee, First pray God to scatter the mist from thine eyes, which Self
has long blinded thee with, through a sweetness in affording God that
pittance which thou could well spare him, and yet hold thine own too.
Secondly, search narrowly, and thou shall perceive, that selfe-humility has
some marks of discovery to know her by. These marks be warned against.

First, she is very coy and queazy, 1. Coy and queazy.
cannot endure to be reproved; Marks of Self defeated.
whereas true humbleness in Gods way, lies open brested to receive every point
of Gods weapon, to let out her corruption, and all, because she would be rid
of it. Learn therefore and be warned to handle thine heart roughly in this
corruption; let none be more jealous and suspicious of thine humblings then thy
self: Be willing that the word teach thee that way of God wherein true
humbleness appears, shrug not at it, but give way to it, that it may work
kindly: Refuse not reproof; inure not thy self, to utter or hear thine own
praises; thou shall at last bless God more for one Abigail and her counsel,
then for ten flatterers: Too tender skins cannot endure the prick of a
pin; How should they endure a corrasive then, to eat out their dead flesh?

Secondly this selfe-humblenesse is lazy, 2. Lazy.
and loath to take pains; it conceives, that if it should be convinced indeed,
it must be feign to put it self upon a sadder way then she is willing to hear
of: Abhor this ease, be content to be informed of the worst; the worst of it
is, to abhor that which would destroy thee, and God can give thee a safer
ease in his own way, if thou can trust him, then thy way can afford, if thou will suffer thine own spirit to stoop to his. Refuse no pains to amend a
rooted error; let it not seem wearisome to thee to change thy course, if the
word will have it so. Thou will censure a Papist that he will live and dye in
the Religion of his forefathers, when a better is revealed; dye not thou in the
antiquity of selfe-delusion. To be willing to submit to any way of God, for thy
good, is a sure mark of a humbled soul.

Thirdly, false humbleness discovers it self by this, 3. Partial.
she will love them that should teach her, while they please her and no
further; if she may not teach them, how to teach her, and put their lesson in
their mouth; she will none of them: Abhor therefore this mark: Submit thy
self to Gods discipline. Naaman seemed humble, when he stood at Elisha his
door, but it was for a vantage; when he had not that he looked for, he became
another man: But learn thou to accept of the labors and counsels of any who
are for thy good, though never so harsh, mean and despised instruments in the
eyes of Self; love them best, who come most against her, in the name of the
Lord, and crouch as humbly to the poorest adviser in this case, as ever thou
stoopedst hypocritically in thine own way.

Lastly, selfe-humility bewraies her self by this, she is seldom in a frame,
but always in her extremities: observe thy self, and thou shall find the
symptoms to follow the disease of Naaman: Thou shall be but off and on, out
and in, in thy mood very humble, but by and by, stout and coy again: It is not
easily for a rolling stone to lie still: But a falsely humbled heart, will be
always breaking out. Prove. 7.11.12.
As Solomon speaks of a distempered woman, she may bite in her froward humors
for a while, (as an hot gleame in a winters day) but she is overcast presently,
and fills her house with clamors and chidings, quarrels and passions, because
she is inwardly turbulent: No painted white face does so differ from the look
of a bedred man, as the counterfeit humility of Self differs from the
ingenuous hiew of a lowly spirit. Beware therefore of extremities, and till the
Lord has truly brought down thy winter out of the sky, know it will never rot
there, it must be the merciful calm of grace which must bring a settled state
upon thy soul: It is no condition of safety to be trusted to, which always is
thus, which yet cannot be avoided till the love of God, come in stead of love
of Self, to enforce the soul as by a principle of powerful persuasion, to a
sweet frame of spirit well appaid by the promise, and abhoring such extremities.

Be humble in Gods way. Esaias 55.2.
there is no fear of excess in the way which God has chalked out. Be earnest
in prayer for this wisdom, to spend thy labor to purpose, and thy silver in
that which can profit thee: Ascribe this prerogative to the Lord, that he only
must teach the soul both how and wherein to express humility; and account all
other, a device of Self serving to no other end, save to bar the Lord out of
the soul, in the maine point of self-denial, and to nouzle up it self in
pride and ease: the Lord only, who knows the heart, knows the secret
baseness and pride that lurkes therein, and by what means it may be best
searched out and purged: For us to affect other ways, and to be humble where
God requires it not, is to set our selves on work, and to be wiser then God;
and therefore let no such look for requital at his hands. Jam. 4.
God resists all proud ones, and none more then those who are proud under a
mask of devotion and humbleness. Let us hearken what God says, and abase our
selves in his way, and then our hearts as well as our habits shall be so, and
we shall not lose our reward. For so says Saint Peter, he gives grace to the
humble: And he who denies any thing for me, wealth, credit, wife, child,
(having first denied himself) shall have an hundred fold here, and hereafter
eternal life. Let this use then be a spur to quicken our pace in the use of
the former doctrine of self denial; of which I will now speak no more,
having handled it at large. Thus much for this doctrine.

1. Part of his distemper, Rage.
The other point, and last of this verse, is Naamans rage: It may seem as
strange as the former: For why? What cause was given him to carry himself
thus? If Elisha had dealt by him, as by Iehoram, handled him roughly at the
door, and chased him away with disdain; If he had answered his request with
a scorn, as our Saviors did the woman's, Matthew. 15. Away thou dog, what have
thou to do with childrens bread? Thy disease is past cure, I will not meddle
with such a nasty one as thou, an enemy and Champion against the Church of God:
then indeed had he a just cause of wrath and rage: The ground of the point
opened.
But now he has an answer of mercy and love, and hope, from one that sent for
him for the nonce, when he was at a set; and lo, because only he crosses him
in a circumstance, that is, that he concurres not with his humor, for the
manner of curing, but sends him word of another way, for this alone, he finds
enough in his heart to pick a quarrel, and to depart in a rage! Ah poor
wretch! If thou had now seen thy waywardness, and foolish struggling against
mercy, thou would have abhorred this cursed humor of thine, and wondered that
mercy could so have enclosed such a rebel in her arms, as to heal him
against his will! For why? Had it been but a Physician should have prescribed
a medicine one of seven, which he could think of, would thou have taught
him how to cure thee? Would not a Physician have said, If thou be wiser then I,
what do thou here? Go heal thy self: How is it then, that in a desperate
case, only in Gods power to heal, thou art so careless of his counsel, that
thou railest at the messenger, and art ready to go away in a rage? Oh! this is
surely for our example (brethren) to learn by: do not cast off the point ere
it come at you; say not that he was an heathen, a Noble man, of great spirit,
and they will bear no affronts. True it is, so he was: But this was neither
the fruit of ignorance properly, nor yet of greatness, (although of both in
part) but of that disease which all of us carry in our bosoms, that is Self
and self-love: be we never so enlightened to know the truth, or never so mean
(for poor ones without grace can be as proud as rich) we may bewray this tetch
and distemper as well as he! well (beloved) now you have the ground, lay aside
descants, and come with meekness to hear this point, that you may be rid of
this disease, which though all condemn in Naaman, yet few see in themselves.

The doctrine is plain: Self if she be defeated of her hopes rages:
Doctrine. Self defeated rages.
Naaman whiles he had hopes, is at ease and a good point, he waits and is
patient; now comes this cross errand that turns him over, as drink does a
drunkard, now he can hold no longer; his patience turns weariness, and waxes
madness: I doubt not but you see the bottom; yet I doubt not but you would be
glad to see it cleared; mark then a little those texts and reasons which serve
for it, and so lead to the application of it to your selves. Take that
behavior of the young man for one proof, who coming in a deep
forestallednesse of conceit to our Savior, that his case to Godward was good,
and yet thinking so highly of Christ, that he could inform him, thought it not
amiss to ask, Good Master, what shall I do to be saved? Matthew. 19.22.
Our Savior to beat down his courage, sends him to the Law, saying, Keep the
commandments: He being prepared, and hoping to be riveted into his course by
the mouth of truth, (as men if they can get but half a word from a Preacher of
comfort, they are safe ever after) answers, All these have I kept from my
youth. Our Savior not to establish any rule (as Papists dream) but to quash
his self-love, replies, then thou have need of an eleventh command to be doing
with, seeing thou have kept the ten, Go sell all, and thou shall have
heaven: what a pickle is he in upon this! Oh (thought he!) this is yrkesome,
this is to beat me off quite, surely if it be thus, I am wrong, and have been
long defeated; my wealth I am loath to foregoe, and therefore he went away
sorrowful. What is that? Secretly vexing at his lot, out of love with Christ,
sad and discontent, fretting and distempered at the counsel. Another example
(for the ground of all rests upon a fact) may be their practice, of whom we
read, Esaias 58. who fasted and sought the Lord from self-love, (as appears by
the context) that they might under pretense, please and flatter themselves the
more in their oppression, and stop conscience from biting and stinging them.
Now when they perceived this was no way to speed, and themselves would beteame
the Lord no other, they fly out intemperately and challenge God himself: Why
(say they) have we fasted and thou regardest not? Oh! they were so madded,
that they could have flowen in Gods face! Is this the fruit of all our care and
cost, that we cannot have thank? Away ye wretches, ye fast a meal from some
meat and drink, but you have pleasure within, for you feast with your bribery
and stealth, and excess of covetousness. Is this a fast? Do I regard the
bowing of a bulrush, when as the soul is surfeted with lusts, and the soul is
neither afflicted, nor seeks reconciliation? No, no, I abhore it. Mark,
because they cannot get God to be like them, nor bribe him with all their gifts
and glosing selfe-denialls: lo, they fall out with him down right, and bid him
go seek his service. A third place is yet more evident, Mal. 3. where the
Prophet brings in other the like hypocrites to these, who had both tried God,
or tired him rather, with their abstinences, and fastings, not from meat only,
but from many sins, (so that these were better then Esaias his men) but lo,
they are crossed of their hopes, they could not speed of their purpose, to be
accepted and in high favor with God, still he lowred upon them and would not
be friends: And why? Because they did all from a false bottom of Self, and to
a base end, to steal away favor from God: And what is the issue? Surely they
cry out upon God, and tell him to his face, that he cannot discern between
his friends and his foes; he favors them that swear and play the Idolaters,
as those that worship him, and fear an oath: And who will serve such a Master?
But those that feared God, and esteemed rewards, not by outward blessings, but
that hundred fold of peace and comfort; they cried them down as fast as these
did the Lord, they rage also at their lot who fare better then they: Refer
hither the discontent and rage of the Prodigalls elder brother, Luke 15.22. And
it were endless to insist in examples: What else is the scope of that wretched
answer, I saw thou were an hard Master, who reapedst and gatheredst where thou
sowedst or strawedst not, I saw little came of thy service, I therefore buried
thy talent, take thine own to thy self, and look for no more at my hands.
Even as it fares with hirelings, so does it with hypocrites, no longer then
their turn is served, do they regard the worship of God, for they look at a
vantage, either of some outward bribe from God, or to delude conscience, and
when neither, or not both succeed to their mind, they fall off.

Demetrius robbed of his shrines, Act. 16.19. Act. 19.24.
made an uproare presently: The Devil spoke shrewdly, when he said, Thou have
hedged him in round about, he serves thee not for naught: Job 1.
But now, do but touch him, and he will curse thee to thy face. If he had not
mistaken the man, he had not mistaken his mark.

Secondly, that effect which commonly follows a lesser cause in a Solomon,
Prove. 13.12. tells us, That the deferring of the hope, is the fainting of the
soul. By the same reason, the defeating of the hope, must needs be the
vexation of it.

Thirdly, look what we see to fall out in mere natural disappoints, Athalia
being defeated of her son, rises up and plays the mad tyrant, 2 King. 11.1.
and destroys all the Kings Seed (though in a sort she took this opportunity:
Act. 12.
) So Herod being defeated of the wise men, slew all the males at Bethlem: much
more then in spiritualls.

Fourthly, that which is seen in spiritualls of inferior nature, much Jonas
in a case, not so real or weighty, (because it concerned the defeat of others,
rather then his own) yet was wondrous tetchy, even at the conversion of
Ninivee (thinking it to threaten Israel,) yea he was sick of vexation, and
desperate in his defeat; and all, because he might not prophecy to the
destruction of the City, rather then the conversion: How much more when the
spiritual defeat concerns the soul it self nearly toward God.

Fifthly, it must needs be, that wheresoever the supposed attaining of Jonah 4.
needs therefore must he be disquieted when he is defeated. See it in an
illusion, Ionahs gourd caused an idle yet extreme content, more then such a
babble should; therefore when the Lord smote it, he was most basely distempered.
The suddener the raising up of the seed was in the gravelly ground, the
suddener was the withering of it. A little to insist upon this: There is no
feast with stolen bread and waters, so sweet as the feast of hypocrites, who
live upon stealth from God: To seem to have gotten a felicity by our own wit
and industry, without self-denial, is more then to joy in treasures of gold
and silver; because it resembles a principle that still affords it from a
fountain: And indeed, if an inferior could match the opperations of a
superior, if nature I mean, could walk in the furniture of grace, it were
great wonderment. Unusual seize, breed impotent joys, as when a child
of twelve or thirteen, reaches the learning of an elder of nineteen or
twenty, when a woman gets arts and tongues, it breeds a very sickness. How
much more here? For a Pharisee to carry away heaven as sheere, as a believing
Saint, I wonder not, if it puff up with excessive boast and triumph (as base
as it is) for they seem (with Jacob to have overcome God! when then the Lord
shall take such in hand, convincing, disappointing and confounding their
consciences, turning them out of all as beggars and banquerupts (as he will do
all whom he will save, and some whom he will not) Oh! we may well conceive
what wrath and rage it works.

James says, and out of an ill custom and habit, grows to be as old with God
as with men, if he cross her, she knows not, she is not capable of
subjection. So much for reasons of the point.

Amplification. The godly themselves, so far as led by Self, rage, if
disappointed.
Nay more, that which I have said of hypocrites, may be verified (in measure,
and with limitation) even of the godly, so far as they are unmortified and
led by this Spirit of Self; though not totally, yet in any particular case of
error and delusion; so far as they forsake the promise, and go to work by
their own conjectures and strength, as in zeal and prayers, (wherein a good
man may rest too much upon himself, no doubt the Devil and their corruption
feasts them but too much; (as one said, he never seemed so zealous, as before
God mortified his own spirit, but after he found prayer another gates work;)
But when the Lord separates the precious from the vile, and shows them the
vanity and wanzingnesse of their own principle, it becomes as the very sting
of an adder; only the the ods is, an hypocrite is fretted with such a
distemper, Yet with difference from hypocrites.
as commonly, makes him no better; but the regenerate is wholesomely smitten by
God, to cause him with shame and sorrow to abhor hmselfe, and to crouch and
run under the wings of a better friend, who can give him content from a
better fountain, and of a more lasting nature.



Answ. Self does not rage till defeated.
To which I answer, That the reason thereof is, because they have no defeates:
Self in her quietness and jollity rages not, but when she meets with
affronts, either by disappointments, or by terrors of the Law, convincing and
slaying the soul: The soul in this case is abased and cast down, either
wholesomely as by a step to humiliation, or else slavishly, and then she shifts
and goes forward in a rotten course: But Self rages nevertheless: Or else
recovers her self again by her own subtility.
Note the difference: In such as God will save, the discovery of this Self and
the subtilty thereof, shall humble the conscience, and work a kindly change by
degrees; but yet Self and corruption will rage and rebel, being loath to give
place: But as for the rest, both Self and conscience together may not rage,
because the Law has not put an enmity between them, still they hold in
together as body and members incorporate in each other, and not divorced. This
by the way. But mark, The Lord does not always bless the word to work a
defeat of Self in every hypocrite or unregenerate person, neither do all such
meet with such defeats: Ezekiel. 14.
Rather the Lord suffers such justly to stumble at the blocks laid in their
own way by themselves: As they chose error and delusion, so the Lord leaves
them to Satan to be more deluded, 1 King. 22.
and so they fall, (as Ahab by his false Prophets) because being taught the
truth soundly, they have preferred their own ease and liberties to it. Self
may want defeats being given over by God to delusion and hardening.
Nay more, the Lord suffers many such (and it is a common thing in these
declining days) to be so far from meeting with defeats, that rather they are
habited in their ways, erring by necessity, seeing no danger: They are
enchanted so with this cup of Self, that it has cast them into a deep
sleep, and they are as one asleep in the top of the mast, no buffetings
will startle them out of their course: And it were well with some, that this
were all: For the unclean spirit returns into many, Matthew. 12.
and imbarkes himself in them more strongly then before, defiling them with
such lusts as they lie open unto specially, and bringing them into such a
confused perplexity, some by their uncleanness, some by intemperancy, some by
their open profaneness, that they never outgrow it, but go on with wasted
and seered consciences, to their dying day, without remorse: Although such as
belong to God, shall return even by these unwelcome batterings; for the Lord
saw, that else their fusty savor and taste would never have gone out. So much
for answer to this objection.

This doctrine falls point blanke upon many of us (brethren) to shame Terror.
let it be Terror to all such as walk with this cursed heart of wrath,
impatience and discontent, Wrathful and discontented persons, reproved.
daily and Naaman here so blameworthy, (being an heathen and defeated of his
will,) for his rage and distemper? What shall become of thee then, who art in
continual wrath and vexation? Not in a fit (as Paul calls it, Ephe. 4.29.) but
as it were in a falling sickness: Truly brethren, Because raging in cool
blood.
I wrong Naaman to make him the text of such a commentary! I tremble to think
how many present themselves here duly at the worship of God, who yet in their
usual course are never quiet, neither in themselves, nor with others! They are
(as I may say) steept in vinegar; rarely shall you find them other then
froward, waspish, envious, bitter and distempered: and yet no defeat appears
to heat their blood, as here in Naaman; they are so in very cool blood, out of
the surquedry of their wickedness, they are always distempered, because wicked:
There is no peace (says my God to the wicked. More like Nabals, then Naamans,
Esaias 57. ult.
of whom his own servants could say, he was so wicked, that no man might
speak to him. As the Apostle in Romans 1. describes those heathen Romans full of
all wickedness, as a toad is full of venom, top full of wrath, rage, malice;
as a vessel standing full to the brimme cannot be touched, but they will run
over. Nabal being saluted by David's men courteously, (perhaps by the name of
Lord, or worshipful) answers with nicknames, of rogue and runnagate! Is not
here an heart top full of rage and madness? Oh (brethren!) I remember what
Solomon says of neighborhood, Prove. 3.29. Live quietly with thy neighbor,
and hurt him not, for he lives securely by thee: What is that? He means well
and peaceably toward thee, Prove. 24 21.
and looks for no other from thee.

And art thou so fierce, currish and churlish a Nabal, that even when thou
might live in the midst of thy people (as she told Elisha) thou delightest to
play the tyrant and termagant among them! 2 King. 4.13
I tell thee, Naaman is a Saint in comparison of such a Devil, nay worse, for
the Devil himself if pleased is quiet: Some of you have by your sin in this
kind got brands of infamy upon your selves, you are noted for your
intemperance of spirits, as not fit to live in a society! Oh! then go out into
the wilderness apart, and build you cottages among the wild beasts! And yet
they are better then you, for Bears will agree with Bears, and each beast
with her kind; but man to man is a wolf and a Devil! Oh, make your peace
with God, for till that work be over, the base heart is like the sea that
continually rages! weigh well what I say: Should any man or woman here, so
carry himself, that no man should care for their company, but count themselves
best, when furthest off? Beware lest you meet with your match! And lest you
that bite and snarle be devoured by others! I have noted it, that nothing will
cool some men's spirits, till they meet with such as tame and taw them, and
bring them so low by suits of Law, and crush them by their power, that they
make them weary of their parts! Then at last they cry out, woeful wretch, was I
the only man in a Town, who by my fierce spirit frayed all men from desire of
my company? Such a Nabal as could not live quietly with my wife, (though an
Abigail) nor with my servants (though too good for me) nor with my neighbors,
(who yet lived securely by me) and were far from hurting me! Oh! If I might now
be out of the claws of such as tear and devour me, how glad would I be of
them all! What a Lamb should they live with in stead of a Lion! It is well
that harshnesse and violence of greater opposites can effect that, which love
and courtesy could never effect.

If they be so being full, how much more fasting?
What are they then, when they are opposed, wronged and defeated? Surely like
Bears robbed of their whelps! Oh! then we think we may lawfully set up our
bristles! then we may threaten, quarrel, go to Law, revenge: for why? Were we
not provoked? If they would have let us alone, we would have been as fair
and courteous as Lambs; but if they will stir us, they shall know what
metal we are made of. Do they know us, what men, how wealthy, great, and how
much their betters? Dare they cross us? Why? Who art thou, O thou earth,
earth, earth, dust and ashes, sin and poison? Who may not know thee by thy
colors? Who sees thy smoking nostrills, fiery face, sparkling eyes, who
hears thine oaths, blasphemies, cursings and rage, but he must needs know what
house thou come of? What set thy heart, or thy tongue on fire, Jam. 3.6. 1 Samuel 10.12.
but hell? Who need ask who is the father of such as thou? Oh! the least word
uttered awry, the least conceit taken, or pritch, the breaking in of a cow into
their grounds, yea sheep or pigges, is enough to make suits, and they will be
revenged, kill and slay, who art thou that may not be crossed? Who has more
crossed, yea cursed others then thou? Humble thy self (Oh worms meat) and say
to thy self in secret, Oh wretch! If thine heart were tame and quiet, the Lord
would make even thine enemies thy friends! he who caused Jacob to say of Esau,
Behold I have seen thy face this day, Genesis 33.10. as the face of God, could
turn all this to a calm, if there were not a controversy between him and
thee, which till it be decided, know thou, that thy rage and wrath equals not
his righteousness, he can match thee himself; yea although thou should
fight against heaven it self, and dare the Lord with thy pride and distemper,
yet he can resist the proudest stomach, and bring it low, and by that time he
has done with thee, he will make thee such a poor worm as that no man shall
know thee indeed to be the party: And therefore while thou may, be glad to
abate thy fierce heart, agree with thine adversary quickly, while he is in the
way, lest if once his wrath be kindled, thou perish in it! then happy are they
who know themselves (whether others know them or no) and who can possess their
soul with moderation and meekness. So much for the second branch of Terror.

But to end this use, and to go one step further, Self if she have well
deserved, and yet be slighted, is most intemperate.
what think ye becomes of Self, when she does any special work thankworthy,
and yet is defeated of her hope? Surely then she thinks she may be mad by
privilege: For such men look that their good deserts, should (as a stream)
bear down all their faults to eternal forgetfulness, and procure them
endless thank: Spy out any of their follies, or lowre upon their merits, and
they are mad by those defeats. Take an example of each. See 2 Samuel 3.8.
Abners warlike valor was the proppe of Saul's rotten house; It fell out that
he defiled Saul's concubines. Ishbosheth takes him up for it. What says he for
himself? Am I a dog that thou should so speak unto me, so take me up for
this woman? God do so to me and more, if I restore not this day, the Kingdom
to David! He could not bear it: So Ioab (just like him) having cut off Absolon
in a dangerous war, 2 Samuel 19.7.
and restored David: David (unseasonably) falls a mourning! what does Ioab? So
rages that he comes and dares David thus to his face, Now I see if Absolon had
been alive, though we had all dyed, thou would have liked it well? But I
swear by the Lord, if thou come not forth and show thy self, all thy people
shall go away from thee; it is enough to name these examples: Let us all
abhor this bitter cursed root of selfe-defeated rage, and as we would loath
it in matter of Religion, so let it be odious to us even toward men;
accustoming our selves to be content, though we hear ill when we have done
well, which is a royal grace indeed.

Secondly, this also may be just reproof to others (though not so rank as
Reproof.
such as although they live in a bad course and know it, yet are no sooner
convinced thereof, but they cavil against God himself, and lay him in all the
fault; they would as feign be better as the Preacher, and they cannot deny, but
they are far from that they should be: But these Ministers they say, would
go beyond God, and have them better then God will make them; which cannot be,
for till God change and mend us all, we can be no better, let men tear their
tongues to the stumps. And and whence is this cavil? Truly from base profane
Self, which is crossed in her way, imagining that because it is easy for God
to work as he please, Cavillers against God as if he were in fault for all
their error^, convinced.
and the work of conversion is only his, therefore they may live the whilst
as basely, idely, and profanely as they list: They would have grace drop out
of the clouds on the sudden into them, that their hearts might all at once be
humbled, comforted, and turned to God, before they be aware, and then they
think they might escape a great deal of trouble that others meet with, who are
so restless, painful and unwearied in the use of the means: For their own
part they will use good means too on the Sunday, and come to Church and hear;
but they will wait till God work?

To whom I answer, The Lord rebuke all such wretches! God open their eyes! For
tell me I pray you, these waiters upon God, how live they the whiles? Most
loosely, deny themselves no liberty, lust or will of their own, but lash it on
upon the score, till grace come and wipe off all; they spare for no sin
committing, to be lewd companions, drinkers, covetous or the like: For why
should they? If heaven will be favorable, it can pardon great, as well as
small offenses: If it will not, in vain should they strive! For they have no
strength of their own (they confess) to restrain from any such courses till
God turn their hearts; and then you shall see what manner of persons they will
be, when they be of Gods making, you shall see what new men they shall be: But
oh you white Devils! you that turn rebellion into smoothness, and play the
still swine who eat up all the draffe, how should such as you ever come into
Gods mint to be new stamped? I denounce unto you, that all your hypocrisy
tends to the vailing over of your sin; it is not grace you seek, if your
breasts were open, hell and destruction are there, and the way of peace you have
not known: Peace you would have, pardon and heaven, Gods love and favor, but
your cursed wills you would not forgo: And therefore that ye would have,
(mercy I mean) you shall never have, and what ye would shun, you shall for
ever inherit, even woe and wrath.

I know some of this sort are not so profane as others; but feed themselves
with duties and moralities, a smooth way of Religion, and so wait: Matthew. 3.
Esaias 30.
But who has taught such to escape the wrath to come, by their sloth and ease?
What although it be our strength to sit still? Must we therefore suspend our
labor, pains and use of means? Will God be found in a way of ease, of
yawning desires, and lazy hopes, which abhor to be guided Gods way, and to
come to his oath and covenant of humiliation, aith and self-denial? No
neither the profane, nor the lazy, shall enter into his rest, no more then the
rebellious: They maintain a secret distemper and pritch of heart, and tetch of
self against God, and either will be saved their own way, or not at all: And
therefore to these I also profess (with sharp reproof) The way to peace ye
have not known, neither will; you rather will quarrel with God for not
fulfilling you wills, to make you such as you would be, without your trouble:
This way God never knew: Nay, I say more, Though God would save you, yet you
would not, if ye might; and I may say truly, salvation it self cannot save
such as would not, because it saves none but the willing. Pull down your
cursed spirits, and cease to kick against the pricks, for till you be content
to abandon your lusts and ease, you do secretly cavil with him, whom you
shall never be able to make your cause good against; you stand not right in
your plea, the Court is Gods, and the judgment is his, who shall curse all
weapons formed against himself, and condemn all those most justly who cavil
against him. Therefore I say again, take this word of reproof with
meekness, Esaias 54. ult.
and sit still in the point of cavilling, but abhor to go against Gods edge
by your prophanensse, or your ease; for the Lord will never believe, that
either of these will ever be content to find mercy, though they might enjoy
it: And as Esau when time came would have had the blessing, but yet would be
still a sensual Epicure, and therefore it was finally denied him: So I say to
you, If in truth you would have grace, pray to God to pluck up that root of
bitterness which springs up in you; Heb. 12.
for that will defile you faster then all your idle and false wishes can cleanse
you, and no wonder if you well weigh it!

And secondly here come to be censured all such as go yet a step further,
Selfewilled ones who bind God to their labors, convinced.
but then when they see that God will take no pains for full price, but for
serving his own grace, and good pleasure only: then they fret and fume at
their lot, because God regards not their labors: What say they? Is this
equity, that the Lord should alike esteem of the painful and the lazy? I
answer thee, yea if Self defeated be the caviller: Thou take pains it
seems, that thou might be warm by thine own sparkles, and have somewhat
to allege why God should regard thee! That is, thou would have him for thy
sake, to forsake his own way, and turn free grace into wages: Romans 9.13.14.
And because he will not (as indeed he never will be a servant to the runner
or the willer) therefore thou frettest and fumest at him, for not serving thy
turn. But oh man! Who art thou that disputest with God? Shall the axe quarrel
with him that cutteth with it? I answer thee therefore, The Lord does not
simply equal thee with such as take no pains, keep thy pains still, and if
thou will, add more unto them, but rather take away thy upbraiding spirit; do
that thou do with meekness, and be content to sink in thy costs, and be as
nothing, an unprofitable one when thou have done all, cast not God in teeth
with them, call not for them back again, nor bring him his own in a napking:
For these qualities poison all thy labors, Gods hearers will be at Gods
dispose for blessing.
and drive the Lord further off, rather then draw him nearer: And when thou
have turned all thy selfe-defeated discontent into self-denial, and art
willing that the Lord should do with thee as he list, then see how he will
dispose of thee: A little barley or an handful of meal with a little oil
shall make a more accepted meat offering to him (with an heart willing to be at
his dispose) then all thy plenty of costly sacrifices without it! Joel. 2.13.


Lastly, it reproves all such, as yet go beyond these also, and are content
desire. To whom I answer, All ye have done hitherto is well. Add one thing
more, give all your humbleness, your labors, your endeavors to God, Waiting
upon God necessary for such as look to speed of grace.
and when you have waited upon him therein, give him your waiting too, (for it
is not too good for him) perhaps there may be a Self in that also, and sure it
is, the finer Self is spunne, the more she will take pritch if she be
defeated. But be thou as Paul was, 2 Cor. 12.9. who feeling no bottom in
himself, yet was content to be under that weakness, and all to try what mercy
could do: doubtless in such a case, thou shall find that grace shall at
least be sufficient for thee, if the Lord do not also magnify his power
(beyond expectation) in thy infirmity: And poor soul! what gainest thou in
the mean while by thy carking, plodding and casting about with thy self? If
thou do thy duty, shall it not be well with thee? And have thou not a great
recompense in this, that thou art accepted, and thy success is with God? Is it
not much that a sinful wretch who cannot lay claim to the air, earth, water,
to breath in, to tread upon, and the like, may yet come and look up to
heaven with hope, and come to the Lord as bound by his promise? Alas! his pay
may be leasurely, but it is sure; the gains may seem small, but still they
are coming, and will make a heavy purse at last: And what? Is there not some
scurffe which the Lord must purge out, think you? Has not a long course in
evil hardened thee? And may not a speedy course of thine own, hurt the more
another way? What if the Lord should leave thee to such corruption of thine
own, as should cause thee to wax wanton, were it not better prevented by
longer delay? And speak the truth, (to shame the Devil and thy slavish heart)
is it not better with thee at sometimes then at other? If it be no^, suspect
thy self; if it be, suspend thy cavils; cease thine enmity, thine hard
thoughts, thine unbeteaming heart, the Lord loves to be as freely thought of
for his love as he deserves: And for thy self, if it be thy lot to lie longer
under hope then others, and to want the cheerings which some have, yet sure it
is, if thou abide waiting in thine innocence, (not being tainted with shrewd
dregs of thine own stale and base heart) the Lord will at length break out so
much the more in pity to thy fainting soul, by how much his delay has made
thee wait so long, and it shall not then trouble thee that thou have thus
endured: Mercy at last shall be sweetest to thee, Esaias 57.16.
that thou fail not wholly. Singularity of delay, sometimes argues an heart
tainted with Self in more then a common manner. And so much for the use of
reproof.

Great men must submit their great spirits to God.
First special, to such as are Naamans, great ones in place, renown,
authority, birth or any other worth above others, viz. That their great
stomachs rise not up in arms against God to quarrel with him, when they are
crossed in their own hopes and expectations: The truth is, the stream of
Self is rank enough of it self, though there be no oil added to the flame:
The poorest wretch could say, though I am not so rich as thou, yet I have as
proud an heart as thou: But yet, when one stream meets another, the flood is
the greater: Great men who think it a piece of their Nobleness to take no
affronts at any man's hand, what ever it cost them, had need deny themselves
far, to get a subject heart even to God himself: Their great blood, the
repute of their own eminency and parts exempts them (in their own opinion)
from the common lot; as we read of him, 2 King. 6.
who having first raged at Elisha (as the supposed cause of the famine) saying,
God do so, and so, if his head stand on him this day; after being greeted by
him more discurteously then he looked for, flew in Gods face too, and said,
shall I attend on the Lord any longer? Ver. ult.
As once a great Prince being crossed of his pastime by the weather, told God
(swearingly) he was a King too, and he offered him ill measure so to defeat
him. Abner the pillar of Saul's house, being but reproved by weak King
Ishbosheth (set up by himself) for meddling with his fathers concubines, 2 Samuel
3.6.
took it so hainously that he forth with revenges himself, and betraies the
Crown to David: Great men therefore swell easily if defeated, and indeed these
two were as bad as great, but the best in this kind take defeats heavily. Let
such consider that which Naaman (if he had had the knowledge which they have)
would soon have noted, viz. How desperate a thing it is to fight against God,
and to cross him, when he serves not our turn? If God resist all proud ones,
and especially great ones, how much more proud resisters? Pride being of it
self a resistance: Although your spirits rise up soon against men, (which yet I
allow not) beware ye be not found fighters against God: Act. 5.
Know that though men accept your persons, yet God puts no difference,
especially in matter of salvation: It is counted a great humility in a great
one, to be never so little humble. But oh worm! (for what is the greatest
flesh, else?) if thou think it equal that a poor beggar should stoop to
thee, what should thou do to God, to whose eminency, thine is as the drop of
a bucket?

Take not upon thee, (though thou be the chief of the Parish, the Lord of the
Town, and Patron of the Minister) to yoke him to any other conditions in point
of reproving thee impartially then the meanest: If he do his duty faithfully,
turn not away in a fume, scare him not with thy looks, change not thine heart
to him, nor think his love less toward thee therefore; rather rejoice that
God has given thee so faithful an overseer, which few such have the
happiness to enjoy, much less play thy parts with God in this kind, but
subject thy self to the authority of the promise, as humbly as the meanest, he
has little to take to upon earth, and all thou have cannot help thee, without
the good will of him that dwelt in the bush: God has chains for Princes:
Psalm. 149.8. Act. 17.11.
Deny thy self, cleave to the bare truth of the promise, try it as well as
thou will, as those noble Beraeans did) but when thou have done, seek no other
way to heaven, save it: Heaven lies no more open to a Noble man's performances
and merits, then a pezants; all were dug out of one rock, therefore count
it thy Nobility, to give God his honor by believing, and count it more
presumptuous to affront him in point of his honor, then any man's affronting
thee; there is but one way for thee, and the poorest, to heaven: cleave to it
with an heart as low as the poorest; God will count more highly of a great
little heart, then a small little one, and stoop to this point in hand also:
David never got such interest in Gods affections by his Crown, as by his
poverty of spirit. Inure thy self to take a defeat from God without rage, yea
unkindnesse. An Emperor for his Crown could stand bare foot at the gate of a
base Pope till he released him, and shall thou think much to cast thy coronet
at the feet of this Emperor? Oh! wait (even thou) at the gates of God
unweariedly, and although it be long ere he hear thee, and although Self in
thee would swell, yet beat it down and wait still, till the Lord send thee away
with Naamans answer. Consider if thou turn away with him from God, whither
shall thou go? Shall hy wealth and honor save one whom God will not save? Or
could all Naamans honor at home have healed his leprosy? Came not that from
another friend? And think, what a sad confusion he had found it, if he had
humored himself in this distemper finally? Oh! as tickling as it was now, it
had stung him after as a serpent! and so shall thine do thee, if the Lord
prevent it not for thee by counsel as he did for him, whereof in the next
verse (God willing) we shall treat more fully.

Try thy self how the defeating of Self works with thee.
whether Satan mix himself with them to inflame corruption, and to make sin
out of measure sinful; or whether they come only from within our selves: If
it be from Satan stirring up rebellion, then the spirit of Grace, may
nevertheless be at work, and may prevail thereby in time to cast out Satan,
and to subdue the soul to self-denial and patient waiting for why? The
impression is violent, and contrary to that spirit which guides thee:
Therefore thou shall find it yrkesome to thee, unwelcome and wearisome, thou will not harbor it, but reject it, and embrace the defeats of Self, as Paul
did, till the Lord satisfy thy desires. But if thou feel that this discontent
proceed from mere corruption; then know, that God calls thee to so much the
more abhorring of thine own way and will, and to say, Note well.
alas! what is the salvation of a poor worm, a gnat, to that infinite glory
which God seeks to himself in his own holy way? What if I lose heaven in
mine own way, so I may have it in his way, yea any way? Phil. 3.
Yea she shall wish she had Paul's strength to become Anathema, so that Gods
wisdom might be exalted? I say thou had need entreat the Lord so far to
reveal unto thee the holiness, the equity of his wise way, that in respect
thereof, thou may stink in thine own nostrills: Oh do so! choose to go to
heaven with the forfeit of thine own dearest eyes, hands and feet, rather then
go to hell, (for so would Self) with them: Matthew. 18.8.
Say thus, I would wash seventy seven times in thy Jorden, to cross my self,
Lord, rather then turn from washing seven times to cross thy command. I would
with Paul, attain to the resurrection of the dead by any means whatsoever,
rather then fail of it, through good report and bad, through as many disasters
as Paul chose to pass, rather then he would not fulfill his Apostleship, would
I ^huse to go, rather then lose my desire, through poverty, loss of friends,
shipwreck, persecutions, hunger, stoning, nakedness, yea Self and all, though
defeated of her hopes. And so much shall suffice for this verse, use, doctrine
and time. Let us pray, etc.

THE TENTH LECTVRE upon the thirteenth Verse following
VERSE XIII. And his servants came near, and said unto him, Father, if the
Prophet had bidden thee do some great thing, would not thou have done it?
How much more then, when he says unto thee, Wash and be clean?

VERSE 14. Then he went down to Jorden, and dipped himself seven times, etc.


YOU may remember (beloved) that in our entrance upon this Scripture, we
divided it into four parts. 2 Kings
Elisha's message, Naamans entertainment of it, Transition to the 13. verse.
The servants attempt, And the issue thereof, both immediate and consequent.
Two of these are already finished through Gods providence. The other two
remain. At this time therefore by the same assistance, I am to proceed to the
third general, viz. The attempt of the servants of Naaman (for these the Lord
chose to use for the rectifying and restoring of their distempered Master,
rather then the Prophet, through the prejudice of Naaman) and how the Lord
inspired them with wisdom to give an onset, (at this dead lift) upon their
Master, to dissuade him from doing that which he rashly purposed, to wit, to
depart without his cure: And this attempt of theirs, is set before our eyes in
this thirteenth verse; The method and parts of it two. 1. The coherence. 2. The
matter in 3. things.

wherein two generals are to be noted. First, how this verse hangs upon the
former: Secondly, the substance of matter contained in it. For the former, I
pass it by till I enter upon it presently: For the latter it consists in three
points. First, we have the persons attempting, the servants of Naaman.
Secondly, the attempt it self. Thirdly, the inducements which they use to
persuade him. In the persons, observe two things. First, the relative duty,
wherein each is bound to other, I mean they to him, and he to them. Secondly,
their wise and religious carriage toward him as one out of the way, and that
in three things: First, in their reverence: Secondly, their mercy and
tenderness: Thirdly, their seasonablenesse: The attempt it self follows;
wherein (with their advising him to obey) they secretly tax his self-love:
The third general contains the inducements whereby they persuade; as first,
the easiness to obey; the second, from his love and respect to the Prophet;
the third, from the Prophets integrity; the fourth, from comparison of the
greater to the less. All the which points, what they contain in them, we
shall (God willing) as they come to hand, propound, open and enlarge, so far
as our weakness through his grace shall permit us.

1. Point of coherence handled.
Not to repeat any thing then of former things, let us come to the first of the
two generals, that is the coherence: In which two particulars are contained.
The former is, how different Naamans case is in this verse from that wherein
the former presents him to us. The point will better arise when we have opened
it, Opening of the point.
as the text affords it: For hitherto, (and especially in the two verses
before) we have seen Naaman very unhappy in his proceeding: First, in his wrong
assaying of the King of Israel: Secondly, in his bootlesse attendance at the
door of Elisha: Thirdly, In his rejecting the message, wherein both the way
and the success of his cure was tendered unto him. In special we have seen
the prejudice of his own heart preventing all taste and liking of the message:
Then we have seen his carnal shifts wherein he has taken pleasure, for the
confirming of himself in his error: Lastly, we have seen him fall to play the
fool and mad man, wallowing in his blood, and foaming out his own shame, in
pride and rage. All which laid together, present unto us a man wholly wedded to
himself, and foole-hardy to get out of those arms of mercy which had offered
themselves to him for better ends then he would acknowledge; fighting and
struggling against that good which yet himself pretended to seek: And now who
is there (that looks with no other then a man's eye) beholding Naaman in this
pickle and misery, but would be ready to pass sentence upon him and give him
as gone? who is there, that seeing one deadly sick, tumbling in his bed
without ease, and throwing the potion in the Physicians face, or against the
walls, would not say, this man is but a dead man, he is past cure? Even so is
it here with Naaman: If God were as man, or as willing to turn away in a rage
from man, as man is from God, how should he choose but perish? But here is the
wonder: Naamans cavilling against mercy, provokes mercy to so much the more
pity; his winding and wrestling with Gods arms to get out, draws these arms
closer together to enclose him in them.

If God were as man then were man forlorn.
And now between cup and lip, in this narrow neck of despair, mercy comes in,
and disputes for him who disputed against it self, saying, poor wretch!
whither would thou go from this mercy offered thee? I see better then thou,
that to yield to thy will were to leave thee to sorrow: but when all is done,
mercy must heal thee, and therefore call thy self to better consideration:
Let all thy rebellions become as so many shamings and tamings of thee for thy
folly, humble thy self so much the more deeply, by how much the more thou have
disguised thy self, and let thy sin be thy sorrow! Lo here, I reach out
cords unto thee of persuasion made of many twists, the counsel of thy servants
about thee, whom I have made wiser then thy self, that thou might come a
little lower in thine own sight, and at last become a fool that thou might
be wise: And to conclude, I have put strength into their counsel, and
persuasion into their arguments, and authority into their obedience: Lay hold
therefore of this my strength, make peace, and recover health and cure of soul
and body, from the disease of the one, and distemper of the other, and go to
Jorden, wash and be clean: This merciful assistance the Lord through this
verse holds forth to Naaman: And what comes all this unto? Surely to this
issue, That look whom the Lord has once cast love upon, according to his good
pleasure, and the purpose of calling home; the same Lord will so fasten upon
and hold close to himself, (whatsoever outward discouragements, inward
oppositions and resistances come in the way to hinder it) till by the
irresistible might of his power, he have brought them on shore, past all danger.

Let the first point then be this, whom God has begun with in preventing
Whom God has graciously prevented, he will also assist powerfully to proceed.
till the work of grace be perfected. Let us see some texts and some reasons
of it, and so come to the use. First for reasons, in a word, the maine is, that
God knows who are his by their names: And he will not lose his own work;
he will add to that which he has done, rather then undo it by detracting
from it: All his works are perfect, he leaves nothing by halfes, that were to
dishonor himself: Go no further then Naamans example here, God had already
prevented him, and brought him fairly toward both cure and conversion: Now if
he had left him in the briars of his own difficulties, and suffered the
prevention to come to nothing, what a crossing should this have been to his
ends? He who prevents that he might assist, will not fail of his purpose.
Moses tells the Lord, Deuteronomy. 9.28.
that if he ceased now to go with his people, the heathens would blaspheme his
name, and say, It was because he could not bring him through the vast
wilderness, and so the glory of his prevention had been lost: God then having
foreknowledge, power, wisdom and faithfulness enough to serve his own
glorious ends, how absurd were it to think, that any thing could cross them,
either from without or from within? no enemy, no danger, shall hinder the
assistance of grace from that soul which has been prevented once thereby:
Other reasons will appear in the answer of a question by and by.

Briefly then for Scriptures. Compare first, Exodus 5.21. with 6.1. Proofs of
the Doctrine. Exodus 5.21. and 12.31.
The Lord meant the deliverance of Israel both outward and spiritual, by the
hand of Moses: He had already and long prevented them by the glad tidings
thereof, and the expectation of it: But so it fell out, that in the attempt
thereof, matters went very cross and awry, as appears by the text, for
notwithstanding the often assayes of Pharaoh, yet he held them off with delays;
and the plagues being staid, the bondage continued, his heart hardened more, and
he would not let them go: Nay more, those very instruments in whom (next to
God) their confidence was, Moses and Aaron, rather occasioned their greater
misery, insomuch that that the people thought it had been better if the onset
had never been made: Now when they saw this, the Elders come to Moses, saying,
God be judge between us and you ( q.d. we pray God there be plain dealing
among you) for you have made us stink in the sight of Pharaoh, all goes worse
and worse through your mediation: Exodus 5.20.21.
who would have liked this contrariety? Yet the Lord (who could exalt himself
above all these lets, and over Pharaoh himself) wrought to his people a
deliverance even from hence; and that which this tyrant would not permit
willingly to be done, lo, the Lord by forcible breaking in upon him, does
compel him to, and in the way of saving Israel from him, overthrowes himself.

Joh. 9.5.35.36.
See Joh. 9. When the Lord Jesus had once prevented that poor blind creature
with love, and the handsell of his cure, presently (in stead of good success)
all falls out very foul; for why? The Pharisees (to stop the glory of it)
swarm like hornets about this poor man, disquieting him with questions, and
snaring him with their malice, till at last, for his loyal Apology for Christ,
they had cast him out by excommunication. This might seem an hard gobbet for
so weak a stomach to digest, and rather a mean quite to discourage him: But
could all their railing upon him and Christ, alienation of him from Christ,
estrangednesse of parents, do it? No, as poor as that seed was in him, yet
lively it was, and held out forcibly against all enemies, valiantly defending
Christ's honor and innocence, till when the time came, that the Lord Jesus saw
good to strike up the bargain, a few words served the turn; and in the mean
while, no discouragements could beat him off, all wrought him closer and faster
to Christ, by that secret and hidden attendance of the Spirit upon the poor
entrance which had been begun: Romans 8.
All shall tend from the first to the last) to their good whom God loves; not
only in sanctification, but in vocation also, both being subordinate to
election, though the former under a stronger promise. Act. 9.1.6.7.8 etc.
Who also (thirdly) could have thought, that Paul had been near his
conversion, when he breathed out threats against the Saints (like a Lion) at
his nostrills? Yet that could not keep off Gods preventing mercy from casting
him down and taming him; and being so cast down, and a breach made, let the
Lord slacken his work? Did he not assist it strongly? When this poor prisoner
(instead of pursuant) lay blind and desolate, yea when all were afraid to
meddle with him (as thinking the Lion to be couchant for a skill, that he might
be rampant after) how does the Lord break through all difficulties, and sends
Ananas to open the eyes both of his body and soul, and make him a sound man!
And thus here this poor Naaman (in show) further from cure then at first; how
does the Lord strangely turn the wind out of the East of a distemper, into
the South of a calm? Causing here poor servants to become prevalent with
their Lord, to yield to that which he had renounced? Surely so it is, the Lord
can on the sudden cause deliverance to appear (as recovery out of a long
quartaine ague) even when all hope is past; when doom is given of shipwreck,
Act. 27. God shall make Paul to stand up with a word of hope to poor wretches;
he can hasten salvation with wings (when it seems a far off) when misery is
at the deepest, then comes up the seed of light which was sown for the
righteous: As when there is no strength to bring forth, the Lord (unlooked for)
enlarges birth for the fruit that is to come to the birth; and as the tender
nurse overcomes the poor froward child with love and mildness till she have
brought it out of it humors: so here: Esaias 38.
the doctrine then stands firm upon her bottom.

If any here ask,

I answer, Answ. Assistance of grace wherein it stands.
by accommodating himself in special to the condition of such a soul as does
stick thus in the birth, and staggers between Gods preventing and perfiting
grace. I say, his assistance is always according to the souls difficulty: Here
in this case of Naaman we may clearly see how he steps in by the servants,
furnishing them with more understanding of his case, and inabling them to
ponder the same with the sad effects of it, more then Naaman himself, and
hereby kindling in them a sparkle of divine counsel, which enabled them to
speak wisely, feelingly, pertinently, and in due season according to his
condition, with special blessing succeeding the same, and carrying it home to
their Masters spirit: how easily had the thing fallen out otherwise in every of
these, had not God assisted him? By these instruments, the Lord first stopped
the precipitate mind of Naaman, from so sudden a departure; weakened his
strong conceit, overthrew his carnal cavil, abated his pride, cooled his
rage, enlarged the promise, the easiness, the probablenesse, yea the
divinenesse and certainty thereof, till having beaten down his high thoughts,
he is made a low valley, and prepared for cure and conversion. So in like
manner does the Lord work in any soul which needs his seconding assistance
toward the enjoying of salvation: he will not suffer them to want any help
which may further them. For example, Instances.
Does the Lord see their discouragements to come from others? He Elisha's) and
imbreed an holy opinion of him: Do friends oppose and become enemies? Note.
and hasten his work: His assistance shall be sufficient, till judgment
break forth into victory.

Only here may be a question, why the Lord suffers such stops, ignorances,
weaknesses, fears and discouragements to abide in his poor servants so long,

Answ. God has special reason to delay his work.
I answer, The time is not yet come, he will do it, after he has well
disciplined and yoked them to his own way, humbled them in the particular
insight into their own corruption, baseness, and insufficiency of themselves;
and caused his power (all that while) to appear to them, which at the first
could not so have appeared, if he had prevented all such trouble at once. But
there is a time present, for Gods sufficient grace to stay them from revolts
and extremities; and there is a time to come for Gods perfiting grace to set
them free; then shall they look back and see reason in all this way of God.
See Joh. 13.9.10. When Peter was averse to Christ, in the offer of washing, our
Savior tells him, What I do now thou know not, but hereafter thou shall, 2
Cor. 12. A secret hand shall uphold thee the whilst, but after shall discover
the reason of all. Now I come to some use briefly.

Instruction.
and that in two respects. First, it teaches them what Assisting grace of God,
the root of manifold privileges to a believer.
Does the Lord thus apply himself to such as are out of his covenant? Does he
so prevent them at first, or does he after so follow them up and down, as the
nurses eye attends the feeble Infant, for fear of shrewd turns? When their
rebellious spirits cavil, wind out of his arms, and roll back to their
dungeon, does he clapse them more strongly? Does he take it to concern him to
do so for his honor? No surely, and yet (as the case stands with them) he
knows they must sink, except he pity them. But he is free and bound to none,
save to whom he binds himself; therefore he speaks to the one and to the
other very differently: To his own that golden promise belongs, The Lord will
dry up Euphrates to make a way for his scattered ones; (some think it
concerns the return of the Jews miraculously, as once through the red sea:
Esaias 28.
) But to the other, that fearful speech, There shall be a line upon line,
precept upon precept, here a little and there a little: Why? That they may turn
back, spue, fall, and rise no more: Blessings he means, shall turn curses to
enemies to condemn them: But crosses and offenses shall turn releases and
eases to the other: Oh! fearful is the state then of the one, happy of the
other! Well might it be said, Luke 4. of Naaman, There were many lepers in the
days of Elisha; but only Naaman to whom he was so sent: As Lysias told Paul,
he was feign to buy the liberty of a Citizen of Rome with a great sum, which
Paul was borne too for nothing! Tell it thy soul in secret, how few have I
seen God compassionate and show a tender heart unto, when they have fought
against mercy? How has he suffered them to roll to their dunghill? Rev. ult.
His eye has not pitied them; but he has said, He that formed them will show
them no mercy, let the wilful be more wilful, and the caviller fulfill his
measure, let the carnal have is own way, stumble and fall (and rise no more)
at the stumbling blocks of his own iniquity! Ezekiel. 14.
If he will needs depart let him go! Joh. 6. Did our Savior pull those
time-servers (which followed him for the loaves) back again when they
revolted and picked a quarrel with him? No surely, he let them go. But to his
Disciples he said, Will ye also go? He was loath to part with them.

Oh! what should more prevail to affect the hearts of al Gods people, who have
met with assisting grace then this experience? Has he dealt so with all sorts
as with you? As Moses pressed the children of those Israelites that survived
their fathers, Did ever God so speak to man, Deuteronomy. 4.33.
as he has to you, and yet lived? So say I, Does God no more for you, then for
all sorts? Then account him but a God in common: But has he, even when you
have been at last cast, suddenly caused light to appear, turned the low
wheel uppermost, brought light out of darkness, and spread a table in a dry
barren land? This he has not done for all: If you have found the wind thus
suddenly to turn, Oh acknowledge it! What if it had not been so? If God had
not been so on your side? Surely the floods had prevailed and drowned you: If
he have made those waters walls to you, Psalm. 123.5.
which have been gulfes to others, is it no more then he ought you? Or did you
wade out of your own strength? Did your own hand sustain you? Will ye play
the Pelagians now in this kind, and ascribe this escape to the lot of your
better judgment, honesty, labor and prevention, then others? Is there room
for such scurfe here? Or may free will presume to be named the same day with
the assisting grace of God? Those innumerable difficulties and dangers of
shipwreck which thou have avoided, could thy own wisdom and will shun
them? No, let thy soul break out into admiration at this freedom of mercy
now, as at first, and confess, Not to me Lord, but to thy self give the
glory! Thou have done it for thy name, and to get thee glory, else it had been
undone for ever! they and I were dug out of one rock, Esaias 63.3.
and their prerogative was as great as mine: Who am I that thou should
reveal thy self to me, and not to the world? That which put the difference,
was the grace that separated us, being all of one rock, of one mass

And secondly, Assisting grace following prevention, is a bottom of sound
experience to a poor soul, See Romans 5.10.
it should instruct Gods own servants to gather experience Genesis 7. Psalm.
32.5.6.
how few escaped the trialls of their sincerity in a safe manner? How many of
them lost their peace, wasted their conscience, by drunkenness, uncleanness,
intemperate passions, pride, the world, disguised, and at last coming to their
grave with sorrow? Witness David, Solomon, Asa, Hezekia, Jonah, Peter, others?
Behold the times in which we live: Do we find it so common a grace, that
those (whom we have esteemed of well for uprightness, and zeal to the Gospel)
still hold their beauty? Do they not begin to change color, and wax pale
and wanne? Do they not stagger, temporize, and grow common in their communion
with all sorts, in their affections to the truth, to the power of godliness?
Is it not hard to find one who may be trusted? Oh then! if God have kept thee
close from the error of the wicked, that thou might not be pulled from thy
steadfastness, nor wanze in thy first love, count it a peculiar, unspeakeable
mercy!

Again, do thou see the most professors to keep from revolts? Is not the
world full of offenses of such as gave their names to Christ? Whence then are
so frequent scandales of such as are fallen to uncleanness in all corners, and
so to other reproachful sins? Art not thou one of them? Has the Lord hitherto
helped thee as Samuel says? Bless him and wonder: Oh Lord! thou who gave
Paul the lives of all that were in the ship with him, and (notwithstanding all
tempests and fears of shipwreck) broughtest them all safe to land! Thou have
graciously given my soul to the Lord Jesus, put me into his ship, kept me
hitherto from sinking, and being cast away upon the rocks, sands and shelfes of
this woeful sea, in which I am tossed: Even so (O Father) because thou have
promised, else I had been cast away a thousand times, by temptation, by
offenses, by my corruptions: But as nothing could intercept the Lord Jesus till
his work was done; when they had been on the top of the hill to throw him
down headlong, Esaias.
suddenly he passed through them without hurt, fire could not burn, water
could not drown him, Devil could not tempt to prevail, nothing could hinder;
but he passed through all reports, wrongs, persecutions, fears, till he had
fulfilled his course, rose again from death, and conquered it: And why? He
walked under the banner of his fathers protection: Even so it has pleased thee
O Lord! to fence and fortify my poor soul, that neither my desertions, when
I thought my self cast off, and in despair, (through unbeleefe) nor the dint
of my afflictions, (when as yet the arrows of God dipped in venom, stuck in
me,) nor the malice of enemies, nor the fiery darts of Satan piercing me by my
lusts, could ever wholly divorce me from thee: Oh! how many thousands have
fallen on my right hand, and as many on my left, since I began? Men of like
age, birth and education, of better parts and endowments then I; and yet, mercy
has kept me hitherto: nay Naaman was never so sullen and froward with the
Prophet and with Jorden, as I have been wayward with God, sometime weary of
his crosses, cavilling against his government, both in general and special,
ready to leave his work, to renounce his Sabbaths, Sacraments, Promises and
all, because I could not see how God performed them to me! when I have been
oppressed with Self, and a dead, saplesse and savourlesse heart, ready to give
the Lord and his trade quite over; yet he has revived me, and not suffered me
to revolt quite from him by all these; still by the power of poor faith he
has kept me to salvation, he has delivered, does and will deliver me still,
if I can wait. Oh! wonder at this grace of his, and let the first link of
vocation, be a warrant to thee, that the link of justification, sanctification
and redemption, shall never be broken, but he that brought thee through so many
unlikelyhoods, to believe; can and will (now much more) bring thee through as
great oppositions to persevere: enjoy thy privilege, stand at gaze, and boast
only of the Lord. Thus much for the use of instruction.

Lastly, let this doctrine be an encouragement to all feeble and fearful
Encouragement to all feeble and fearful ones.
ignorance of Gods way, their deep pride, Self, rebellion and hypocrisy;
they behold these corruptions (by which Satan holds possession as by Forts and
Bulwarks) as evident marks of their perishing one day, and that they are so
strong, that they will master grace, and deprive them finally of hope. But
poor soul! stay a while, do not so hardly sentence thy soul: Look here
upon a poor Pagan out of covenant, an alien from God, behold how freely God
prevented him at first, when he sought him not; how graciously he assisted him,
and that when he was past all sense of it, deep in the sense of the contrary:
One (I say) that had no promise, merely an hangby to the visible Church, (save
that he was supported by an invisible bounty of unspeakeable goodness) and yet
lo, when he was at the saddest point, and the lowest ebb of despair, suddenly
(as if this were Gods season to break his heart, and to win him to himself,
all hope of good success being past) there appears a change of his wretched
condition, into an happy; secret mercy had first marked him out for God, and
the same still waited on him not suffering him to slip away, and depart from
welfare. Has God done this in the green tree, and shall not he do it in the
dry? Have thou (O poor soul) either deeper distempers then Naaman had, or
sadder affronts then he, within or without? Can not thou take courage to thy
self by a promise, when he found mercy without one? What is it then that
causes thee to be so heavy? In the following points, I shall speak further to
thee, only here let me say this, If thou can prove that God has once
savingly prevented thee (whereof upon the ninth verse I have at large spoken) I
can prove he will not forsake thee, he will not lose any one stroke of work
upon thee, but will assist it, and in time perfect it: Sure I am, thou can
not feel thy spirit deader or further off then did Naaman, thou can not be
further out of Gods precinct then he was; and yet the Lord beyond hope, turned
all to as happy an issue, as the premises seemed uncomfortable.

Take thou like courage unto thy self. All thy unkindly affronts shall end
well: when thou art weary of hearing, God shall revive thy spirit, so that thou
shall hear a voice behind thee, saying, hear still, thou shall not be able
for thy heart to give over the ordinances; thy sullen heart shall not be
permitted to prevail in thee against the promise; do what thou can, some
light or other shall appear to encourage thee, to cast out thy prejudice,
cavills, frowardnes, when others are left to themselves to sink in their own
peevish rebellions thou shall find pity; thy tender nurse shall use all his
wisdom not against thee, but for thee, and shall not be provoked to give thee
over, as thou do him; thou shall see it and bless those arms that
comprehended thee, when thou could not contain thy self; those feet that
followed thee, those hands that laid hold on thee, saying, return O Shulamite,
return! whither will thou go? Out of blessing into the warm Sun? What boot
will that be to thee? What an occasion of endless repentance and regret will
it be to thee hereafter, to leave God in a tetch, to forsake clear, evident,
sure mercies, upon a toy and conceit of thine own, against the promise of him
that cannot lie? Oh! consider better of it, lay not the bottom of remediless
woe betimes! Thou shall wish one day of the Son of man hereafter, and that it
were with thee, as it has been, but then, the guilt of thy former contempt
and fullennesse shall be a thousand witnesses against thee! Thus the Lord shall
even revive the spirit of Naamans servants, in thy spirit, to pull thee back
from the pit, and prepare thee for mercy.

Only beware thou yield not to thy temptations, but wait upon the word: A
caution hereupon.
Suffer not this grace of God in thee to be slighted, (as it is by hypocrites)
or to be damped and eclipsed by wantonness, wordlinesse and base lusts (as it
is by profane wretches, for these will rankle in thee, and fret into thy
bowels a as canker) and then fear not but other annoyances shall cease in due
time, and turn to a sweet calm in thee, when suddenly the Lord Jesus awaking
out of his sleep shall rebuke them, as he did the storm and waves which
threatened the ship wherein he lay; for it is as possible that those should have
overwhelmed him and his Disciples, as these shall ovewhelme thee: perhaps thou
conflictest with boylings of corruptions, and rebellings against the Law of
faith and righteousness of the Lord Jesus; but even these shall humble thee,
and turn to great casting of Self out of thee: perhaps thou art cast upon same
unwelcome crosses, losses, sickness, fear of death (before thy peace be
made:) be content, the Lord does not try thee in vain, they are to make sure
work of thy heart, and to bring thee to a duer sight of thy self, they are
not to destroy thee, although thou may think them sent to discourage thee,
God shall put more courage then so into thee, he has the power of death in
his hand, and it shall not seize upon thee, till the work of God in thee be
past danger: The bed of thy sorrow, and the rack of thy conscience, and the
clattering of thy bones, and thy loathing of dainty meats, and drawing near
to the grave, shall not hurt thee; for all shall end well, Job 33.
and turn thee from the pit; and when thou art convinced thereof, thy
loathnesse shall be turned to readiness; as Peter's was, Joh. 13.9. and thou
shall say, Do what thou will Lord, if for good, I am ready to stoop: perhaps
thy own parents, wife in bosom, best friends and companions turn enemies,
look estrangedly, lie at thee with threats, taunts, scorns, for thy casting
them off, and looking another way: But be quiet, the Lord shall teach thy
fingers to fight, and thee to think that the more precious, for which the
Devil so blusters against thee; resolve to bear what thou can, but
surrender not thy hopes: perhaps when the Law has laid thee open to the sight
of thine own conscience, buffeting thee with guilt and horrors exceedingly,
thine estate seems worse and worse, thy old liberty in a sinful course
bubbles up within thee, tempting thee to shake off chains, to return to it
again; but God shall teach thee to prefer his chains to the Devils
freedom. In a word, Satan will disquiet thee with Atheistical thoughts
against God, Providence, Scriptures, the threats, the promises, as if they were
all but fables, (so the wicked world through error counts them) but in all this
confusion the Lord shall not leave thee, (and as I said before) through this
sea (dried up,) he shall bring his scattered ones, rather then they shall
perish. All shall give place (be it never so opposite) rather then Gods work
shall be defeated. And so much for this point of coherence may serve.

Another thing there is to be noted here, Ground of second point. Gods
continuing still to buffet and humble Naaman,
ere I come to the substance of the words: And that is, that this thirteenth
verse wholly aims at a third buffeting and subduing of Naamans spirit to the
obedience of Gods command: Twice already you have heard how the Lord crossed
him: once by the idle carriage of the King who rent his clothes, when he
thought he would have healed him: Another time, when he waited at Elisha's
door, for an answer of real cure, without delay: We see these did but incense
the froward spirit of Naaman, and set him on carping and cavilling; and not
only so, but upon a will and stomach of his own to turn away and give over
all: Therefore to take down his high looks, and that the cure which now
followed, might not light upon so rebellious a piece: Lo, the Lord tames him
this third time, not by sending Elisha to shame him, but by setting him to
school to his poor servants and underlings; such as commonly were glad to be
at his beck, Do this and he does it, go and he goes, come and he comes.
But lo, now the case is altered, the Lord so honors them, that rather he is
under their authority, they bid him come back, and he comes, they exhort him
to go to Jorden and he goes, they bid him do this, Wash seven times, and he
does it, yea and he is a happier man by thus obeying then ever in all his days
by commanding. We know, when a Parent will abase a proud son, he will not
vouchsafe to correct him himself, but put him to his Ostler or to his Groom
to be chastened, and this takes down the pride of his son: So here: The Lord
keeps Elisha within doors, and sets the servants of this great stout
Champion, to take him to task, so ordering it that they must be conquerors of
him, who yet had got so many victories: Now they can charm and level his
spirit, more then any other, and now these poor fellows of far less wit,
policy and insight, must yet be inspired with more of Gods meaning then
himself, must be appointed as his teacher, to do him better service in this
their superiority, then ever they did before.

And it seems to me, Opening of the ground further.
that in these two respects the Lord would tame his spirits by his servants:
the one this, That now he sees them convinced of that mystery of truth which
lay hidden in the Prophets message, and appeared not to himself, he thinks it
high time to follow: The second this, That now his stomach is left without any
abettors, his high spirit is left to it self, from the Prophet he had that he
could have, and so, now his servants turn abettors of the Prophet against him,
turn strong Counselors against his rage and carnal distempers: not one now
of all his retinue that sticks to him, or humor him; now he is in a strait, in
a strange place, he is like to go home uncured alone, if he will needs go,
for not the poorest page of his company dare carry him home a leper, all offer
their best service to Jorden for a cure, all are for God, and for the end of
providence, swayed as one man to the obedience of the charge, not one offers
his attendance to Aram: The speech is, woe to him that is alone; Eccles. 8.
but here it is contrary, happy is he who is left alone; miserable while he was
abetted, happy being forsaken: For why? Now there is no remedy but Jorden, all
cry that way; now he is in a strait, now servants and all are for it, what
should he think but the finger of God is in it to persuade? he can but
venture to try, there he may have help, at home there is none, what then
should he now do but try? Oh! what a turning of the stream begins here to
be? What a venture is now made upon this so long cavilled and scorned Jorden?
And with the entering of these thoughts, lo, more and more light enters, so
that at last he obeys. Out of both these passages (brethren) let me note
somewhat, and that but briefly; and I will no longer hold you from the
substance of the words themselves.

Doctrine. The grace of inferiors, a great help to superiors. Joh. 13.
From the former of these two, I note this, that when light and understanding is
wrought in the inferior, it is a great convincement to the superior to
follow: As the superiors eminency sometimes is a crack to the pride of an
inferior, as Christ stooping to wash his Disciples feet: Has our Lord and
Master denied himself so far, and shall we be prouder toward each other?
Amplification of the point.
So the judgment and wisdom of an inferior, is a check to the
conceitednesse of a superior: Surely I see, that even he whom I disdained, is
wiser then my self; it is time for me to be a fool that I may be wiser. Out
of the mouth of babes and sucklings has he ordained praise, Matthew. 21.16.
(says the Psalmist.) Paul in one place, Romans 11.13.14. tells us, that he
magnified his Apostleship among the Gentiles, that he might breed an emulation
and shame in his Countrymen, that they were so backward. 1 Pet. 3.5.
Saint Peter also tells the women, that he would have them subject to their
rude and churlish Nabals, that so their conversation might become convincing
when God should visit them. Some indeed (as Saint Jude says) are so base and
perverse, that they rather are moved to prich and disdain by their inferiors
forwardness, calling them hastings, soon ripe, soon rotten, ragged colts
make the better horses; and calling their zeal, pride, boldness, singularity:
Much like that foolish Prophet Balaam, reproved by his Ass, which spyed the
Angel of God standing in his way, 2 Pet. 2.16.
when he could not spy him himself, and when she dashed his foot against the
wall by starting, he smote her: But we see he is recorded as a notorious beast,
(more brutish then the Ass) and therefore convinced by the Ass herself. But
where there is but a dram of ingenuity and humbleness, the very thing it self
speaks. When a poor silly woman of the inferior and weaker sex, shall see
that in the Ministry which her husband sees not, (who yet goes for a man of
deeper understanding,) what a buffeting is it? When a poor servant of mean
esteem, and belonging to some base office about the house, shall meet with the
knowledge of Christ in the Gospel, which the Master of the family wants, what
an upbraiding and humbling it ought to be! Lo, such a poor wretch has that in
him which I cannot reach, who yet should be the fountain wherefrom should flow
all wisdom for the replenishing of the whole household committed unto me: Oh
how it troubles me! A poor child, a creeple, to have more in it for true
gracious revealing, then all the fry of jolly children, how does it convince
them? God is in it of a truth! Alas! by this the Lord casts down the high
things of man's wisdom when it sees it has no more, nay not so much as the
basest worm, and most contemptible of a thousand: The great things, lofty and
stately the Lord laughs to scorn by the silly and mean things: And then,
where is the Scribe, and the wise man with all his depth? Sure it is mere
shallowness and folly! I have to this purpose spoken before: The sluggard
seeing that in an Ant which he wants, may be humbled.

Therefore in a word, let it speak first, to the silly and simple, and tell
Instruction. Mean silly ones, if godly, are not contemptible.
as base and despised as they deem themselves, God can cloth their uncomely
parts with more honor, and cause them to be terrible to the proudest to
convince and humble them. Small creatures as the Cock is a terrible object to
the Lion it self; nature having so curbed that mighty creature: Inferiors
make themselves despised, because there is little in them to honor them, for
if there were, it is not their meannesse could do it: Ah ye poor underlings
in this assembly, here is a portion for you (for ye are of the family, Matthew.
12.
and stewards must give each one his due) me thinks I pity you, to see how
painfully some of ye drudge in the kitching, others in the field, others at
your wheels, in your shops, and mean occupations, with poor maintenance (God
knows) and less countenance! I pity you, serving men, who upon small wages
creep into your Masters houses, glad of mean vayles: But alas! that which
makes you such pezants, and poor sons of the earth, is not your outward
quality, your poverty, your service, your mean attire and sordid work, for
all these are for God: Look into the Scripture, and ye shall meet with poor
things which yet carry their mark of honor upon them: 2 King. 4.1. Mark
12.43. verse 3. Philem. 3.4.
That poor Prophets widow left in debt, the poor widow with her two mites,
this poor wench in the beginning of this Chapter, a Captive and servant, poor
Onesimus, one good for nothing, good for all things after: Oh ye poor souls!
your sin makes your base outside out of measure base, if that were clothed with
honor, it would afford so much the more beauty and esteem unto you in the eyes
of all men; none so much your betters, so much richer, learneder, nobler then
you, but should admire and be in love with you, if there were true humblenes,
faith and grace in you! who reads the story of poor Rhode, Act. 12.13.
but must needs affect that cordial love of the Saints in her, who (for joy
could not open the door to Peter, till she had been the first messenger of
his deliverance? Therefore (ye poor inferiors) take heart to your selves;
think not those only to be esteemed with God who have greatness to commend
them to the world: No, no, the lesser you have here to take to, the more covet
that which may commend you truly and really in the sight of all that can judge:
Let none despise thee, poor soul! Thou will say it is not in thy power. I
answer thee, Tit. 2.15.
seek to him who (as Hanna says) exalts the lowly and meek: while men
behold the poor and proud, a drudge to the kitching, and to thy lusts, wonder
not, if thou be as the offscouring of all men; but assuredly, thy base outside
should not disgrace thee, if there lodged any goodness, any spark of Gods
image in thee. Truly (brethren) great rich men are too high for Religion, and
base poor folk think themselves under it: But if you would seek for
knowledge, humility and grace, you should see whether it would not stoop to
you: And you servants that are butlers to Gentlemen, or Stewards, nay Ostlers
and Bayliffes and Caters; you should be honorable in the sight of your
Masters, As Obadiah to Ahab, Joseph to Pharaoh.
they should equal themselves with you, yea be glad of you, (whatsoever their
authority be otherwise) if there appeared grace in you.

Balaam) when you see the Lord goes about to convince your folly and
backewardnesse: Admonition. Superiors must turn their indignation at the
grace of inferiors, into shame and emulation.
Smite not, threaten not the Ass whose mouth God opened to reprove you. Many
of you husbands, parents and masters, when once you perceive your wives,
children and servants, to grow zealouser then your selves, are so far from
countenancing and holy emulation, that rather you have them in continual
jealousy, and hold them under so much the more: Their Religion must be sure to
be their prejudice and encumbrance; they can the hardlier please you, you are
the the more prone to pick quarrels, you watch the time of crossing them in
their lawful liberties, yea you joint them the more of their freedom for Gods
worship within and without: what is this but to play the taske-masters and to
lie heavy upon them? So that, if God sustained them not by his power, they
should fall off: And no doubt many are offended by such means, but woe to such
by whom the offense comes. Others there are who seeing Religion to have
qualified their inferiors with faithfulness, humility and peaceablenesse, in
marriage, in their business and carriage; are glad to see the change, but why?
Not joying in their grace and good examples, but because you make benefit
thereof for you own behoof and content, taking all ye can get out of them,
but acknowledging no mercy from God, either to them, or to your selves in them:
Nay perhaps ye slight them, quip and mock them, Oh! these women must have
their wills, or else we shall have no peace! and so the liberty they get, hey
must have with unequal conditions: I do not here speak of the vilest in this
kind, how rather many provoke themselves to vexation, brawling, quarrelling
and threatening of their inferiors, as thinking their forwardness an
inspersion to their base backewardnesse, and therefore they behold them with
the eyes of Kites whom they should behold with Doves eyes; they shorten their
wives of allowance, give them discouraging affronts, they beat and misuse their
servants, threaten their poor children to joint them of this and that land or
portion, for their Puritanisme and forwardness: And those that go not so
far, yet still keep at one stay, profit not by their inferiors, if they do
not disdain to learn of such, (as most are hardened thereby) yet the best is,
that they give them their course, and still remain, as base and barren as
before.

Romans 11.13.
Whereas, rather they should be provoked to jealousy by them: Naaman here did
so: Doubtless the insight he saw his servants had, in the will of God (more
then himself) did smite an holy awe and authority into his spirit! Do these
underlings see that which I cannot? What lets me from it? Surely some strong
lust or humor blindefolds me! What a shame is this, that my retinue, (whom the
business concerns not) should perceive that which I cannot? Surely it
furthered the convincement exceedingly: Oh! let us all in the fear of God be
of his mind! We shall not need to subject our selves and debase our selves
for the matter: But let us not blindefold our eyes, that we should not behold
the light shining in at the least crevis! We Ministers let us not disdain the
examples of private Christians, either in their zeal of obeying or suffering;
but if we see secretly grace breaking forth from the poorest, in more then
common wisdom, uprightness, closeness to the truth; be so far from
snagging, and nipping of such, that rather we mark them for peculiar ones, and
(although they know nothing) what hinders, why (even from such) we may not
better our selves many ways? Was not Apollo glad to learn of Aquila a
Tradesman? Act. 18.26.
But especially you private persons observing such inferiors as exceed your
selves, do not loutishly slight and put them off, but say I perceive if I hold
my peace, the stones shall cry! truly these cry aloud in mine ears! me thinks
I consider, if such poor ones get such knowledge, what might not I get with
pains? Truly, I will give the onset! I shall else never look upon my poor
child, but mine heart will throb and tell me, he shall rise up in judgment one
day (against his will) and condemn me! when the Lord shall say, I sent a poor
daughter of mine, to lie in thy bosom, to see if her zeal could any whit
warm thee, but I see thou art cold as a stone still, and as dead as a block!
I raised up out of thine own loins, a child or children to fear my name,
that I might provoke thee by that means to jealousy, but I see nothing
prevails: Nay perhaps a poor drudge in thy kitching, or rubbing thy horses
heels; such an one as thou might wonder at, how or whence he should come by
any savor of Religion, and yet thou take no notice of it, seek not to me
to drop any mercy into thy soul, to break and convert it! Oh! what a woeful
item have thou laid up, what an accusation have thou put into Gods mouth
against thee? Surely if such examples provoke not to thee jealousy of
imitation; they shall occasion God to burn against thee with the jealousy of
indignation! And so much for the coherence.

Now for the second branch of this coherence (the ground whereof I have already
laid down) that which I would say of it, is this, viz. The second branch of
the point. God will never lin with his till he have tamed their rebellion.
That the Lord does still thus follow Naaman with new affronts, that he might
conquer his will and stout heart, which had taken courage to it self, and
hardened it self in it own way against God. I say, the Lord now intends a
final battery of it, by setting his servants (all of them with one consent) to
side with God and the Prophet, none with him; which no doubt, was a great
battering and stubbornness. And it teaches us that this self-will of ours, is
as desperate and tenacious an enemy as can be in the matters of God, (worse
then selfe-mindednesse and strength of opinion;) when one self-will comes to
strengthen self-conceit, that it hardens it self against God, and will try
masteries which shall carry the goal: strange it is, how invincible a fort it
proves against him and all the way both of commands and promises: But mark,
before that the Lord turn home the soul unto himself, he will by one means or
other, (though it be by a continual opposing of the same) so break, pull down
and level this woeful rebellion of heart and will in the soul, that he will
let out the water and blood of it, and shed the bowels of it to the ground,
that it may never arise up any more to cross him: He will bring it so to the
bent of his bow, that it shall say, Speak Lord, for thy servant hears: And
with him, Act. 9. What (Lord) will thou have me to do? And as I have noted
already in the former affront of the message, so now in this I note again, The
Lords Kingdom is not set up, nor his throne stablished, save upon the ruins
of self-will, which has her Kingdom and Scepter (through Satan) set up, as
altar against altar, contrary to this. Naaman now, immediately before his cure
and conversion, must be the third time thus encountered both by the persuasions,
and by the finger of God, in drawing of his servants to a contrary will to
their Masters; that so at last his opposite heart might fall down after all
this encounter: wonder not at the resolution of the wayward will of man against
Gods; it is the very blood, spirit and marrow of the soul, it is the fort which
holds out longest against God; til the Lord batter that, there is no approach
of grace: Will quails and fails, as soon as the Lord enclines to do the
poor soul good; be it never so unpleasing, seem it never so harsh,
impossible; by head and by hand, the Lord will not be overcome by corruption:
he will make it cry out, thou have overcome!



Note well.
our ease, our profits, our pleasures, or whatsoever lies in us, contrary to
Gods way, either of salvation or government, the Lord will have cast down in
us, ere ever he betrust us with grace; 2 Cor. 10.4.
at least, in the vouchsafing of grace, he vouchsafes that: a most meek
submission of soul, a renouncing of that selfe-way, and self-will in us,
which perpetually lusts against his Christ and obedience: Yet repentance goes
not before faith.
the choice, the propensity of the soul (which is the darling of all) the Lord
will carry down before him with a stronger stream of his own, and turn it
back not only in point of resistance, but in point of concurrence. Cardinal
Wolsey is reported to have been a man of so hauty a spirit, that his style was
wont to be [Ego and Rex meus:] As I and the King please. But God will admit no
such Peer, as our will, to quarter arms with him; he will have the stone of
our heart broken and taken out, and an heart of flesh put in: He will not have
us do according to that seems good in our eyes, Deuteronomy. 12.8. and either in
believing or obeying: It is not our flourishing about with duties (when we are
pleased) that shall serve our turn: A woman pleases not her husband in all her
busy welcomming and feasting of strangers, but in the resigning up of all her
will to his: So we please not God in doing some of his will, but in having our
own will subdued to his, implanted in it, and abhorring to establish our
selves with him in the throne of Majesty: He will show us what favor he
pleases, or we could desire; but still (as Pharaoh said to Joseph) I will be
chief in the Kingdom, thou shall be under in that. Genesis 41.40.


To conclude therefore brethren, look into this cursed will and stomach of
ours, both the root and branches, how cross and contrary it has ever been
to Gods, how it has ever fallen upon and chosen the worse way: consider the
deepnesse of the purposes of it, how hidden, secret, close, they have been;
weigh the dangerousnesse of them, that commonly they have been most rebellious
against those ways of God (if any be weightier then other) which have most
touched upon his prerogative, (as the matter of embracing the maine promise, or
the parting with some precious, personal beloved lust:) also remember, how
dead and rotten this will of ours has always been in contradiction, and walking
contrary to God, Levit. 26. Insomuch that after some seeming convincement, and
vow of subjection, to Gods will in such and such cases, yet when old occasions
and objects have offered themselves, we have forgot our covenants, and are as
rank and rife in our self-willednesse and stiffeneckednesse as ever, and made
a very custom of it: I say in Gods fear, remember how it has been, a dead
rotten will and heart we have nourished against the Lord: And therefore let
these and this example here, break this staff of pride and will in us, which
has hitherto borne sway, and defiled both mind and members to the obedience
thereof, as fearing to cross her; and let us at last be confounded for it: If
Job were so, how much more need had we? Chap. 42.4. And seeing it has ever
misled us, let us cross it, abhor it, and give up our selves to the rule and
authority of the Lord Jesus: He is our sole King who must rule, he will teach
us to choose, will and affect, love, loath, fear, abhor nothing but which
shall be for our good: Be ruled by him and he will destroy Athalia the usurper,
and set up the true heir, and the land shall have rest. Otherwise if we
finally hold our own against him, he will do that in wrath, which he would
have done in love, and have his will of us in hell, and suffering, who could
not get it in obeying: For every one that contends with him in judgment, Esaias
54. end.
he shall most righteously condemn. And so much for the coherence. Now I come
to the words themselves of this thirteenth Verse.

You may remember (beloved) the Analyze I gave you of the contents in this
Verse, and the order thereof.

First, (as you know) I began with the attemptors, The first general head of
the verse, the attemptors.
these servants of Naaman; in whom I considered, First, that special duty of
loyal faithfulness to their Masters soul and body, and the welfare of both:
This I call the duty they stood bound unto by virtue of their relation. Suitable
whereto was his commendation in a due respect and tenderness toward them, as
a father toward children. Father (say they) if the Prophet, etc. The word I
grant, is generally a term of reverence; howbeit here, the realnesse of their
faithfulness, shows that there was more in it. They carried a filial
subjection toward him, as to a father of peculiar honor and account with them:
No children could have more faithfully demeaned themselves to their natural
Parent, then these servants did to Naaman. For why? Opening of this ground of
the servants fidelity.
they observing the scope of their Masters journey to be weighty; an object of
great expectation to their Master; and seeing him now through his distemper, to
take a course contrary to his own designs, yea thereby being ready to
renounce the means of his welfare by a mere tetch, and pritch against the
Prophet. What do they? Most faithfully set themselves to procure a redress of
this error, as foreseeing it like to be sad and remediless, except prevented
in time. And this they do with some earnestness, (seeing the case so to
require) that is, they oppose him in his mood and humors, seek to rectify
them, and breed a good opinion of the Prophet in him, that so he might obey the
message, recover the cure, and turn from his wilful purpose of a wrathful
departure. This will better appear, if we conceive that which some servants,
yea the most, would have done in this case. Surely to demerit their Master, and
to humor him in his base pangs, they would have come to him and said, Here is
a surly fellow indeed, a Prophet who sent for our Master, and yet that scorns
to speak to him; lo, he has sent him a flim, flam, a tale of a tubbe: And
what Nobleman of worth could brook it? Come Master, let us scorn to attend
upon him any longer, let us set spurs to our horses and let him go, let him
keep his cure to himself. If they had said so, they might surely have been
welcommer to a man of passion, then speaking as they did. But the Lord (whose
the work was) put more faithful and wise thoughts into them then so, for the
attaining of his ends. Doctrine. Servants must be faithful to their Masters,
both for body and soul.
The point then is this, Servants must be loyal and faithful to their
Masters, and procure their good both spiritual and outward, for conscience
sake. I am now entering upon a point of moral nature, yet of special use and
importance, for the instruction of this condition of people; which seeing I am
fallen upon (though besides my scope of this text) yet I will labor to open
unto you, as God shall give me grace; ere I come to those other points more
suting to my purpose.

Mark it then: The duty of servants in special is, faithfulness to their
governors of both sexes, to whom they belong. Every servant should count
himself as an Onesimus in name and deed to his Philemon, Philem. 11.
useful in all respects, but especially in faithfulness. That which once the
Duke of Medina, general to the King of Spaines his fleet against England in
eighty eight, spoke basely, each servant should speak out of conscience. For
being asked by one what his meaning was to do with the English, in case he got
the day, whether he would not spare the Catholic party; he answered, he would
neither spare one nor other, but make way for his Master: A speech of a very
wickedly faithful servant: But a good servant must say so: I am for my Master,
and that is my scope. So their Master fare well, though they have an ill word
and have small thank (yea sometime by himself, for flatterers for a time
find more favor, then faithful ones) yet they must still be faithful.
Reasons and proofs are these.

To be trusted by our betters is honorable.
therefore he must be faithful, else it were more slavish and treacherous.
When Joseph was tempted to unfaithfulness in a high degree, his argument of
disswasive (best he could use to an heathen) was, My Master met with me a
stranger and boughr me, yet has betrusted me with all he has, he knows of
nothing of all under mine hand; Genesis 39.8.9.
he has forbidden me nothing save thee: and shall I play the traitor with him
in this? No. The trade of a servant in each kind is a stewardship; no servant
is so silly, but is or may be in case to be trusted with more or less that
way: Now it is required of each steward that he be faithful; 1 Cor. 3.2.
not that all servants are equally betrusted; yet none are so ill trusted, but
if they despise conscience, both the life and state of their Master (more or
less) may lie at their courtesy. As one said of a traitor, who so despises
his own life may easily be Master of another. They are supposed faithful,
not suspected: If they be false what may not they attempt? Chastity of wife, of
daughter, welfare and safety of son, wealth and estate of Master, name,
credit, and content of all. And should such an one be faithless and not
faithful? No verily, except one maine sinew of society among men should be
cut in sunder. Some servants are (I grant) more interessed in their Masters
then others: Merchants Factors, Agents, Gentlemen's stewards, and Auditors,
Accomptants, some Prentices in the shop, have the trust of their Masters
counting books, revenewes, receipts, moneys, and the greater the trust, the
more dangerous the unfaithfulness: (As he who to provide for himself, Luke
16.6.
bids a debtor to his Master of an hundred pound, to set down fifty, a speedy
way to undo his Master.) But yet all servants have temptations enough to be
unfaithful: All therefore, as well one as other must be faithful, yea write
fidelity upon their fringes and borders, palms and shoulders; as the high
Priests Miter had [Holinesse to the Lord.] This is the first reason, the honor
of their condition requires it; God has disposed so, that it cannot be well
otherwise.

The second reason: Fidelity was required even of slaves, such as those Paul in
his Epistles directs his exhortations, 1 Timothy 6.1. and elsewhere. Such as knew
no God, no Christ, mere heathens, bought and sold as sheep in the Market;
such as (if they had been slain outright) could have been in no worse
condition, then they were in; and therefore one might look for nothing from,
but desperateness: Now if these were so urged to faithfulness, what should
ours do, who are ingenuous, free, partakers of the same commodity? If they who
had no encouragements; how much more we?

Thirdly, Fidelity is the prime virtue of a servant; as subjection is of Mat.
6.22.23.
If that which gives strength to all the rest be wanting, how shall they
subsist?

Fourthly, (which is all in all) the most wise God, the author of all God
stands countable to good servants.
has so appointed it, that servants must be faithful. It is he who has made
himself the rewarder of them, and stands between their Masters and them for
w^ges. If they serve Masters who will conceal the labor and fidelity of their
love; yet they have a better string to their bow, for they serve the Lord
Christ, and he will requite them to the uttermost.

F^ithfulnesse is the center whence all ^h^ graces of a servant are derived.
As Christian conversation is strengthened with special virtues supporting it,
as faith and confidence in straits, patience in crosses, righteousness in
earthly dealings, subjection in hearing the word; so in the special relations
of life, each one has her supporting grace; among the rest, faithfulness is
that virtue which affords life, and sap to each part of a servants
employment. As then, the spokes or staves cannot be wanting to the wheel, but
of necessity the wheel will split, and the motion thereof will be stopped: So
faithfulness cannot be wanting to a servant, but (of necessity) the whole
round of serviceablenesse must be interrupted; which must needs infer a
mavelous detriment to the family, when so maine an instrument of the good and
welfare thereof, (through whose hands so much of the affairs thereof must
pass) is disabled and perverted. So much for reasons.

Proofs. Heb. 3.5.
Scriptures for the proof of it are many. When the holy Ghost does but allude
to servants, he always alludes to faithfulness, as their main virtue. Moses is
always styled the servant of the Lord, and therefore he is said to be faithful
in all the house of God. When the Lord Jesus brings in the Master reckning for
the talents, he commends his servant thus, Well done good and faithful
servant, thou have been faithful in a little, etc. Ahimelec being questioned
about David, 1 Samuel 14.22.
and the sword which he gave him, answers Saul, And who is so faithful among
all the servants of Saul as David? Tit 2.10.
So Paul to Titus, not purloyning, but showing all good faithfulness, that
they may adorn the doctrine of God our Savior in all things. The point is not
questioned; common experience gives sufficient proof to it, and is as a
thousand witnesses.



Answ. 1. Servants can be well bred only in the house of Christ.
I answer therefore, as it is in all other relations, Religion must be the first
shaper of the wife to be subject, the child to be dutiful, so it must also
fashion and mould the servant to be faithful. We use to covet servants for
their good breed; a servant well bred and brought up under such a choice
governor, or Mistress, taught and trained to obedience, and diligence, is
much desired. But indeed the Lord Jesus, that great Lord of all the families of
the earth (who yet himself was a servant to his father, and faithful as a
son in all his house, and in this form of a servant obeyed, yea denied
himself to the death, to give his father content) must be the shaper of all
faithful servants. Phil. 3.7.
Some bastard colors a servant may get, by observation, by trayning, by
experience of the world; but these colors will wash off easily with weather,
when either peculiar temptations of Satan, passions of his own, provocations
by the Master be offered: A moral servant is better then a rude and unbroken
one, but he will last no longer then his principle lasts; he will be
faithful, except it be very much for his ends to be otherwise, but no longer.
Then he may prove a filcher, a thief, a fugitive, then unfaithful to Masters
business, wife, children, name and honor. Except there be a bar put in the
way to stop all these as occasion may serve, a servant will leap over all
these bounds. And hence it is, that we say thus of many servants which break
out on the sudden, some to uncleanness with fellow servants, dishonouring
the family, others to intemperance, others to stealth and abandoning their
Masters: Oh! I never saw the the least fault in him, he was so diligent,
gentle, painful and faithful, that I never suspected him, less nor more:
Alas! he was too subtle for you, he was so while he saw his time and vantage:
But because these colors were never laid in a good ground and in oil,
therefore they washed off. There must be a superior principle which must cause
faithfulness. The element of service, the Masters work cannot teach it:
Servants must go out of Christ's School: a true servant of Christ, faithful
to him, out of love for love, for reconciliation, for pardon, for peace, for
grace, will be faithful for his sake to a Master, (be he good, be he bad) why?
Because the maine fidelity of heart to God, will first bind him to the Lord
Jesus in what charge soever he betrust him: As if the Lord Jesus say to a
Minister, I have loved thee, made thee faithful, and put thee into my service,
I now will have thee declare thy faithfulness to me in feeding my sheep and
lambs. Joh. 21.
A Minister will do it for the love he bears Christ. So a wife for the love
she has found from Christ will be subject, a child will be dutiful; so a
servant faithful. The influence which this love has in it, carries an
instinct into the soul for every service: let God appoint the work, the love
of Christ shall be the compeller to faithfulness, whether negative, not to
filch, not to be unclean, not to answer again, not to be untrusty: or
affirmative, viz. to be reverend, chaste, true, painful, trusty: I say, out of
the School of Christ this must proceed. Hence it was that Joseph, Genesis 39.9.
solicited to unchastenesse with his Mistress, presently had his hand upon
this hilt, How shall I do this and sin against God? His Master was absent,
he might have abused him, and he ignorant who hurt him; but Joseph had another
tie, he had conscience and peace to forfeit, he had another Masters work to
look at, and better wages to lose, and therefore this peace ruled him, and he
durst not for his soul, (if all pleasure, profit, ease and rewards in the
world had been offered) have attempted such unfaithfulness. Learn ye Masters
in whom your greatest strength with servants lies; not in your awe, fears,
rewards or punishments: all your succors must come from a deeper tie, you must
be beholding for all the faithfulness of servants to their God and their
conscience. Tie them there and you have them bound for bursting, else a wet
eele is as easily held by the tail, as such servants when they see their
opportunity. Hence is that triumph of Paul about Onesimus: Oh! faith he, I have
begotten him in my chains! and now I send him back to thee, Philem. 11.
no filcher or fugitive, but profitable to me and thee, one that now may be
trusted. This is the first main thing; without this, I would wish no Master to
trust a servant further then he sees him, let his shows be never so great.

Secondly, 2. Grace adds all qualifications to a servant.
this will produce sundry other qualifications in a servant tending to
faithfulness. Grace only puts wisdom into a servant, and gives him a
discerning eye, to behold God in each ordinance: he acknowledges a divinity, a
finger of providence in the several relations of the family, 1. Wisdom to
consider the Lord as the ordainer of all relations.
for great and weighty ends. A common servant makes wash way of his service;
looks at his Master for his own ends, looks at himself, his abilities: But
he looks not so far as to see God the ordainer of relations. For if he did,
this would infuse other principles, as awe, fear, humility, etc. For why? It
is God who has so ordered it for the good of a Kingdom, Commonwealth,
Church; that there should be superiors, inferiors; some mean ones to be
trained for time to come to bear rule; others superiors, men of ability,
worldly employments, trades, dealings, offices, who also have need of
inferiors, to be their hands and instruments to act and manage for them those
businesses which they cannot perform themselves. And not only so, but also it
is from God, that the one is set over the other, to conveigh and infuse such
skill, art, and knowledge of trades and services, as the inferior has not,
that so by tradition, these skills and gifts may be delivered from one to
another; and from the same God it is, that the inferior and ignorant, should
subject himself to that end with all dexterity, diligence and faithfulness.

When once this is understood, that it is God and not man who has devised this
course, not only in the greatest government of Princes or Magistrates, (for
they have their servants and officers, as he said to Christ, Matthew. 8.5.6. I my
self (though a Master of an hundred men) am under the authority of the Lord
President) but even of meaner authority of ordinary Tradesmen, whether public
or private, ingenuous or manual, civil or ecclesiastical, spiritual or
bodily; still the same God is the wise orderer and disposer of all: Oh! this
thought yokes and subdues the soul to a wise, holy and subject esteem of
government, and a setting it up in the spirit, as an inviolable ordinance of
God, not to be dallied with or profaned. Romans 1^.1.2. Prove. 8.15. Matthew. 8,
As the Apostle says, All authority (less or more) is from God: By him
Princes rule, and by the same Officers obey; Masters command, do, go, come;
servants are subject and at their beck: Why? Because they discern a
Sovereignty in the ordinance, in the superior awing, ruling, subduing the
spirits of inferiors; in the other, fearing, adoring and reverencing God in
man. Hence David, It is the Lord which makes the people subject to me. They
rebelled often, but the Lord, (not David's arms, nor Ioabs sword) brought them
back to subjection. So that he who disobeyes a Prince, a Magistrate, Minister,
Master, disobeyeth not man, but God; and ye ought not to obey for terror and
punishment, Romans 13.4.5.
but for conscience. The very brute creature is subjected to sinful man by
this ordinance; and that causes the creature to forget his strength, swiftness
and stomach, and to take bit and bridle, and to be subject: else who should
tame Lions, Bears, Elephants, Horses, if they knew their strength? Even so,
this sense of divinenesse in man's government, causes the inferiors will to
forget it self, and to be subject to God in man. So that now although both
Master and servant be Religious, both free men in Christ, yet that is no
occasion to flesh, to withdraw duty, and to turn inferiority to equality, but
to acknowledge God in the most loving, familiar and courteous governor, and if
the Master be lewd and a devil to the servant, (who is godly,) yet he beholds
in him that sacred hand of God, who has bound his spirit to awe and reverence,
not to a man for vantage, but to God for conscience. So much for the second.

Thirdly this produces a mavelous gift in a servant, 3. It produces
subj^ction of spirit in an inferior.
(still more procuring faithfulness) and that is subjection of spirit. Divine
authority creates subjection in the servants spirit, and that consists of these
two things: First, self-denial; Secondly, serviceablenesse. In two things.

1. Self-denial. 2. Serviceablenesse.

For the first, It is not the state of an inferior, which can exempt a man
from pride and disdain. None is so low but he loves to be Master of something.
Ye shall not see three or four cattle together, but one will be Master.
There is a woeful pride of spirit in man, disdaining to be under any. As those
base Jews, Joh. 8.33.
(in their greatest slavery) yet vaunted they were free men and never served
any. And hence it is, that we call the mere underling the dog, as of a
School, of a family etc. So loathsome a thing is subjection. But mark, let
conscience of love, and sense of divinenesse in an ordinance, possess the
spirit of a man, and this sinkes his spirit by and by. As it is said, 1 King
10.5
the Queen of Sheba came to Solomon with an equal and high spirit to dispute;
but seeing more then a man in him, lo, her spirit failed her: What is that? She
felt an infinite inequality in her self to Solomon, thought it no
disparagement to her self, to be inferior to so wise a man as he: and
therefore set her heart at rest from any more bubbling thoughts, and calmed
herself to a most meek self-denial. If mere gifts will do so, what will
grace do? Surely much more. For as it will cause the inferior to sink and
beat down his spirit under the authority of a well and ably qualified
governor, (as I grant God requires all to be) so yet it will discover a divine
power, even in the weak and unqualified, by virtue whereof, it will deny it
self, and say, I quash my proud and base heart, (which would easily disdain
to submit better parts of wit, skill, Religion, to one that wants all) to God
in man, although I see nothing in him that should deserve it.

And this true self-denial is the root of all faithfulness in a servant.
For pride and stoutnesse in an inferior will always be slipping neck out of
the collar: Shall such an one as I, of such breed, worth, abilities, stoop to
obey and serve, especially such an unworthy one? No, I scorn it! Oh! but this
scorn marres the servant, because it destroys the ordinance! God must level
thy heart, and fill thy valley, and cast down thine hill, that thou may
say, down stout heart, God looks not at what thou seem otherwise, but at
thy inferiority, and in that respect commands thee not to look at what thy
proud heart would, but at what his ordinance has thought wisest: Better thou
lose thy proud heart, (which shall be thy gain) then God lose his honor, the
ordinance her due regard, and so both Kingdom, Church and family, the good
which thy subjection procures. By this mean the stoutnesse of the heart stoops
and is convinced, that is but an equal thing it should be subject.

And secondly, the bar being so removed, the heart is let out to the fruits
of humbleness; that is, to serviceablenesse. For what should I refuse to do,
for, or under such a governor, as I see by the wisdom of God set over me, for
both mine own, and for a general good, and the ends of providence? If once I
see how woeful a confusion it were to pervert an ordinance; how can I choose but
also deem it a strange unrighteousness for one under the ordinance to
withdraw service? What is self-denial, but a letting out, and taking down of
a base heart, (thinking it self too good to serve) to a willingness in
undertaking what service soever the rules of honest government can impose
without grudging or contradiction? So that as a proud heart is bound up soul
and body; so an humble spirit is enlarged unto every such service, as reason
guided by Religion, can impose. Nothing can come amiss to an humble heart;
self-denial of her own accord, falls to serviceablenesse. And what wonder?
When once the spirit of an inferior has no drift, will, way of his own,
besides his Masters, but is wholly his, and for him: how can it choose but utter
it, in doing as it is bidden? Go, come, do this and he does it? This for the
Third.

Fourthly, hence comes faith to fall to her work. For as a Christian in his
general work of Religion, 4. Grace in inferiors, sets faith on work. 1.
Purges the soul of special distempers.
so a servant in his special relation of service, lives by faith: And how? In
these three respects. First, faith clenses out of the soul all those
distempers which usually possess the spirit of servants. It is not enough for
faith to purify the conscience in general from all dead works: But in
special, it descends deeply and searches the corruption which creepes into
duties, into the graces of the soul, into the use of means, into the
particular relations wherein the soul stands to God, whether directly or
indirectly: Else what were a general purging of evil which comes not into
act? But it purges each privy corner of the heart, and brings the heart thus
purged before God, in the several occasions which are offered. Nothing comes
between the cup and the lip in this case: All particular falsehood will be
hunted out of a servant, whose heart is cleansed by faith from all dead works;
all baseness and distempers will give place: There is not one base quality of
the heart, but if nourished, will corrupt faithfulness; if any one string be
out of tune this harmony will vanish: any case or sloth of heart will make a
man unsaithfull in point of diligence: an angry froward heart will make a man
unfaithful in point of answering again and cavilling: any falsehood and
hollownesse will cause unfaithfulness in point of doing the service which it
promises, as he who said, he would go into his Masters vineyard, Matthew. 21.30.
yet went not: In a word, a corrupt heart will be unfaithful to the marriage
bed of his Master, defile his children with cursed examples, filch away his
commodities, report wickedly of him as an hard Master, who reapes where he
sowed not, corrupt the rest of the fellow servants, and what not? Only faith
clenses the heart of these evils, and justles them out of place; for how can
Christ agree with Belial, or these with faithfulness?

2. Furnishes the heart with good qualities.
Secondly, faith frames the image of God in the soul, as in general, so in the
particular relations of life; that furnishes the heart with sweet qualities,
with promote faithfulness: What trouble is to an heart which is diligent, to
take any pains? To an heart that loves the Masters good, and is upright, to
seek the credit, welfare of the Master? To an heart that is well grounded,
what base commands of an ungodly governor will prevail against faithfulness
to God? To an heart well seasoned with grace, for the right manner, due measure
and the right ends of obeying, what service will be difficult? Now faith it is,
which only can make faithful.

And thirdly, faith having thus qualified the heart, 3. It puts it it into
actual exercise.
does also put it into service, causes this habit of fidelity to appear in
the course of service; refusing no employment whereby the heart may utter it
self for Gods sake, to man; to whom God has committed authority and
commission to press obedience and faithfulness, in a lawful condition of
life; whereof more in the exhortation (if Cod will) shall be spoken. I now
hasten to the Uses.

The first use may be just Terror and Reproof to bad and unfaithful Bad and
unfaithful servants terrified.
neither care to practice it when they are entered. For Terror first, Alas!
whither shall we go to find such as first give themselves to God, and after
to their Masters? Who looks after entrance, or moulding into Gods principles?
They doubt not, but to the work they are hired unto, they can dispatch it, (so
can horses and oxen) and go through stitch with it! They have been in good
houses they say, where there were folk as hard to please as others, and yet
them they could give content too, and they hope they are wise enough to make
their covenants: But as for being made faithful, (as Paul says, 1 Timothy 1.)
and putting into Gods service first, alas! they know not what it means! so
they be faithful droiles and drudges, they think more cannot be required, so
they can do work enough, what care they to lie, to swear, to guzzle, (at
their times appointed) to abuse and profane the Sabbaths, to balke the
congregation, to run about their own occasions, when God should be
worshipped? And if they be reproved, they ask, Is not your work done? And so
think to stop all mouths: But alas! There be yet worse then these! even
debaucht and slack hayred companions, whose trade and course of life it is, to
run from Master to Master, and when they have wearied one house, then run
to another and poison that, with their profane, drunken, unclean, and cursed
qualities? I speak of this Nation of bad servingmen, then which generally none
are more ignorant of God, or loose licentious in life: As for faithfulness to
their Masters, they know none, save to cast on their livery, and wait upon
them idely at home or abroad, and spend their days and years in a most
vanishing cursed profaneness. And the truth is, the condition of servants in
the houses of great men, (who keep a retinue and attendance of servants for
state and number) is so idle, and slothful, (for the most part) that it is of
necessity, that servants be so wicked, ease and base sloth so defiling them,
that whether they depart quickly, they pester so many the more houses, or if
they abide, they defile that house so deeply, that the taint of it can never
be washed out.

I speak not, A caution
as if God denied to great persons the liberty of much attendance; But then
they should not think it a disparagement unto them, to look so narrowly to
the ways of their servants, that when their attendance upon their tables, or
their persons within or without is ended, they may improve them in some such
other business either ingenuous or mechanique, as may prevent that forlorn
and woeful sottishness and sloth, which when it has possessed servants,
causes them to be noisome to God, to men, yea often to themselves, besides the
poisoning of the family by their examples. The si^s of b^d servants.
If servants were first leavened with the fear of God, durst they enter into
service upon such terms? Now as concerning meaner men's covenant, servants or
journey-men, what should I say? where is there one of ten, that enters into
service with the least spark of Religion in them? I dare speak it, this
Nation of journey-men, (for the most part) is a greater bane to towns and
families, then any one besides. For what is their life, save a licking up of
the scurffe of the Country, yea the depth of Satan, and leaving it behind them
wheresoever they become? So that the lewdness, the swearing, the bastardy, the
unseasonable hours, and revell route of towns, may as much be fathered upon
these as any! And as for the beholding of God in the ordinance of servants, how
far are they off it? They can skill to get in^o houses of liberty, where there
be no Puritans, where they may have most elbowroome, good usage for meat and
drink, best wages; and when they fail of these, get them gone on the
sudden, and leave their Masters in the lurch to provide for themselves! God
they see none in an ordinance; their governors they look at as they serve
their turn, as they show them countenance, according to the vayles they can
get under them: But as for conscience to deny their proud hearts, to live
meekely, subjectly and patiently under that yoke which God has put them under,
they are so far from it, that let them be crossed, their blood being up, they
neither will spare their Masters in words, nor deeds, blows nor wounds! What
wonder? They never came where Religion and faith grew, their sent is still in
them, and occasion being offered, there is no baseness so horrible, but they
will commit it, no unfaithfulness so great, but they will adventure it? They
are traitors to God, how therefore can they choose, but be unfaithful to man?

But all their unfaithfulness is not in the entrance; for what is their
practice, save a perpetual trade of unfaithfulness? Witness the infinite
company of bankerupts daily growing, and the decaying of so many husbands,
tradesmen and shopkeepers; whereof if ye enquire the causes, it is an hundred
to one, but bad servants come in among the chief. If their Masters be thrifty,
circumspect to overlooke the state of their families, to debar them from free
egresse and regresse too and fro, all their commodities, they blaze them abroad
for such hard Masters and unbeteaming, that it is pity, they say, that a good
servant should ever come within their doors. And if they dislike their diet
never so little, (as not dainty enough, though indeed too good for them) what
is their custom, but to combine, and each to lay their heads together to filch
their Masters commodities, bread, wine, beer and what not for the serving of
their appetite? What is more usual among servants then to forfeit their trust,
and to use those keys which are committed to their care, for the safeguarding
of commodities under their hands, in Dayrie, in Almery, Buttery, or the like,
for the betraying of them into the hands of them that imbezzel them, by
unseasonable feastings, junketings and merry-makings, their governors perhaps
being asleep in their beds! And because these are thought but trifles, what
servants almost are there now adays who may safely be trusted, with those
things (which yet they cannot be well kept from) I mean their Masters
receipts, accounts and moneys which they are trusted with, either as Prentices,
Receivers, or Stewards? Servants being now grown to that point, that (further
then they are watched narrowly) they will have it by hook or crook. How many
unfaithful Hazaels are there to the lives and persons of their Masters, 2
King. 8.15.
as the daily experience of Assizes and Sessions do witness? How many
villainous wretches to the peace of their governors, being so audacious as to
go between bark and tree, breeding suspicions, jealousies and debates between
man and wife, that having done so, they may work thereupon to incorporate
themselves into more credit? How many are traitors to their chastity, maids
impudent and whorish to allure their Masters, men their Mistresses or Dames to
uncleanness, overthrowing the foundation of the family, by such bastardy,
besides the kindling of another fire that will never go out?

How many are there, who like Onesimus rob their Masters of their moneys and
plate, and then play the fugitives, putting their Masters to endless trouble
and regret of body and mind, and yet lose their labor when all is done? How
many servants be unfaithful in the children? Some tainting them with secret
lewd qualities, ill counsels, bad examples, corrupt and rotten communication,
betraying them to vile company, uncleannes, to rob their Parents, to be stout
against them and rebellious? How many children may thank unfaithful servants,
for their depth of defilement, yea for the utter ruin of their bodies and
souls! How many have stolen away their dear children, married against their
consents, exposing them to Parents hatred, and to extreme misery? How many
Gehazi's which make use and gain of Masters to their reproach and dishonor,
gaining by their extreme loss, not caring what become of their credit or
thrift so they may raise their own fortunes? And no doubt the greater the
place of servants is, and the temptations they have, the more foul and odious
their practice is, making their Masters to be counted hard, that they may go
away with the gain; or else slyly plotting and sharing with such as they
traffic with to conceal their theft and falsehood. How many unfaithful
servants to the souls of their Masters, as Doeg to Saul, always suggesting
false accusations against them who are most faithful to them, that so they may
betray them? How many who are Bauds and Pandars to their Masters, to help them
in their cursed purposes to procure the harlots, and keep their counsels, to
draw them into endless expenses, lusts, quarrels with their Christian
yokefellowes, lewd and clandestine companies, wasting of their states and
patrimonies? How many that serve their turns, (as Saul's servants did his, in
bringing him to a witch) to borrow great sums of money for the serving of
their pleasures? But no sooner are their Masters come to ruin, but these
P^rasites fall off like lice from a dead corpse? Oh! the unspeakeable mischief
that unfaithful servants create to their Masters.

How many sow such dissentions and quarrels between their Masters and others,
(like base pickethanks) till thereupon suits, yea challenges, duells and
bloodshed follow? Again, what an unfaithful humor is it in servants, to be
more for strangers and their content, then for their Masters benefit, giving,
lending and bestowing upon such as they please, more then either they have
leave to do or thank for, that hereby they may enhanse their own praise and
account? What truth is there to lose account with the Master, to procure it
with the stranger, by loss of fidelity? How do many lewd servants slander
fidelity, with the aspersion of covetousness? They will never be base and
worldly (they say) to be counted faithful while they live! If they lived under
beggars it were another matter: but as long as they live under rich men they
will have it, and let them (in Gods name) keep a good house with that they
have! mean time, neither have their Masters ever the more thank, nor their
business better done, besides the needless wasting of the creature to the
value of scores yea hundreds through the year, not for need, but a base
custom; and there be servants also as unthankful in their conniving at
others, as these are wastefull themselves, thinking it rather their reproach,
then faithfulness to betray and prevent such pillars and pollers of their
Masters; and when these are put away or suffer for their falsehood, how do they
fill the Country with clamours and uproares against their innocent Masters for
rejecting them? How common a course is it with servants to spare themselves in
point of pains and providence for their Masters; their ease makes cold in
winter, heat in summer, to be tedious to them, labor, prevention,
watchfulness over the cattle, commodities and business of their Masters, how
burdensome is it? How little serves their turns? How do they murmr, if
their task please them not? What shifts have they to avoid it?

If weather, if travel upon errands and journeies, if work be against them,
how do they cavil? How ready to thrust forth others and to grudge (with him
in the Gospel) that the heat of the day lies upon them more then others? Genesis
31.40.
So far are they from enduring Jacobs service with ill terms! If wages
please not, how do they cast their Masters in teeth with other men's servants?
How full of eye-service are they? If their Masters see them, how nimble at a
start are they, but if their backs be turned, how resty and lazy? And what
melting, spoiling, breaking, losing, and battering the commodities of their
Masters within doors? What neglecting of their cattle, fences, annoyance of
other neighbors abroad, so that all goes to havocke for lack of diligence? It
were endless to mention all: Ye Masters know better and by more woeful
experience, (who keep many and of both sexes in your families) then my self can
do. But oh you unfaithful servants! When I have said what I can, you can
cover your falsehood from men, and so hope to do from God: but although the Law
take not always hold upon you, to take away your lives, or to stock, whippe,
brand, imprison or punish you here; be sure of it, the Lord Jesus will one day
judge you for your prankes and rex that you have played in your services, either
plaguing you with the like servants, or else pronouncing that terrible doom
upon you, Cast that unfaithful servant into utter darkness, there shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth! And yet I have known many my self of both
sexes, who have (many years after their stealths and cheats committed) come in
and (after conviction of conscience by the word) made outcries, and asked what
shall we do? Our Masters and Mistresses are dead, Their children we know not
off: What shall our stolen goods be done with? How shall restitution be made?
Their consciences have so torn them, and their old morsells have so glowed and
heartburned in their stomachs, that they could have no peace till they could
vomit them by such restitution as they could make: And whereas others be more
stiff and stout then to be so convinced; let them know, their sin and
damnation sleep not: The Lord shall awaken them one day to their cost,
although now they can digest any gobbets. But I have held you too long; Here
even abruptly I am compelled to break off, reserving the rest to the next
occasion. Let us pray, etc.

The end of the Tenth Lecture.
THE ELEVENTH LECTVRE Still continued upon this thirteenth VERSE.
VERSE XIII. And his servants came near, and said unto him, Master, if the
Prophet had bidden thee do some great thing, would not thou have done it?
How much more then, when he says unto thee, Wash and be clean?

VERSE 14. Then he went down and dipped himself in Jorden, etc.


2 Kings
THE last Sermon (beloved in our Lord and Savior) we entered into this
thirteenth Verse; and (as you know) opened, divided and handled the coherence
of it; then came to the first of the three generals in the Verse, concerning
the duty of servants faithfulness: The ground whereof, with reasons, proofs,
and explication of the grace of faithfulness, when we had finished, we
began with the first use of Terror against all unfaithful servants, both in
their entrance and practice.

Reproof. Religious servants failing in their faithfulness, are blame worthy.
as though in profession Religious, yet in their particular relation to their
Masters, walk as if they had a dispensation, cleave not closely to
faithfulness, nor to the commands of their superiors, as if God from heaven
spoke unto them, If thou love me be faithful in thy service: As it was once
when the Gospel came among bondslaves, they took it, as if a flag of defiance
had been set up, to proclaim liberty to them from their Masters; pretending
that if they believed in Christ, they were freemen from the Law of God, much
more from men, insomuch that Paul was faint to blow a trumpet of retreat to
their defiance, Ephe. 6.5.6.7. 1 Timothy 6.1.
and to fetch them under line again: Even so it is here with many of our
servants, if once religious, they abuse this color to make them libertines;
how careless about their business, slack, negligent, spending and wastefull
are many such? If they make their conditions, The pranks of many such servants.
what liberties do they covenant for? How do they (under covert of hearing
the word) take courage to themselves, to spend days after days in their
journeies, companies, and private affairs, to the detriment of their Masters?
They seek not the honor of the Gospel by their double subjection and
faithfulness, nor procure a freedom from their Masters good will, requiting
their diligence; but that they have they will extort it as a due belonging to
them: So saucy and checkmate with their Masters if religious, so scornful and
rebellious toward the ignorant, as thinking them too mean for their service,
so full of tart answers, and taunting speeches, so censorious, uncharitable,
unthankefull for kindenesses, boasting of their own gifts above theirs, as if
they were fitter to rule their Masters, then they them, disdainful to their
fellow servants, curious about their provision and diet, as that they open the
mouths of the bad, to wish servants rather ignorant and carnal then such; and
all by their hypocritical shows of that which is not in them; for were they in
truth that they go for, their hearts would rather be on their right hand then
their left, they would rather be jealous of themselves, wary lest any thing
should appear in them repugning to subjection and faithfulness, laboring by
their uttermost self-denial to win credit to the Gospel, by their humble,
harmless and painful service: this is according to God; the other is base
and fleshly: and commonly where a servant is faithful, the Lord so honors
their faithfulness, Genesis 39 4.
that even (as Putifar seeing Joseph's fidelity) betrust them with their matters
above all their fellows, whereas these are less trusted then any, and if they
have been trusted by such as knew them not, they have bewraied themselves to be
of a bastard brood, often running away when their turn is served, and leaving
Religion in the lurch and to suffer through their baseness. To these I say no
more, repent in time, dishonor not the truth of God by your lewdness: I have
seen few of this strain; but they proved lewd hypocrites and openly debauched
in time: Therefore prevent the Lord by serious amendment, before he pull the
visor from your faces, and make your nakedness to appear to all that behold
you, that so some amends may be made to that truth of God which you have
dishonored, when as all shall see that you were arrant varlots, such as
Religion can receive no blemish from. And so much for this second use of
Reproof.

Let a third use then (brethren) be an use of examination, Examination.
for all servants Quest. But how shall I try it? Four rules of Trial.
Answ. By these four or five Rules.

First, no true faithfulness must be beside the word, but fetch her warrant
and stamp from thence. Whatsoever is from any other is sinful. There is a
wicked and base faithfulness in the world, as we see in the rash attempts of
many desperate servants, who (to approve themselves to carnal Masters, rush
themselves into such dangers, as they neither have power to overcome, nor
calling to undertake. 2 Samuel 23.15.16.
See that example of David's servants, who to demerit their Master, and to
publish their valor, undertook (two or three of them) to break through an
host of enemies to fetch him water. An ungrounded attempt in them, and a worse
motion in David, as appears after in his shaming himself for tempting God,
and pouring that out for a drink offering, which was the purchase and price of
the precious lives of men. Here seemed great loyalty, but it was a will
service, not an obeying in the Lord. So many servants pickthankes, to indeere
themselves with their proud Masters, affect to drink healths in honor to
them, and whosoever refuses to pledge them, they are ready to give him the
stab, to defy him, and challenge him into the field. These are double
diligently faithful, which service a good Master should abhor as to hot and
to heavy.

Paul pleaded for, So those Ziphites. 1 Samuel 23.20. 1 Samuel 22.9. 2 Samuel 13.28.
1 Samuel 28.7.
and (when the rest abhorred) Doeg and his Edomites performed, to satisfy his
bloody demand, in slaying those hundred eighty Priests of the Lord: Also that
treacherous obedience, imposed by a desperate Master and fulfilled by Absolons
servants, in the bloody murder of Ammon. Not unlike whereto was the
faithfulness of those servants of Saul, in directing him to a witch: Such is
the service of those necessary mischiefs who hang about the sleeves of vicious
and prodigal gentlemen or spendthrifts, who procure them content to their
lusts, as money upon unreasonable terms to fulfill their lavish expenses,
harlots to satisfy their lusts, debauched gamesters for their pleasures,
attending them, counselling them, and spurring them forward to ride on in their
miserable courses, till hell devour them. As that forlorn fellow said, that
he was so addicted to Marius his Master, that although he knew his Master ought
not to bid him burn the Capitol, yet if he would bid him do it he would.
Such Monsters of faithfulness as to please the humors of their Masters, will
do what ever they enjoyne them; if they be bidden to break the Sabbath for
them, they will do it, if to swear and to forswear themselves they are
ready, if to stabbe or wound an enemy, they are for them: Yea and we have such
as write books in the justifying of such servants, as obey their Masters in
the breaking of the Sabbath, as if a servant were not bound to have any
explicit faith or conscience of his own, but only inwrapped in the bosom of
his Master who may be an Atheist. No, the command is clear, Exodus 20. Thou and
thy wife, thy manservant and thy maidservant, etc. Each one must have a
conscience for himself to direct his obedience. Joh. 18.10.
If Peter in the loyal defense of his Master, smiting off the ear of Malchus
had a check (by virtue of a special exception in that case) what then shall
the bloody, cruel and profane service of such as these be deemed?

Ephe. 6.5.6. Coloss. 3.22.
from the very heart root, (as Paul speaks) not for base ends of our own and
avantage. Many there be who for praise, great vayles, to flatter and pick
thank with their Masters will at the running pull, do great things, who yet
in cool blood, are the veriest cowards and sluggards of all. And many others
are like Gebazi in their Masters eye, 2 King. 5.25.
who so diligent, industrous and active as they? Only to cover their habitual
unfaithfulness, and to get themselves a name, or to serve themselves into
their Masters opinions and affections; but no sooner out of sight, but (as he
following after Naaman) running after their own ends.

Fourthly, it must not be against the Law of piety, or charity, mercy See Tit.
2.10.
For a servant to be faithful to his Master, in the advising of him to
alienate that from Gods use which belongs to him; or for a servant in the
Market (under color of faithfulness) to oversell his corn or other
commodities to the detriment of the poor, and beyond his Masters allowance,
are both unfaithful faithfulness.

Fifthly, it must be equal and entire, like it self in all parts of
faithfulness, 2 Samuel 3.
Abner was a faithful servant to the house of Saul: But why? That he might the
more equally have his will, and go without check whatsoever villainy he
should attempt. And therefore being told of the defiling of Rizpah the
concubine, his service withered, and he had done his work. Such are many
servants now adays; give them their swinge, let them have their will, to do
work without subjection, and they promise wonders; but go about to teach
them, reprove, correct them, then they scorn you, and they will work no
longer. An unbroken, unsubject heart is all at a running pull, and from Self,
nothing from a principle of equality or subjection.

Lastly, good faithfulness (as Paul styles it) is active, stirring, sedulous
Romans 12.11.
It is not enough for a servant to pretend himself faithful by a secret habit
within unseene; that is a barren faithfulness which has no daughters
attending her; she must not only bear the mind not to be treacherous and
hurtful, (for so was that unprofitable servant, who brought his Master the
talent in a napkin) But she must have all these properties which commend a
faithful servant: A sedulous eye to observe all occasions, within or without,
tending to remonstrate the habit within; also alacrity, activity in business,
skilfulnesse, providence and prevention to foresee the way of benefit, to avoid
loss and damage, vigilance, dexterity, curteousnesse, affablenesse, love,
subjection and unweariednesse. It must always tend to operation and exercise,
not affecting a careless, indifferent and fulsome faithfulness: A loose
servant will drive out the cattle out of his Masters corn, or help to pull
his beast out of the ditch, when he is told of it, or gastred to it: But an
active servant will prevent both to his uttermost, that howsoever casualities
must be, yet they may be few. Iaacob bare not only a fidelity within, as raked
under the ashes, but at all seasons, early, late, in frost, in heat, was ever
upon the wing of circumspect prevention, and watchful diligence: And in truth
this is the soul of faithfulness, going through all and every object of his
service. Try your selves (ye servants) by these and such like marks; and if ye
find (as I fear most of ye will) your selves behind hand in any of them,
Conclusion of the Trial.
take warning: We Gods Ministers are told to our faces, oftimes by your
Masters, who groan under these burdens, that we are frequent in telling them
of their faults; but let your servants run riot. Now the text pulles me by
the ear to reach you out your (Demensum) as needful for you, as your meat and
drink: Such of you as never were faithful, I heap these hot coals upon your
heads, and pray God to kindle some spark or other of this grace in you, that
it may appear that this doctrine is from God, and came seasonably dropping as
the small rain or dew: And such of you, as are faithful, and yet rusty and
overgrowne, in the fear of God, by these trialls search out what scurse has
mixed it self with your goodness, Heb. 12.9.
that that which is crooked may be rectified, and not quite turned out of the
way, but purged and

Instruction. Masters choose your servants by this faithfulness.
I hasten to the fourth use of instruction: And that is to all Masters who
desire good servants. As ye would try an earthen vessel or a piece of silver
by the ring of it, so choose a servant by his faithfulness. Masters never so
cried out of bad servants as now; but when they come to choose them, they look
least of all at faithfulness; choose not servants by other complements only:
Oh! he is a proper man to stand about my table, to attend my person, a fellow
that has excellent skill in keeping an hawk, a very good huntsman, or he is a
very fine fellow at a weapon, of fine activity to dance, to vault, to bowl, to
keep me company: Choose for no part whatsoever, till you have chosen for
fidelity, subjection and self-denial. David could say, Psalm. 101.6.
Mine eye should be to the faithful of the land, he that walks in a perfect
way, he shall serve me: A slanderer, a proud hearted one, a deceitful person,
or a liar shall not abide in my sight. Choose such as in whom thy heart may
rest, as well behind thy back, as before thy face; undoubtedly the chief
fault of bad servants, is the choice of ill Masters, whose hearts affect not a
servant for his faithfulness, but for any second hand property. A faithful
drudge pleases them better then a faithful servant. But by that time they
find, their families are tainted with uncleanness, their childrens manners
corrupted, their goods wasted, and the rest of the servants poisoned with
drunkenness, swearing, when they see the wound so festred that they cannot
tell how to cure it, then they cry out, it is time to give over housekeeping,
ere bad servants destroy all. Nay many bad Masters abhor a Puritan should
come within their doors, till base servants have undone them, and then they
wish themselves and all Puritans! But let this be your counsel, if servants
will not shun unfaithful qualities, let Masters shun unfaithful servants, if
they were known to encourage such, if your houses could hold such, like would
to like, Luke 17.37.
And where the carcass is, thither the young Eagles would resort. Strange it is
to see how wise men are in other things, to discern every man's excellency in
his element; if we go to sea, we will choose us a Pilot able to steer and
rule his ship and save us from danger; if we to build us an house, we will
have a Carpenter who can build skilfully and strongly, such an house for us,
as will stand against all wind and tempests: But when we come to choose
servants, we choose them for complement, and for trifles never looking at that
which truly constitutes a servant, viz. his subjection or faithfulness.

Go to a College of Jesuits, and look what novices they entertain: Papists
put (...) down for government.
They love children witty, apt, active, for their turns; but because they
cannot tell what hot service they may set them about, they will be sure of one
thing, or else they will suspect all the rest, they will have them subject, they
will be Masters of their wills, absolutely unsubsisting in themselves, merely
nullified, that whatsoever they put upon them, they may be for it, and then
they count them theirs indeed. Do you choose servants thus, and ye are happy,
especially your selves resolving to be under God, that you may not abuse their
wills to profaneness, but use them to faithful service: Even you have hot
work to do also, be therefore Masters of their wills; you have Gods Sabbaths
to hallow, you have children to be brought up, you have sometime weighty
business to send them about, great sums to be paid or received: What shall
secure you in all these, save faithfulness? Once a knot of Masters met
together, and fell on talking of their servants, one boasted of his, and said,
he had one bred well, that could carry himself bravely; another had one could
run a horse or ride him well; a third had one that would do work enough,
and so forth: One among the rest stepping forth, asked them, but tell me (I
pray you) will not these servants of yours, sometimes be drunk? Yes, that they
would. And would they not teach their Masters what work they should set them
about? Yes. And had they not horrible proud stomachs? Yes that they had. Alas!
quoth he, you perceive nothing at all: For (upon point) these are your Masters,
you are their slaves and servants. I have servants at home, which I confess
want some of these qualities which yours have; but I for my part chose my
servants not by that they had so much, as by that they wanted, not by having
this wit, that skill, presence, ableness to do a message, but by their
wanting a will of their own, a proud stomach, and (says he) I find my choice
best. For why? Your servants know this and that, but my servants will learn
any thing they know not; your servants can do so and so, but mine will do
what I list; you have your servants fingers ends and outsides at your commands,
I have my servants will at my girdle, you have servants tied by cords of shame,
fear, praise or wages; but I have mine tied by iron chains of subjection and
faithfulness: my servants be not so proper fellows as yours, but I dare trust
them in my closet or with my purse; my servants are not so quaint of speech as
yours, but they are afraid of my displeasure; my servants are meaner then
yours, but mine will bear a reproof: And who (think you) has the better
servants? All concluded this man to have the best; but then they would needs
know if he had any such to spare, that he might help them to some? He told
them, if he could, Note.
the matter stood not in that; they must do as he did; for they used to take
and choose, he used to choose and take, they met with bad and made them worse,
he, if he met with raw ones, he made them ripe, if with good ones, he made
them better; meaning that the choice of a servant, and the rule of a servant,
must make good ones. And so let it be (brethren) your course in Gods fear: To
get a good servant of another man's providing, is no furniture worth the
speaking of: Service is no inheritance; good ones may soon be gone: But choose
them and rule them, and so have them: Let God be chief and make your choice,
and bear the chief sway, and then you shall have good servants; subject and
faithful ones, have all qualities infolded in one, if they want skill they
scorn not to learn, if they fail, they desire but to be taught, if they obey
not, they refuse no reproof or punishment; for their wills are their Masters,
not their own, and look what they fail in, it is by error or infirmity, not
wilfulness; one such servant will do better service in a year, then another
in two. Boar him in the ear if thou take liking, and he love thy house, and
be not weary of him, desire no change, let him or her be thy servant for ever.
So much for this fourth use.

Exhortation.
but to be faithful; not to have such and such parts, but to have one worth
them all, subjection and faithfulness. Learn here of Naamans servants: What a
shame is it, that such poor heathens should come forth so suddenly under the
anvile of this one present occasion, formed and molded, and thou under all
Gods discipline should be no better? Oh! you servants remember what a long
race of unfaithfulness, riot, falsehood, stealth, stomach, disobedience, Bad
servants must not think it too late for them to repent.
rebellion, you have run hitherto: Oh! that I could but see one Onesimus here
this day, one fugitive, one lewd and slothful or wilful wretch, whom this my
doctrine might convince and convert to God? But truly (brethren) I see so few
broken in pieces for their errors, so few penitent and tender for their old
pranks, that I am afraid to put new wine of Exhortation into such old bottells,
for fear all should break and be spilt! I have met with some (I thank God) and
I see no cause why the Lord should not take some of ye napping in your service
and the sins thereof, as others in the way of their bad government, marriage or
childhood. What have ye gone from service to service, have ye left your rags
behind you and scattered your scurffe so in the places where ye have become,
that you think it now too late to repent? Are you so sapped and soked in your
way, that you begin to think there is no hope? Beware of being so desperate!
Say thus, Is it not enough Lord, that I have been so lazy, so false fingered,
so bold, so answering again, drunk at times, loose in liberties, not for my
Masters ends, but mine own; but now I must fulfill my measure, add
drunkenness to thirst, and an hard heart to my other prankes! No Lord, this
were not to be an unfaithful servant to a man (which is bad) but a desperate
one and impenitent to thee, which is cursed! If Onesimus had not robbed his
Master, he had never met with Paul, nor been converted; his perishing was his
happiness! Thou had grace for him O Lord! thou made him faithful to thy
self, purgest him of his baseness, as deeply seated in him (for ought I know)
as mine is in me, that thou might have the honor: Thou made him
faithful, put him into thine own work, set thy mark on him, sendest
him back of a wretch good for naught, good for all things: Ah Lord! This day
my sinful service comes to my remembrance, Lord batter me, break and thaw
mine heart, put me in hope, pardon my sin, put me in to the Lord Jesus his
School, cleanse me of all my cheats and prankes, and make me a true Onesimus
fit for thine use, according to thine heart, and I doubt not but out of thy
forge, mine heart shall be framed and molded to all subjection and
faithfulness to man!

Beg it hard, Lord teach me to adore thy wisdom in ordaining servants to their
places, and Masters to be their governors! Lord discover thy sovereignty to
me, and shine thy self with thine authority upon my Master and Mistress, that
I may see God in their government, either because they are holy, or else
because they are governors: If I see not such a Master as I would, let me see
mastership from thee, and be awed under it? Lord take my will out of my
bosom, and put in thine: Speak Lord, thy servant hears, give me a will to be
subject, and be as thou will, and then command and spare not, I will do not
only what thy self, but what man under thee commands! And it shall be my
heaven and happiness to be under for conscience sake! Give me also faith,
Lord, to create all serviceable qualities in me, to lythe, to form, and to
accommodate my spirit and members to all welpleasing (without flattery) and
obedience! Let me under a good Master be subject and faithful with
thankfulness; to a bad one, for conscience, not compulsion, as serving the
Lord Christ! Sundry charges Lord, thou give by thine Apostles, Paul and
Peter, Servants be subject to your Masters in all fear, 1 Pet. 2.28.
not only to the good, but also to the froward; for this is thankeworthy, if a
man for conscience sake endure grief wrongfully: Coloss. 3.22.
Servants obey in all things your Masters, not with eye-service as men
pleasers, but with singleness of heart fearing God, Doing, it heartily as unto
God, not unto men, knowing that of him ye shall receive the inheritance, for
ye serve the Lord Christ. And so in other places. Lord write this Law of thine
in mine inward parts! Thou have also in thy word not only scattered the
examples of vile servants. Ziba, Gehazi, Judas and others, to tremble at and
abhor, but also of faithful ones, Lord, to follow and imitate: Thou have set
forth Eliezers example, that old trusty servant, Genesis 24.10. 1 Samuel 25. M^tth.
25. Acts 10.22. Texts alleged above.
to the good of his Masters son: Those servants of Abigail to the life of her
and her husband, that of Joseph to the chastity of his Mistress, that of
Cornelius his servants to the soul of their Master, those of the servants that
occupied talents to the outward advantage of their Master, that of David's, for
the succor and relief of their Master in straits, the Centurions to the
content and business of their Master, Rhode faithful to Gods Ministers, and
so of others: No one object of faithfulness, but some pattern of it or other,
thou have added to sweeten it to assure me of the possiblenesse of obeying it.

Oh! give to thy servant somewhat of all these, that I may be all in one, a
cast piece without crack or flaw, (in respect of unfaithfulness) and the
rest, cover O Lord, accept and pardon! Be earnest I say with the Lord, beg of
him an understanding heart, put not all over to thy Master; say not, look you
Master what you command (for that concerns not me) I must do all you bid me:
No, examine thy Masters commands ere thou obey them: But if they be according
to God, scruple them not, yea although they be not, yet if but negatives only,
forbear for a time, and provoke not by rebellion: say not, I will not forgo
such a Sermon, such a duty of Gods worship: But if it be positively bad,
abhor it. Beg also the spirit and life of this faithfulness: Put thy self
forth by occasion; for a good servant is never tried, till he be put to it
thoroughly; be in one as another service, wholly your Masters, watch and be
upon wing for faithfulness, pick out duties, be ready for duties, be
unwearied: Let the honor of thy Master, the trust of thy Master, absent or
present, the good of children, whether abroad in fields, at home, working thy
self, overseeing others, among fellow servants, at prayer in family, about a
journey and message of weight, about thy lawful liberties: Still let this
soul of faithfulness be wholly in all and each part, to guide thee aright.
The instinct of subjection and faithfulness will teach thee to speak and do
that, which thy Master himself cannot teach thee. Occasions of providence will
teach thee how to answer, persuade, prevent, when thy Master is far off.
Eliezer and Cornelius his servants might be trusted to say, what they saw
meet, the one to Laban and Rebecca, the other to Peter. And when thou have
done all, let thy conclusion be, Remember me O Lord, not for my goodness, but
in thy goodness, and according to my faithfulness: I shall account pardon my
best reward, because at the best I have but been an unprofitable servant. This
for the fifth use.

Faithful servants may be comforted Heb. 6.10.
you think you tread a maze of confusion and work, and are cast into a corner
to play the drudges: As those Eunuchs in Jeremy, ye think your selves cut
off from name, memory or reward! But God overlookes not the labor of your
love! Oh! It would not grieve you, I say, if you might have a good word,
countenance or acceptance!

Nabal, or the Lord Christ! Therefore be cheerful! Your business is not the
thing God looks at, be it never so poor in kitching or in a ditch; the
subjection and faithfulness of heart is all which God looks at: Thy scouring
spits, or ditching, or dunging the fields, (with such an heart) shall be more
to the Lord, then the work of a Justice of peace, carried by oppression and
injustice. And the Lord can plead thy wronged cause in due time against thy bad
Master: Be thou faithful, though borne down by flatterers; God will bring
forth thy light in due time, and thy virtue (the whiles) shall be thy exceeding
reward. God shall send thee, a good Master to requite thee for all the wrong
which a bad has done thee.

Again, know it, the Lord prises subjection above all qualities, more Philip
the King of Spain (if he might be believed) when he heard that his under
general of his fleet in eighty eight, I mean the Duke of Medina should say,
had it not been for obedience to his Lord the great Duke of Parma, who charged
him to attend his coming, he could have put England hard to it: Answered, it
now grieves me not that I have lost that Kingdom, I see I have one servant who
knows how to be subject, whom I prise above it: whatsoever he did, the Lord
prises thy obedience above a world of rebellious servants.

Absalons servants in that day, to allege we were dogged to it by our wicked
Master: The Lord most justly plagues base servants by their lot to be so; as
those of Ahazia, who came to fetch down Elija from the top of the mount: The
Lord destroyed them in their service, King. 7.8. Coloss. 3.25.
their mends was in their own hand. So says Paul, There shall be no respect
of persons with God, but a punishment to him that has done badly: Gods eye
shall not pity him, as a poor servant that did as he was bidden; but smite
him for an unfaithful one, who did that which was unlawful, as to break the
Sabbath or the like, to please a wretched Master: Even so I say on the other
side, If thou have been faithful to God against a woeful Masters commands,
although he can here bear thee down with person and greatness, yet thou
shall be heard where person is not accepted, but the cause; and the Lord shall
quit an innocent servant against an injurious Master. Moses had a Law that no
Judge should favor a poor bad man in a case of evil, for his poverty: but
then much more he had another, which forbad to accept the person of the mighty
against the mean in case of unrighteousness.

Lastly, the Lord will bless thy righteousness of a servant, with fidelity in
thy servants, when thou shall govern. And as Adonibezek said, Judge. 1.
the Lord had justly required him for his cruelty; so many Masters ill
servanted, may say, the Lord justly plagues them with lewd servants, for since
they were rude and unfaithful, they never repented. Well is that sweet
coherence of the Centurions speech to be noted, Matthew. 8.
I my self am under authority, and am subject; and what of that? God has
blessed me with such as are obedient, come, go, do as I bid them* and are at
my beck. I might be endless, there were comfort enough in this, if there were
no more, that at the last day of reckning, when all servants shall be called
coram; then shall that blessed and final sentence be pronounced upon thee,
Come thou good and faithful servant, thou have been faithful in a little, be
ruler over much, enter into thy Masters joy. God gives no less then a Kingdom
for the poorest, the least duty of the meanest of his servants. Let thus much
suffice for this use also, and so for this whole Doctrine.

Now ere I come to the next point in the text, Addition to the former doctrine.
I must not pass by the relation of Naaman to them, having said somewhat of
the servants toward him. Relatives go together in nature, and therefore in
handling: Masters must be fathers to their servants.
And as these servants performed the faithfulness of sons: So Naaman (by
their own confession) was a father to them rather then a Master. Servants will
be glad to hear me say somewhat of the fatherhood of Masters, as well as of
their faithfulness, and it would not grieve any servant to be faithful to a
Master who is as a father. I will bring things to as narrow a point as I may.
Masters then must be fathers to their servants: Not only so, in point of
superiority and reverence, to procure honor to themselves, but in point of
tender respect, care and love to the good of their servants, both souls and
bodies. Ephesians. 6.9.
The Apostle having given servants their charge (lest their Masters should
begin to overcrow them) presently comes in, And ye Masters do the same
things unto them, forbearing threatening, knowing that your Master is also in
heaven, and there is no respect of persons with him. For why?

First, they are under thy roof, and have betaken themselves under the covert
and shroud of thy wings, they have left their parents, under whose protection
they lived, that they might be wholly (under God) for thee; reason therefore
that thou should be as a patron, protector and father unto them. A servant
may in a sort, say to his Master, I am thine save me, for all things look for
support from them to whom they belong.

Again, thy servants are children to thee; their close fidelity and denying
themselves for thy good, should draw thine affection to be for them: True it
is, servants are not as children in point of naturalnesse and neerenesse, for
the child abides in the house for ever, but the servant only for a time; yet
during that time, he pleades for fatherhood and regard from thee so far as is
meet. Quest. But wherein stands this duty of Masters toward them? Answ.
Briefly, in these things: First, in a preparation. Secondly, in a performance.

1. Preparation. Behold God in thy servants duty. Genesis 35.5.
First, for the former: When thou see that thy servants heart is subject unto
thee, and that there is a real awe and Religious fear of spirit put into him
by God for thine advantage; and that (as it is said of the Nations when Iaacob
went to Luz) the Lord smites a trembling at the ordinance of government: Thy
duty is to behold God in this work, to see thine own baseness, and to say,
who am I, that thou should subject the wills of men unto so sinful a
creature as I am? It is not my worth, authority or carriage, which could claim
that esteem and service which my servants tender unto me: It is thou (O Lord)
that subduest my people unto me! In me there is nothing, but might breed
disdain and despising, as well as reverence: But thou have covered my uncomely
parts, by the honor of thine ordinance! Oh! that this might draw my soul in
subjection and awe under thee, Ephesians. 3.15.
who art the father of whom all the families of the earth are called: Oh that I
could tremble at thy greatness! Oh! that as thou hidest from my cretaures
their own strength and parts, that they might be wholly under mine authority;
so I might remember, that I am under thee far more absolutely, then a creature
can be under mine: Oh! that I might not feel mine own parts, strength,
wisdom, welfare, but feel thy fear upon mine heart as a bridle to awe and to
restrain me from any boldness or looseness before thee: Lord, I never see
awe and fear in my inferiors to me-ward, but presently I conceive thou art in
it to reflect a greater awe of my heart toward thy self. For every Kingdom
and rule in this world, from a King to an householder, is under a greater: Oh!
let not my servant rise up in judgment and condemn me, in that he could
behold that in a sinful piece of flesh which could subdue him, but I could
never see that luster and glory, that mercy and love in thee, which should draw
and subdue my heart to thy self, and set thee up so therein, that my self
might be as nothing, Psalm. 73.27.
that I might say, Whom have I in heaven but thee, or in earth like thee? By
this meditation with prayer, prepare thy self first, and then the duty will
follow the better.

2. Performance. 1. Yield fatherly respect to thy servant.
Secondly, having thus first given up thy self to God, give thy self also to
the duty of fatherly and due respect to thy servants, and let not thine heart
check thee for any such wilful neglect of them, as might cause the Lord to
punish it in thy self: Even thy very diet, lodging and care of the body, must
be good. Thy horse thou will sometimes attend busily and carefully, because
thou would have him serviceable and loath he should fail thee; even so,
look what thou would have thy servant toward thy self, that utter by the
managing his spirit and framing of him for thy use. The Masters eye makes the
fat horse, and his care the good servant. This general branch out to thy self
in these particulars.

First, be sure, that as thou thy self look daily, Tender to him his share
in spiritual instruction.
for the bread of the day from God, so tender thou (as thy servants steward)
the (demensum) or portion due to thy servant daily; let him share in thine
instruction, catechizing and information in the Lord, with correction and
reproof, warnings and admonitions, encouragements and promises, let him not
go up and down, shifting and graceless, give him such as the Lord has given
thee, with prayer for blessing daily, and know, that this is as meet for him
as his daily food or wages, better unfed then untaught. Trust not thine own
wisdom, but carry him in thine arms to God, and pray the Lord to wash him,
shave off his locks, and pare his nails, to make him faithful, to lay his
hands upon him and bless him, that so thou may have a servant of the maker,
purged and made useful for himself and thee: When thou have him tied to thee
by Gods cords, he is safe. This whet every day will be no let unto thee.

Secondly, feed him not only by the ear, but by the eye; Feed him by the ear
and eye too.
pull not down that in practice, by an humorous, passionate, base and
ungracious carriage which thou have set up in him by teaching; for this will
make him loath thee and despise it: But tender unto him an holy, grave, and
pure example; walk before him so, that Gods authority may appear in thee:
Stand not so much upon thy superiority of fatherhood over him, as wisdom and
respect unto him. Above all (as Solomon says) over hear not thy servant when
he speaks evil of thee, that is, let him see that thou art a man who can rule
thy passions, for thy self can tell, that thou have often offended God in that
kind. This convincingnesse of thy carriage will breed invincible reverence and
reflection of obedience toward thee again. See that thy servant despise thee
not: This will command reverence: Contrarily the heart of a servant will
suggest thus; if thou walk basely, what is matter how I serve such a Master?
What if I filch from him, neglect his work, speak evil of him and dishonor
him, run away from him? It is good enough for him, God is just: But holy
walking awes a servant, overpowres his heart, shames him, makes him blush and
puts him to silence. This is powerful not by violence, but by persuasion, both
in sight and behind thy back.

Thirdly, Look to thy authority. 1. In charges.
be careful both of thy authority in commanding and in practicing. For the
former, impose nothing upon thy servant, which the Lord has not warranted thee
by his word. Be not so vile as to digest any thing, so thou may have thy
work, and thy will done by him: Be thou thy self also under authority, and be
a Master in the Lord. Thou have enough to answer for thy self, endanger not
his soul also, to make thine account more grievous: Stretch not thy conscience
to pervert his, urge him not to break Sabbaths, send him not upon errands that
day (as if it were loose and might be spared) fleece not from God; press him
not to make a lie for thee, to swear or forswear for thy sake, and the like,
carry him not with the, to base, lewd companies, pleasures, lusts.

2. For practice.
So for practice. Ye shopkeepers, let not your servants behold in you a spirit
of covetousness, to obtrude bad wares for good, to belie their goodness, to
sell for too great prises, false weights, scant measures. Such scurffe will
soke into them, as water into the bowels, and fret like a canker. The Devils
market is so full as it is, by this tradition and exchange from Master to
servant. This is not to be a father but a traitor; for a three penny commodity
to betray a soul to hell, and (the whiles) to the like practice: Such straked
rods laid before sheep, will cause them to bring forth spotted lambs. How
many on the gallows and more in hell, roar and cry out upon such Masters? Thy
life shall go for his, and he in hell groans for thee to follow, without
special mercy and repentance. so much for this.

Impose lawful commands in measure.
Fourthly, in the obeying of such commands as are lawful and current, yet
impose not tyranny in the measure thereof; both in the former and in this
latter, servants may be overloaden. When Masters care not what excess of
toil and moile servants undergo, and that out of season beyond strength,
without due rest, sleep or intermission, they show themselves no fathers, (for
fathers pity their children) but oppressors. Thy servant is for thee to use,
not tire or tear out: Thou must not take both fleece and flesh too, So when
that is laid upon the young and ungrowne (in either sex) which belongs to
stronger arms and shoulders to lift, or when a task is imposed, which exceeds
the skill or experience of a servant, it is an exaction an overdriving of them,
more fit for Egyptian task Masters, then Christian governors: Take the
servant in his way and element, it is best both for thee and him. So also let
thy spirit be sweet and easy toward him in his moderate labors, else thou
were better lay on more work. For the spirit of a Master, if insulting,
taunting, chiding, upbraiding, is more heavy and contrary to the spirit of an
underling, then work is to the body. A servant would not care what he did for
his Master, so he might have peace and quietness. But a tyrannous spirit and
wrathful tongue with implacablenesse, is a continual weariness and dropping
to a poor creature. A loving interpretation, a tender compassionate heart,
acknowledging with content, the diligence of an inferior, is as marrow to the
bones. Thou could not abide a froward currish spirit, a dogged servant,
answering again, cross and disquieting of thee: Take heed then thou measure
out to him by the same rule, whereby thou would have him measure out unto
thee. Awe him and rule him, spare not, and correct errors, yet with a fatherly
heart and hand; 1 King. 13.
but play not the Rehoboam to his subjects, who cared not what measure he laid
on, nor feared what they could requite him withal: His little fingers should
be heavier then his fathers loins; but his fathers twelve tribes, turned to
become his two tribes, and so the mends was in his own hands.

Encourage him sometime.
Fifthly, if thou see thy servant extend and enlarge himself for thy content
beyond ordinary, conceal not his labor of love, for it is love and bounty of
affection which causes him so to express himself: Else he would shrink in and
restrain himself. Do not therefore Nabal like, look another way and reject
it, but see it, encourage and accept it, as thou would have Christ do
thine. Sometime a little liberty of honest exemption refreshing his weariness,
or a little overplus, a teston or a shillings requital, will do more then all
violence. Somewhat has some savor; and what a servant would thou be to
God if thou had all commands and no encouragements?

Sixthly, Yield him all due protection and shelter.
the Lord requires thy fatherly protection to shield and safeguard thy servant
while he is in thy business, that none molest, wrong or discourage him. The
Lord promises to uphold us while we walk in his way: So must we under God
protect such as commit themselves to our shelter. Much more then ought thou
to show thy self a father and friend in troubles and vexations by enemies, who
pursue him in his estate or otherwise. Most of all, if the Lord lay his hand
upon him either in mind or body. Most Masters if they find, that their
servants grow sad and sorrowful in spirit and laden in conscience, abandon
them presently, and are loath to endure the trouble, or to bear the loss of
some little time of hearing the word, consulting with the Minister, whereas
rather they should be means to provide counsel for them. So for body, if a
servant be hurt, bruised or lamed in our business, or if otherwise, the hand of
God be upon them, not to leave them to themselves, but to fellow-feele their
affliction, to be afflicted with them, and help to bear some of the burden
which they undergo. God tries thee in such a case, whether thou will take all
his service, but shake off all burden.

Seventhly, Carry an equal impartial hand.
carry an equal hand between thy servants who deserve well. It is a maine
duty of the Master to regard those most, that deserve best: (for that will
provoke the honest to emulation, and shake off the bad altogether:) But among
the equally well deserving, let not an unequal stream of affection be
carried, and all kindnesses go to one as a favorite, and nothing to others,
for that will breed heart burning and ill will, both against the Master, and
amongst themselves, and much impeach thy wisdom and government.

Eighthly, as thou must do for them while they are under thee, Respect them at
departure.
breeding in them the knowledge and skill in thy trade, and the experience
which thou can afford them; so at their departure after long and weary
service with thee, do for them as their occasions require of thee: The Jew
though he were sold as a slave for his time, yet at his dismission was to have
a gratuity paid him, to begin the hard world withal; either by lending him
somewhat for a time to occupy, or to help him in his marriage, or by
commending him to some better service, or yielding him any such countenance or
testimony as may advantage him. The worlds cry is no penny no Pater noster, if
once work be done, let him look us no more in the face. But the weldeserving,
require another carriage: Thy servant has spent his best time with thee,
therefore it were harsh altogether to neglect him in his decaying time. Let thy
counsel and aid be ready for him if he desire it, in token thou look at
his deserts, as much as thine own ends. And so much for directions: Which if
they were duly practiced, how would they win and draw the hearts of servants
to their Masters? What burden would they refuse for such? As the old men told
Rehoboam, If thou shall speak kindly to these people, they will be thy
servants for ever. Naaman here, is not for nothing called father by his
servants, who are as thankful to requite his respect: And the truth is, he
might account the cure as wrought by their persuasion, under God and his
Prophet. And still I say as before, the fatherhood of Masters, would breed
childlike faithfulness in servants, and doubtless the many clamors of both
sorts against each other, by taking these counsels, would much what be
stopped. And so much for this point also, added to the former by a necessary
coherence: So much also for the first qualification of servants and Masters
faithfulness and respect.

The second thing in the persons attempting: Their care for their Master with
seasonablenesse and wisdom.
Now follows the second thing to be noted in the persons attempting, and that
is their due behavior of themselves in the attempt making. Which I noted to
consist in a compound of sundry virtues, especially of wisdom, tenderness and
seasonablenesse: I will not handle them apart but altogether; yet I would open
them briefly for the better grounding of the doctrine.

And first, their wisdom appears in this, that they mix awe and fear with
love, a due reverence compounded of both: Some would rather have discovered
disdain of his folly and rage; but even in these humors of his, yet they
bewray their reverence of him. Father is a notion made of fear and love. The
ground of the point opened.
As if they had said, your are our Master, we your servants; we come now to
treat with you in a case concerning your own good; yet we understand our
selves to be inferiors, and that the person which we sustain will not bear
any boldness or sauciness: Let our words therefore be accepted, and we shall
think our pains well bestowed: commonly men think reverence is superfluous
in the case of welwishing to others; we may be as bold and usurping as we list:
no, but even in this also, very great humbleness and loyalnesse is required.

Secondly, they are very tender, meek and merciful to their Masters soul and
present condition, and because it needed some expostulating and contesting (for
the better piercing into him) so yet they saw, that his froward passion would
not endure any harshnesse or sharpness from them; and therefore they put on a
meek spirit, instead of (Master) call him (Father) sugering the bitter potion
they were to minister, they come with the heart of a Lion for courage and
resolution, to thrust in the loose joint into his place, yet with the hand of
gentleness and smoothness: Even as Chyrurgians must do to broken bones.
Wrath added to wrath, would have caused madness: But this mildness brake the
dint of it.

Thirdly, they add seasonablenesse to both: Angry men we say, must be waited
on till the humor is over: But now the case required present advice. For if
their Master had set spurs to horse, and made away homeward, who knows
whether any opportunity would have been offered them to treat with him? But
now while the Prophet was at hand, and the cure in some hope, it was their
season to strike in with him, and to prevent future danger. Now therefore they
rather choose to take their time, and to alay his wrath with much moderation of
heart toward him, then to wait for the cooling of it while remedy was past.
All these three come to one, that is a due and discreet behavior in attempting
to heal one who was distempered and passionate: If they had violently driven
out one nail with another, and taken him to task thus, Sir, you show your
self scarce a man, not wise enough to see what business you are about, you
are mad with your own shadow, and who shall be wise for one, who will needs
play the fool against himself? We for our parts, are resolved to give you
over, if you be at this point, go home hardly, and repent at leisure, etc.
Alas what had come of it! ten to one a further enraging of him, and a splitting
him against the rock of his own passion, and making the disease incurable:
This therefore they saw was no course to be taken with him, and therefore they
melt him with mercy, rather then batter him with terror, saying, Father, if the
Prophet had said some hard thing, would not have done? etc. They cover their
expostulation with sweet speech, as one that would lap up a pill in the pap of
an apple.

The point then will be this, It is no easy task for any, Doctrine. It is no
easy task to advise rightly in spiritual distresses.
to encounter them aright who are in any distemper: or thus, To speak to them
that are distempered in spirit to any good purpose, is a work of some
difficulty. And as touching the ground of this point, out of the text it is
evident, that it was difficult for these poor servants thus to encounter their
Master. For (to say truth) it was none of their own work, but the Lords in
them, who set them on. As is was said of Hophni and Phinees, 1 Samuel 2.25.
it was from the Lord that they should not hear the counsel of their father,
because he meant to destroy them; and of Rehoboam, 1 King. 13.
it was from the Lord that he should not hear the voice of his old
counselors, that so he might fall: So it was from the Lord that Naaman should
take counsel of his servants, not to turn away in a rage, but go to Jorden
and wash, that so he might be healed; and therefore much more the means were
from the Lord whereby this was effected. The Lord sent them forth with meet
furniture, and caused them to prevail, which else would not have been.

For these three qualities of wisdom, tenderness and seasonable fidelity

First, for inferiors to encounter a superior, Amplifying of the point out of
the text.
a Noble man and of great spirit, was a thing of some difficulty, especially in
such a perverse temper as he was in. Equals to equals, or superiors to
inferiors carry an hand of greater authority, then inferiors to their
betters: Because the spirit of the great soon rise against the mean, as if
they thought themselves despised. And therefore the Lord forbids every one to
meddle with the elder or ancient, by reproof, but to exhort them as fathers; 1 Timothy 5.1.
they will not easily bear it; they must hear of their fault by implication
as Naaman here does.

And secondly, distemper is a kind of superiority of it self, because it is
lofty and proud. So says Solomon Prove. 21.24. Proud and hauty is his name etc.
For the while, that a distemper lasts, the veriest underling thinks himself
somebody, when as in truth he is less then himself: How much more then, when
state is joined with it, as here? Distemper of spirit, looks at no reason,
arguments, carriage for the present: Elisha himself (in a lawful distemper)
yet being transported, 2 King. 3.15.
was feign to call for a minstrell; by the harmony of whose music his sick
spirit was a little brought to it self. This for the Text. But now for the
general, much more may be said for the proof and explication thereof.

Proofs.
Take some Scriptures first, and then some Reasons. See Act. 9. Paul (then Saul)
was in a deadly distress of spirit after his casting down: the Lord bids
Ananias arise and go to counsel him. But what says Ananias? Oh Lord, I have
heard say of this man, he has been such and such a one, a persecutor,
blasphemer! q.d. If he now be to be dealt with, it exceeds my ability. I know
not, but he may do me hurt for my love. No (faith the Lord) he is a chosen
vessel to bear my name, go and be not afraid. Well, he went, and how does he
encounter him? Very mercifully and respectively: Even as Naamans servants here
do, alleniates his distemper, grates not upon his sad heart, adds not sorrow
to sorrow, opposes him not, upbraids him not for his former cruelties,
qualifies his fears, eases him of those aggravations of horror which had sunk
him, brought him to the clear sight of the promise, and mercifully reaches him
out the hand, Brother Saul receive thy sight both of soul and body. Was there
not some difficulty in the harping upon the right string, if God had not guided
his hand? So Paul in the case of the excommunicate Corinthian, how wisely,
tenderly and seasonably is he feign to carry himself? 1 Cor. 6. with 2 Cor 6
7. 2 Cor. 11.29.30.
He was at first, very violent with him: After, seeing how he humbled himself,
how wary he is, lest he overdrive, and so put him into an extremity? Oh! says
Paul, he has been cast down sufficiently; I dare not use mine office to
destroy, but to save. Therefore rather comfort and encourage such a one, then
add sorrow to sorrow! See Esaias 50.4. The Lord Jesus was anointed by God his
father, as with the oil of gladness beyond measure; so in special of
Prophecy: The Lord God (says he) has given me the tongue of the learned,
that I might speak a word in season to him that is weary. So says Job, or
rather Elihu, Job 33. If an interpreter one of a thousand be sent unto him,
etc. The work of a man (who is one of a thousand) is no common work. Read also
Elihu his breaking in upon Job, an ancient man, (himself being young) he comes
in with his preface, to avoid envy, confesses his youth and unfitness of
himself, to deal in the matter: But (seeing God had set him on) what does he?
He tells him, that he will not be as his three friends had been, an accuser
and censurer of him, nor yet an excuser of his errors and misbehaviour, but he
would be to him an equal and impartial judge, and as his own soul, and as
in the sight of God he would wish him to be. No easy matter it is then to
be an Elihu to an afflicted Job. Paul speaking to Timothy, how a Minister of
God ought to carry himself toward the distempered, 2 Timothy 2.
says, He must not be prejudicate and rash, but patient and long suffering
toward sinners, waiting if at any time the Lord will give them repentance to
life. Esaias 42.3.
It is said of the Lord Jesus, that he was the beloved of God, in whom he
delighted, and whom he qualified for the nonce to preach glad tidings, to
relieve the poor prisoners and captives, etc. And what did he? Surely he
would not break the bruised reed, nor quench the smoking flax. His voice was
not heard, he cried not in the streets, he was a lamb, dumb before the
shearer. That is a most compassionate and tender helper, who by his own
afflictions, had learned to be full of sympathy, and to be afflicted in all the
afflictions of the people.

But I hasten to Reasons. The first is this. It is no easy thing to carry
David, 1 Samuel 25. in the case of Nabal, he was so enraged, (thinking he had
some cause of it) that without any more ado, he would needs command all his
men to gird on their swords, and to dispatch him and all his house, both guilty
and innocent. And had not the Lord encountered him by a rare person, how hardly
had he been dissuaded from his attempt? Well then, if mere natural distemper
of wrath be so hardly cured, how much more spiritual distempers, which lie
far deeplier seated in the spirit, and are of a far more intricate nature?
Such was Naamans here with Elisha, though the disease were bodily.

Secondly, it appears to be a difficult work, because it has posed Jobs
three friends, very wise men, and full of very sage and profound divinity, yet
in Jobs case merely mistaken, and took a false cause for a true; esteemed him
to suffer for his sin, when yet he suffered in his innocence. So we see that
Peter discerned not the state of Simon Magus, but thought him a believer as
others did, till afterward he discovered himself. What shall we say of Paul's
not seeing the state of Alexander, Demas and others? If when the spirit of
discerning flourished in the Church, it were a thing of such difficulty, how
hard is it like to be in these times?

Thirdly, this is much more true in spiritual cases of conscience, and

For the first, such as are to counsel others do rarely exercise themselves
in such things as concern this cure: Both in respect of 1. Them who give
counsel.
They do not judge it an equal object to their endeavors; thinking that it
is sufficient to study controversies, or common places, or the text, and so be
able to preach: But as for studying cases of conscience, they deem it
needless, they hope not greatly to need any experience in it, and they see it
is tedious, requires a learning from heaven, also a very broken, selfe-denyed
tender and merciful heart: And besides it requires a very life for the nonce
to attend it, though a man should do little else, and a diversion of a man's
thoughts from his own mere worldly affairs, seeking of many benefices,
following suits, pleasures, companies and liberties: These men are loath to cut
off for other men's ends; and although it be one of Gods maine ends, yet it is
hard for a man to count Gods his own, (especially in this selfe-loving world)
to prise a soul according to the true worth of it, or to cast our selves upon
Gods requitalls, and set our labors upon his score. This for the counselors.

2. And also those who take it. 1 In respect of their dispositions.
Also for the parties counseled, it is difficult. Partly, in respect of their
dispositions, and partly, their diseases. For the former. The dispositions of
people in these cases are strange. For till there be no remedy, and till
absolute necessity and desperateness of state compel them, men are very loath
to make out, and discover what troubles them: They love to bite in their
diseases, and keep them to themselves, either through vanity, hoping they
shall be better in time and shake off their distempers, (which yet rankle
within them as festred sores) and yet use no means. Loathnesse to advise till
necessity compel them. Or a lazy irresolute mind dallying with Gods ordinance.
As some kind of languishing sick folk are very hardly drawn to take
physic, till fear of death compel them, hoping that strength of nature will
overcome it, when yet the humor still increases: Or else others do it
through a lazy irresolute mind dallying and slothful, not able seriously to
weigh the danger they are in, nor the benefit of a well satisfied and quieted
spirit. Others out of bashfulnesse and shamefastness, loath to be troublesome,
or to be known and observed. Or vicious* self-love.
Others out of a vicious self-love, as loath to have their ignorance or
self-love, corruption and unbeleefe, unprofitablenesse, under means, or
secret sins and lusts to be discovered and searched by the word, thinking it
will cost them more shame, smart and repentance then they are willing to
undergo. Others snared by the Devil, who buzzeth into them, Or secret sins
loath to be ripped up.
that if once they enter into these lists, they will never come to any rest nor
peace while they live; and those that do thus, do it but in pride and humor,
to seem troubled and get them a name, and these Ministers do no good to such
as come at them, but still they live in as desolate a state as at the first,
and that it is not in the power of men to help in such cases. Or fear of too
much engagement.
Others think they must be so engaged to such as they advise with; that they
shall never make them amends, with a thousand such crotchets, neither of any
truth, nor import, save only that their distempered hearts are proud and loath
to yield to Gods way, through base ease and infidelity.

Or through sinister ends. As credit and commodity.
Besides, many there are who although they do come and break through, yet have
many base and sinister ends therein. Some having only a crafty meaning hereby
to scrue themselves into good esteem, and not to be counted of the common
sort, also thinking it may breed some advantage thereby, either for borrowing
sums of money or for gaining custom to their shops and trades, or for
commending themselves to marriages, better husbands or wives then others, or
such base ends. And when they are defeated hereof, then they fall off and
bewray themselves. Discontent if fail.
Others do it, thinking withal to tell the Minister of their wants, that by
this stirrup they may get into the saddle of their own ends, to have men's eyes
cast upon them more publicly for relief and succor. Others yet more basely,
do so gull their own consciences, that although they know themselves
debauched and vile, To conceal themselves from the world.
yet if they can scrue into a Preachers affections, they hope their sins may
be better concealed; or if their consciences do accuse them, yet by drawing
the Minister to give them some comfort (upon their subtle informations) they
may the better bear down their fears, and smother their checks. To gull
themselves with false comforts.
Others although they do complain honestly, and seek out for conscience
sake, yet are so sullen, so froward, so difficult, so thwarthing, Sullenness
and melancholy.
captious, and still unsatisfied, that they turn the benefit of the ordinance
to be a snare to them; grow more deep into their objections, more stout and
proud in the conceit of their own distempers, that none can satisfy them,
grow to affect multitude of counselors, and to think none sufficient to
convince and advise them, and so make a work of forty days, a work of their
whole lives; and if melancholy be deeply joined with their disease, they grow
to affect their distempers, as if it commended them really, that they were so
deeply troubled, and so make their afflicted lives a continual dropping of
misery, except they can make their hell to seem a kind of heaven by custom,
which is worse. These I give but as a taste of many more: This for men's
dispositions.

Now in the point of their several diseases, 2. In respect of their diseases.
the case yet is more and more difficult. And that both in point of true
discerning, or kindly healing of men's distempers. As we say in the art of a
Physician, that the exact Theorique skill of judging diseases, and the
Therapeuticke of applying medicines, may well take up two men's lives: So I may
truly say here, that these two skills in a Divine, may take up two men's gifts
to handle well.

For the former, it is hard to discern of spiritual distempers wisely; 1.
Discerning them. Psalm. 41.1. Because of their depth and closeness.
he is a blessed man that can do it. Some lie so deep and close, that the
parties themselves cannot utter them, nor another easily perceive them. Jobs
friends sat three days and three nights, looking upon Job silently, for they
saw the grief was great and the disease intricate, both the outward and the
spiritual; both were unusual, and the cause thereof was hard to find: And
when they began to pitch upon it, all were deceived in it by an uncharitable
judgment.

Secondly, some lie in a perplexed confusion, that is, 2. By confusion of
causes bodily and spiritual.
there is an unhappy mixture of some bodily and some spiritual distemper in
one, which it is hard to discern whether is the others cause or effect: Now
till the one be severed from the other, and the soul see clearly what troubles
it, look what is spoken, is as water spilt upon the ground. For what availes
it to lay an outward plaster upon a soul sickness, or to give spiritual
counsel to a worldly sorrow and a carnal malady? When the body is eased, then
the soul still remains in her distemper, and never complains. There is many
one, that being rid of shame, poverty, enemies, bad husband or wife never
complain after. Again oftimes there is a true special disease, and yet
through the distemper of the spirits by melancholy, 3. Unstablenesse, etc.
the soul is not capable of counsel, through unsettlednesse and fickleness,
which till physic have removed, the soul cannot apprehend or retain
counsel. Again, some are so weak and feeble minded, that they (through long
custom in their greefes) cannot well tell how to begin or proceed in the
mentioning of their estate. Others have confused



The applying of remedies hard.
And secondly, when the malady is perceived; yet the application of the remedy
and the beating in of resolution and satisfaction is not so easy. The cure of
diabolical temptation is contrary to the cure of our own corruption: He that
should urge a poor soul to attend the one, or to shake off the other
suddenly, might destroy it. There are peculiar remedies according to the
diseases; one salve and counsel cannot heal all sores: oftimes there is
necessity of staying a man in an extremity, who yet may not be comforted.
Again, the objections of an unsatisfied spirit, are not easily answered,
although perhaps the remedy be known. Want of experience or of tenderness, or
(as the case may be) of courage and boldness, or too much haste or delay in
applying remedy, or want of some special apt Scriptures to terrify, or such
promises or examples as might specially comfort are out of mind; and finally,
the Lord is not present with every counsel, and so the cure waxes tedious, the
patient impatient, the counselor weary and discouraged. So much for the
Reasons. Now I come to the Uses.

Uses.
And first, I would begin with one or two general ones; the one touching the
dealing with natural distempers. The other touching the duty of inferiors,
when they are called to treat with their betters. For Naamans distemper (much
what) was a carnal moodinesse and rage: And the servants who encountered it,
were inferiors, yet prospered in their attempt, because qualified for the
purpose.

In the first respect, let it be Instruction, 1. Instruct. 1. Branch. Anger
must be pacified with meekness. 1 Pet. 2.23. Prove. 26.5.
to all who have to deal with distempered passions, that they requite not
evil with evil. Let the same mind be in us, which was in our Lord Jesus: of
whom Saint Peter says, When he was reviled he reviled not again, when he
suffered, he threatened not, but committed himself to him that judges
righteously: And the like has been the practice of all Gods Saints, except
(in some cases we be compelled to answer a fool according to his foolishness,
lest he increase in his pride and rage, and so grow to implacablenesse:) Thus
Ipta handled those proud Ephramites, who would be answered with no reason,
Judge. 12.4.
but showed that they came with proud and disdainful hearts to speak
desperately in their wrath: An exception.
When he saw them more enraged with his equal answers, he fell to blows and
cooled their courage with slaying two and forty thousand of them. And the truth
is, none but dogged hearts and treacherous spirits will be incensed by softly
speeches. For the Lord has appointed it as a quencher of the cause of wrath;
Pride and Self are the matter and cause of this distemper, and that which
kills these, kills the effect. Mildness and love will shame pride and put it
to confusion; and when an angry man sees his wrathful face and sparkling eyes
in a quiet glass, he is astonished and afraid of himself; but if he see
himself in another which is like himself he is enraged to try who shall shout
furthest in the Devils bow. None save a Judas will be provoked with
mildness: And therefore it is just, that such should be left to the fruit of
their own hands, to reap as they sow: But usually it is otherwise; and so
have the Saints practiced: Not only such as have stood in fear of the angry
(as it stood Abigail upon to please David with fair words and with kind
presents, 1 Samuel 25.
because she saw him armed to make havoke) but even such as had power to
revenge themselves. Thus Gedeon, when he could have served those Ephramites as
Ipta after did, yet he chose rather to appease them by fair speech. Alas says
he! Judge. 8.3.
you shall not need to grudge me this victory; for what is my strength and
prowess to yours? And who knows not Ephraim to be chief of the ten tribes?
Or what is the whole vintage of Abiezer, to the after gatherings of Ephraim? Oh
this pleased them well! and so their fierceness abated.

So David when he had the advantage of Saul twice, 1 Samuel 24.4.
both when he was asleep and took away the pot of water from him and his
spear; another time when he cut off the lap of his garment and came after him,
saying, I could have slain thee this day, and instead of cutting thy lap, cut
thy throat, but thy life was precious to me. This for the time shaked his fury
and wildefire; and although it could not wholly quench it, yet his end was most
desperate, as commonly theirs is, whose rage a calm answer and mild usage
will not qualify.

So Iaacob in his return from Laban, foreseeing Esau his old grudge, Genesis
33.13.
sets himself in an exquisite manner to appease him; first, by gifts, then by
great titles and humble carriage, whereby he turned off that rage which else
might have brake out, if he had opposed him by violence. Oh! such Abigails,
David's, Gideons and Iaacobs are much wanting and almost out of the world! 1 Samuel 25.18.
Now men have justled out Divinity, and made a mock of it by their brave
stomachs, maintaining that a man shall be so much reputed amongst others, as
he reputes himself and stands upon his terms; and he that puts up one wrong
or reproach provokes two: And it is true, if we be such indeed as stand to our
own and the worlds judgment and bar, appealing from Christ's; we may take
our course, go on without let, till shame and repentance, and perhaps meeting
with our matches do compel us: But if Christ's voice will prevail, and we
will stand to his tribunal, he has told us plainly, such cowards and
white-livers we must be, (and yet Christianity makes us rather as bold as
Lions in a just defense) if we will be his, read Matthew. 44.5. You heard them
say of old (mark, revenge is the old Religion, though in a new cut) Thou shall
love thy friend and hate thine enemy, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, wrath for
rage: But I say unto you (mark the voice of the new Gospel of peace) love your
enemies, do for them that spite you, and speak evil of you and hate you:
Turn the other cheek to him that smites you on the one cheek. That thus you
may be children of your father in heaven, who lets his rain and sun fall
upon the ground of the bad, as well as the good. And this is the same with that
of Paul, Romans 12. If thine enemy hunger, thirst or be naked, give him meat,
drink and clothing, Romans 12.
thus heaping hot coals upon his head, recompencing evil with good.

And lest ye should think there is one Divinity for plain folk, and another
for Courtiers, Gentlemen and brave sparks of hot and noble blood; look (I
pray) upon Elisha's Divinity which he brought to Ieroboams Court; 2 King. 6.21.
when he had brought the Aramites blindefold to Samaria, he asks them, My
father shall I smite them? But the Prophet answers, No, smite them whom thou
take in the war, kill not in cool blood, set bread and meat rather before
them and feast them, and so send them home to their Master, and so he did, and
the bands of Aram came no more that year. It was good policy and Religion too.
And no doubt but many of our braving and lofty stomachs, when they have met
with the affronts of them whom they have provoked (as commonly boasters always
go by the worse) then they wish they had been wiser and held in their stomach
ill afterward: But I doubt many of our challengers and duellers, if they were
put upon the enemy in a pitched battle, and in Gods way, would prove like those
sparks spoken of in Judge. 9. I mean Gaall and his brethren, who asked, who is
Abimelec? But when they saw him, their hearts fainted, and they were beaten
down.

To conclude, let this general Instruction (brethren) reach to all states,
persons, occasions: Let the word dwell in us plentifully in all wisdom to
guide us in our course. The word is, answer not a fool in his folly, lest thou
be like him. The patient man is better then he who is hasty in his spirit and
in his matters. He that overcomes himself, is better then he that overcomes a
City. Ecles. 7.8. Romans 12.19.
Be slow to speak, and slow to wrath. Here be the rules. If the former
examples of Saints persuade not thereto, let the practice of these heathen
servants, shame and upbraid us: You husbands and wives, remember Satan is always
at your elbow, if he can dstemper you, quickly will the whole house be
distempered and out of frame, and your examples will fret like a canker.

Do therefore as wise Abigail did to drunken Nabal, (for drunkenness and rage
are both madness) she gave way to him while he was in his cups and in his
jollity of feasting, but next day when wine was out, and wit in, she told him
of his base distemper, and then he was tame. So do not take your husbands or
wives weapon out of their hand suddenly to wound him or her. If one rage, let
the other pray and be innocent, perhaps the Lord will do thee good for their
wrath. Consider each other, the party in cool blood, consider of the other
party, as of a man in drink, prevented by his passion that masters him: Do not
now add oil to the flame, and drunkenness to thirst: But remember, now God
tries me! These words are as stinging as fiery darts, this tongue is set on
fire by hell, but now does the Lord vex every vein in my heart to see what
metal I am made of: If now I listen to my lust and outshoot the Devil, I may
set a mark upon my self and be ashamed: but if I can possess my soul with
patience now, and keep my fort strong, I shall show my self a man, or woman
stronger then a conqueror. Luke 21.11.
I will deny my self therefore and take away anger from mine eyes, Ecles.
11.10.
and distemper from my heart: I will seasonably give over strife lest it become
as a fire broken out, or as the bars of a Palace. Better so, then let your
shames break out to others, and so be feign to put your quarrels to
arbitration, and then your selves shall be the first that repent it. The like I
say to you all, brethren, in your worldly dealings and controversies, or in
those tetches which you take each at other. Break not out to open words of
defiance (upon mere conceits) but weigh the reports, perhaps they come from
tale-bearers, examine your grounds, and although you find truth in them, yet
see what construction they will bear; Jam. 4 4.
consider that the spirit that is in us lusts after envy: If these reports will
not bear a good censure, yet cool your hearts first, then debate the
quarrels in cool blood before witnesses, if the fault be proved, let it be
sufficient that he is convinced; but let not words, blows and suits follow, as
if you were heathens! Oh says one! Shall I endure such a base fellow to
overcrow me? No, he shall well know I am a better man then himself ere I have
done with him: Oh earth, earth, earth, hear the word of the Lord! Abate thy
heart, abase thine heart, and do as he did, Humfrey Mummouth.
who meeting his enemy who had sought his life when he could have crushed him,
entreated him to be friends and brake his heart! do thou so and prosper.

Touching the second point of inferiors attempting superiors, 2. Branch.
Instruction. Inferiors dealing with superiors, must wisely observe wh^t their
persons will bear.
let this caution be observed from Naamans servants, that we wisely observe
what our persons will well bear and admit. Inferior men's sway and stroke will
go but a little way with superiors. The meannesse of the one and the
prejudice of the other will be bars. Yet so it may fall out that necessity
may put some calling upon an inferior, as when there be no superiors or
equals present, when silence would embolden the offender much, when the glory
of God lies at the stake unavoidably, and especially when the grace of the
reprovers wisdom may be like to overmatch both his own meannesse and the
others stoutnesse. Otherwise there had need be great caution lest inferiors
rather run themselves into the suspicion of sauciness, receive great affronts
and discouragements, (if not wrongs) from the reproved, lest also the offender
be more hardened in his sin, A caution.
and the ordinance with the fruit of it be dishonored and unprofitable. But
(to return) if God do intimate to the spirit of any wise inferiors that they
ought to reprove, then let them suspect their own persons, and beware that
they make no open contestation, but be content with privacy, where no affront
may be given before witnesses, especially let it be carried with great
aloofenesse, and rather with insinuation of an error, then taxing openly,
exhorting rather to a contrary duty, then reproving the fault downeright: 1 Timothy 5.1.
Rebuke not an Elder, (not only a Minister, but a superior in any eminency)
but exhort him as a father. Otherwise if God afford not discretion and
opportunity, better is a warranted silence, and commending the cause to God
with some item of a grieved heart, then a rash venturing and rushing beyond our
bounds. But to be sure, let all lenity be used, all possible acknowledging of
their places, years, worth and worship, give them all their due, both titles
and praises to the uttermost, that it may appear, the reprover is so far from
presumption, that were it for the mere regard of the offenders soul, the
glory of God and the discharge of conscience with peace, the reprover would
much rather have chosen silence, then to attempt reproof, and so leave the
issue to God. So much for this second.

Uses of the special fact of (...) servants.
I come now to the Uses, arising in special from this example of the servants
wise and loving carriage toward their Masters spiritual distemper. And first,
if it be so difficult a work to ease a distressed spirit: Let Instruction.
It is a peculiar favor to enable the Minister to speak a word in season to a
wearied soul: But how much more for the soul to find the word, and to feel
it to be so? Instruction to the heavy hearted, Proverb.
is not as the gift in the hand, which Solomon tells us, prospers whithersoever
it goes, and carries a commanding power with it. Esaias 57. The settling of a
distressed heart by counsel, is a mercy highly to be prised.
No: To speak to the heart is Gods work, whosoever be the instrument; and
none can create the fruit of the lips, save only he that first created and
formed the body of the earth, and breathed into it the breath of life. We
Ministers may speak to the ear, discern and advise, urge, answer doubts and
convince, but the spirit of grace which anointed the Lord Jesus to be the
Prophet of his Church, can carry those words into the soul, and cast them
there as seed, and give them a body and being; altering ignorance, doubting,
fears, deadness, bondage, insensiblenesse, infidelity, heaviness, into
light, resolution, hope, life, liberty, feeling faith and comfort. He that
said, lift up thy voice as a trumpet and convince my people of their sins:
and again, Comfort ye my people, comfort them at the heart; means not, that
we should pierce into and reach the heart (for we cannot get to it) but that we
be the messengers of peace and glad tidings: God only must by his Spirit
convince, Joh. 16.9. and he only can carry consolation through those manifold
turnings and crooked windings of the soul, even home and close to the heart
roots. He only can say, My doctrine shall drop as dew, Deuteronomy. 32 1.
and as the small rain wetting at the root. Therefore whosoever thou art,
here in this audience whom ever the Lord has caused to break through the
host of discouragements, and to consult with the Minister, sincerely aiming at
the true ends of counsel, and has also met with thy special disease, spoken
to thy heart so, that it has gotten a real bottom out of the word and
promise, for the sole of her foot to rest upon against fear and doubting: Oh!
learn to prise such a favor above all treasures.

Elisha was sent but to one leper, as many as there were in Israel; and did not
he esteem that privilege? Let the 15.16. and 17. verses witness for him: So
the Minister of God goes to hundreds of sick and afflicted ones: But perhaps
he is sent in the spirit of counsel and sealing up of peace through pardon to
a very few: It is their portion to whom it pertaines; those must partake it who
can receive it, and only such can be thankful. What is the cause why we
comfort so many through the seven year, of whom perhaps we hear no more
again ever after? Our feet are not beautiful to the most of them; they never
embraced the power of truth, they despised the counsel of God for their
salvation, and the consolations of God seemed small things unto them: They have
got that they came for, a kind of stopping of their outcries of conscience,
their wounds are kept sweet and do not rankle (as they think) they can now
follow their business, and go about the world at their pleasure, pleasing
themselves with that the Minister has said unto them: And that no man shall
pull from them, for it pleases them well to hear themselves to be under the
condition of grace, that faith belongs to them, that the least desire of faith
is faith: But alas! They are comforted all at once, their comfort grows not as
their doubts grow, they are not unsatisfied in seeking it, they are not afraid
to deceive the Minister about their condition, and so deceive themselves: But a
dead comfort they are content withal, and if any call it into question, they
stop his mouth with this, the Minister of God comforted me with such and
such texts. But oh thou beast! It appears since by thy base and common course
that the Minister of God was deceived in thee, thy glosing and semblance of
sorrow, thy selfe-loving complaints, and desires, and thirstings, deceived him,
and thy self also. Were that Minister to confer again with thee, upon due
knowledge of thee, he would profess thou deceivedst him and thine own soul
much more; for he never comforted thee otherwise then upon such conditions as
thou never had: But I digress too much.

In all these respects I say, Conclusion.
who ever thou art who can unfainedly speak it, that God by the Minister has
met with thy sin, humbled thee for it, let in some glimpse of mercy to stay
thee for a time; not suffered thee to rest there while thou could see how
that light increased as the day, and how it bred in thee such affections, as
brought thee to settle upon the free and eternal satisfaction of Christ for
pardon and peace: I say, in what poor measure soever these have been wrought,
yet thou have felt scales to fall from thine eyes, deadness from thy heart and
grace to enter by degrees, till thou saw cause to rest in some sort upon the
naked love of the promiser: Thou have infinite cause to bless God all days of
thy life. I will not now bid thee beware of forgetting the Minister of God, and
passing him by as a stranger (as hypocrites do) for thou shall prise him above
the parents of thy flesh; do otherwise if thou can, Gal. 2.
he shall be so dear to thee, that thou shall pull out thine eyes to do him
good, yea esteem him as one of a thousand; and there shall be a perpetual
ascent of praises to God from thine altar, it shall smoke continually; and
although thine edge may blunt, yet thy metal of admiration and thanks shall
abide for ever. Consider ten miscarry to one that prospers by counsel; they
return to their old sloth, ease and distempers, they relapse to their
worldliness, self love, and lie under a clod; If then thou have beheld the
wisdom, and savoured the good of the ordinance, try thy self thoroughly, as
touching the fruit it has wrought in thee, take not glass for gold, and
pebbles for pearls, be sure the Lord have thee in a cord surely bound to him,
for playing the starter and time server (as most do) and I say, give over the
Lord if thou can; But surely while these coals are in thy bosom thou shall
be burnt, and as long as thou have this treasure about thee, thou can not,
wilt not choose but be exceedingly thankful and cheerful. So much for this.

Admonition. 1. Branch. M nisters must not count this a sl^ght work. 2 Cor. 1.
Esaias 50.4.
to speak a word in season to a heavy heart? Do not imagine the art of that
to be so easy (as most Ministers do) the work whereof is so difficult, and
the fruit whereof is so precious! Think it not a small thing to be a Minister
of reconciliation. Paul says, God has made him meet for it, he had comforted
him, that by his consolation he might comfort others. A tongue of the learned
is no easy matter to come by. M.R.G.
Once an holy man in this Church, after long labors in the Ministry (though
contrary to some men's judgment) thought it meet to leave his charge, to betake
himself to the work of speaking a word to the weary; as seeing it to be a
full work, and great use of it, and finding himself fitted. I would not advise
any to do so, (whom God holds in) but I would have none (of what parts soever)
to think this an easy gift; such an one as will flow from the mere habit of
his understanding, studies of Divinity, or pains in preaching alone:
Discerning of leprosy was a peculiar skill of the high Priest. Read Levit.
from the 12. to the 15.
So this is a special gift by it self, obtained by study of thine own heart,
acquaintance with the infinite windings and subtilties of it, by much
self-denial, much strife in applying the promise: Also much experience is
required to judge aright of the states of the distressed, much reading and
through acquaintance with the Scriptures, much meditation and conference, much
prayer both ordinary and extraordinary must prevail with God for it; Helps to
enable a Minister to it.
yea commonly it is the gift of such as have been much buffeted with
temptations, humbled and tozed under Satan and their own corruptions; such as
have wrastled much with the Lord for a blessing, and halted upon it, that they
might not be puffed up, but learn to be willingly under infirmity. I say, it
is the gift, for the most part, of such as have labored to destroy their sense
and reason in and by faith and the promise, holding the realnesse of it from
the truth of the promiser, whatsoever flesh say to the contrary.

Yea it requires great love, a meek and tender heart, burning with the weak,
to be all in all for Gods ends, losing our own in his, and cleaving to the
work for Gods cause unweariedly, against discouragements whatsoever. I exclude
no other learning, arts, tongues, for a Divine, but for this part of Ministry,
I say, there is another course to be taken for it. Alas! who should wonder that
there should be few counselors (under the Lord Jesus whose office it is, Esaias
8.) of distressed ones? Nay, that in stead of comforters, there should be so
many discouragers and miserable comforters? Alas! there are few that taste the
method which I have spoken of. If it were but this one thing alone, it might
easily resolve us of this wonder, even to think how few there be who discern
aright of soul diseases, or the estate of the poor, as the Psalmist speaks!
How easy is it to be cheated by the cunning tricks of base hypocrites, who
come only to serve their own turns? How had blind Ahija been deceived by
Ieroboams wife, but for God? 1 King 4.4.5.
I profess of late there came to my self a drunken companion for comfort! and
if God had not specially armed me beforehand, and discovered his spirit, I
might have been deceived in him, and when he was gone, he reported me to be
uncharitable! But all that knew him, knew that he slandred me! Who is
sufficient for these things? If God keep the state of a poor soul from us
(as Elisha said of the Shunamites dead child) how shall we speak to the
purpose but patter? 2 King. 4.27.
How many worthy and wise ones have been mistaken? (for I speak not of such
as will thrust themselves upon the work, when they want all manner of
meetnesse, and so will go through stitch and say somewhat, though to the
banning and perverting of the parties, rather then the settling and comforting)
How hard is it often to judge of sorrow, whether it be worldly or godly? Have
not both as deep pangs one as other? And although it be spiritual, yet how
hard to discern sorrow coming from the terrors of the conscience, or arising
from the hope of the Gospel? How easy is it, out of a present mercifulness of
heart to one in trouble, to go rashly to work, and to apply plasters to a
freshly bleeding wound?

How many laden wretches with the guilt of their daily revolts and lewdness,
come roaring to a Minister for ease, merely from an horror of heart, no way
desirous to be broken off from their course in evil, but only from the hell
of their conscience, which if they were rid of, they would return to their
vomit worse then ever? Who would think bleeding at the arm, would stanch
bleeding at the nose? That is, that it were a medicine for such a one to be
drawn into more true horror by the word, for sin as it is sin: And yet no
other remedy will ease such a one: Who is able to discern diabolical
injections (which may be perceived by the unnaturalness, hideousness, dogging
and pertinacy of them, and the like,) from evils of our own wilfully
committed and polluting the soul? For why? Both may seem to cleave to the
soul, the one as fast as the other. And so I might be endless. I spoke of a
great many of these difficulties in the third Reason. Is it then an easy thing
to speak a word in due season to one that is weary? No doubtless.

I conclude therefore, let it be a caveat to all Gods Ministers whom this work
concerns, as not to put it off, (being one of the maine pieces of our calling)
so neither to rush upon it suddenly and without due preparation: use those
directions before named, and join this last, to seek of God a wise discerning
spirit, (for that gift is not wholly absent from the Church) to put a
difference between things that differ: Which means being used, and love
setting all on work as the chief mover, it shall not be difficult to do that
in time and years, which perhaps at first seemed hard. God will bless
experience, and make this yoke (for so it is to the flesh) easy, and this
burden light. I would have come to the other branch of the caveat to the
people. But time cuts me off: muse the while of these, and we shall proceed to
the rest the next time, if God will. Let us pray etc.

The end of the Eleventh Lecture.
THE TWELFTH LECTVRE Still continued upon this thirteenth VERSE, etc.
VERSE XIII. And his servants came near, and said unto him, Father, if the
Prophet had bid thee do some great thing, would thou not have done it? How
much more then, when he says unto thee, Wash and be clean?

VERSE 14. Then Naaman went down and dipped himself seven times in Jorden,
according to the word of the man of God, etc.


I Could not (brethren) the last Lecture, finish the point of the Religious
service done by these servants to their Master; wherein I observed the
qualification of their persons with love and lenity, to advise him for his
good. I have opened the doctrine already at large, and made some general Uses,
and some in special. The last was Admonition to the Ministers, with the which
I have done. The next follows now, as God shall guide us: Concerning both
Ministers and people, and that is exhortation: Therefore (brethren) if the
work of speaking to the weary soul be so difficult: First, let me speak to
you that are to be comforted, and to receive instruction by the Minister of
God. The people must beware lest they turn away from counsel of their
Ministers.
And the thing to which I exhort you in general is, that both you beware lest
fear or sinful shame hold you off from counsel, and then that ye fitly apply
your selves to the advice of the Minister of God, not to hinder, but to further
the work of your own souls. If a man that has a bone out of joint could
help the arm of the Surgeon (who wants strength) to thrust it in again; how
gladly would he assist him in so hard a work, rather then by his wilfulness
abide long in his pain? The misery of a soul out of joint, and of a
conscience wounded, far exceeds all bodily pain, and all the skill of a
bodily cure: How then should we frame and accomodate our selves as by prayer,
so by all other means, to the skill of such as God has given us to be
spiritual fathers, and to be restorers of us being out of joint?

First, therefore (brethren) let me advise you ere you go to any counselor,
Gal. 6.1.
go to God to plant and set your hearts aright to receive counsel. It is
said, in Zachar. 5.4. that the lamps which were to be replenished with the
oil dropping from the olive branches by Gods providence, were situated so
aptly under the dropping bows, that none of the oil dropped beside, but all
fell upon the lamps underneath and fed their lights. So would the Lord have all
who go for advice to his Interpreters; he would have them carry hearts well
planted, wise and tractable to receive what is put into them.

Perhaps some may wonder at that I say, considering how hard it is for a sad
and distempered spirit to come with moulds ready to receive the molten metal
of Gods promises to be fashioned and formed thereby: But my meaning is, that
whatsoever their distemper be, they would strive by all means for such a calm,
equal and teachable spirit, as may be subject to counsel when it is afforded
them out of the word; otherwise they resist the ends of the ordinance. For why
has the Lord appointed the gift of counsel save to settle and stablish the
weak? The Minister (I doubt not) being wise, may both supply the office of
liquor and vessel also, counsel I mean, and an heart to receive it, if God
fit him for it. But the work will be the sooner at an end, if all such
corruption as wilfully cleaves to the distressed spirit be first removed.

1. Counsel.
Therefore first, let all such go to God by prayer and acquaint themselves with
him, and him with their wants, beseeching him who is the eternal counselor,
to order their unquiet and unsettled spirits, to separate all carnal and
worldly distempers, passions, ends and respects from them; to show them how to
pick out an end out of the ravelled skeine, and clearly to discover the malady
unto them: To take away all such mistakes and errors from them, as might cause
them to misconceive their estate and to think it other, better or worse then
it is, and to separate the precious from the vile, that is, the work of his
own convincing spirit, from the work of their own rebellious nature, their
discontent, their fullennesse, melancholy, fears and other extremities that
cleave unto them: Also that he would show them what he has done for them
already, that they may not provoke him by unthankefulnesse, and what is yet to
be done, and at what especial knots and objections they stick, what their
chief bars and lets are which most hold them down; and if they cannot feel
themselves rid of these confusions of spirit, yet that the Lord would take away
that wilfulness of stomach, that crossenesse, that waywardness, which makes
their disease so ranckle in them, and send them to seek advice, with a mind
desirous to subject it self to God and to his ordinance, and to mourn when it
cannot, being held in the chains of it own horrors or rebellion.

And secondly, let them commend the enterprise in hand to God for success;
that the Lord would be pleased to dispose of the understanding of him that is
to advise them, that he may be as from God unto them like Elihu; that he may
discern of their complaints, rectify their errors, meet with their
corruption, show them their state and wants, and comfort them at the heart as
God allows them: That if they cannot at the first find stay and support, yet
(if they see but a little light at a crevis) they may be glad of a little and
not be dismayed; that they may seek still after counsel, till the work by
degrees be perfected: that they may not lay stumbling blocks in their own way
to fall by; but hold the measure of light (so far as they are come) waiting
till God reveal the rest, and not defiling their consciences the whiles, Phil.
3.15.
and so make the work new to begin.

Thirdly, that the Minister of God may be wise as an Angel of God, as well to
find out apt and meet Scriptures to encounter the soul, (as the need thereof
requires) either threats, or promises, or other sentences; and when they see
that these are urged not by the authority of a man, but of God, (whom they only
must look at in this case and not man) that then their base hearts may no
further kick, cavil and gainesay, and so put the Minister of God to a double
toil, not only to conflict with their real distress, but also with their
wilful and accidental sullenness, pride and rebellion.

Fourthly, let them crave of God a wise utterance of their estate to the
Minister of God or at least an inckling thereof, that it may not be mistaken;
for a crooked rule being put into a man's hand, will force him to make a wrong
line, though his skill be good enough to draw a right one.

Fifthly, choose thee out a faithful interpreter, one of a thousand, for love,
lenity, skill, patience, long suffering, bowels of compassion and experience:
For such a mercury is not made of every block; thou may else light on
miserable comforters.

Sixthly, above all other things, let such persons beware of any base motive or
principle, leading them to ask advice; let them not affect any sinister
respects, nor aim at any base ends; to be noted for zeal, to think
themselves safe, because they have taken counsel, to choke and smother the
accusations of conscience, to make them bolder in sin, to pretend and allege
the counsel and comfort of such a Minister, to harden themselves against any
just reproves which after may be urged upon them, and the like base ends,
whereof the bouget of man's vile heart is fraught and full, especially in this
formal crafty age, wherein every one will be Religious, and Satan transformeth
himself into an Angel of light. For by this means that unclean spirit will
return with seven worse then himself and defile more dangerously: But let thy
aims in this work be honest, simple and sincere, to go forward with God
according to thy light cheerfully and humbly, and so look to prosper.

Secondly, for the Minister of God; let him be exhorted also, first, 2. Branch
to Ministers. 3. Things. Abhor error and prejudice. 1. Error.
to cast out all bad principles perverting the spirit of counsel, and crossing
the gift of restoring the weak. And these are first, a prejudicate sour heart
inclined to sinister thoughts of the afflicted; conceiving them according to
carnal reason, and not discerning the work of Gods spirit in such. This is no
common grace to have a clear spirit this way. For the spirit that is in us
lusts after envy. We are all a kin to old Eli, who seeing poor Hanna sitting
sad, with her lips moving and no voice, thought her drunk: But when he
perceived her to be a woman of a troubled spirit, 1 Samuel 1.13.14.
pouring out her soul from a full heart to the Lord, and understanding the
cause, he became a Prophet of God unto her, for her satisfaction and comfort.
2. Error. 3. Error.
Beware therefore of a base heart of prejudice, error, misprision, rashness.
(And yet take heed also that love and pity, make us not too hasty in comfort.)
Also ease, unmercifulness, unbeteamingnesse, sullenness, uncharitableness,
weariness, and loathnesse to be enlarged in our bowels, as the Lord allows
us, of which disease Jonah was sick. 4. Error.
Also waspishnesse, suddenness and hastiness; whereby as Physicians cutting
off their patients in their complaints they are impatient to hear, and so
discourage them. I confess that the talkatives and vanity of many weak ones
in their complaints, (who in stead of inclining their ear and hearing, that
their souls might live are swifter to jangle, and to neglect that which which
is spoken, then to mark) and have never done with idle repetitions, may
sometimes cause a wise counselor to chide and reprove them justly, yet with
tenderness and meekness. And the like I may say of those endless answers
which many make, when they are demanded how counsel has prevailed, and they
rather bewray themselves worse and worse, then better and better; for though it
be not in our power to settle the spirit sooner then the Lord please, yet it
behooves not any distressed soul so to nourish themselves in their lowering and
distempers, as to dismay the Minister; but rather by wise concealment or
desire of new satisfaction to draw his heart to pray for them more earnestly,
and wait more patiently till the spirit shall blow peace upon them.

The second duty. Practice.
This preparation being made, the next exhortation is, that the Minister of God
do first meekly, and then wisely, speak to the heart of the afflicted. For the
first of these, it is a duty much pressed and exemplified in Scripture: I say a
merciful and loving heart of fellow feeling and tenderness to the heavy: Fot
hereby the Minister of God conveieth the heart of the Lord Jesus into the soul
of the afflicted; of whom it is said, He had learned compassion toward them by
his own sufferings, Heb. 2.18.
that so he might pity and succor those who are tempted: And surely
wonderful use there is of this grace. For alas! in these troubles many a poor
soul (though not wilful, yet) is not her own because it is overpowred with
the violence, hideousness, and irksome of temptations without, fears and
unsustained horrors within, so that for the time, it has no power of fastening
upon counsel be it never so strong, nay the stronger it is, the harder to
enter. It must be time and stanching the blood and waiting by degrees, putting
in here a drop, a line, a little and there a little into the soul, which
must win such an one to some hope by degrees. Some texts observe for this.
Elihu seeing Jobs state sore snarled by his prejudicate friends and by the
self-love of his own heart, and that it was hard to reduce all to a mediocrity,
applies himself in the spirit of singular modesty and meekness to be a
mediator between them: Job 32.
Behold, says he, I will not deal harshly in misjudging thee, but be unto
thee as thine own soul, this was the next way to redress his sorrows. So
Paul to the Galathians, when he had sharply reproved them, yet seeing many of
their weak minds entangled, tells them, My little children of whom I travel
again, till Jesus Christ be formed in you: They had fallen into the hands of
false teachers, who had made their state more dangerous: Gal. 4.19.
And what does he? Meekely and lovingly he bestows the pains to travel
again of them: Simil.
A woman has enough of breeding her fruit once and bearing it once; but we
should count her a very tender mother which should bear the pain twice, and
fellow-feele the infants strivings and wrastlings the second time, rather then
want her child. So Paul here is content to bear the pain twice of traveling
for these Galathians, (he means not a second birth, but a second travel to
reduce them home to Christ from their errors) and to sympathize them so far for
their good, till they felt Christ again revived in themselves, after a former
miscarriage and false conception.

So in Gal. 6.1. The Apostle again, does require those Galathians which were
strong, to restore in the spirit of meekness such as were fallen, the word is
set in joint: Be meek and work in the bone with much oil, that so it may
return again into the socket with less pain. And Ezekiel tells us, Ezekiel.
34.16.
that this is one peculi^r property of a true shepherd, that he seek up the
lost, and suffer not the bitten or broken to perish, but carry it home upon his
shoulder, tender it, dress it, and bind it up again. These and the like
places show, with what spirit the Lord wishes such to go to work, and even so
be it with us in Gods fear, limpe with the halting, lispe with the stuttering,
sit still and be silent a while, till deep affliction can speak out, help
forth the words of the distressed which stick in the passage, be tender, and
pitiful, till God draw the heart by these cords of a man; Hosea 11.4.13.2.
and be as the Master of the cattle who takes off the yoke and lays meat
unto them, yea as the Lord Jesus, who would not break the bruised reed, Matthew.
12.
nor quench the smoking flax, till judgment brake forth into victory. Iron and
steel come not to an edge without much oil.

Thirdly, 3. Branch.
apply counsel and remedies with all wisdom and seasonablenesse, speak a
word in due season. Now here the maine work lies. But some may ask and say,
how should I perform this duty? I answer, The variety and difference of
estates, admit no rules in general; only to satisfy the desirous, I will
instance in a few kinds and show what remedies most fitly agree with them.

Observe wisely and discern the estate of the afflicted, Rules for this.
and that will be a great help to tell a qualified counselor how to judge
both of the malady and medicine. For as it is in bodily diseases, each one has
his several symptoms which are not easily concealed: So it is here. A wise
man will discover the sore by the behavior of the party, both for the kind,
the measure, the continuance of it, and accordingly apply himself.

First then let it be one caveat, 1. Discern and separate mixed sorrow from
^^^gle.
that we observe whether the dolor be single and simple, or mixed and
compounded: If it be simple, the trouble is the less: But if mixed, that is
partly temporal, and that first and chief, partly spiritual: The way is,
first, to separate the one from the other, and not to multiply spiritual
comforts to such a one, for his disease admits none, because the root is
carnal: And although it have ceased also in part upon conscience yet at the
second hand: Here then, labor to lessen and diminish carnal and worldly
grief, if it can by any means be removed, as if it be a cross upon the name,
body or state, see if that can be effected, and then you shall see if there
continue any sorrow, if it do not, it was merely carnal, and no spiritual in
it; if that cannot be removed, then labor to divert the heart from the outward
to the spiritual; and that thus: First, showing that this without the other is
fruitless: That the soul may be as miserable without it as with it: That
love or hatred stands not in it: That it may easily deceive a man about his
sorrow: That God either sends it as a needle to draw the thread of godly sorrow
after it, by the stirring of the spirit, or else to leave the soul worse, and
that if it vanish as it came, it will be so: That the nature of it is deadly,
for worldly sorrow causes death. If these motives scatter the carnal sorrow;
and the spiritual remain, then it is from God: And then the counsel is,
strive not to remove it at first, but to ground it well upon the word, that it
may seize kindly, and so deal with it accordingly, as in the rules following.

2. Rule. Discern diabolical temptations from inward.
The next is, discern diabolical injections and temptations from the troubles
arising from our selves. Here the counsel is, strive by all means to resolve
the party that the Devil shall pay for his own sin; Suggestions terrifying the
spirit from Satan's malice, are none of ours: Judge them by the disproportion to
the souls disposition, their unwelcomenes, their irkesomenesse, desperateness
and tenaciousnesse. And if a poor soul can truly say, they are none of hers,
although she cannot be rid of the insulting of this god of flies, yet by prayer
for riddance, constant detesting to have fellowship and consent with them,
(whether thoughts against God, his word, the Ministry, Heaven, Hell,
Providence, Religion or lusts and vile affections,) the Lord will weaken them,
and not suffer thee to be held under temptation: And to say truth, violent,
external causes last not long: The greatest danger is, lest the heart being
rid of them, wax wanton and secure, and be not humbled for that corruption,
whence these have their welcome and fiery fierceness.

3. Rule. O^serve the measure of the trouble.
The third rule is, observe wisely of what measure the trouble and affliction
is: If it be moderate, then proceed accordingly: But if it be excessive, so
that extremities may be feared, succor the fainting heart with some hope, even
at the first, though perhaps the condition of it may be far from applying a
promise: Yet because the horror or trouble may threaten despair or violence:
Show such a one that the Lord delights in no such thing, but in mercy to the
oppressed; and when the heart is eased, then return to such a method of
counsel by degrees as their estate needs. Necessity as we say has no law:
Much may be done to avert a present danger, which else might stay longer. The
jailer was to be staid for fear of selfe-murther.

4. Rule. Whether terror come from sin or fear of punishment.
Fourthly, discern wisely of terrors of conscience, whether from sin as sin, or
as a mischief which cloggeth and loadeth the heart excessively. Many a wretch
(and these days are full of such) will roar and cry out of himself, the
horriblenesse of his sins, their returns upon him after intermission, not from
any true abhorring of the evil of them, but because God dogs his cursed heart,
(delighting in those evils) with shrewd terrors, which although they are two
extremities, I mean great swinge and sweetness in sin, and great horrors
for sin; yet nothing hinders why both may not be at once, and yet the
mediocrity far off. In such a case, to believe such a wretch for his outcries
and horrors when it is manifest, he does but seek for hope, and sodering, and
possibility of pardon that he may return to his vomit the more boldly, were
to add oil to the flame. The mark of such is this, their object is that
which presently pinches them; you shall hear little or no aim at Christ and
his sweetness, for they regard it not: The counsel is, to hold them hard to
the law, that their souls may be under bondage of sin as sin, and not
only under present accusation. If this prevail not, they will rush themselves
quickly out of their horrors into profaneness more and more. And had not
comfort been well bestowed upon such as need none?

Fifthly, though thou perceive the soul to be under bondage, 5. Rule.
Consider whether the frame of the heart under conviction, be tame or rebellious.
yet consider well of what frame the party is: If the heart be rebellious and
that sin does wax more sinful by that conviction; then (though it be a good
sign for time to come) yet the Lord makes no haste to comfort such a one, till
his rebellion be brought down; and then his heart will be doubly humbled both
for guilt and rebellion also: It is meet that some should lie and wait under
their legal abasings, because else, commonly they return to their old byas
again, if they come not to see how out of measure sinful sin is in her
nature. I observe it in this age of ours, that the law troubles few, except
some violent crosses attend it, which argues that they will hardly hold humble
when their troubles cease. Be not too hasty therefore.

Sixthly, when thou see it a season to speak a word to a poor soul, 6. Rule.
Observe due season.
defer it not: For there may be as great peril in delay, as in rash haste:
And show thy self as careful and cordial in pressing of a promise earnestly
and effectually to a soul in case to receive it, as thou were backward in
applying it till it was so: A laden soul is under the condition of the
promise; and therefore to delay such an one from it is to defraud it of her
portion due to it, which is a worse sin then rashness, even as despair is
worse then presumption. To this end, be conversant with the promises, and be
able to apply variety of them not knowing which may prevail.

If the affliction be an holding down of the soul from believing, 7. Rule.
Whether under the condition or no, what lets it, or if so, what hinders
believing?
when as yet it is under the condition of the promise; search out what the
special stop of the soul is, and accordingly apply remedies. For instance,
if the soul be tossed too and fro between the condition and the performance,
labor to settle the heart upon the condition first, proving it truly laden,
and hold it there, telling it that the Lord is willing that it hold that which
it has gotten, and then it shall be more easy to finish the other work. If
the glass be shaken who shall see his own face rightly? So again, if the
fear be that it has not the conditions of the Gospel, or has them not in
such a measure as it ought; resolve such a one that the Lord having wrought a
true loading in the soul, will also work the same to the sight of ease by the
promise; which promise as it appears more and more real, both in the meriter
and the offerer; so it must needs afford more hope, more desires, mournings and
longings after it: As for the measure of these, God snares no poor soul with
them: Be it never so feeble and bruised, he will not break it. So again, if
the trouble be, that it has long waited and is weary; that the heart is
exceeding hard, corruption very strong, others are got before us, we are afraid
we be not elected wiih a hundred more, apply the remedy thereafter: And whereas
the maine stop is Self, and aiming at our own ends, and a dead heart to
believe, let the counsel be thereafter: Subdue the base heart under mere
mercy, enlarge the glory of the promiser, above the gain of the believe: Also
be well exercised in the through opening and urging of a promise on Gods part,
by enlarging the length and depth, of the free, full and faithful heart of
God, infinitely above that which a soul can long after. But if I should enter
into particulars, I should be endless.

8. Rule. What to do in revolts.
Eighthly, if the trouble arise from revolts and breach of covenant after
repentance, first, observe whether former experience of mercy have broken such
an heart or no, if not, then endeavor to break it, and to raise up the soul
from the present desertion wherein it seems destitute of that grace which
formerly it enjoyed: Convince it, that the Lord has never cut off nor cast out
any branch which was ever planted in him: Also that by such desertions he
labors to hold the heart at a deeper bay of humility, Read for this Jer. 3.1.
and Hosea ult.
when once it comes to outgrow the confusion of fear and horror, which a
guilty conscience has snared it withal. And lastly, show it that there is no
way for her to return to God again by repenting, till first upon humiliation
for her revolt, she come to God in Christ by a promise, viz. to wit, that he
bids backesliding Idolaters, and harlots divorced, to come back again, and he
will marry himself to them, and acknowledge them for his own.

9. Rule. In deadness of heart etc. Psalm. 42.
If the distemper arise from the deadnes of heart, strength of some prevailing
corruption, decay of faith, ove, zeal, tenderness of heart; the party is to be
encouraged by the examples of the Saints, whom the Lord has raised up in the
like eclipses and wanzings of spirit, and that by the recovering of the ground
of comfort, viz. the free promise of God, who (although his people do withdraw
from him by unbeleefe) yet does not change as we change; but rather abides one
without any shadow of change, and cannot deny himself, though we believe not;
but rather will revive us again by his word, that we may live in his sight,
and go in and out with him as in time past: especially if we can prove that
our ebbings and decaies do not proceed from wilful withdrawing our selves.

If trouble arise from particular fears or staggerings, which touch not a
Christians freehold, 10. Rule. Special fears etc.
but only his welfare and welbeeing, as namely from some straits whereinto he
is fallen, or temptations of Satan, which he cannot answer, or melancholy, or
the darkness of Gods administration of his Church, suffering his cause and
people to go to the walls, and his enemies to prosper, with sundry such like,
which befall a man in the course of Christianity; the answer must lie according
as the trouble lies: As that God is not tied to one course with his Church in
outward things, his best servants have had greatest straits: That we must not
so much look at the troubles we meetwith, as the promises which we have to
support us: That the wicked have prolonged their malice and the righteous have
perished in their innocence, and yet the whiles God has been most righteous.
And so much for a draught of these instances; according to which, others (which
are innumerable) may be conceived. And therefore to finish the use, let the
Minister of God wisely apply himself to this work, as knowing it to be most
precious, necessary and honorable; unto the which not only is annexed
special encouragement here, but also hereafter: Here a savoury report, and the
loins of many poor souls blessing God for us; herereafter blessedness it
self and shining in glory, and that so much the more brightly, by how much we
have converted many, as Daniel speaks: And as for the difficulty of it, the
Lord is able to make it sweet and easy by custom and experience, to such as
desire to be faithful. And so much for this second qualification of these
servants, to wit, their mild and wise carriage to their Master in this his
distempered condition.

Now according to my former method, I proceed from the persons attempting, to
the attempt it self. Wherein I considered in the servants a secret taxation of
their Master, which I call so, because it lies only couched and conveied
closely, (as became inferiors) in the manner of utterance, for it is an
expostulatory question, intimating their dislike of the distemper which he was
in, and that Self and carnal reason whereby he was carried against the
Prophet: As if they had in plain terms said Master, this thy descanting
against the Prophet, by thy cavills and carnal reason, is not comely for a man
in thy case: If the Prophet had said some great thing, thou seemedst forward to
obey, why then do thou so cavil and contradict him in this his message?

The point is, Self with carnal reason, Doctrine. Self and carnal reason
are justly reproveable.
and such like scurfe in rejecting the word are justly reprovable evils.
Touching this point of carnal reason, I have said much of it already, here I
repeat nothing: If the variety of the doctrine will add any other things worth
observation, I will only insist thereupon, and that very shortly to shun
tediousness. First, some proofs of Scripture, and then some reasons will be
needful to strengthen the point.

For texts first, Proofs. Number. 11.22.23.
when Moses objected against the Lords power to send he murmuring Israelites
meat in abundance, saying, this people is six hundred thousand foot men, and
thou have said, I will give them food a whole month; shall the flocks or the
herds be slain to suffice them? Or shall all the fish of the sea be
gathered together for them? What does the Lord answer? Does he put up this
carnal speech? No: He cuts him up for it: Is the arm of the Lord, says he,
shortened? Thou shall see whether my word shall come to pass or not? Another
Scripture like it, Numb. 20.10.11.
is that where the people murmured for water not at Rephidim, Exodus 17. but at
Kadesh; whereupon the Lord commanding Moses to satisfy them by smiting the
rock: But they in an indignation at their baseness, outshot them in their
own carnal reason, saying, come onye rebels, has God nothing to do, save to
give you water out of the rock? And he smote the rock twice, first
doubtingly, what came of this? The Lord was extreme angry for this carnal
opposing the word, and causing those rebels to distrust God double. Therefore
(says he) because ye believed me not, to sanctify me in the eyes of this
congregation; therefore shall you not bring the children of Israel into the
land which I have given them. Mark, here seemed to be a lesser sin, and a
greater punishment: For (might Moses have said) Are not rebels to be children?
Yes, in due season, but not then when the Lord was working a miracle among
them: Therefore together with a check he incloses them with those rebels,
both in the mark of their sin, calling the place Massa and Meriba for their
cavilling with the people, as he called that of Rephidim by the like name for
their murmuring against God: And as he told the rebels that all their
carcasses should fall in the wilderness, so he told them that they should dye
there too. A sad penalty, and real reproof of their carnality.

John 6.42.
Another place is that of our Savior, to those Jews who following him for the
loaves, were by him persuaded to behold himself the true bread and manna and
water of life: This seemed to their gross carnal sense senseless, and
therefore they ask, how shall he give us his flesh to eat? Our Savior
answers, Murmr not within your selves; you do not well, you are but carnal
in thus speaking, for you can do no other then as you are; till my father
teach you wisdom, it is not your reason can compass my matters, you were as
good hold your tongues as patter about them: So when Martha, (who yet before
had said that she knew Christ could do all things) yet seeing the stone to be
rolled away, John 11.22.39.
where Lazarus her brother was laid, cries out, Lord by this time he stincketh,
he has been buried four days; but her carnality and contrariety so stancke
in Christ's nostrills, that he is feign to check her, even before he did the
miracle; Said not I unto thee, if thou would believe, thou should see the
glory of God; as if he had said, why do thou so cross me in this my attempt?
Were it not just to deprive thee of the miracle, seeing thou preferrest thy
sense before my power? So Peter, when he being bidden to come to Christ on the
water, Matthew. 14.35.
attempted to come, and by the way funke, (through carnal sense, which told
him that the waters were not things to go upon, but the firm earth;) what
says our Savior to him? Oh thou of little faith! Is it not all one for my
power to support thee upon the waters as upon the dry land? Why did thou
stagger from my word? And many more might be heapt up to this purpose, all to
convince, that although we might think it venial for weak flesh to cleave to
her own carnal conceits, because Gods matters exceed her much; yet God having
once testified his pleasure by his word, looks that flesh lay hold upon her
mouth, stoop to the Lord, and when it does not, he may justly rebuke her. As
Sarah for her laughing was checked, and Zachariah for his distrust, Luke 1.20.
was not only so, but stricken dumb for three quarters of a years space, and
all to teach them to prefer the word before their own sense: So that even as
Paul seeing Elymas to cross his Ministry, Act. 13.10.
and to harden Sergius Paulus in his infidelity, sets himself tooth and nail
against him, and looked steadfastly upon him, saying, Oh! thou full of all
subtilty and mischief, son of the Devil, will thou not cease perverting the
ways of the Lord? Even so, the Lord seeing this sorceresse of carnal reason
standing at the elbow of the soul, to dissuade and hold it off from believing,
does with indignation cut her up and say, Oh thou full of all venom and
poison, dare thou thus pervert the truth and faithfulness of the promise?
And our Savior did the like to Nicodemus caviling against the mystery of
Regeneration and Baptism, what (says he) Art thou a great Doctor in Israel,
Joh. 3.5.
and yet such a dunce and idiot in the matters of God? What a shame, and (as it
were) a box on the ear was this, for such a Rabbi? And although he seemed to
deal somewhat more fairly with Thomas in his refractory stoutnesse of carnal
reason, Except I see the print of the spear in his sides, and nails in his
hands, I will not believe; yet we shall see he gave him a shrewd touch upon
that merciful conviction: Be faithful (says he) not incredulous: Blessed are
they that see not and yet believe: Joh. 21.
I tell thee, it is small thank to thee to believe having seen. So much for
proofs.

Reasons of the point are many. First this, It is the chief mark of all Caleb
and Joshua, cleaving to the word, made a tush at the other objections; If the
Lord love us (say they) he will bring us into this land, as for these Giants,
they shall be but meat for us: What are they to a word of an omnipotent God?
What came of it? Surely the Lord took it so kindly, as he scarce knew how to
express it; twice or thrice after he tells Moses, Caleb and Joshua have
honored me before this people, and borne down their wretched partners:
Therefore of all the rest (who shall leave their bones in the wilderness)
these two shall inherit this good land. So David, when all the body of the
people were scared and ran from the Philistin, only cried, why? Who is this
uncircumcised Philistin? what make ye of him? I make but a dead dog of him, a
railer upon God and his host: 1 Samuel 17.
And what came of it? God enclosed him (by his faith) into his hands, and as
Heb. 11.34. he was made strong of weak, and put to flight an Army by that
means. Paul also, Act. 27. when all were against him, both Pilate, Centurion
and Soldiers, they all thought that there was no way for them but to perish;
contrary to their fears, Paul is confident, that not an hair of their head
should fall to the ground. For why? Says he, although I see as much against it
in show as you do, yet an Angel of God stood by me this night and told me so,
and I believe God: Oh! how did the Lord honor him with the safety of all in
the ship?

Now to conclude, if the Lords heart be so set upon believers: How must he
needs cast a sad countenance upon them that overthrow his promise, and will
believe no more then they see? Contrary objects to those which are most
desirable, must needs be most unwelcome? And if the one provoke esteem, how
can it choose, but the other must cause indignation?

Esaias 63.
and all that they might see his works and know him, and trust him the better:
But (says he) forty years long have I been vexed with this generation; They
have tempted me, proved me, and wearied me: Therefore I swear in my wrath, they
should not enter into my rest. Why? Because all his miracles and deeds before
their eyes, could not draw them to trust him, but (as if heathens) they would
cleave still to their fleshly reason. Surely he that swears in his wrath to
destroy, and is vexed with people, he does more then reprove. This for the
second.

Esaias. 55.8.
but that our souls might be filled with his excellency? And think nothing
too hard for such a God to do: If he have dried up the sea Jorden, stopped
mouths of Lions, raised up the dead, and fed six hundred thousand men and
women without corn or flesh of beasts, made water gush twice out of a rock,
give a woman of ninety years old power to conceive, etc. does he not deserve to
be set up above carnal reason? Does he not deserve at our hands more then a
faint fulsome grant with Martha, thou can do all things? Does he not deserve
a peculiar faith for this and for that, for raising this dead man now at this
time? For quickening this dead heart at this instant by this Sermon? For
softning this hard heart? For converting this soul to God? Oh! how justly
reproveable must such a villainy needs be! And surely, this let me add, if it
be so base an evil in respect of the dishonor to God, must it needs be so in
respect of the mischief which it causes unto our selves? Did ever any man hate
his own self? does he not love and cherish his own flesh? What an unnatural
evil then is this, which chooses rather here with Naaman to perish with the
holding of a carnal will and conceit, then by denying it and clasping to the
word, to be happy for ever? Sure that which is so derogatory to God, and so
unnatural to our selves, must needs deserve sharp reproof.

Fourthly, it must needs be a reproveable evil, which does so desperately viz.
That carnal reason is a maine enemy to all the matters of revealed truths, is
a full reason of this doctrine, that it is justly reproveable: Other sins
seem to undo the acts of God as his moral commands: But this undoes the Lord
himself, (in a sort) in those things wherein God is himself; so that either
God must not be God, a promise must not be a promise, Christ must be no Christ,
no satisfaction, no redemption, or else carnal sense must perish: Both in
strict terms cannot stand together: God has testified himself in his word,
admirable in this one attribute, viz. Providence for his Churches good in the
greatest straits: Who reading the strange passages of that one deliverance in
Esters time, Esters story.
how God concurred just with each circumstance of time, of occasion, as then to
cause the Kings sleep to depart when Mordecai was in greatest peril and
reproach? Then when the banquet was prepared, that all other opportunities
should be fore laid to oppress Haman, and to exalt Mordecai? If a man would
compile a story according to his own wish for the demonstration of Providence,
could he frame a more punctual one? Read Ezra's story, Daniels, Joseph's, does
not a naked hand of God appear in them? And yet carnal reason would say, That
if there were windows in heaven, God could not now save his Church, as he
has done in their times, in Elija's, Elisha's and others. What is this but to
limit the holy one of Israel to our own measure of working? And so I may say
of all other his Attributes. Nay carnal reason is such a deep gulf as is
able to swallow down the greatest evidence that ever God gave to the world of
himself, both his Godhead and Attributes which is the sending of the Lord
Jesus in the flesh into the world, to walk, live, suffer and dye for the
salvation of the Elect: What can so secure the soul of the truth of Gods
nature, persons and realnesse in all his promises as this, to cause the
eternal God to be personally one with our mortal flesh? Might not the holy
Ghost Heb. 1.1.2. say, That this way of God has greater demonstration in it to
stablish a believing soul then all that ever were besides? And yet what use
makes carnal reason hereof? Does it not turn all to a mere story without any
groundwork of faith or persuasion? We think that the exhibiting of Christ
concerned the Jews who saw him, and if we had lived with him as they, we
should have abhorred to distrust him as they: Why? Did not God give them full
assurance of himself by his Son? Read Act. 17.38. Had not they as clear
proofs out of the Prophets, that he was, and none save he, could be the
Messia? and yet their carnal reason did so abhor him to be their Messia,
that they hated him to the death. Justly then may I conclude, that this sin
is a reproveable one. So much also for reasons.

I proceed now to the Use: If this evil be so reproveable, it is pity it
Terror to sundry. The first. Neuters, Atheists and Epicures and ignorant ones
reproved.
Pity that any should justify the wicked against God! Let them therefore come
in the dint of this reproof who are grossest in this kind, Neuters and
Atheists, who if they do not obstinate their spirits to think of all Gods
matters and the frame of Religion according to their carnal sense, yet are as
deeply careless of rejecting and bearing it down by the stream of the word, as
Gallio was careless of the Apostles and their opposites: How many are there
who like them in Peter, mock at the Scriptures, threats and terrors of it, 2
Pet. 3.
saying, Where is the promise of his coming? Lo all things are still as they
were wont to be, the times, seasons, affairs of men and course of the world;
therefore we think the world will endure always: Oh ye Atheists! One year
with God, is as a thousand, and a thousand are as one day: Do ye judge the
coming of Christ by that which befalls in the space of forty or fifty years
of one mortal life? Do not all things decay, and cannot the Lord shake the
powers of heaven, and restrain the influence of the upper bodies from the
lower at his pleasure? But of this (says Peter) they make themselves wilfully
ignorant, that all things were made of nothing and shall return to nothing;
they persuade themselves that they ever were and so shall continue: Such a
seminary there is and such a tale of scurfe here among us, even of practicke
Atheists, who are led by sense as brute beasts, that me thinks I feel my
spirit sink and fail within me, when I should scare them out of their dens:
These are those profane Swine, who although they rise not up openly to desie
God and his word and threats, yet like sensual Epicures void of all
understanding, they live in a profession of infidelity, (only differing from
Pagans, in that they carry the badge of the resurrection about them for fashion
sake) but else resolved to suffer no word of truth to enter into them or
trouble them, and make a privy contract with Satan to hold their own lusts,
against all Preaching, what difference is there between thinking there is no
God, and resisting him speaking in his word? Between open maintaining that
there is no judgment, resurrection or torment for sinners, and the practice of
blasphemies, swearings, breaking of Sabbaths, stealth, adultery, and all
debauchednesse?

What shall I say unto you? Shall I say as that ancient Father once did to his
people of Antioch, Get ye Bibles for shame, and come in (O ye uncircumcised
hangbyes) to the congregation! Howster out such vermin (O ye Church offcers,
if ye serve for oughts) out of their kennells! But you are readier some of you
rather to pursue the best of your neigbours, (take heed my words stand not upon
record against you without repentance,) rather then hunt such as pester our
Towns with Atheism and Impiety! Alas! the Devil is served as well by such,
as by them that have read Lectures of Atheism heretofore! They profess a God
you will say; Tit. 1. ult.
what is that, when they are in their works abominable, and to each good thing
reprobate? They live by swinish principles and customs of darkness, they see
all swayed by money, favor and policy; they see others all for back and
belly, purse and pleasures, pomp and preferments, and therefore further they
will not stir. They whom carnal reason merely rules, are negative Atheists,
because they admit of no principles which should make them other, and cause
them to tremble at themselves! Oh! mourn (dear brethren) for this, that the
Land swarms with such, and pray for such as are in place, that they may
reform it, and consider with what fruit we requite God for this seventy years
of his Gospel past, by nouzeling up among us a generation that know no more of
sin, Christ, judgment day, then the swine at the trough, but rather trample
upon these pearls! Tell them of their washing, brewing, baking, startching on
the Sabbath, and they answer, Alas! we are poor, and the six days are little
enough to work in and earne meat to our bellies! we must be fed and clothed,
and more then we work, we must look for nothing! Others being asked about
their hope in death, tell us, they have had their purgatory here in want and
misery, and therefore hope they shall have no more hereafter! Others live by a
Popish mixture of some shreads with their own wisdom, and such errors of the
wicked as they suck up every where: The issue of all is, they abhor the word
and those that live by it, and do wholly breath in the element of their own
carnal savor! Oh woeful ones! your damnation sleeps not, and the flood of
Gods wrath, the fire of vengeance shall sweep you to hell, Matthew. 24.38.
as the waters did them who ate and drank, married and gave in marriage, and
would know nothing till they were under water! God keep you from it: You have
had your reproof, but except God ring an alarm in your ears, you will not
awake! But alas! I speak to the walls, these Gibeonites come not within the
Temple, carry them home these news you that dwell by such. So much for the
first Use.

Secondly, is carnal sense so reproveable? What is then an utter despising
Reproof of sundry sorts.
to the very eyes of men, so that they cannot deny the finger of God? We have
many such Such as sin against sensible and ocular mercies, worse then such as
sin against promises.
into their bosoms, judgments upon their bodies, children, wives, names,
(even such as their own cursed mouths have wished, pox and plague, etc. and
their cursed works have procured justly;) and yet they are as Pharaoh hardened
by his inchanters, even when the frogs leapt up upon his bed in his privy
Chamber: what is this save to fight against heaven it self: When judgments
follow not the word, men cavil and say, these Preachers cry aloud, but no
thunder or lightning follows upon it: But what say they when the Lord plagues
you, and raines snares and tempests upon you? Many of you, what diseases has
the Lord cast upon you, noisome and stinking? Note well all these following
Instances.
Are ye one whit moved by it? You use to answer (as the sorcerers did) all
sorts are troubled with one disease or other; all sorts have some poor, in
reproach, etc. But you know that yours are sent upon you for your debauched
courses? Do you see God against you? Had not Thomas been grossly
reproveable, if when Christ thrust his hands into his sides to feel the print
of his nails, he had been unfaithful? But these men's eyes go out with
beholding the Sun shine in their faces!

How many are there of you here, who have cavilled at God, that he

Others of you, what mones and chatterings have you made (like Hezechia did)
upon your sick beds unto God? Oh! should the Lord take us away in our prime of
youth, our best years, ere we have spent any time in the land of the living,
to prepare our selves to meet him! The Lord has heard you, (or else earnest
prayer for you I am sure of it) and has brought ye from the brinke of the
grave, and set you upon your feet again: What is come of it? Are you any more
penitent then you were? Does the presence of God awe you? Do you walk softly
in your house (as he said) as having escaped a scouring, and felt Gods fingers?
Have not your recoveries made you more fledge and saucy with God, so that now
ye fare as if the wind were turned, and you had the Lord at a vantage? I
denounce here unto you, that most of you are waxen gross, fat, laden with
fatness, you have despised the God of salvation: Deuteronomy. 32.13. Esaias 38.
And instead of Hezechias words, The living, the living shall praise thee, you
may say, the living are worse and stink worse above ground, then if they had
been rotting in their graves: So that by experience we are now grown to trust
no sick men's promises whatsoever they be! Oh you woeful people! Do you thus
requite the Lord? Alas! I foresee you are ripe for the harvest, and groan for
the sickle to reap you down indeed at last without any remedy! And although
some of you make a shift to hold out, 1 These. 5.2.
yet your damnation sleeps not, it shall come like a whirlewinde, when you cry
peace most, then shall it come swiftly! Oh be reproved!

Joh. 6.27.
I mean the seeking of the meat that perishes not? No: But he has been
content with common gifts and so rested? You have therefore showed you selves
false in covenant, and given over the Lord in the plain chase, when you might
have felt and groped the Lord in his manifest providence. Act. 14.


Romans 2.3.
then ever they imagined. But what, has this long suffering of God led them to
repentance? Has not their clay laid in the warm sun, hardened the more? Is
their any power in their souls to break off their old lusts, and to return
to God sincerely? No surely, but having the better end of the staff, they have
prolonged life, to increase wrath, and to treasure up vengeance. Nay (to speak
a word to the better sort) how many of us in our deep heaviness of spirit
under the Jerem. 2.
how have we counted our lives scarce worth a straw under our feet? Yet has
the Lord blown over our fears, made a calm, swallowed up death into victory?
Nay, some of us in our deepest sicknesses of body, (when sin and Satan are
most busy) have we not found God nearer to us, then in our best health? Has
he not answered us as Hanna in our long prayers? Has he not enlarged the
promise unto us by the seal of his Spirit, making (as I may say) the light of
the Moon, as the light of the Sun, and the light of the Sun seven times
greater then ever, in comfort and holy confidence above all fears? How has
this wrought with us? Has it knit us in so firm a covenant with God as never
to be broken off? Has it caused us to walk here below as shadows, and to
despise all the earth in comparison of our hopes? I doubt not but some do, and
shall find the fruit of it at death.

But oh! that such fair wether should do harm, and be an occasion to make us
wax wanton, earthly, and think grace to be pind to our sleeves, how
reproveable is it? Good brethren, look to your selves: If carnal reason be
so base, what is it to blindfold our eyes against ocular mercies? Oh! such
favors as some of us have met with, should make us cry out, I have found, I
have found! God has not dealt with others as with me! Therefore whether it be
my lot to be in straits, or whatsoever temptations, I must endure, yet I will
call to mind the old mercies of the Lord and be comforted; yea I will gladly
be under infirmity, 2 Cor. 12.9.
that the strength of God may be perfected in me; and though he kill me, yet I
will trust in him through mercy! Oh that this fruit might appear! Who would
have thought that when Hezechias request was granted, to wit, the going back
of the Sun ten degrees for the assuring of his recovery, that his recovery
should have been so stained with apostasy? But alas! God has made our fears
and griefs go back as many for us, and yet we have revolted, not as he did
once, but made a falling sickness of our course!

To conclude the Use: In the Sacraments and Seals of Gods Covenant, Thomas
himself shall rise up against such! So much for this Use also.

Thirdly, let this be a caveat to Gods own people, to teach them to Admonition.
their faces) viz. That they will believe God no further then they see him,
when they hear the promises urged upon all broken and mourning souls; what
say they? Yea you say well, if we could feel it thus!

Instances. 1. Putters off the promise to be reproved.
First, I say this may be a pranke of an hollow heart, and then it is horrible:
As we see in those Jews, who were always pressing upon Christ for a sign: Tell
us if thou be the Christ? And why? Not as meaning to believe, (for so he tells
them. I have told you often by preaching and miracles, yet you believe not;) but
as a cloak of your profaneness, viz. That they could not so clearly behold
him as they desired. But put case it be otherwise with us, and that thou
meanest simply: What then? Is thy speech to be commended? No, in no case: For
why? Do thou not go by the worlds rule, it seems not to be so, I cannot
think it; Is this enough to bury the truth of a word of the eternal God
under? Do not still speak evil of the way of salvation, because God makes it
not so rational as thou would, and will not sell thee heaven for thy
prayers and devotions? He asks no more then his word believed, will give thee
power to perform, if thou reject it not by distrust.

Administrations of God must not be quarrelled.
or upon our selves pleases us, while he dandles us in his lap, holds off
enemies, enlarges our abilities, keeps under our corruptions, tries us by no
great temptations, annoints our paths for us, and gives us better gifts, fruit
of our labors and outward blessings, then we expected: Oh how we can cleave to
him! This draws water out of a marble stone! But let our sun enter never so
little into an eclipse, or if God remove our strong holds from us, leave us to
enemies, seem to smile upon them, side with them, suffer them to enjoy
whatsoever their heart could wish, Psalm. 80.4. Job 1. Mica 2.7.
in having their wills on us: But to frown upon us not only while we sin,
but when we repent, and to disregard us even in our most frequent and
importunate prayers: Do we then persist in our uprightnes? Dowe then (as Micah
says) believe that still Gods word is as good as ever it was, to such as walk
uprightly? When neither Moon nor Sun appears for many days, do we abhor to
suffer darkness to possess us within, because there is such a darkness
without? Can we fall to Paul's remedy, Act. 27.20. Act. 27.20. Judge. 6. Mica
7.9.10.
I believe God? No, no, we cavil and say, If the Lord be with us, how are all
these evils upon us? Why I beseech you? Although he has promised to all
believing souls to show them light in darkness, and after to turn their
darkness into light, yet did he ever promise us to keep this darkness
quite from us? Had Christ's love so appeared, if he had come and kept Lazaras
from dying, as it did by raising him up when he was dead and began to
stink? Bring me forth one word sounding that way that God would always keep
one even tenor of outward peace and prosperity over his Church, and then tell
him he is not as good as his word.

But this is a Religion better fitting Papists (who know not what faith is)
then such as we! Oh be warned! This carnality of ours sits near Gods heart,
loades him as the cart with sheaves is laden: Do not give God over thus: say
there will be light for the righteous, it is sown for them, though not come up,
yet God is good to Israel, to the upright in heart: The eternal strength of
God is a brazen pillar, Psalm. 73.1.
which the soul may swing all her strength upon in the greatest straits, and
(although heaven and earth go together) such shall have peace, peace, that is
sure peace, as Esaias speaks: and as for carnal reason, she shall see it too,
Esaias 26.2.3. 2 King. 7.3.
but she shall not eat thereof, it is a dainty only serving for waiters and
believers: It is faith which must do the work of works, keep fire from
consuming the bush, or burning the three children: It is faith which must do
all these feats, Heb. 11.35.36.37. Carnal reason never wrought one miracle,
but it has marred many. Faith and the power of God has kept a venice glass
from being broken against the wall, when it was cast with violence: But carnal
reason breaks all it throws.

Therefore to conclude, take heed of her, and learn admonition to lot upon the
word of truth, for thy self, for the Church, in the promise of God, in the
providence and alsufficiency of God: If he satisfy not thy desires, know it is
not because he is weaker, or falser, or less pitiful then he was, but he has
other ends then thou see, he aims at purging out thy canker of Self, and
perhaps has more universal ends for the manifesting of his vengeance upon a
Nation not worthy to be beloved, and deserving a decree to come forth: This is
no season for carnal sense to lowre, but for faith to fall to work, if not to
save others, yet to save each one himself, and lay in (as Iosia did) for
himself, Jer. 45. 2 Kings 22.20.
that he may have his life for a prey, and he may not see the evils which
shall come upon others. And so also to lay in pledges of hope for posterity,
that when Gods winter is come down, and his people scoured, and his old brass
and candlesticks melted, he will make better vessels of our posterities, even
zealous ones, and prepared for every good work.

And again, a third Instance may be this: The outward difficulty of Samuel,
and say, Hitherto the Lord has helped us, and so he will: he has not kept us
from a Bear and a Lion, that a Giant, 1 Samuel 7.12.
a Dog should destroy us. Say thus, The Lord has not yet put us so sharply
upon the pikes of famine, as that we should eat our own children, or mice,
dogs, cats and rats, as in former ages of Popery they have done in this
Kingdom: Therefore I will trust him still, and although there shall be no
Calfe left in the stall, Habac. 3.
nor Bullock in the flock yet the Lord shall be my salvation. I will not (as
poor as I am) say, as a Carle lately did, of great wealth, I shall dye a
beggar: Neither will fall to pillaging and breaking open granaries to serve my
turn, nor rise up against the rich, as lately some did in some parts of this
Country, and were justly executed.

Conclusion of the Use.
Lastly, in general, be we armed by this doctrine and admonition, against the
common sway of the age to believe as we see: They say of the dampe in Colepits,
that if it come, it will cause the candle to burn blue, Simil.
and thereby the workmen haste them to the mouth of the pit presently, lest
they be choked. This world is the Colepit, this dampe is the carnal Religion
of it, the candle burning blue is the infection of men's understandings and
wills: when therefore we see this infection to have tainted most men's hearts,
and the power of goodness decaying; then let us be warned, look to our lives,
ere we be choked with the error of the wicked, and let us run to the pits
mouth, and desire to be haled up to the open air; let us go to the Word and
Testimony, and as David did, Psalm. 73.
ere he was quite stifled, let us go into the Sanctuary, and lay this carnal
religion in the balances of it, and we shall find it too light, and such as is
reprobate silver, for both weight and substance, and then we shall cling to a
more sure word of the Prophets and Apostles shining in a dark place, 1 Pet.
1.20.
which doing, we shall do well, and so not be reproved or rejected. So much
for this third.

Paul, 1 Cor. 15. urge the Atheist by similitudes of natural things, to grant
spiritual, convincing him of the resurrection by natural experience of the
corn rotting ere it live? And so by others:) But its above it, and therefore
resists it; rules of art and reason fail here: Reason says, of nothing comes
nothing: God says I create the fruit of the lips, peace, even of nothing: Yea
of nothing comes every good thing. He that denies himself and is nothing,
shall be my Disciple. Other virtues go by addition: Gods by subtraction. God
counts the things that are not, as if they were. The principles of Divinity are
not as sense is. The Lord Jesus himself truly eternal, yet truly mortal. God
cannot dye, and yet they killed the Lord of life. Christ a very man, and no
person, but a nature. By death to conquer death is a senseless thing in reason.
Flesh consumed to dust, yet shall be made again the self same body. Reason
attempts great things by great instruments. The Lord uses the poorest and
silliest. Reason would say, the richest make most rich: Religion tells us, As
poor, and yet making many rich. As having nothing yet possessing all things.
That a poor company of fishermen should conquer the world, which Alexanders
army could not. That Babes should understand mysteries which wise men cannot.
That the King of all the world should ride upon an Ass, etc. How absurd are
these notions? But to be principled in these senseless truths, irrational
principles, what a wonderful advantage is it to a poor soul in her first
entrance upon Religion? How will it prepare the heart to bear down reason and
flesh? To think the better of truth by how much it crosses reason most? To
bear troubles and crosses meekely, because by how much less they promise any
happiness, by so much the rather they perform it? So much for this use of
Instruction.

Lastly, let this point be use of comfort to all Gods people, who Consolation.
Close cleavers to Gods promise, are in a blessed state.
or else soon recover their sliding foot from this common error: For if
carnal reason be so reproveable, then is living by faith commendable. The Lord
shall one day cause thy light to break forth poor soul who in all the
forenamed respects, look more to Paul then the Pilot, to the word, then the
world and her Religion. Thou live here as a despised creature, as one of Gods
fools thrust up into a corner, as a candlestick thrown up and down the
house, who were wont to hold out the candle to the house of God: Be of good
cheer, if thou be content to be as God will have thee, and to teach thine own
soul in stead of teaching others, if thou be one who wilt thrust thine eyes
blindefold into Gods bosom, and see no further then he has light for thee;
take courage to thy self, Mica 6 9. Psalm. 37.
one day it shall be better, and the Lord shall bring forth thy righteousness
as noon day. He shall take thee from among the crokt pots, and restore thy
doves silver wings as bright as before: wait the whiles, and be doing the
thing which is good. When the Lord shall come in flaming fire against all that
have set up their crest against him, and be a swift witness against them,
then shall he refine his Levy with this fire of trial, Mal. 3.3.4. Reve. 3.14.
2 These. 1. Heb. 10.37.
and by this day (or night rather) of tentation, which he has spread over the
face of the earth, if thou hold the word of his patience, he shall bring thee
forth of the Colepit. And then shall he be admired by them and in them that
believe, because (abandoning themselves) the word was received by them in that
day! I say, cast not away thy confidence, it has great recompense of reward.
But what should I need to comfort thee, who carriest the matter of comfort
within thee? So much for this use also, and for the whole doctrine be spoken;
as also of the first thing which arises out of the attempt it self of these
servants, etc.

THE THIRTEENTH LECTVRE Still continued upon this thirteenth VERSE.
VERSE XIII. And his servants came near, and said unto him, Father, if the
Prophet had bid thee do some great thing, would thou not have done it? How
much more then, when he says unto thee, Wash and be clean?

VERSE 14. So he went down, etc.


2 Kings
I Have in the last Exercise (Beloved) as you may remember, finished the attempt
of the servants; being the second general of the Verse. Now we proceed in
order to the third: viz. The arguments which they use to persuade their Master
to obey the message: The third general, viz. The arguments. The first whereof,
is the ease of obeying.
I told you there were four of them: I come to the first, and that is of
greatest weight, let us note it well. And that is, that this obeying and
washing, was an easy task. The words give it clearly, for thus they argue, If
it had been a difficult thing which the Prophet had enjoined thee, thou
would have done it, and will thou not do this which is so easy? So that
now this first motive, they oppose to the chief stop and let in their Masters
thoughts, viz. That it was a troublesome and unlikely way to succeed: They tell
him no, it was a very easy one, and likely to succeed: For the other reasons I
will open them as I come to them.

First, let us fasten upon this: And for the Text you see it manifest, the
servants urge their Master with the privilege which God by the Prophet has
bestowed upon him: God (say they) of mere mercy has sent for thee by his
Prophet, of his own accord offered thee a cure, upon condition of washing: By
this means it comes to pass that whatsoever it be to other lepers, whom God
has not vouchsafed this honor (to whom it is no easy work) yet to thee it
is: Look not thou at the difficulty of the cure in it self, or to others,
look thou at the privilege which God conferres upon thee above others, and to
be sure by virtue thereof, thy cure is easy. Now if it be so, stand not
questioning any longer why such and such lepers come short of cure, leave that
to God; (mercy only can give a reason of that) but consider that, to thee,
Naaman in person, this grace is offered, to wash and be clean: Take the offer
as it lies to thee thus under Gods call, and to thee it must needs be as easy
as it seems. Now if it be so, make it not worse then God has made it: That
which God has made easy, make not thou difficult: But wash and be clean.

The point then is this, Obeying of the charge of God. To believe and be saved,
is an easy task. But here quickly you will object, how is this Doctrine
raised? Did Naamans servants, or Naaman himself, understand each other, or
conceive the charge and promise, to reach at any thing save a mere bodily cure?

What is that to the believing of a promise? The ease of the one,

I answer Naamans conversion in all the passages concurring thereto: So that as
the affronts and humblings which Naaman had, were ordered by the Lord for a
spiritual humbling and selfedeniall, so the advice of the servants is guided
by God to a spiritual issue, although perhaps neither of them saw it for the
present till afterward. Who can say, that the words of that poor blind man,
Joh. 9.10. in the defense and honor of Christ, were (to his own feeling) any
other, then mere thankfulness and natural affection to Christ for his
benefit of sight received? For as yet he had no faith; and yet it is
questionless, that on Christ's behalf, they were secret seeds of that esteem
of Christ, and breakings off from the hopes of things below, which afterward
brake out more clearly, (when Christ met him) into actual believing. So much
for that. The bar being removed, we come to the point.

The obedience to the command of faith is easy. Doctrine. Obedience to the
command of faith is easy.
Here (because this point will bane all hypocrites who run apace to this
bait, as pleasing to the palate) let me put in a word or two to stop their
hasty proceedings. I mean not that every drunkard, or wretched adulterer, (who
come steaming forth of the stews, or from their Alebench) or any other such,
shall find it (in the case they are) an easy work to believe: No, be it
known unto them, that its simply a thing impossible for them, as such, to
attain it. Explication. Matthew. 19.23.
It is as easy (says our Savior) for a Camel to go through the eye of a
needle, as for a rich man (whose confidence is in his riches) to enter into
heaven: I shall at large give them their answer in due time; only this I
prefix to the point, to beat off any from such a vain confidence. The Text
harpes upon another string, to wit, one who (by peculiar providence) was made
capable of this privilege, and to him and all such as are under the assisting
grace of God its easy. The phrases which the holy Ghost uses in this kind to
evince it; as it was otherwise with Naaman here, then with such diseased
lazers, as lay at the poole at Bethesday, J h. 5.
who came to the poole, but yet they must attend the moving of the waters
first, by the Angel, else not: But Naaman had a call by the Prophet to come
down, and then an absolute promise, that upon his mere washing (without any
other condition) he should be forthwith cleansed: So I say, the gift was free,
and without any more ado, conferred upon his obeying. So here, those whom the
promise concerns, have no more to do but simply to believe, and to them its
easy: I say not now, how every such one does find it, but how the Lord offers
it, and how it might be, if he did not lay not offenses in his own way, if he
make it difficult and put in more conditions then the Lord puts in, (who says
simply to a laden soul, Come, I will ease thee) the fault is his own. Romans 6
ult. John 1.12.
Mark the phrases of Scripture. The gift of God is eternal life. What Is easier
and freer then gift? As many as received him, he gave them the gift to be
called the Sons of God? What is easier then receiving this gift? Lord thou
have done all our works in us (says Esaias) what is more easy then to have a
man's work done for him? Esaias 26. Ephesians. 1.20. Hosea 2.12.
Heaven is called an inheritance. What is more easy then for a child to be
made his fathers heir, and to possess all his lands? It is the holy Ghosts
phrase, that we are married to Christ? What is more easy then for a poor
desolate wench which has nothing to take too, to consent to be the wife of a
Prince, or some great man, especially if he be a suitor to her, and will have no
denial in any case? So what is easier then to pass away without any exact
payment of a man's debt by the near account of his creditor, Psalm. 32.1.
who imputes it as paid, and imputes it not as due, although it be unpaid? Take
a free man of Londons son and heir, what is an easier thing then for him then
to be borne free of the City? It costs him nothing, it is a privilege cast
upon him. As Paul told Lysias, he was a Citizen of Rome, and when he replied,
Act. 25.
it cost him a great fine: Paul told him, but I am so borne, it cost me
nothing. I will not any longer dwell upon bare illustrations: I know that every
word I speak, makes you stand upon thorns till you see the bounds of the
point: Therefore first I will reason it, mixing here and there proofs of
Scripture, then apply it with such caution and encouragement (if God please) as
shall both sholl out the dogs, and welcome the children whose bread it is.

The reasons may be taken from sundry kinds of ease. First, from that
respective ease which stands in relation: Reasons. 1. In respect of he
difficult w^y of the Law.
And for that I say, that there is great difference between the difficult way
of the Law, and the sweet way of the Gospel. The Law prescribed a tedious, yea
an impossible way to heaven, Do this and live, requiring so exact, pure and
strict a way, as exceeded the capacity and ability of our fallen nature to
attain: Now the Lord in the Gospel propounds another way, most easy and
comprehensive, and that in and by another, saying, Believe and live. He changes
the rigor and burdensomenesse of doing, into the ease of believing, which
translates the guilt and curse of the soul upon another, translates the
service of obedience upon another, draws power and ability to endeavor after
obeying from another, who also covers and conceales the defects thereof, and
accepts such endeavors as proceed from a nature in great part unsanctified, as
if they came from an entire and perfect principle. As imputation of a
righteousness, is a far easier thing then an infused and inherent
righteousness dwelling within us: So the way of the Gospel, is far more
easy then the way of the Law: See Romans 8.3. For what the Law could not do
through the weakness of flesh, God supplied. How? By sending his Son both
to condemn sin in the flesh, and in the same flesh to fulfill all
righteousness: Why? That the righteousness of the Law, might be fulfilled in
us. In whom? Even in weak ones who had no strength, by a far easier way then
the Law imposed. See also Romans 10.6.7. The Law says, he that does the
commandments, shall live in them: But the righteousness of faith, says
another thing: What is that? Believe and live: Say not, who shall ascend to
heaven? Or who shall descend into the deep? For Christ has both descended of
his own accord to satisfy and ascended thither in triumph: And this word is
offered unto thee, is near thee, is in thy mouth and thy heart to do it: and
the doing it, is only the believing it: If thou confess with thy mouth, and
believe in thy heart this sweet easy way of God, thou shall be saved. So much
for the first Reason.

Secondly, this appears in another respect also. The Lord aims at In respect
of a further thing which the Lord arms at. 2 King. 3.
the reducing of our decayed and corrupt frame of nature, to his own image in
light and holiness. Now as he who aims at a maine scope in a thing, thinks
it a light thing to compass the means tending thereto: So it is here, take an
Instance: Iehoram and two other Kings, combined to destroy Moab, in their
journey they were like to perish for lack of water: They consult with Elisha:
He (at last) tells them, This is a light thing with the Lord to give you water,
and save your lives, for he intends a further blessing, to deliver Moab into
your hands. It was not light to work such a miracle, but in respect of a
further aim, it was but light: So to believe is not easy in respect of it
self, so much as in respect of a further excellency, to restore us to that
perfect image of God which once made us happy; it is light with the Lord to
take of our guilt, to remove our curse, and that bar which stood in our way
by Adams fall, to keep us from ever coming to God again, in his pureness
and holiness of nature. This may be a second reason.

Thirdly, let us come from respective ease, to real ease: And here we shall
also find, that in two respects, The obedience of faith is easy. Note this
against Sectaries.
Although if some idle brains might be believed, the price should not be great;
for they say, that Christ was such a person as to whom sin could not be so
imputed, as to take hold of him by the curse; but God imputed this ease to the
excellency of the person of his Son (being God) that instead of suffering the
wrath of Gods justice in his soul and body; he should only suffer so much
penalty as that traitor Judas, and those enemies of his, Pilate, the Elders and
soldiers inflicted; and this suffering, although in it self not equal to
justice, yet God the Father imputed it as an equal satisfaction: A most
horrible fancy! we renounce it; and affirm, that the ease of the price stands
not in him that paid it, for so it is the most full, dear and costly purchase,
that ever was paid since the beginning, yea greater then the damned in hell
pay, who by all their paying satisfy not: But its easy to us, it comes to our
hands ready wrought and finished, and costs us nothing at all, the Lord does
not require of us so much as the wetting of one finger, or stirring of one
joint toward a price (for it were bootlesse) so we can but accept it, and
apply it to our selves. Christ paid a most full price, to the cost both of
bearing his Fathers wrath, and desertion for a time (although with moderation
of extremities and disguisements) in his soul, and the effusion of the last
drop of his heart and life blood in his body; and less then this would not,
nor could not satisfy justice, for if it would it should; and the Lord offered
his Son wrong, if he might have taken less, and yet would urge more I say this
being considered that he chose this in his wisdom as the best;) and for my
part, I see it not to be any trenching upon the omnipotency of God, or any
other ends of God whatsoever, to urge this for the safeguard of his justice;
for without the integrity thereof he is not God: If he would have his Son lose
his glory that he might satisfy justice, and then would content himself with
a pageant of satisfaction by imputing; why might not Christ wholly have been
spared as well? But this by the way: because I see many incline to think God
might (if he had would) satisfied himself in the pardoning of sin without
satisfaction made; which Divinity passes my skill, and I think savours more of
Socinianisme and Humanity, then Divinity. I return: In respect either of the
Fathers cutting off his plea, and finding out a mercy in the bottom of his
breast exceeding justice and revenge; or the consent of the Son to admit of
those conditions of obeying and suffering, for the purchase of peace, and
abolishing enmity, Col. 1. it is most strange, unlikely and difficult: But
considering that he to whom all things are easy, would apply and bend himself
with all his power, wisdom and truth, to bring his good pleasure of free
saving to pass, and would devour all difficulties; therefore nothing could be
hard, but all easy to such love so armed and attended: God so loved the world
(says Saint Joh. 3.12.) that he gave his only Son: But otherwise in it
self it was a great thing. Jacobs toil in heat and frost was great, (though
love made it sweet.) And so to end, though it cost Christ an infinite price,
yet being freely offered to us, it cost us nothing, its easy.

In respect of the dispensation of it.
and the efficacy of this price, (I speak now of his revealed will, not
secret) but offers it by the Ministry of the Gospel to all sorts, without let
or bar: That whosoever will submit himself to his way and dispensation with
humbleness, the Lord will be found (ordinarily) by such, without putting
difference: He does not sh oll out or discourage any, as if he did not intend
it to them, he does not reject any who reject nor him, nor forsake any
(conceive me rightly) who forsake not him: And their rejecting or forsaking
proceeds not from his decree working it, but from their malice and unbeleefe
procuring it: But as for the Lord, 2 Cron. 16.4.
he does not forestall or prejudicate the spirit of any man to his
dispensation, but freely, generally and fully offers to all sorts of sinners,
the benefit of his grace and pardon, who do not basely and treacherously
withdraw themselves, and cavil against his simplicity. The Lord does not put
difference in his offer, saying, to such or such an one I offer it, to such and
such I do not, he offers alike to all; and although some conditions go before
the actual application of the promise, yet those conditions are wrought in the
soul by the offer in all, who do walk with God in the w^y of his Ordinances,
except they fight and resist the same. So then, whosoever does not despise the
counsel of God, Luke 4.
and think himself unworthy of salvation, but show himself of the number of
them who are drawn and persuaded to accept it, he shall assuredly partake it.
So much for the fourth.

Fifthly, to come a little nearer, that is, to the real efficacy of working
The condition of faith is easy to such as belong to election.
When as the Lord has brought the soul under the condition of faith, partly
by loading the same under her misery; partly by the presenting to her the
sweetness, gainfulnesse and faithfulness of the promise; and partly by
removing all such bars and lets as might dissuade the soul from it; then
hereby to such a one, it becomes easy to believe. And to say the truth, to
these its only easy, in the true kind and proper sense of easiness. For
why? These are exempted from the common sort of hearers, to whose thoughts the
very conceit of faith is a difficult thing, much more the enterprise. For alas!
Naturally, what in all the world is so harsh and unwelcome to our carnal
disposition, as to obey the Gospel? Not to preach, to hear, to give away our
wealth, to sacrifice our children, to keep the Law, are so hard as this: But
to such as the Lord has brought under the authority, love and conduct of the
word, and the Spirit of grace working thereby; he makes it sweet and easy.
Others plod and take on, make a bungling work of it, Esaias 63.12. Psalm. 23.3.
as we see untidy servants go awkely about their business, which neat and
skillful ones dispatch at once; but the Lord conducts these as a shepherd
leads his sheep into the green pastures, and as those Israelites were led by
the pillar of fire and cloud through the wilderness. If a traveller be set
right on his journey, his ease is in his guide: As Isaac seeing Jacob bring
venison so soon, asked him how he came so quickly by it? He told him, because
the Lord thy God brought it to his hand: So he had no need of Esau his
hunting. Now briefly, it shall not be amiss to show by what steps the Lord
makes this work easy and familiar to his people.

First, Cernaine particulars of this holy ease. The first.
as he gives them a sweet view of this work of obeying the Gospel, that is a
clear and familiar conceiving thereof, so that it is not an intricate and
wearisome object: (As Solomon describes the way of the fluggard to be an hedge
of thorns, which no man is willing to meddle with:) So also the Lord brings the
soul unto the door of hope, showing it an entrance and a possiblenesse of
escape, working a knowledge of it, and withal an hearty and close aim and
sympathy to it. Hosea 2.
It so plants the soul under the promise, that the droppings of Gods myrrh,
oil and balm, do not light beside it, but right into it. When a man has got
the promise of a lease; he is sure of the next vacancy: So men that lay in for
an advouzon, wait for the next avoidance. It is a good ease for a poor
Scholar in the University to be made a Probationer of the next Fellowship (as
in some Colleges they use) for then he waits in hope, and is eased of the
hazard of missing. Such Probationers and Candidates of heaven, does the Lord
first make his poor people, that so having an inckling of his meaning, they
go on with sweetness, because heaven is theirs in the grant and reversion. As
once an holy man told me, that the Lord intimated his heart with this thought,
that if he would seek him faithfully in the means, he would save him. A
marveilous privilege. So that look when any grace falls from God, they are
the parties whom it will light upon; this takes off an exceeding deal of
bondage, and makes means sweet. So it was to them of Ninivee, Jona 3.7.8.9.
Judge. 14. Jer. 4.3.
who upon this hint from God, applied themselves to the means very carefully.
This causes the heart to plow with Gods heifer, to find out his riddle, and to
see into the mystery of the promise; and therefore to plow indeed and fall to
work, to rend up the fallow grounds of her proud rebellious nature, self and
scurffe, to hunger after and set a price upon the promise, as a pearl above
price.

2. In diverse points.
Secondly, the Lord makes it an easy work by settling the promise upon the
soul, and that by sundry works: For first, it does pull up all hedges and
fences which stopped the souls course, standing between the soul and her
harms, he puts her out of fear, and sets her out of danger, removes Lions of
supposed difficulty out of her way; as malice of Satan dismaying, error of the
wicked deterring, and self distempers which disquiet her with doubtings: we
know if a man would go the next way to a place and avoid dirt and bad way, he
must have a guide to lead him by the fields, to pull up gaps, bars and stops;
which done, the traveller has great ease. So the Lord deals for his, he
suffers them not to travel tediously to heaven; that is the portion of
hypocrites who undo as fast as they do, and are ever new to begin; but to
his own he gives sweet ease in his way. If a man should hold our enemy for us
and bind him by strength, it were (as we say) five of the seven, we might
easily beat him. Thus our Lord Jesus binds Satan and difficulties, that the
soul might get the better of him, and go forward without awcknesse, Luke 12.
self-love or hypocrisy.

Secondly, the Lord makes the promise easy, by presenting to her all the good
things of it (as Canaan was seen easily by Moses when the Lord showed it unto
him) and so sets the soul in a sweet course: Deuteronomy 34.1, 2, 3, 4.
We know by experience, when once a man gets the savor and smack of an
object, he goes roundly: A Tradesman having tasted the real sweet of his
return, and a scholar of his book, take small thought to go through stitch.
Paul in that place to the Corinths, tells us that the Lord has diffused the
savor of his truth into him, and by him to others. An hypocrite is puzling
after it all his life time, 2 Cor. 2.14.
but is so poisoned with the more welcome savours of his pleasures, gain and
lusts, that he falls short of the grace of God, and as it is Heb. 12. Esau came
short of the blessing, Iaacob came just in the way of it and failed not: And
this savor differs from the decaying and wanzing taste of temporaries; it
abides in the soul, and causes it to be restless, till it possess what it
savours: It is as leven, sowres the whole lump of mind, will, affections.

Thirdly and lastly, it does authorize, enable and carry the soul (as Esaias
speaks, Esaias 55.9.10.
The snow and the rain return not in vain to him that sent them, but cause
the earth to bring forth corn to the eater, and seed to the sower: So shall my
word (says the Lord) not fail of its scope, but to do that for which I sent
it. And sithence the Lord Jesus speaks no words in vain, but with the promise,
adds the performance; therefore the soul hears it so, takes and finds it
so; even as the command of Christ to the sick of the palsy, Be thou clean,
cleansed him forthwith. So then, if the Lord will have it so sweet and easy a
work, who shall let it? Who shall disanull it? So much for the Reasons.

I proceed to the Use. Uses.
Let this first teach us to put a difference between persons who profess to
seek heaven: Whatsoever the world thinks Esters Ester 9.14.
time, when Hamans plot was broken, Grace is easy to them that are bred for it.
that to the Jews was a day of gladness and rest from all their troubles,
feasting and ease; but to their enemies the contrary: So I say, to all plodding
ones and hypocrites, the Lord gives as much toil (and more) for hell, as the
godly for heaven; it is their lot, Eccles. 2.26.
and the portion of their cup: They would never come within the condition or
suburbs of mercy; but the others lot is fallen into a goodly heritage. Psalm.
16.
It is with them, Simil.
as it is with two men carried into a field wherein there lies an hidden
treasure: The one is left to seek, to dig, to harp upon the place by
conjecture, and so finds it a bootlesse work: Matthew. 13.44.
The other is carried to the plac^ pointed by the finger, and there he digges
and finds it. A Scholar in the University that has a general wit for
learning, will thrive and get it (although but poorly maintained) when another
kept there upon costy terms, wanting such a spirit, shall plod in vain.
Matthew. 13.11.
It is only theirs to whom it is given, to whom by covenant it belongs; even
such as renouncing themselves, wholly resign up themselves to him, who can
only make it easy and sweet. The elder brother was as near his fathers elbow
as could be and always with him; yet it was the lot of the younger (a prodigal
turned to his father) to eat of the fat calfe, to have the ring, robe and
shoes put on him; it was easy for him to be happy, when his father would
beteame it him as his lot. Judge. 14.
When Sampsons friends are kept from the riddle, how hard is it in seven days
to hit upon it? But when they plowed with his heifer, how easily they find it
out, and come to him, saying, What is more sweet then honey? And what more
strong then a Lion? When the two Apostles, Peter and Paul preached to the
Jews, how they pressed upon them the offer of salvation, because by virtue of
the covenant, they were to have the first refusal? Read two places, Act. 2.
Peter tells them, To you and to your children (out of Gods free love) the
promise belongs and the powrings out of the spirit, and to as many as the Lord
our God shall call. And so in the 13. of Acts, To you (brethren, the Jews at
Antioch) is preached by this man forgiveness of sins. It was a great honor
though they had not the grace to see it: And so much more to all under the
condition of faith the promise belongs, although to such as are under the
condition of their own strength, it shall be a mere toil and bondage. So much
for the first instruction.

Quest. Grace is called by name of a yoke, how then easy?
Some presenting unto us a marveilous ease in the yoke of Christ and a
lightness in his burden: Others a marveilous difficulty, and such a thing as
must be striven for, and yet may be mist.

The answer is, Heaven and Grace are both the most easy, and the most
difficult that can be; Answ. Grace is the hardest and the easiest thing of all.
Math. 19.26.
both may well stand: They are most easy to the soul which will be taught of
God, and will not resist his method by attending their own wisdom: But to
others, they are matters of greatest difficulty: To God all things are
possible; to flesh and blood, to the wit and will of man, to the freedom of
our own choice, nothing is so impossible. I remember the answer of a
Philosopher to a great Prince (who had been his scholar, and was discontented
at him for publishing his books) be content, says he, and know, my books of
Philosophy are published and not published, for none are ere the wiser for them,
save those to whom they were read and made evident. So here: The mystery of
Christ is the most easy and the most hard; easy only to such as in whom the
Lord has opened an ear, Job 33.15. and revealed it, to others hard. So much
for Instruction.

Terror to many.
running away with them as horses with empty wagons, not through any Slighters
of the work of grace, abuse the doctrine of ease.
Others are blind, idiots tell them of Regeneration and Conversion, and they
run to their own strength, they do hope well, that if they put their good will
to Gods, God will so far enable them as to get somewhat: They hope men make
more ado about matters then God himself: God has told them, that faith in the
promise is easy, and none of these sour Preachers shall pull this liberty
from them, what needs all this ado? If God be on our side, we fear nothing;
as long as men walk even and fair, harmless and devout, bearing a good
mind toward God, keep their Church, and pay all men their dues, and give to
the poor; for ought they see God is merciful, will not the death of a sinner,
is found of them that sought him not: Esaias 65.1. Matthew. 11.^9. Esaias 57.17.
His yoke is easy, he says he will not be always heavy upon men, he knows we
be no Angels: yea he says, that he has seen the iniquity of men's
covetousness, and he will heal them and make no more ado. It is for his
glory to be merciful. As for these Ministers who stick so much at the truth
of heart, and faith unfaigned, they say, only God knows the heart, and they
trouble men's heads more then they do them good, making men unquiet, and
finding out new crotchets! What is man's life (say they) if he may not be
merry and cheerful? God loves it, and Christ has dearly bought it, and its
best to be merry, eat and drink, and cast away care. God (say these) has made
us of bodies as well as souls, we be not all spirit, nor shall be in this
world; we must tend Sermons so as we may tend our work too, our bodies must be
made of for God, and what skils it, though we play and be good fellows, and
drink a cup or two, (so it be in the fear of God) although we be none of
these Puritans, yet we be not against them; we hope by this means to spend
out our short time, having God before our eyes, and to be in heaven ere we be
aware. Oh ye woeful creatures! Do you thus construe Gods ease? I ask you,
Has the Lord ever brought you under the bondage of spirit, for all your cursed
nature and impious profaneness? Did it ever cut you off from your old stock?
Did it ever bring ye under hope? No doubtless: Think not then to make faith
an easy purchase upon your own purse; it will be one day, in that your last
night of death and darkness, such a toilesome journey, through tempest and
foul weather, dirt and weariness, that you shall be quite tired, and then
shall true toil succeed false ease: Hearken not to that lying spirit which
bears you in hand, all ease, ease, for it shall turn to extremity of anguish,
and to a desperate impossibility: The mouth of the Lord has spoken it, The
Lord indeed moderates the labor of his poor weary travelers to Zion, Psalm.
84. So that they shall grow from strength and feel no faintness: But no man
shall go up in a feather bed to heaven, if it were ever an easy way, it was
never easy; foolehardy stout travelers, which boast of their limbs, shall
faint suddenly. Matthew. 15.
Dogs must not come with poor children for Gods dole, it belongs not unto
them. So much for the first Branch.

Others also there are whom this terror reaches unto: And they are Hypocrites
who come with their toil and cost to God, are rejected.
devising painful and tedious ways of their own, but shunning Gods easy
way. They will obtrude their whole rivers of oil and wine, and whole barns of
corn, for the sin of their souls; whereas he asks only a third part of an
Hin, and an handful of flower for a meat offering: A poor thing in Gods way,
is better excepted then all excess of our own. Ye load me (says God) and
pester me with your offerings, I groan under the burden of your sacrifices.
Honor me in mine own way, and I will make it easy and sweet to you: But
else, the sand is not more heavy to men's shoulders, then you to Gods; you are
out of Gods element, therefore every thing is weighty; you may complain that
you are not regarded, but the Lord pitties no toil of hypocrites against his
word. Elija shall sooner consume the sacrifice with fire from heaven by
standing still, and praying in Gods way, then all Baals Priests with their
lancings and leapings upon the Altar. Cost without wit is waste. Its said of
Jonathan that he had wrought with God that day on which he overcame those
Philistines. So I say, Gods people work with God, 1 King. 18.28. with 37. 1 Samuel
(rather he with them) but hypocrites work with themselves; therefore they lay
out their labor for that which profits not, and money for no bread. They go
against the stream, a Esau in his hunting, for the blessing went another way
with less ado. Esaias 55.2. 1 Samuel 14.45. 2 Timothy 3.7.
As its said in Timothy, Always hearing, never coming to knowledge: Oh the
endless bootlesse toil of hypocrites! You poor asses, running the Devils
round, and grinding in his mill, with your eyes blindfold, at last be scared
out of your trade! You do but as Sampson, Judge. 15.
lay heaps upon heaps, and die of thirst! Once get into the right way, and
undo somewhat first, which God would have you forgo instead of your doings;
and this will cause unto you incredible ease and sweetness in your proceeding.
Remember that speech, Esaias 30. your strength shall be to sit still: Sit still
and be quiet therefore in your hypocritical devotions, and be stirring and
working with God under the condition of his promise, and your labor shall not
be lost in the Lord. 1 Cor. 13. ult.
Else you shall suffer loss not only of a part, but of the principal; you
shall sink in your sweat, and the most despised fatherless creatures with
their poor emptiness, scarce daring to lift up eyes to heaven, standing afar
off, shall go away better justified then you with all your supererogations.
Luke 18.13.
And when you are thus defeated, your mends shall be in your own hands. So much
for this second.

Reproof. Sundry branches. 1. The chief season of ease is at first.
yet never had the wisdom to discern that spiritual season, in which the
Lord makes this work of faith easy and welcome. The ease of believing (in
Gods usual method) attends a peculiar opportunity of Gods own vouchsafing, in
which he does more readily work, then at all other times. Commonly when the
word is first sent to a congregation, as a dainty, as a rare and desired
pearl, an object of price: Again, when the spirit of the hearer is carried
with violence to carry the Kingdom away, whatsoever pains and charge it cost
them; when also the Lord sends the Angel or Minister with a more then common
spirit of zeal, to stir the muddy poole to the bottom, and to unsettle men's
hearts frozen upon their dregs: I say, when as the Lord inspires him with the
spirit of Eliah or John Baptist, with special love to the precious souls of
men, with laboriousnesse and the spirit of convincing: when as the Gospel
draws all sorts unto it, by the fervency of affections and examples of such as
make toward it, then there is ease in believing. Not when the Gospel is waxen
stale in a Town, and Manna plentiful, which commonly causes loathing and
fulsomenesse: Not when the hearers heart is sunk and dead in his breast,
indifferent whether he speed or no: Not when the spirits of the Ministers of
God wax dull, as Moses hands with long holding up: Not when the Spirit of
grace, of power, melting, drawing and persuading, begins to flag: And (as Micah
says) is straightened: Mica 2.6.
Not when the hearts of Ministers faint in them and turn another way: Not when
they are driven out from their places, and are feign to seek into remote
Countries: Not when the affections of people wax generally dead, and careless
which end go forward, rather minding their own world, will and ends, then the
matters of salvation.

When these marks fall out, the shadows of the mountains wax long, the wild
Beasts go out of their dens to spoil, and the laborers turn their backs
upon their work, because the Sun is down. Not in these seasons, not in
death, deep sicknesses, crosses, fears, losses, is there like to be found
this ease I speak of? And therefore, Oh you (my brethen who hear me this
day!) who have long lived here under the means, (above fifty years) think
seriously of your estate. If yet the work of believing the promise be undone,
if you have outbidden and survived all these happy seasons, (wherein your own
souls know you felt such dampings of corruption, raisings of heart, thawings,
inclinings and movings of spirit, to embrace the offer of salvation) and have
fallen to the world, to pleasures, to ease, and (as Cain did) being cast out of
Gods presence, to go and build Cities: Let my words now pierce you (if any
tenderness at root remain in you) and take heed lest if ever you find God
gracious, (if he have not quite cast you off for your dallying) you be put to
toil and travel for it, lest it cost you ten times as much trouble as you
might first have had it for. The Lord is hardly drawn to return to a
particular man, when he has left a public place: I tell you, if you have
slighted such means and seasons as these, it must be the unspeakeable patience
of God which can pull you home at last: It were strange if a man who has lost
his fair or market, should come many days after and meet with those
commodities which he wants, then he might have stored himself with ease, but
after with much hazard and cost.

You have had your season, your accepted time and day of salvation; Special
application to the present people.
many hundreds have believed and set seal to the grace offered, and most of
them are at rest with God. If you be those unhappy ones who have received it
all this while in vain, Hard for long dalliers with God, to recover him again
at their pleasure or leisure.
I doubt whether ever any new appetite will be lent you, and although it were,
I doubt whether (the doors being shut) you shall speed of your desire (though
you should run from Barwicke to Dover, from old England into new for it) or
be admitted to believe: Oh! How shall I speak to this woeful place for the
padling out of her season of ease? God has brought salvation to your doors,
as to the children of the Kingdom, pind it on your sleeves, I may truly (and
in a good time) speak it, The Gospel has always brought you more gain then it
has cost you: Pulpits have been, as it were, set up in your streets by your
houses, (so near is the grace of God come unto you;) and when others have
ridden and trotted five, ten, fifteen miles, you have had it at home, for
stepping in at the doors; floods of butter and oil have flowed down in your
brooks and streets, and thousands have been satisfied with your leavings: You
have been as free borne to the Gospel; What (in all the world) shall you
pretend for your selves, if you have never had (I say not the best portion) but
any part at all of it: Oh! that I could teach you, (after all my pressing of
the promise among you) how to dispute for your selves? But that exceeds my
skill; you have had a fee-simple, an inheritance of the Gospel, you have been
married to the Lord, under long, constant, unwearied, plain and powerful
means, long ere I came among you: All men's gifts have served you, Note you of
the congregation.
you have entered into other men's labors. I may add this, that you have
possessed fields, vineyards and orchards, which you never knew the price of;
never bought tilled or planted. For my self although I have long lived
unprofitable, yet if ever God lent me any fitness to do you good, it has
been since I came among you: And yet some of you, through laziness,
worldliness, love of your shops, formality, neglect of meditation: Others
through a cursed sullen heart, snuffing at the Ministry, stumbling at the stone
of offense, but the most from a cloyed and surfeited stomach with much food,
have never come to taste the ease of mercy. If some few have, truly, either
they have little else to take too, or else God has picked them out as odd ones
here and there; and what may become of some of these when means shall fail,
God knows! But now even at this last cast and farewell, for Gods sake, come
in and dally no longer, and break through all your lusts for this promise! It
shall vex ye as fire one day, to think of this, how foolishly did I miss of
heaven? When I might have had it with ease, then to lose it for a base lust, a
vanity, which shall leave me empty, Oh fool in kind! The Lord move your
hearts! So much for this first branch of Reproof.

Deny selfe-ease for Gods ease.
by leaning to their own strength, zeal and affections. I have beat much upon
this: Now I say no more but this. Wonder not if your lives be full of
complaints! Oh ye, says Esaias! who kindle a fire of your rotten sticks, Esaias
50. ult.
and compass your selves with your own sparkles, much good do it you with
your own light and heat, but you shall have this at mine hand, you shall lie
down in sorrow! Is it a small sin that turns Gods ease into misery? Verse.
10.
No surely. A viper shall come forth of your own heat and sting you to death
without repentance! Who is he among you that fears the Lord and obeyes the
voice of his servants, that walks in the darkness and has no light! Let him
trust in the name of the Lord, and stay himself upon his God: And so doing, he
will do his work for him. Get once the slight of it (as we say) and then
half the work is at an end: Lay down rather your own spirits and sparkles,
good deeds and affections, rather then take them up to demerit God and resist
his ease: And so by denying your selves, here on the left hand in your vices,
there on the right in your virtues and praises, sucking out an humble heart out
of the promise, (for alas! what needed the cost of Christ, if your cost could
serve the turn) you shall find your selves to profit more by one Sermon, then
you have done by ten. So much for this second Branch.

Thirdly, this reproves all such Ministers as turn this true and spiritual
Preachers of carnal ease who sow pillowes.
yea sowing pillowes of fleshly ease under their elbowes; telling them they are
in good ease, and these Preachers scare them with false fires; for Gods yoke
is easy, Christ came to destroy the hard Law, etc. And the ground of this
practice is either idleness, to spare themselves a labor, or through
profaneness, or through Gods just judgment to give them teachers such as
themselves are, to cause them to stumble and fall, and rise no more, and all
because they have rejected better means. And others Pelagian wise, teach that
there is an universal sufficient grace offered in the Gospel which also is
effectual, except men resist it, and that they have free will to accept and
embrace it. As for the doctrine of Gods peculiar ease of persuading some more
then others, they cannot endure it. They teach the people to say to God, as
those in Esaias are brought in, saying to one man, do but bear our name and
own us, and we will be at our own findings, thou shall not be troubled with
our maintenance, we will be fed, apparrelled and supported by our own means
and moneies. Pelagian ease of selfe-conversion, and of fre-will confuted.
So say these to Christ, bear our name for fashion, and obtain a general
pardon by the merit of thy blood, and as for the application of it let us
alone, we will find strength by our own free concurrence with the grace
offered, to fasten upon and apply it to our selves. And so if there fall out to
be any defect herein, it is no want of the accommodation of grace to us, (for
that is equal to all) but our accommodation to it in such a due season, matter
or other circumstances, as if they had been concurring, might have produced a
persuasion to receive the grace offered. To all which, I answer, such ease as
this in obeying the command of believing, the orthodox Church of God know none:
The ease that is, is on Gods part, preventing, assisting and perfecting, and
from none of ours. To us, the work is absolutely impossible. So much for this
third Branch, and so for this third Use of Reproof.

The fourth Use should be Exhortation, and that many fold. First, Exhortation.
In sundry Branches. Such as have found ease in Gods way are thankful.
who have found Gods way sweetened thus and eased by the Lord, that they be very
thankful for this special favor. Say thus, who am I whom thou should
make that sweet and easy unto, which to others thou suffer to be
toilesome? Thou might have brought me as hardly to heaven as others, there
is not a prouder, tougher molded wretch of an hundred then I have been, Jer.
2.3.4.
yet thy mild and gentle cords of allurement have been strange to me! Thou
have pulled me with the cords of a man, made love to me even in the
wilderness, forelaid my way sweetly, brought me into the net ere I was aware,
concealed difficulties while afterward, mittigated my horrors, gone leasurely
on with me, drop upon drop, line upon line, not gugged me too deeply with my
lusts, not suffered me to revolt to my old courses; thou have laid no heavy
burdens upon my shoulders, required no toil of service; thou have given me an
hope of success from the beginning, so that I have gone to work with hope,
been freed from excessive fears, temptations, crosses, discouragements, which
many others are basked withal. For my part I know no reason, and I can but
wonder, that thou should do as thou have (which I cannot deny without
lying) to one so hollow, inconstant and perverse, as I know my self to be. It
pleases thee to hold me fast to those steps to which thou have brought me, and
to try me no deeplier then thou give light and strength to resolve and
revive me again. Methinkes, thou have made the whole mystery of Christ
sensible and lively to me in the ground of it, the merit, thy scope (which is
to magnify thy self in the hearts of thine) and my heart has found some
sweetness in it, found it day by day more lightsome and sweet: As the
loadstone holds iron to it self, so I have felt thy promise to draw me, so
that I cannot give it over, nor forsake the means, but they are daily sweeter
and sweeter to me. I have not felt such temptations to hideous thoughts and
lusts as some have done: I am not disquieted so much about the measure of my
preparations as some have been, from my youth up, thou have by steps and
degrees wrought that which thou art feign to work in others by violence and
with difficulties: Nothing but excess of clemency and mercy has been my
portion; and yet in all, I have held some good testimony in my own heart of
sincere and plain intentions, although feeble, yet faithful. Oh bless the
Lord!

Pity such as get to heaven with difficulties.
As for others, whose birth costs more travel and pains, pity them the
rather, and confess thou owe them so much the more compassion by how much
they come harder to heaven then thou do. We see an heir toiles not so much
for all his inheritance, as a poor labourer for a groat a day. Does the poor
man murmr at him? No, but puts himself under providence which has made some
owners, some tenants, some to live at more ease, others with more toil: The
Lord is the maker of both, and perhaps foresees, that if the poor had as the
rich, he would bear it worse, and therefore his rough spirit must be basked
and held down from pride and rebellion. Let not such as meet with more
hardship in their conversion accuse God, for changing ease into toil: Let them
not murmr at Lydia, at Zachee and such as have been easily brought home; but
bless God that he would trouble himself with such pieces as they, rather then
burn them as knotty logs scarce worth the hewing, and bestow any cost upon
them for his own names sake, rather then they should perish: But let them be
far from cavilling at God that they have abode the heat of the day, and
others coming in at the eleventh hour have fared as well? Matthew. 20.15.
Is thy penny the worse silver for theirs? Or is thine eye evil because Gods
is good? wonder rather that ever that penny should come in thy purse, then that
others fare as well, or that thou farest not better! So much for this Branch.

Beware lest the ease of the first mercy, cause thee after to slight it.
become not a snare unto thee afterward to cause thee to slight it and forget
it. Do not as wanton heirs, who spend it as lightly and basely, as it came
easily: Lest the Lord make your hearts ache for it, and set you on the rack,
teaching you to repent and to keep within bounds. Oh! abuse not this goodness,
slight it not, walk not slackly, sit not loose upon easy mercy; devote thy
self rather to God, for so free, sweet easy mercy, with the most close
faithful heart, thinking nothing too dear for him. David could break forth
Psalm. 43. ult. into great triumphs, after a tedious conflict and combat with
his fears, doubts and depth of heavines, and say, I will still praise him who
is the health of my countenance and my God: And shall not thou say so much
more, who have escaped many such scourings? Do not now think thou art safe,
thou may hear, pray, receive the sacraments as loosely and formally as thou will, because grace came easily: No, make the more precious account of it; else
thou art a slave and no Son. An heir seeing himself stockt by his father,
with sweet dwelling, rich grounds, great revenues, so that he needs not to
carke and toil for a living: What does he? Surely as the Lord bids the
Israelites, who came into a land flowing with milk and honey, and that at the
best vantage, even in the harvest of all commodities: But rather knit the heart
to God. Joshua 5.11.
Beware lest now ye forget the Lord that has thus endowed and furnished you:
Walk humbly, and fear the Lord that it may go well with you: So should we
do; we should say, now all other things are done to mine hand, there is but
one thing to do, Lord teach me to do it well; If I can be full and yet
remember the Lord that made me, and highly esteem the rock of my salvation, he
will think them well bestowed, Deuteronomy. 32.14.
and confirm them to me, else they shall be a snare.

Fall not to Adams and Eves sin, who in the abundance of all things, being
set in a Paradise, could not digest their happiness, but fell to revolt, and
so were cast out. Say not, Soul, eat, drink, be merry, cry not, peace, peace;
but let the ease of mercy keep thy soul from all presuming and sensual
security. John 5.
Remember that bitter pill given by our Lord Jesus to a loose one, whose cure
cost him nothing, and so he began to play his parts: Thou art healed, now sin
no more lest a worse thing befall thee, and then thou will wish, would I had
lien lame by the poole still! We are scarce able (brethren) to bear the ease
of mercy but we wax wanton, and that is the cause why so few find it, and so
many complain of such difficulties: It is just with God to make us wear the
chain for it, to teach us to walk before the Lord more humbly and soberly.
And so much for the second Branch of the Exhortation. I should now have
concluded the Use with the third and last Branch, that we walk in the
experience of this blessed ease, to trust God forth on for the like goodness.
But the time is spent: Let us cut off here and call upon God, etc.

THE FOVRTEENTH LECTVRE Still continued upon this thirteenth VERSE.
VERSE XIII. And his servants came near, and said unto him, Father, if the
Prophet had bid thee do some great thing, would thou not have done it? How
much more then, when he says unto thee, Wash and be clean?

VERSE 14. So he went down and dipped himself in Jorden seven times, etc.


2 Kings
I Gave you an hint briefly (beloved in our Savior) when I last ended the
former Sermon, what I would have proceeded with, if time had permitted. I have
showed you, That the believing of Gods promise (to such as are in case) is an
easy thing. Sundry grounds and Scriptures I cleared the truth by, and sundry
Uses of Instruction, of Terror, of Reproof, and of Exhortation I have added.
And to this last (wherein two branches were urged The ease of mercy should make
Gods yoke light for ever after.
in believing pardon, should be earnest with God for the ease and sweetness of
an holy course, that the yoke of God may become easy and his burden light.
Say thus unto the Lord, Hitherto thou have dealt with thy servant in mercy,
thou have not laid heavy taskes upon me; I cannot accuse thee (like an
hypocrite) that thou have taken up where thou have not strawed, nor reaped
where thou have not sown: Rather I may say, that others have labored, and I
am entered into their labors, that is, found a sweet and easy work of
believing. Now as I bless thee for this, so yet, be not angry with me, if I
have another request to make unto thee, Matthew. 25.24.
and that is, that thou would still hold the like hand toward me, in making
the life of faith sweet unto me, and the course of obedience most welcome and
familiar. Oh! let it be no harsh thing unto me to believe all thy other
promises, Genesis 18.30.
concerning strength against tentations, power against my lusts: And breed
experience for time to come.
Lord let not the difficulty of walking be as great, as the ease of conversion
was merciful; just it were with thee to make it so, and to try me what
soundness, what uprightness were in me by hard trialls: But oh! lead me not
into tentation, do not suffer my corruptions to wax stronger then I can master,
nor Satan to be more fierce and fiery in his darts then I can resist or quench:
I do not pray against crosses or assaults, but that they may be according to
man, and that an issue may be given with them, that I may say, thou have been
afflicted with me in all my afflictions, to make them tolerable, Esaias 63.9.
by thy meekness, confidence, patience and courage put into me: Let the Angel
of thy presence save me and conduct me, bear me up by thy hand continually,
and redeem me out of them all at last in an happy manner; give me O Lord, both
the upper and the nether springs, enlarge my coast, and be with me against
those Cananites of the mountains, Judge. 1.15.
who have iron chariots! If thou shall indeed bless me (as Iabez said) thou
shall be my God, 1 Chronicles. 4.10. Teach me mercy to the distressed, patience in
affliction, faith in straits, soberness in blessings, faithfulness, if a
Minister, subjection, if a wife, understanding, if an husband, dutifulness, if
a child, trustiness, if a servant, and let there be sweet ease in all these.

Lust is sweet (Lord) to my unmortified part, but present thou such a
prevailing sweetness in thy love by thy promise, that it may bear down the
corrupt pleasure of my sin; so that, while thy love and the joy of thy
countenance is present, the image of such scurfe may be despised, and it may
not be tedious to me to reject the tentations to wrath, revenge, earthlinesse,
looseness in liberties, pride, vanity: But all these may become bitter to me,
thy grace making them so! Oh (brethren!) the Lord teach you to think of this:
Strange it is, how many of us go to work with God in the way of our
conversation, especially if private, solemn, dangerous, disgraced, hard duties
be urged, we find our hearts so sullen, weary, hollow, fickle, carnal in any
duty which concerns us, as if God were highly beholding to us for our work.
What then should be the pitch of our ambition with God, save that still he
would carry us upon Eagles wings, hide all difficulty of Religion from us,
present it to us as a sweet object, remove our waywardness of will, and fill
us with love, that we comprehending the length, depth and height of it, might
be filled with his fullness, and be carried on without any great rubs, or sad
offenses, that our heads may not be brought to our graves with sorrow, but we
may finish our course with joy. David in that Psalm 27.4. having found one
mercy with God, stays not there, but lays in for a new: What is that? One
thing I will ask of God that he will not deny me, That I may walk and spend
all my days in his house continually: A child finds it no trouble to him to
walk in the presence of a loving father, who pitties and provides for him! So
should thou. Mourn thus, if ever any thing come between my soul and ease,
it will be this treacherous heart which will come to a point! Its that which so
manacles and pinions my soul, that I cannot reach that liberty and joy which
thy servants feel! Its that (Lord) which makes me so dark, so lowering,
discontent, unfruitful and sad! Esaias 38.
Oh Lord! ease me here, these have oppressed me, deliver me! I do not lay in,
for liberty to the lusts of the flesh, to fulfill them, Pray for five things to
make Religion sweet.
I desire the curbing and destruction of them for ever, and their wasting
daily! But till thy sweetness satisfy my soul, and soake me to the roots, I
shall never be as I would be, nor can thy work be as it ought to be! Accept
therefore first, the will for the deed, a little for Saul's armor upon David's
back, who could not go with them: And to

Nourish not fears about the way of God.
then any of the former: And that is this, That seeing the people of God, have
an allowance from God of ease in believing: Therefore let all poor souls set
their hearts at rest, and not nourish fears within themselves of a more tedious
entrance into the Kingdom of Grace, then the Lord has promised. Nay rather,
let them fasten upon this privilege, not looking at themselves, but at him,
who has all impossibilities at his beck, and can turn them to ease. In which
respect Abraham is said to believe, that (although in show Sara's womb was to
be barren, yet) because God was able to make good his word, therefore from one
who was as dead, should issue thousands. Thus faith gives glory to God, and
drownes her own fears in his power: True it is, we cannot believe that God
will make his promise easy till we believe: But one excellent argument to draw
us to believe, is, the meditation of it as an easy work, and that the Lord
can and will make it so. As I noted before, the cause why so many start and
shrink from the way of God, is the conceit of the most noisome and tedious
hardness of it. The sluggard still cries, A Lion is in the way, Proverb.
I dare not go. Take we heed of this bondage: We cannot dishonor God more
deadly, then by an ill conceit of him, and his method of believing. For wisdom
is easy to him that loves understanding; if God will make it so, why
should thou gainsay it? A lowering, sullen heart, causes this slavery in us;
we are willing to believe that which we wish: but look what we have small
list unto, that we naturally frame to our selves very difficult. Counsels
against this disease.
Strive first to get a true judgment of the way of conversion, that the Lord
has said its easy. Naamans servants here labor to beat into their Master, so
freely offered it; that will win thy affections to it; and when thy heart is
taken with it, thou shall soon be on thorns to enjoy it. The ease of
believing issues from the souls getting under the condition of the promise.
Touching which point, because it will offer it self in the next verse more
fully, I say the less here. That which in a word I will press here (and so
finish) is this, Resist faiths enemy which is bondage,

It costs the Lord exceeding pains to banish out this error, which if it were
once overcome, its not to be said, what incredible ease would appear:
Therefore let thy course (poor soul) be, to beg of God the Luke 5. Joh. ult.
Genesis 18.14.
Thou can bid Peter spread his net, just where they are, and enclose
multitudes in it, after he had fished all night and caught nothing. Alas! he
cast out his net on the wrong side all the while; but when the Lord Jesus came,
then he cast on the right side, and caught abundance. At thy command Lord, a
dead heart shall be quickened, a dead womb shall conceive, a creeple of thirty
eight years shall be healed, and what hard thing has not turned easy at thy
command?

What was easier then to go through the red sea first, and then Jorden
dryshod, when thou causedst the winds to keep up the waters like two walls on
both sides, and to dry up the mud in the midst? What is hard save because of
lets? And what is not easy if bars be removed? Oh therefore Lord! thou who
by that miracle made Peter a Preacher, and gave him a sign that he should
be a fisher of men, and enclose three thousand at one Sermon; teach me this
blessed gift, make me such a Preacher of reconciliation by thy skill and ease:
Act. 2.
And thou who broughtest all fishes under the net, be not discouraged by my
shinesse, fear and loathnesse to be driven in: Say but the word, and I shall
come under it, and thy Minister shall cast out on the right side and enclose
me! Oh happy soul! if after all my tricks and wiles to shun thee, thou shall
at the last, make my will willing, and cause me to come under the sweet and yet
authority of thy promise: I crave not Lydia's ease, Zachees ease, I know now
thy course is more leasurely: I do not so much seek shortness of labor, as
sweetness of spirit, and meekness of heart, and surenesse of success, and
riddance of my baseness and contradictions: The wilderness shall be as
welcome to me, as the way of the Philistines, if thou will tame my rebellions,
and give me a pledge of Canaan at last! The Lord will not stop his ear to such
a prayer; mercy pleases him, and the ease of mercy pleases him; what should
hinder him from giving that which pleases him? Only our own ease set up
against his, makes the way to heaven tedious, if that be removed, heaven will
be as easy as this cure was by washing in Jorden. So much for this last
Branch, as also for the whole Use.

viz. Admonition. Wisdom is needful to judge of the ease of grace.
That notwithstanding all which has been said about this point, yet that we
be wise and discreet in our judgments, both concerning Gods diversity of
dispensation, and concerning the estates of men. For the first, although I have
said nothing but the truth of God hitherto, yet this must not breed ill blood
in us, when we consider his casting off thousands, yea millions of people, both
such as are without the pale of the Church, and such as are visible members by
Baptism: It may arise in the minds of some to think, that if the way of God
were easy, why should the Lord hide it from so many generations, from the
beginning till now, (for ought we know) among Pagans and Infidels? And why
should so many among our selves after their long knowledge and use of means,
yet find it so hard a task and come short of it when all is done? The answer
whereto is, That the secret ways of God are not for us to descant upon: If he
will conceal this way of his from many for special cause, we must say. Known
unto the Lord are all his ways and works from the beginning. Act. 15.18.
Hebrew, Greek and Latin are things easy and familiar to some children, but
they who never had training, Judge not rashly either of Gods public,
never come to know them; they are theirs whose lot it was to have good
education. Its the lot of some Countries to have plentiful Mines of gold and
silver, and its no hard matter for such to dig it out of the earth: Act. 17.38.
But they whose lot it is to have no such privilege, know not what the ease
thereof means. Therefore the woeful forsaking of them, and passing by those
times of ignorance, must not make us think, that those to whom the Lord
reveals it, find it to be a difficulty. Its easy only to such as the Lord
makes it so; Whom he will he shows mercy unto, and whom he will he hardneth.
Such secrets as these must be trembled at and adored, not descanted; rather
those whose portion it is to be so mildly and easily drawn home to God,
should applaud and magnify his goodness to them as a peculiar privilege, and
say, He has not done thus to every Nation, neither have all known his ways.
That which has been impossible for some to reach unto, we have been borne
unto as free men, and have found it easy and sweet unto us.

Secondly, let not us judge the estates of such, Or private administrations.
as whom the Lord has exercised with long difficulties in this point of
believing: I need not instance: Its well known to all that observe Gods
government, how different it is in this kind; how sweetly and safely the Lord
has drawn and carried on the course of some of his servants with ease and
comfort: And yet, how many others, not inferior in grace unto them, have been
brought through a thicket to heaven. Paradise and Purgatory are not more
contrary notions, then the estates of these two. How many holy men Preachers
and others have led wearisome days, nights and years, in their conflict and
continual combat of their unbeleefe? How intricate has Satan and Melancholy
made their conditions, that they have thought it as impossible for them to
believe, as to climb up to the clouds? The Lord knows why he suffers such
holy, humble and hungry souls to be so long tozed and disquieted without ease;
some to see sin more bitter in the cross and curse of Christ, then in all
legal terrors, and some to dye so; Phil. 3.
not to teach us to judge them (for no doubt they are comprehended of him, whom
they comprehend not) but to tremble and adore the Sovereignty of God, who will
as it were step out of his course when he pleases, and is bound to none, and
has it in his own hands, how and by what way he will bring his to heaven. So
much for this fifth Use.

Lastly, this should be Encouragement and Comfort: That although the helps and
means under which they live are poor, their wits silly, Comfort and
encouragement to poor souls by this ease.
the Devil mighty to beat them off, their friends ready to discourage, and
above all, their own hearts most ready to dismay and give them the slip; yet
the Lord having drawn them truly to seek him, he can make the way easy, and
can fight as well with few as with many: He can make a way through Euphrates
for his remnant to return by, as Esaias says, His bare word speaking causes
the light to appear, 2 Cor. 4.6. and one word of his mouth will cause the
light of grace to shine in the heart, and scatter all darkness at once. Oh!
how shall thou hold up thine head before the Lord when he has made thy way
easy, if thou by thy base sloth and presumption, or stoutnesse and rebellion,
or by the minding of other trash, shall make thy self incapable of it? When
the Lord promises to carry thine Arc above all rocks and mountains, and to
set it down at length in safety upon dry land, that yet thou will not betrust
thy self to it, nor resign up thy fears unto him! Oh, thou shall be
speechless when the Lord comes against thee! Therefore (to finish the point)
bear thy self upon this sweet privilege of ease and enjoy it; was not Ruth
willing to enjoy the favor of easy gleaning? Did she reject the ease which
Boaz his favor allowed her, Ruth 2.16. and 3.13.
in suffering the ears of corn to be scattered before her by handfulls? No
surely, she and her mother both took it as from God. Say thus, I think it was
thy good will and pleasure (Lord) to have it thus, else it should never have
been, thou meantest love to me, else I should have made no such earnings of
it: But seeing thou will have it so, shall I reject it? No, but rather draw
others by thine experience to seek the like.

2 King. 7.
Ease makes men very ready to talk. The two lepers having found such an easy
booty, could not be quiet till they had declared it to the Kings house;
declare it thou to thy wife, to thy poor children, let it be as a loadstone to
pull their hearts to the promise, Come my child, I see thou fear thou shall
never get any thing; but look not thou at thine own awcknesse, look at the
Lords ease: I looked to have met with as hard a bargain of it as ever did any;
but no sooner had the Lord tired me with mine own wrastlings, and humbled me
under the hope of his sweet ease, but my chief work was over. Even so, get
down thy heart, subdue it to Gods promise, and all shall be sweet and easy.
If a Lady being sued too by a King to be his wife, should answer, were I a
Queen I would soon hearken: but alas I am a poor Lady! Would the King affect
her? No surely; the marrying of a King will make a Queen of it self. 1 Samuel 25.
Abigail hearing that David had sent for her to be his wife, made a great
matter of it, but seeing he would needs have it so, rejected it not, though she
was not meet to wash the feet of his servants: 1 Samuel 18.23.
And David though he said, Seems it an easy thing unto you to be the Kings
son in law? Yet refused not finally to be so when it was put upon, but
accepted it with gladness. No man willingly stands in the light of his own
lawful preferment, save a fool. And so much for this last Use, and for the
whole Doctrine, grounded upon this first Argument of the Servants.

The second argument of the servants Naamans love and respect to Elisha.
Now I proceed to the second: And that is the love, esteem and repute wherein
their Master formerly had had the Prophet. They saw it now to be weakened
through prejudice, therefore they put him in mind of it, and (as in the next
point we shall hear) do rectify him in that error. But for the present, the
argument (coucht secretly) is this, ^f thou love and esteemest the Prophet
really, obey him and be ruled by him: thou would have done any thing he
should bid thee, because of the honor thou barest him. Do so still, if thou
love him, obey his counsel. This their argument breaks it self into two
parts: First, into a ground of reason. Secondly, into the reason following upon
it. The ground is, Thou esteemest and honor Gods Prophet. The reason,
therefore take his loving counsel. Of both these in order in handling this
second argument, if God will.

The clearing of the ground.
Touching this ground of Naamans esteem of Elisha, because I doubt not but many
will cavil about it, let me first clear it, and then come to the point. Some
will say then, what wonder, if so strange and miraculous a cure of a desperate
disease as Naamans was, did attract extraordinary affection, and cause a desire
of gratification? But that's nothing to our love to Gods Minister, which if it
be sound, must arise upon better bottom: But to that I answer two ways.

First, though Naaman of himself was carried as an ordinary man, yet the Lord
having the ordering now of his whole course, bred as well good affections to
the Prophet, and to God his own glory and worship, as it bred gladness of the
cure: So that, even in this love of his (being in the bud) may be discovered a
seed of that which after brake out when he was healed. We read of the like
example, Joh. 9. of a poor blind creature, who no sooner was healed by our
Savior of his blindness, but his affections of love brake out strangely
toward him; shall we think that because the occasion hereof was his cure,
therefore there was no more in it, save a mere carnal humor? No; if we read
the 37. and 38. verses, we shall see what fire this sparkle brought forth when
our Lord Jesus had met him, and enlarged him with more grounds, to love him
upon better reason.

But secondly, I say, it were well, if even we having deeper and stronger
bottomes to build our affections upon to Gods Minister, were carried with no
less demonstration then he was, of which, more in the Use shall be spoken. And
whereas its objected, that now his servants rather tax him for his want of
present love to the Prophet, then commend him for the former. I answer, what
wonder if so weak a man were so easily transported in his passion from his
former affection? First, it was God who suffered it for his humiliation: And
secondly, how many who think themselves to stand upon surer ground in their
love to the Minister, yet upon far lesser occasion then Naamans, even mere
tetches and pritches, very toys and conceits, can alienate their love from the
Prophet of God, and that both more deeply then Naaman and without repenting
thereof, which yet he presently did. So that the truth is, we have no such
cause to cavil against this point, nor to disdain to take Naaman to be our
example; rather it were well if we would prove as good Scholars, as he is
meet to set us to School.

The point then is, Doctrine. The esteem of Gods Minister ought to be precious.
The esteem and love of heart wherewith we embrace the Minister of God, ought
to be singular. If the Prophet (say they) had bidden thee do some great thing,
would thou not have done it? Sure, it must be great affection which should
so easily cause a man to do great things? Whether we understand their words in
relation to his obedience, to any charge which the Prophet should have put upon
him for the cure of his disease, or in relation to his readiness, to beteame
the Prophet a deep gratification for his labor; both must needs argue love and
esteem. If the Prophet had told thee thou must go barefoote on pilgrimage
many miles, or fought some battle of great hazard or the like, would not
thou have adventured thy self to get thy disease cured? If the Prophet should
have required at thine hands some rich recompense, talents of silver, costly
apparel, the most curious presents that could be, would not thou have
freely granted them? How much more then, when he says unto thee, Wash and be
clean? So then Naamans love (we see) runs in a strong stream, a small
thing should not part him and the Prophet, he would do great things for him
rather then fail, let but the Prophet command a task, or ask a reward, and
what would not he do? Nay freely, unasked, unexpected? So that the point is
plain, That the affection which Gods Minister (if the faithful Minister of
Christ) deserves at our hands, is and ought to be singular and precious. This
point first, I will prove by Reason, then by Scripture, and so come to Use.

The first Reason is, the charge of God. Its eternal, and cannot be infringed.
I enter not now upon the strickt question of Tithes, (my Text reaches only to
the singularity of loyalnesse and love, and that other Note.
as of the Princes, it is eternal and unalienable, without horrible
sacrilege. God has both in the old and new Testament, most cautiously
provided that the Minister should never be forsaken. How frequent are those
speeches with Moses, Deuteronomy. and Josh. 18.6. 1 Cor. 9.12.13.14.
Forsake not the Levite all thy days. The Lord has not given him a portion
among his brethren, but the Lord himself is his portion: These Leviticall
phrases are of eternal right. Thou shall not muzle the mouth of the ox (says
Paul out of Moses) he that serves at the altar must live upon it. If we afford
you spiritual things, is it much if we reap your temporal? Did those
Ministers of God, who were inspired with extraordinary gifts by the holy Ghost
without their own toil and industry speak thus, who because they freely
received, might freely give, and shall it not much more be verified of them
that serve at the altar of the Gospel, whose labors cost a greater price of
pains and charge to furnish? And because these Texts do trench rather upon the
fruits of love, then the affection it self: How were the Galathians affected to
Paul, Did they think their eyes too dear for him, to pull out and give him?
Are not the very feet of them beautiful, who bring glad tidings of peace and
good things? Did not those Galathians receive Paul as an Angel of God? Gal.
4.15.
Would not they have imparted to him not only their goods, but even their very
souls? And what wonder? Are they not his joy and crown? Are they not as his
wife? Are not their souls dearer to him, then the bodies of men can be to a
Physician? Does he not love them with a love far above whatsoever a friend,
an husband, a father, a guardian can affect the persons of their friends,
wives, children or orphans? If the love which they utter be greater, must not
the duty of love be so which they owe them? So then, God will have the people
to tender, esteem and honor the Minister: Its a charge which no time, no
prescription can alter.

See Heb. 13.17.
that they may closely attend to Gods work, unto which who is sufficient? Yes
verily. Shall shepherds, soldiers, watchmen, Ambassadors, all need their
support for their travel, and shall a Minister be left to his own charge?
Were it for the Kings honor to send his Ambassador to Venice, and there to
leave him so destitute of means and provision, that he should be compelled to
turn Merchant, or Factor to maintain himself? What baseness were that?
Should he work with his own hands as Paul (who therefore made tents, because
he needed, neither study, nor provision?) How dishonorable were it? Read that
choice Text for this, Heb. 15.27.

Thirdly, the Minister of God, his maine work is, the saving of the 1 Timothy ult.
Act. 26.8.
from their Idols, to beget them to God, to convert them, to travel of them a
new, till Christ be formed in them, to marry them first, and after to present
them as a pure virgin to the Lord Jesus, to bear them upon his shoulders, to
heal them of their diseases, to keep them from the Wolf, Lion and Bear, to
comfort them at the heart, and to declare unto them their righteousness, with
a thousand such like spiritual offices; and can any affection, love, cost,
maintenance, equal that tender regard of a Minister, of the eternal souls of
Gods people? No verily.

Nay not so only; but they are sacred pledges of the peoples welfare, Moses and
Aaron were among the Israelites with their mediation between God and the
people, carrying Gods gifts down to them, and their prayers and sacrifices up
to him, how safe were they? While Noah that Preacher of righteousness lived
upon earth, what waters could hurt it? Was it drowned till he was taken into
the Arc? They are even the hostages of safety to their people: Those that
stand in the gap, and lie in ambush for them, howling between porch and altar
for them, Spare thy people O Lord whom thou have bought! Joel 2. Numb. 14.15.16.
What shall the heathen say (says Moses) if thou bring thy people into the
wilderness to destroy them? Such advocates and impleaders are they at the
bar of heaven for their welfare! They are the Dogs of the great Shepherds
flock to shelter them from the wild beasts of Heresy, Schism, Profaneness,
and Atheism, and from vengeance provoked thereby: They with their Censors
stand between the dead and the living to stay the plague: They are the pillars
to hold up and hold forth the truth of God, and to preserve it incorrupt and
unspotted till the coming of Christ: They are the Swords and Axes of God to
cut down and destroy the wicked, and enemies of the Church, that mouth of
Christ, out of which the sword of two edges proceeds, either to defend or
destroy: They are as Abraham's Jobs, Samuels and Daniels; great stakes and props
to uphold the great building and frame of the Church: as they said to David,
Thou art worth ten thousand of us; So are these, if they be such as they
ought, persons picked out, one of a thousand. 2 S^m. 18.3.
And shall not this honor of theirs procure them love and honor at their
peoples hands deservedly? Yes, without question. Not as though all they can
return, can equal the cost and worth of the Ministers labors; Philem. 8.
(for the work of conversion deserves the return of the soul in thanks) but
to declare the obedience of their heart to him that commands it; and the thanks
which they inwardly bear, and would testify in a far other kind if it were
in their power. Psalm. 16.2.


And lastly, that the due which in deed we owe to God (save that our goodness
cannot reach him) may in the descent of it fall upon his Minister, whom he has
made his instrument of doing good, and his Attorney to receive our
acknowledgement. The reward is rather an honorable, then an equal recompense.
So for Reasons.

Proofs. Gal 6.6. 1 Cor. 7.9.
The Scripture is plentiful of proofs for it. Let him (says Paul) that is
taught in the word, communicate to him that teaches him in all good things.
And the same Apostle (purposely handling the point) Does any man plow and sow
or plant, and not look to eat of the fruit thereof? Does not the Law (meaning
the perpetual equity of it) say, Thou shall not muzle the mouth of the ox
which treads out the corn? And he that serves at the Altar, must live upon
the Altar? Does God take care for oxen, or says he it altogether for our
sakes? Surely for ours, that he who sows in hope, should thresh also, and be
partaker of it: If a man should sow wheat in his field, would he not look at
least to reap a crop answerable to rye or barley? If we sow spiritual things,
is it wonder if we receive carnal? So also again, he implies in Romans 19 15.
That they deserve special entertainment in a special kind, as one who brings
news of an inheritance out of a far Country! Beautiful are the feet of them
that bring glad tidings (though dirty and dusty) yet deserve washing and
anointing. How much more they who bring the Gospel to the people of God, and
say to Zion, Thy God reigns! And our Savior adds, Matthew. 10.
The labourer is worthy his hire, not welcome only, but maintenance also. He
that receives you, receives me, and he who receives me, receives him that
sent me. He that receives a Prophet, in the name of a Prophet, Verse ult.
receives a Prophets reward. In the old Testament, when the Priests and Levites
neglected their service, the Lord was fain to stir up extraordinary Prophets,
but who maintained them? Was it not a custom that all who went unto them for
advice, offered them a gratification? Were they left (think we) for the Ravens
to feed ordinarily? 1 Samuel 9.8.
(In a famine it was necessary I grant:) No, witness that of Saul to his
servant, when he meant to go to Samuel, and heard him say, what shall we bring
to the man of God, for the money is spent? I (says he) have the fourth part of
a shekel of silver, that I will give him. The like is, that of the man of
Baalshalisha, 2 King. 4.42.
who is said to bring to the man of God bread of the first fruits, even twenty
loaves of barley and ears in the husk. Heb. 13.
Shall the Gospel be inferior to the Law in this point? So for assistance and
encouragement, Obey them that are set over you, and submit to them, grieve them
not, nor let them do your work with care and dismayment, for that were smally
for your benefit. Let those Elders (says Paul) who rule well be counted worthy
of double honor, 1 Timothy 5.17.
(both of maintenance and countenance) especially those that labor in the Word
and Doctrine. These are sufficient, others perhaps may offer themselves in the
process of the point.



I answer, in many offices; I will mention two or three of the chief. First,
in the justifying, honoring and esteeming of the Minister. For if that be once
prejudiced in their hearts, farewell all hope of success upon his labors. Ob.
But the Minister himself must look to that. Answ. Answ. 3. Things. 1. Honor.
I grant it in part, viz. That no man is bound to magnify him, who dishonours
himself by his sloth, scandalous life, tongue and manners; and yet even of
such I must say, that to delight to deprave such, or scorn them, (whom rather
we should mourn to behold) is sinful. And as for the infirmities of the
wel-deserving, we should cover them, and carry a mantle backward that we may
not see their nakedness. But I say, there is oftentimes great desert of honor
in the Minister, which yet he cannot come by: Therefore its the duty of the
people perpetually to seek the credit, and promote the esteem of such: For
under Christ, the Minister is that wisdom, 1 These. ult.
which all the children thereof must justify, Matthew. 11.19. If he count them
his honor and crown, what should they count him, save their mutual honor
and best garland? How should they bear up his name, as the Lions of Solomon
upheld his throne, vindicating his person against all scorners, cavillers,
upbraiders? Not to be ashamed of him before any, whether equals, betters or
inferiors; yea the whole congregation should back him, and strengthen his
hands against all opposites, that he may (without suspicion or fear) go on
in his course, as we read of the people to Joshua Cap. 1.

Secondly, 2. Sealing to their Ministry. 2. Cor.
it stands in the peoples sealing of his Ministry and labors in their own
souls and conversation. That they may be an Epistle written in their hearts
for the commendation of him, without any other letters testimonial; and that
the impression of his pains may be seen upon them, which is the reallest
honor of a Minister in the world; unto which is consequent the honor of their
adherence Adherence.
and communion with him as the chief member thereof, that he may be made privy
to their profitings or decayings in understanding and grace, that he may
mourn with them in their sorrows, and rejoice in their comforts, as a tender
father, guardian and nurse, that he may resolve their doubts, ease their
griefs, and be all in all to them; that no man may better know them then
himself, and they him and his voice as their Shepherd, without estrangement or
shinesse.

The third is their serviceablenes 3. Serviceablenesse. Joh. 19.25.
to him: That they count themselves to stand charged with him, as our Savior
charged John with his mother: To be provident for his supply and support, by
all meet preventing of affronts and offenses, at home, abroad, by procuring
assistance, favor and protection, by their best endeavors, travel, friends,
counsel and mediation, as acknowledging him to be theirs. As once a Physician
bad his Minister look to his soul, and he should not want one that would
look to his body: The like should each man, Lawyer, Justice, Gentleman or
meaner do within the compass of their places: Each one should have one shred
of him or other.

Lastly, allowance of a fair and comfortable competency of means, 4.
Maintenance.
to prevent carking or shifting courses, or whatsoever might disable or dismay
him in his Ministry, or divert him from attendance to reading; that so he may
the more freely devote himself to his work: And this must not only last
while he is in the yoke and occupied, but also if he shall by any infirmity,
disease, age, decay, become less fit for his service then formerly,
(especially if wrong and opposition of enemies cause it) that yet they take it
in good part, not adding sorrow to sorrow, but sticking to him in his
distress. So much for the Answer of this Question.

Uses. Ministers must not be distrustful of providenc^.
I proceed to the Uses of it. And here first, let this point be solemn
Admonition, Information and Instruction to the Minister of God. Admonition
first to beware lest through distrust and infidelity, he suffer his spirit to
consult with flesh and blood for the matter of his encouragement and support in
his Ministry. Has the Lord had such respect unto him as to charge his people
solemnly with the sustenance and maintenance of such his faithful Ministers as
serve at his Altar? Has he engaged himself by promise to them, to be their
exceeding great reward, and not to suffer them to want? Has he betrusted his
Church with their welfare, that as they would look for mercy and blessing from
him, so they honor and uphold the person, state, life and liberties of his
servants the Ministers? Oh! take this kindly at Gods hand, trust him to make
good his promise; he who has the hearts and affections, the estates and purses
of all at his control and command, he is able to encourage us and sustain us
in our painful, conscionable discharge of the task imposed upon us, to feed
his lambs and his sheep, to wa^ch over them, to go before them in an holy
example. Let us not shrink from this work, nor shrug at the difficulty of it
through fear, opposition of men, malice of enemies, bad examples of those who
favor their own ease, belly, pleasures: But leave we such to themselves, and
trust we God, who has taken such strickt order for our provision and
contentment, so long as we be faithful. As Peter speaks, Feed we the flock
of Christ, not for filthy lucre sake or from a greediness of gain, Pet. 5.2.
but from a ready mind, well appaid and satisfied with our service, as serving
a good Master who will see us abundantly requited? Josh. 13.33.
The Lord told the tribe of Levi that they should have no inheritance among
their brethren in the division of Canaan: For why? He himself would be their
portion: He had taken good and sure order for them and theirs, that they should
have no cause to complain. And so he did. For so long as they walked in their
places faithfully, they were richly provided for. Should the Levites then
murm^re against God for this unequal distribution? Should they cavil against
him and say, that he had cut them off from their hopes and means, and preferred
their brethren before them, so that they must wait upon their trenchers, and
feed upon their scraps? No, no; Rather he had exalted them above their
brethren, and allotted them a portion out of their estates by a command; so that
now their life was a life of faith, their duty was to feed his people in
Iaacob, and his inheritance in Israel: Their lips were to preserve knowledge,
so that the people might from their mouths understand the lore and law of God:
If they attended these things well, they were to cast themselves upon God for
the rest, who was their God allsufficient in a more eminent measure then any of
the other Tribes.

Even so let the same care of God for us, encourage us to our work. Let us not
forsake this plow of the Ministry, looking back after the world and our own
ends: Let us not distrust him for sinister and outward respects: The world is
unthankefull, and the hearts of men very false and hollow: this might cause us
to forsake conscience and seek our own ends, leave our studies, conceal
needful discountenanced truths, pick quarrels with our calling, and allege
that we Ministers of all others, are meanliest appointed, exposed to the wrong
and base usage of men, that know not their worth, nor how to prise their
pains: Therefore they must be feign to be less attendant to reading, study,
oversight, visitation of the people, and regarding of their souls; They must
be compelled to turn Purchasers, Usurers, Merchants, Husbandmen, and to busy
themselves deeply in the world: They have a charge to look too, wife and
children to maintain, and they know if they be gone, no body will look after
their posterity, therefore if they turn their studies and Ministeries into
carkings and toylings for the world, let none blame them! Well, there is, no
doubt, some cause to accuse the unthankefulnesse of people: But of all others
you may worst complain; for you rather harden their hearts by your own
covetousness and base dishonouring of your Ministry, by your sloth and
idleness, then procure to your selves, or deserve respect and esteem from
them; they only may plead that who cleave to their Ministry, and be instant in
season and out of season, not distrustful, Tit. 1.6.
slothful Cretians and worldlings; and therefore be admonished: Take not an
occasion by the sins of the people to distrust God, but rather by the promise
of God abhor your ease and distrust, and fall to Gods work with cheerfulness
and good conscience.

Again, seeing God has taken the care for us Ministers, 2. Branch.
Admonition. Snare not our consciences in doing our work.
whiles we are at work, let us not snare our selves with an ill conscience in
the doing of our work. God is not tied to our sin for the means of
supporting us. Many make it a strong argument for the swallowing of any
gobbets, and to defend themselves in their flattering of their betters in their
sin, smoothing and blanching them in their base courses; because else, say
they, we shall not have their good will, encouragement and assistance: Great
men's frowns are now a days all in all to scare men from faithfulness in
their Ministry! And if any peril or danger be cast in men's way for keeping of
conscience, presently this objection offers it self, but what shall we do?
would you have us beg, endanger our estates and freeholds, our liberties and
welfares? Alas poor souls! Is this the thank which you return to God for
his alsufficient providing for you? Should you distrust him after all the care
which he has taken? 1 Pet. 3.
Should you now (as Peter speaks) cry a confederacy with the wicked, cleave to
base dishonorable courses, to attain your own ends, as if there were no God
to provide? It were base enough to do thus if the Lord has left you at six and
sevens, to shift for your selves, but having so faithfully promised to see to
you while you are faithful; why should so vile a thought enter into you, as to
imagine, that except you lick up the scurfe of the time and play the
temporizers and hypocrites against conscience; you must needs want supplies,
and be destitute of maintenance? No, no: Trust God, walk in your uprightness,
fear not the fears of the malicious, but sanctify the Lord God in your
heart, who has promised to be with you to the end of the world: Matthew. 28.
ult.
Let him be your fear: Let his promise be your strong hold, forsake him not,
and he will not fail you; he has a treasure hid in the bowels of the earth
for those that cleave to him, and warpe not from him by an ill conscience; he
has not set men on work to honor and support them, to the end that he
himself should let them sink or swim, if others should happly neglect them;
but in such a case, he will step in himself, and be their God alsufficient
rather then fail, so that they shall say by experience, There is nothing lost
by trusting God: Heb. 13.5.
At the hardest, they have Gods bond to put in sure, and he has said, 1 Pet.
4. ult. Matthew. 16.26. Habac. 3.
He will not fail them: Fear not therefore what man can do: But in well doing
commit your self unto him who is a faithful keeper; lose not conscience, for
what shall a man give for the recompense of ir? Can all that a man gains by
such a bargain, requite his loss? No surely: Therefore quiet our selves,
though there were no calfe in the stall or bullock in the flock, yet the Lord
will be your strong salvation. I have seen the posterity of the idle,
scandalous, covetous, of Epicures and lovers of their own bellles, ease and
lusts, such as with Hophni and Phinees, have stolen from Gods sacrifices, to
serve their own turns, to beg their bread, yea in that very place, 1 Samuel 3.
its threatened: But never saw I the righteous forsaken: I have heard of a
faithful Minister who refused to change his living for conscience sake (though
it were poor) and that which was offered him was rich: There came to his house
a good gentleman who seeing him fare hardly with great content of mind,
instantly gave him some pieces to encourage him in his course: Or, the Lord
has given such a blessing upon a little, that it shall go a great way; or, if
he have given a man means of his own, he shall willingly live upon them and
spend them, that God may have his work done the whiles; and if men fail, yet
God shall cause the Ravens to feed us, rather then we shall perish: Children
shall have portions, education and means, from unknown friends, and nothing
shall be wanting to them, that are not wanting to God.

3. Branch. Admonition. Debauch not nor dishonor our selves.
Moreover it shall warn Gods Ministers to beware, lest they deprive themselves
of this promise, by dishonouring and debauching their own persons, names and
estates, by their misdemeanors. They may long enough cry out of the
despisednesse of the Clergy; if themselves pull down the house of honor and
due respect, with their own hands. Such have too much honor in that they hold
their places. Quit your selves therefore (my brethren) of all such indecency
and vulgarnesse of carriage toward your people, as might disparage you: Be no
common Proctors and Barretors among them, seek not theirs but them, chiefly
love them for the good which is planted in them, teach them not the fashions of
the world, to be quarrellers, contentious, covetous, side not with some against
others, main^aine no factions and partialities, be no common companions with
them in their bargains and worldly traffic, hang not about their shop
windows, be no janglers and pratlers with them in common matters, haunt not the
Alehouse, pot and pipe, with them: In a word, be no joviall, boon fellow with
them in their meetings, feasts, games, and pastimes: Easily is such a one
despised, who discovers himself in such kinds, and the like I may say in
eager pursuit of the uttermost of our dues, grating upon them, A sad time when
the Ministers are not so countenanced as they ought.
and threatening them, always at Law, and never satisfied; rather buy peace and
interest it in their souls to do them good, though by denying our selves,
aim not at great things, esteem of the poor with their two mites; be not
proud, ambitious and disdainefull, seek not the account of the greatest only:
Honor stands not in the self-esteeme of the honourer of himself, but in the
esteem and account of others that honor us; who commonly think the meanlier
of us, when we think highliest of our selves: Honor being a shadow which
flies from the pursuer, and pursues him that flies from it: Be not therefore
lovers of honor, inquisitive after the reputations of men, its a means to make
us scorned; rest content with the portion assigned us by God; reach not after
great matters, lest God abase us to a mean condition: Hold an holy mediocrity
between covetousness and improvidence or expensivenesse; between pride and
contempt of our reputation; between supercilious or disdainful carriage, and
a common prophaneing of our persons with the basest; maintain the mean in
holy contentment, soberness and gravity, which may uphold both our names in
that credit, and our estates in that sufficiency, which is meet to encourage
and support us in our Ministry, with hope of profit and blessing.

And to conclude this first Use: 4. Branch. Be encouraged to feed Gods flock.
This provision which God has made for the Minister of the Gospel, should be
encouragement unto him, that setting apart all other matters, he apply
himself to that one thing necessary for a Minister to look to, that is to
feed and watch over the flock of God betrusted him. Alas! what should it need
that we busy our selves about the needless, and neglect the essential thing
of our Calling! What is this, save to tax the Lord of improvidence and
carelessenesse of us? As if he would put us to all the work, and leave us to
sink in our own charge! As if he had no respect to our travel and labor of
love, but put us to our shifts! Shall he cloth the grass of the field and the
Lillies, which neither labor nor spinne? Shall his eye reach to the falling of
a sparrow (scarce worth a mite) and shall we his Ministers fill our souls with
distrust of his providence, and ask who shall feed us, or cloth us, or save
out of the hands of our potent enemies? Are we not better then many sparrowes?
Shall we then, or can we fall without the notice of our Almighty Father? Does
he not hold us in his right hand, and walk in the midst of us? What should we
then do, but take more thought how we might walk in our course of life and
Ministry, inoffensively, cheerfully and confidently? As for other matters,
casting our care upon him who cares for us; for whose honor it is, that we be
regarded, encouraged, backed, assisted and supported, to the uttermost of that
which is meet for us; and in deserting of us (in this our work) he, his name,
his glory, his promise must needs suffer, far more then we, poor worms, can
do. It is our distrust, not Gods unfaithfulness which leaves us to our
shifts: And what wonder then, if we take his office out of his hands, to carke
and plod, and be sick of our own discontents? What wonder then, if the great
work of our attendance upon reading, watching, admonishing, and being instant
in season and out of season, lie by as an arm or bone out of joint, unfit for
use? But certainly could we honor God in believing him to be that he is an
alsufficient God, and one to whom the Tribe of Levi is precious, and his
peculiar portion, we should go to work as men set at liberty, as they who
are discharged from thought and care, and therefore having but one thing to
do, let us do it to purpose, leaving the rest to him, who will secure us from
fear, wrong, danger, enemies; and if he save us not quite from such, yet will
support us in them, and more then that, redeem us in due time, from all our
sorrows, and wipe all tears away from our eyes! Oh! live we by faith in this
promise, stand still and behold we this salvation of our God: And as the Lord
said to Joshua, so he says to us, Fear not, I will neither fail nor forsake
thee. Only be strong and of good courage. So much for this first Use.

Of Terror. Scorners and reproachers of Gods Ministers, reproved.
It was once thought to be an odious and black mark of a Jew, to speak against
the Priest, as the Prophets words intimate: But we have such as both speak and
do against the person and calling of the Minister, with all the poison and
disdain they can, professing themselves to hate the very tribe of them with a
deadly and irreconciliable feud. That Centurian in Luke 5.7. is praised for
loving the Nation of the Jews: But these abhor both the persons and the
whole Nation of the Ministers, taking occasion by all possible means to
express it in whatsoever companies they come, yea in the most reproachful
manner, what opinions and affections they bear toward them.

2 King. 9.11.
Such were those fellow Captains of Iehu, who when the Prophets messenger came
to do his message, asked him, what mad fellow was this who came in unto thee?
Even such base trivial names does the world give to the Ministers of God: And
as the villainy of old Popish Idols deserved the base terms of pild Priest,
hedge Priest, knave Priest, and the like: So now ungodly wretches dare abuse
Gods Ministers as fast for their goodness, calling them singular fellows,
proud, pestilent Preachers, fantastical fellows, factious, enemies to the
estate: Oh! of all other men they think such may be spared, they were well ere
such came, and till they be rid of them they shall never be quiet: As Jeremy
says, Woe is me that my mother bred me a man of contention! And again, Jerem.
15.10. Esaias 8.18.
I and my children are as signs of contradiction; public spectacles to men
and Angels, yea the very offscouring of men! It cannot be imagined how
Alehouse hunters, libertines, epicures, swea^ers, worldlings, dare speak and
think of Gods Ministers: Oh! the bitterness of their spirits, Proverb.
the venom of their tongues; who can stand before envy? Well, let not all this
daunt us! Let us do as our Lord Jesus himself and his Apostles, (who escaped
not the like handling even carry our selves as wisely as we can, and heap hot
coals upon their heads by our long suffering and meekness: But as for them,
look for no other while they continue as they are, they do but their kind.

They who despise Christ himself are high traitors and they cannot be guilty
of less then of petty treason who despise his Ministers; and if the maligners
or revilers of the fathers of their bodies were to be stoned without any more
ado: What shall the scorners and revilers of the fathers of souls be done too?
Psalm. 105.15.
Surely although they may escape the judgment of man, they shall never avoid
his, who has threatened them that do but touch, how much more lay so violent
and execrable hands upon his Ministers? From what other spirit can it come (let
the pretenses be what they will) but a spirit of desperate profaneness and
debauchednes, yea a Giant-like defiance with God, which because it cannot reach
God himself, therefore lets fly all their reproaches and scorns upon such as
do most nearly resemble and bear witness of him upon earth: Psalm. 69.9.
The reproaches of them that reproached thee (says the Prophet) have lighted
upon me: If the Minister can approve it against thee that he bears no other
blows or marks, then such as should have lighted upon God himself: Woe to
them that are guilty of such blasphemy! for the Lord shall plague them with the
same eternal plagues, wherewith he plagues those who immediately have
blasphemed Majesty it self. But I dwell not upon these. I hasten to Reproof.

And first this sharply censures all such as disesteem, discourage and Of
Reprofe. Deserters and discouragers of such Ministers as they are bound too, to
be blamed.
This very fact of Naaman shall rise up in judgment against them in the day of
Christ: Did Naaman so deerly love the Prophet, one whom he never saw before?
Before whose gate only he had stood and heard a message from, but as yet had
not seen? At the bare report of him? For a bodily cure? Nay the hope of it a
far off? Shall an heathen do all this? Shall he even do some, yea any great
thing for him? What color shall they pretend then that are far from doing
the least thing for such a Minister of God, as not only they have seen, but
also heard, lived and conversed with, not the first day, but ten, twenty,
thirty, forty years? Not as Prophets but Preachers, (the least whereof is not
only greater then Elisha, but John Baptist himself, Matthew. 11.12.) not
promising the cure of leprosy, but of the soul, not offering the effect of
Jordens waters, but the waters of regeneration in baptism! Not by a messenger,
but by their own hand, and by the power of the word, far more excellent then
the urim of a Priest, or the vision of a Prophet? Surely one might well think,
that such people should refuse no pains, cost or hazard for such Ministers!
But be willing (if need were) to thrust themselves between the swords point and
their bosoms, to ride and run to do them good, to stake their purse,
counsel, travel, selves, souls and all for their encouragement: If for the
Brethren, much more for the Fathers, should we lay down our lives. But is it
so? 2 John 3.16.
Surely let that prejudice which men generally have of the very handling, yea
naming of such a point as this is, say for them what their affections are in
this case! yea and the thoughts even of Ministers themselves, who study how to
pass over this point, as the Dog of Nilus passes by the stream, rather
catching here and there a lap, then daring to stay and drink for fear of some
Crocodile or other to snap him up! I hope (brethren) you will pardon me, if I
deal plainly, as having no claim either to your tithes or purses, who (I am
sure have spent five times more charge in furnishing my self for the work of
the Ministry, then ever my Ministry was worth unto me) therefore the rather I
beseech you give me favor: I come not to accuse you of this congregation, for
your present love or countenance: Only I must tell you, many who now in our
welfare, use of gifts, liberty and elbowroome, show themselves forwardest to
encourage us; Note this fulfilled Prophecy.
if God turn the wheel, and change our publicknesse into privacy, and our
liberty to restraint, and our peace into enmity, and our health into sickness,
and leave us to their courtesies, will be the first that will lowre upon us, and
challenge us rather for our curiosity and preciseness, then regard us either
for the former services we have done, or for the sorrows we suffer. Experience
has proved it so thoroughly already in many worthy lights, who have spent all
their oil for the use of the Sanctuary; that even those hearers of theirs, who
most of all seemed to rejoice in their light, have no sooner saw their light to
be a little darkened to the worldward, but they have slipped away in a mist, and
beheld them as strangers afar off, deserted them, their wives and children, so
that, (except God had sent them meat and support from unknown places) they
might have either famished, Luke 16.3.
or been urged to dig or beg for their livings. And what measure is to be
expected here from you, God knows; but it is no other like, but the most will
fulfill the sins of their forefathers in this kind, and verify the Proverb,
No penny, no Pater noster.

Special Reproof. 1. Against partial lovers of the Minister.
But I must confine my Reproof to some order. For I see that which is spoken in
general and to all, is spoken to none. First then, here are reproved all
partial lovers and esteemers of the Minister, such as love not directly out of
the judgment of a Ministers calling and labors, but out of humor and conceit.
Such a Minister, they say, they love and can well affect, but as for others,
their edge is not so much toward them: Why? Are they not as faithful, zealous
Ministers of God as the other? Yes verily: Why then do you carry so partial an
affection between them, occasioning both emulation between the Ministers
themselves; and provoking others by your examples (for such one does a great
deal of hurt in a congregation) to partiality and baseness this way? But know
O man! whosoever thou art, that what ever content thy giddy humor may give it
self in such a course, thy conscience (if thou have any left) will one day
take on with thee! Poor wretch, that which is done according to God is done
equally! Unequal affections are from self and self ends, and therefore must
look for no reward from God, they have all the reward they shall have already:
Look to thy self therefore betime and repent; get thine hide-bound spirit
enlarged in thee, and be not straightened in thy bowels to such as are large
toward thee.

2. Passionate lovers.
Secondly, it reproves all passionate lovers of the Minister, only so long as
the pang holds; in a gare and heat, they will run, ride and take any pains
for the getting and countenancing of a Preacher: But why? Hoping to tie him to
their own girdle: So long as this hope lasts, they will be foremost in
procuring him dwelling, means and account, and who but he? But let him once
come near, and touch their disease to the quick, and show himself a true
friend indeed to search and heal their sores: Oh then! They turn as deep
enemies; then all love is forgotten, then they must fall as low as the earth,
who before were lifted up to heaven: Alas! whom sought ye when ye sought
Ministers? Such as might sooth and flatter you? Matthew. 11.8.
Reeds shaken with the wind? Are they therefore become your enemies, because
they tell you the truth? Surely then are you sick of some such malady as must
be strongly purged: If God love you he will heal you with better Physic then
you seek.

A third sort there are, who love indirectly and for by and base ends, 3.
Lovers indirectly.
not for the end of the Ministers labors, but if they can please themselves in
his wit, memory, elocution; if they like the phrase, quaintness and carriage
of his matter to tickle their ear, or if his company be merry and joviall,
apt to correspond with their humors, if he be useful to them in any other
kind, then they can love him: But if these accidentalls be wanting, the oil
failing, their love wanzes also.

Others there are, 4. Lovers for vainglory.
who will show themselves forward for the Minister, that their zeal may be
noted, and it may appear, that they are especial men above others, and so
they seek the opinion of men in that behalf. But if they see others as
forward, or more forward then they, so that they are not like to have the
repute and name of it, then they are cold, yea dead in the nest; showing that
they sought themselves more then God in their love; and therefore although they
should have all their will, and win the spurs without any contradiction, yet
their love would not prove effectual to their own good, except God do change
both it and them in a special manner.

Fifthly, all formal, verbal and fulsome lovers of the Minister, 5. Formal
and verbal lovers.
who will not deny him good terms, good salutations, complements (yea praises
behind his back) but there they rest and go no further: If they be urged to
any real respect and acknowledgement, they vanish presently; for you must know
words cost them nothing, therefore they can afford them good cheap, but more
they will not beteame. Countenance, assistance, maintenance and the like, are
burdensome to them: Rather they pull away from them that which is their due,
defraud them of that right which is not in their power, lawfully to deny; and
that with all the secret subtilty, cunning and devices which possibly they can,
and think that the best gotten goods which is fleeced from him. All bread of
deceit is sweet, but especially the bread of sacrilege; but as all stolen
bread shall become the bane of the thief, so above all other shall this. Oh
say they! its good reason that the Minister should be regarded, and we hope he
lives well, and where he is worth a score of pounds, would he were worth
hundreds, God stir him up many friends, we should be glad to see him prosper,
and many such good morrowes; but as that empty barren companion in Saint James,
who bids the poor be warm, and fed, and clothed, (as if he were all made of
mercy) yet neither clothes, feeds nor warmes his back, belly or flesh; so
fares it with these lovers. Oh the world is full of such empty and
hypocritical dissemblers!

Sixthly, such as care not what cost they bestow upon their lusts, 6. Lovers of
their pastimes and sports better.
their sports and pastimes, pricking up their children in vain fashions,
maintaining a sort of loose and rude servants that spend their time in guzling
and drinking: Their Hounds and Hawks they care not what they give for: In a
word, for their own ease and ends, to game and spend upon their riotous
appetites, they care not what course they take, give up their housekeeping,
and cut off all charges which can be, and more then they ought, till they make
themselves odious: But press them to do any thing for a poor Minister, who
preaches painfully upon small allowance: Oh how hardly it comes off from them!
Its death, and as the cutting off a joint, to be drawn to such a service.

7. Scant lovers.
Again, others perhaps, will afford him some poor and dry pittance, but there is
all: Its as water taken out of a pit, not out of a fountain, when they have
done their devotion, all is finished: They add not assisistance, countenance,
maintenance and honor, as thinking all too little; but stint themselves within
very narrow bounds and will stir no further. Let no liberal people in the City
or Country be offended.
Endless it were to speak of all: These may serve for a taste, by the paw you
may judge of the Lion. Oh! that this Reproof might so pierce them, that they
might fall upon themselves, and reprove themselves bitterly for their more then
heathenish, unnatural, unthankefulnesse.

Papists may cond^mne us for our disregard of our Ministers.
This blind generation of Papists shall rise up in judgment and condemn us
Protestants, yea many of us noted for our zeal: For what cost do they refuse
to be at, to maintain their Priests and Jesuits in their bravery, nay what
fines would they not be willing to pay for the liberty of their Religion? But
alas! We who profess a better, and seem zealous for it, have no such
principle of love in us: Our Religion must stand alone, and defend her self,
or else she may sink or swim for us: Its the mercy of God to our Kingdom, to
keep the hearts of our Queen and Kings of blessed memory and nobleness of
heart, in the defense of the truth of God, without toleration and imbezeling,
and long may the Lord so rule and dispose of their spirits! For its to be
feared, if they and we were but brought to the trial, who would give most for
their Religion, they for their Priests, or we for our Ministers, they would
outbid and outdrop us, (many of us, even wealthy Gentlemen and others, I will
not tax all) as much as Crowns or Royalls outbid brass farthings. The Lord
show us our disease, and to what issue it would come, if God prevented it not.

People exhorted to honor and support the Minister.
That they practice this duty of love to the Minister of God. If you would
truly be free from all these aspersions, (as what good heart would not shake
her lap of such dung?) Do not only abhor the treachery, inconstancy, baseness
and unthankfulness of hollow lovers: Do not only abhor the love of your
selves, lusts and appetites more then God or his Minister; But especially
learn this mystery of loving a Prophet for himself, and in the name of a
Prophet, for his message sake: Get an heart knit to him in a close band of
amity which no sword can cut in two, no time, occasion or danger interrupt: Let
it not be a love of teeth outward, or outward signification, but a child-like,
loyal, reverend and sacred love without dissimulation. Let the very joy of his
message go as d^epe into thy soul, How that may be effected.
as these bad properties go into the spirit of the contrary. Lin not till the
Minister of God have as well kindled a fire in thy heart of sound love and
affection, as set up a flashing light in thy mind of knowledge and
understanding, which may vanish, though for a time thou seem to rejoice in it:
Brethren, if we desire your love, pardon us this wrong, for you shall fare the
better. If once this Epistle be written or engraven in thy heart with the pen
of a Diamond, the characters thereof will be indeleble. Its no letter of ink
and paper, but written by an Adamant claw of the Spirit, which knits you
faster, then Jonathan was knit to David: This will make you close and
faithful, and you will go under a woods side, into a wilderness to renew
your covenant. No message can so pierce into your spirit as this. If your
Lawyer should by his skill and pleading, win the day at Law for you, if the
Physician should recover you of a deadly disease, if your spokesman should
prevail in a great marriage of many thousands: None would stick so deep, nor
deserve such love as the message of reconciliation, and the cure of spiritual
leprosy, causing the flesh of thy soul to return again as the flesh of a
little child. This will make thee do great things for the Prophet, this will
ingratiate and make him as one of a thousand unto thee. Shall any thing now
part him and me? Act. 8.
Think we that the Eunuch (as speedily as Philip was snatched from him) carried
him not away with him in his heart? Should money, travel, fear or danger, ever
have separated them? Oh brthren! let this example here of Naaman, soke as oil
into our spirits! And before you depart hence, beg it of God, that he would
teach you the obligation of a soul to his Minister: And then we will give up
our selves (as Paul speaks) first to the Lord, and then to him in a league of
faithful amity: Make but this sure that we have received his message, Romans 18.
and then there needs no more. That will be a principle within to dictate and
direct the rest; be the fruits greater or smaller, so that love be the guide,
all shall be well. The odds which Paul to Philemon speaks of, Thou owe me
thine own soul: And that which our Savior speaks of, To give a cup of cold
water, we know, is very large and different; yet where love is the root, both
are accepted with God, and all the steps which pass between: Love may be
trusted for the measure, for she has an instinct which teaches her what to
do; she can purge the heart of scantnesse and straitness, and enlarge it
with opennesse and freedom. If Popish and ungrounded love be so full and free,
shall love truly rooted be barren? Shall error be more powerful then truth?
No, no: The favor of love that comes from a soul redeemed with the precious
blood of Christ, excells all other respects whatsoever, and carries more
demonstration with it. And if love bear the sway, a true Minister of Chrst
will be as free to impart himself to the poorest and meanest of his
congregation, who can make him little requital, as to the richest and best;
yea although he be at some cost with them also, as in some cases of distress,
and visiting of the sick it may be expected from him: The loadstone which
draws his heart in pity and compassion, being the grace and necessity of the
parties, rather then his own advantage.

But to return to the people, in a word, The duty urged.
give your hearts openly and freely (next to God) to his Minister for his work
sake. Lately I read a story of the afflicted state of Belgia, thralled under
Philip of Spain, and Don John of Austria his brother, of whose tyranny the
poor Province being weary, they chose by common consent the Prince of Orange
for their defendor and protector, and meeting him in a solemn assembly at the
Town of Gaunt, presented him with a golden heart opened, with this Motto
eng^aven about it, [SINCERITY.] And truly, brethren; to apply this, I say the
true present of a soul won to God by the peace of reconciliation, is an heart
(though not of gold, yet more precious) even made of love and opennesse, with
sincerity of affection: without this we cannot receive the Minister of Christ
aright; we may blear his eyes with false colors, but God is not mocked. It
behooves us to hope the best of all, whom we cannot convince of the contrary:
But except this principle be ingrafted first, all other shows will vanish, and
a false heart must one way or other, bewray her self. This open sincere heart,
is the best present for a Preacher, and that which will do great things if
need be, as Naaman was here ready to do: It says to the Minister, there is
mine heart, take that in pawn, and the rest will follow. But an iron close
hollow heart, is poison to a Minister. The Jesuits begged of King Henry the
fourth of France, that he would bequeath them his heart in token of his
esteem, which they keep in a golden cup in one of their Chappells. Let us do
so to the Minister of Christ, and as I said, let not Friars and Jesuits
prevail more with their votaries for their hearts, then faithful messengers
from heaven with their people. That which is well for the present among us,
brethren, I commend: (If the Gospel had not some friends, it could not be so
well as it is) only take heed, that bad times eclipse it not: But I speak as
I do, because days of peace, are not as days of trouble; among some good
hearts of sincerity, many are hollow, and the best may amend, and learn to be
confirmed to do that they do, upon grounds of conscience: And I desire the
Lord that without prejudice we might hear this truth and receive it.

Ask thine heart whence is it, that my affections are so blunt, and dead
toward Gods Minister? The more I am loved the less I love, 2 Cor. 12.15.
What? Did his message never pierce my soul? Did it never convince me to be a
rank enemy of God by nature? That the wrath or favor of the Almighty was my
life or death? Did it never convince me of this, that the Lord Jehovah has in
the blood of his own son, devised, offered, sealed up a reconciliation, and
that for me? Alas! what wonder, if the hearth of that Altar be cold, whereon
Gods fire was never kindled. O Lord! work the sense of the message of
immortality and life in me by the Spirit of grace, and then I shall behold the
honor and worth of thy Minister with a spiritual eye, and that common base
judgment of the world shall vanish! Then shall his feet be beautiful, his
face and voice precious, and his love above the love of any earthly object. Job
33.
Then shall I call him (with Elihu) one of a thousand! For where one Minister
cares for reconciliation himself, or teaches it to others, some others do
not; so they have the fleece, what care they whether men sink or swim! Oh! Now
I see, its a rare grace for a Minister to prise a soul, to tremble at the
loss of it, to value it at the price of the blood of the eternal God and the
loss thereof, as the spilling of the heart blood of Christ! Oh Lord! Did
thou mean a poor soul so well as to give him a part in this blood? And to
send me tidings thereof by the messenger of peace, thy Minister sealing up that
unto me on earth, which in heaven thou have granted me? My goodness, my thanks
cannot reach thee, but it shall fall upon thy Minister, whose blessed voice
thou have caused to sound in mine ears, and to convey thy love into my soul!
I hope I shall not forget such a Levite all my days! So much for this Use.

Fourthly and lastly, this point is for Instruction, to teach us what duty
Instruction. If we owe the Minister great things, what owe we to God himself?
If to the Minister (a poor mortal worm) we owe such honor and reverence,
what then owe we to God himself? If we should do great things for the
instrument of our peace, who is the messenger only of glad tidings: What then
owe we to him that is the fountain of it, and him that sends it from heaven to
us? What should seem great unto us for such kindness? How should we carry
our lives, liberties, souls and selves in our bosoms, ready to lay down for
him? What cost, what price is so great, which should part the Lord and us? Genesis
23.15.
As Ephron said to Abraham touching the price of Machpelah, its worth so many
shekels of silver, but what is that between me and thee? So should we say, Oh
what is my best treasure worth Lord, in respect of losing thy love and
communion? God will have his servants do some singular thing for him.
Some shreds (I doubt not) we should beteame him, what great thing would we do
for him? What virtue goes out of us? What streams of our love and affection
go to him, from whose springs all proceed unto us? What singular thing do we
for him, who gave his Son to save enemies, and his Minister to bring us news
of it? Servants who attend royal Benefactors, love to seal their loyal love
by some undeniable exploit and mark of extraordinary service. As those
worthies of David would break through an host of enemies to fetch him water;
2 Samuel 23.15.
so great an hazard that David thought it a present meet for God: And all to
teach us, that he whom great things do become to give, deserves the greatest
from us, even the very neglect of life it self, if he ask it! When I read of
the strange adventures of men for the pleasing of their Lords and Commanders,
methinks it shames us Christians! Its recorded of the soldiers of Charles the
fifth, who hearing that he desired a way to be made for his army over a
certain broad River, then beset with the ships of the enemy: They put their
swords in their mouths, and drew those ships surprised to the shore, and
conveied over the army in them? What was this but for the pleasing of a mortal
man? But when as (one day) the soul shall be summoned before God, and demanded
by the Judge, what singular thing have thou done to put it out of question,
what love thou bear to me? What a woeful regret will it be when it can
bethink it self of nothing, save shreds and parings?

We could beteame that God should strain himself to a demonstration of some
great thing for us: If it were to make the Sun stand still, or go back ten
degrees, to work some miracle, or show some sign from heaven of love to us,
that it might appear how great we are in his books! And we make small account
of small blessings which others share in with us, who are lesser then the
least. But what do we pick out to resalute him withal? How do we curtall
him of his ordinary dues rather, Genesis 22.2.
as thinking much of that? The Lord bad Abraham do a great thing for him, even
kill his son, and he was ready to do it, and the Lord said, Now I know that
thou love me indeed: But if he should put us to such self-denial, or try us
with hard duties, we rather would hang down the head with that young man, and
go away sorrowful: So that he might say of us, I have tried thee now, and
found, that thy wealth, thy liberty, wife, children are dearer to thee then my
self, I will trust thee no more! Oh how should we tremble at this! How should
our base, penurious, scanty hearts, even stink in our nostrills and shame us!
Act. 3.3.
when that creeple looked steadfastly upon Peter and John, all he gaped after
was a penny or two of alms, but they bestowed more then he desired, and healed
his lamenesse. How (think we) was he astonished? 1 King. 3.15.
And how was Solomon ravished, when he had Gods answer? Even so which of us
(brethren) that belong to God, can deny, but that he has given us more then
ever we could ask or think? But what have we done for him? Have we found out
singular things for him? Denial of our selves, forgoing of our wills, lusts,
pleasures for him? Nay, have we not taken our uttermost liberty in them? A good
wife, husband, child, recovery out of sickness, have deserved more from us,
then ever we rendered? But what can we say, when his Christ is yet unpaid for?

1631.
Now this dear year, which of us makes it our season to do great things for
God? We know, that we do for his members, we do for him: Where is the man
who fellow-feeles this hard pinching year, and these prises of corn and
victuals? If you of the poorer sort, would do great things for God, even live
by faith, and set up the promise and alsufficiency of God, above your hungry
bellies and empty purses, he would do great things for you! But (brethren)
let the sins of the poor go, look we to our own and amend them. Be we
really pinched (in the fear of God) with their present miseries. Say not with
that churl, shall I take my flesh and bread and give it these beggars! 1 Samuel
25.
No, give a portion to six and to seven, the necessity of the time craves some
singular thing. Common service stinkes in Gods nostrills in a season of
special duty.
If now we come in with our common stuff our sin shall be as great, as our
denying them altogether at another time. Oh! it were a great thing if we would
even feel a pinch in our own selves while this pinch lasts, and abridge our
diet, our apparel, much more our feasts and excess, in an holy sympathy of
their pinch, and let our pinching and sparing from our selves, become a relief
of theirs and a bound to their refreshing: Else we shall pay full dearly for
our baseness! Sell a groat, a test on, yea two (if need be) cheaper then every
churl! Pinch your selves in your prises, sell your corn, eat your meat and
put up gains with less sweetness, more pinching of sorrow then at other
times. If it were not (Lord thou know) for this pinching time, I would not
be so scanty to my self as I am, but seeing I cannot abound my self, Satan
who seeks thy blood can prevail for more then Christ who shed his blood for
thee.
but I am prone to be scanty to others; therefore I will choose to scant my
self, that I may be enlarged to others: Let his (good brethren) be that
singular thing wherein we declare our selves to God. And if we do this in love,
and be suitable in other the like we shall have the reward of such as do great
things for God, when as others do little or nothing at all. Remember Satan
himself requires it and obtaines it at the hands of his servants. So much for
the ground of this second Argument. Now I come to the inference upon it.

The which is, The second branch of this Argument.
the application and urging of this truth upon their Master, If thou will do
such great things out of thy love to the Prophet, then show it by real obeying
his counsel; q. d. else, all thy shows are naught worth.

The point is, True love and honor to a Prophet, Doctrine. True love and
honor of Gods Prophets appears in our obeying them.
stands in obeying his voice. We see in common experience, if a man have a
friend whom he seems to think highly of, yet if that friend perceive that in
any case of importance and weight, his friend will sooner hearken to any
stranger then to him, and that he shall be of his court, but others of his
counsel: What will he do, think himself regarded? No, he will conclude,
surely this man slights my counsel and follows his own ways whatsoever I
say, therefore for my part, I leave him to them who can sway him more with
their counsel then I can. How much more then is it thus with the Minister? If
he see his people court him in their carriage, complement with him in speech
and courtesies, but still abide the old men, reform nothing amiss, go on
still in their course, what shall he conclude? Surely this, I see this people
loves me not, for I can prevail with them in nothing, their own ways they
will take, though I tear my tongue to the stumps, therefore surely they love
me little or not at all. But let us see first some Reasons, then some
Scriptures to prove the point, and so come to some use.

First, they who love from the heart, will obey from the heart, because Ezekiel.
18.
But when there is a reciprocation of affection with the fruit of obedience,
then shall neither grudge at other: Both stand in equal obligation to obey, if
both perform it, there is mutual cause of joy and love, but if one be
faithful to God, and the other unfaithful to him, there will be unequal
drawing in the yoke, and great cause of complaint.

Secondly, there is an holy judiciousnesse and wisdom in love, compelling Esaias
49.4.
its equal and righteous that they requite love for love, duty for duty: That
they set his crown upon his head by their faithful obedience. The business
concerns themselves very sadly, for the Minister preaches not, comforts not,
exhorts not for his own ends, but for theirs: If then he be for them and not
himself; shall they be able to answer it, if they be not for their own
souls? Alas! what shall the discouragement they afford to the Minister, hurt
him? Shall it not redound to them? See Heb. 13.17. That were smally to their
comfort. He is from God, and as in the stead of Christ, doing his Embassage. As
Jeremy speaks to those rebels, Chap. 44. Lo I am before you, you may answer
me as you will: But know, that he who sent me, will not be so easily answered,
2 Pet. 1.16.
he will pay ye home for your rebellion. If the Minister be bound to follow
God, and not cunning devises and fables of his own head, and must give a strict
account thereof to his Master: Woe be to them that perceive not nor lay to
heart! What a solemn account will lie upon them if they despise that message,
which he delivers upon such terms: He has saved his soul, but thy blood
shall be upon thine own head. True love then is judicious, (see 2 Cor. 5.14.)
and as in all other things, so in this; she is loath to offer any measure to
the Minister, which she is loath God should offer herself.

1 Cor. 13.
especially if he be a man wholly set to seek Gods ends in preaching. A good
heart will say, I warrant you, it stings the heart of him who teaches us
soundly, to behold in us slight acceptance: Oh this will breed bad blood! This
will load him with sorrow, and he has no whither to go for ease, but to him
who set him on work: And the Lord will take his wrongs to heart, and count
them his own, and that will prove sad for us. Oh! let us not provide so ill,
let us not cut down the only prop we stand on; let us condole him in his
heaviness, and remove the cause of it; that so his heart being joyed, may
procure a good errand to heaven in our behalf, and bring down a blessed
answer from God unto us.



I conclude then, true love will devise with her self, what will grace and
magnify the Minister and his labors, and finding that nothing will do it so
much as the obeying of his voice; they will force and compel themselves out of
the mere nature of their love to obey him to the uttermost, cost it them never
so much the setting on; as face answers face in water; Proverb.
so does the life of an hearer who loves his Minister answer his labors. Love
must needs destroy it self, if it should disesteem her object; therefore she
honors that, as she would support herself. So much for Reasons.

This point, first affords Terror to all basely minded men, who live Terror.
Two or three Branches.
vexing and crossing them to the uttermost, in stead of obeying: Such as Jer.
44.16. openly tell him, The word of God which thou spakest unto us we will not
hear it: Such as live at open defiance with the Minister, asking, Shall this
fellow reign over us? No: Shall we be tied to his girdle? We scorn it: Let us
cast his cords from us! Psalm. 2.12.
What Lord shall control us? Our tongues, our spirits and ways are our own:
Shall he teach us to marry, to buy, sell, keep company, use our liberties?
Shall he come among us to forestall our pleasures, our wills and lusts? They
that live at open defiance with their Ministers, are odious.
Cannot we tell as well as he what is good for us? He serves us and lives upon
us; and shall we maintain our servant to be in our tops? Oh base wretch! He is
thy servant for thy good, but made so by God, not a slave, but a free
honorable Minister of reconciliation, not to serve thy humors, but to
control them: And (as I said before) then they will run and ride, and lay
their purses together, nay set on all the mastives of the Country against them
to worry them out! But oh woeful creatures! Reproach of Ministers, shame and
spots of assemblies, you need not to hunt them out: Read but that in Mica
2.6.7. and there you shall find God himself will do it for you: You say,
prophecy not: But I say, Ezekiel. 3.26.
they shall not prophecy unto such, lest they take shame: I will not suffer
their faces to be covered with such confusion, as to be plagued with such: I
will rid them from among such, and carry them to a people that love them: As
for these haters of them, when as once their shepherds are gone, I will come
in among them and worry them that worried these: And I will let in a flood upon
them of woe, when my Noa's are taken into mine Arc: That which they sought
for, revenge of my Minister, I will inflict as a revenge upon them, and when
they see themselves left to be consumed by those lusts of theirs, which they
scorned to be rooted out by him, then they shall roar for very anguish, some
here under penury, rags, shame, diseases and impenitency, some in hell, but
then one hour of a faithful Minister shall not be given them if they had the
world to give for it. Beware lest (seeing the fearful examples of vengeance
in Scripture for contempt of the Minister, besides daily experience of the
sudden end of scorners and persecutors, will not draw you from your trade) God
make you examples for others to take warning by. See and tremble at the
examples of Ahabs ruin upon contempt of Micaja: Those Jews in Egypt for
despising of Jeremy, 1 King. 22.32. Jer. 44.
the whole Nation of them both then and after, for rejecting the Prophets,
Christ and his Apostles; and rather make use of such to prevent destruction.
Briefly, peruse these Texts, Jer 26.18. Josh. 22.17. etc.

A second branch of Terror may reach to such, 2. Branch.
as will first qualify their Minister in his charges and counsels, and then
they will obey him, but not till then. It is irksome unto them to obey him in
the Lord in matters of conscience: For why? Their hearts are licentious,
carnal and profane: There be other Ministers which will do the like to their
people, till they have made them like to themselves.
And yet they think it a disgrace to live otherwise then lovingly and
courteously with their Minister. What course then take they? Surely this, they
will first try whether they can by policy, by kind offices, feasting and
entertaining of him, pull him into their company, and draw him into the
fellowship of their pleasures, games and merriments: These (they think) will
be least suspected, and having snared him by these, then they seek by degrees
to fetch him into the Alehouse, People that will seem to love their Minister
that they may lu^ke in their sins, odious.
to drink and be a good fellow: Then they inject a suspicion and jealousy
into his mind against such as fear God, and oppose them in their base evils:
Then to whet his tongue in the pulpit against them, to flesh and encourage
themselves in their liberties and lusts: And so by these means having baned
him, and made him for their turn, they will obey him, good reason: For they
have first made him sure enough, and for their tooth, they have taught him to
be a meet Cook for their appetite, and to dress their meat their own way,
with the sauce that likes them best, therefore they may well venture to eat of
it. Oh base creatures! Do ye first crook the rule by which you are to write,
and do ye then write after it? Thus it was with him, 1 King. 21. who being
sent for Micaja to Ahab, would needs teach him his lesson by the way: Let (I
pray thee) thy words be suitable to the words of the four hundred Prophets, and
then my Master will surely do as thou biddest him. Do thou flatter and claw
him, and then he will obey thee. So do many to their Ministers: Note.
They will prescribe him what truths he shall teach them, and what he shall
balke, they will tell him what method he shall use, be much in discourse, and
little in application, preach smooth and pleasing things, and then they will
hear him. But oh woeful people! Is this to hear him or to obey your lusts?

When Iehoiada was dead, the Text tells us, that his Princes came to Ioash, 2 Chronicles. 24.17.
and finding him a facile and flexible man, they ingratiated themselves with
him by gifts and rewards, by praises and flatteries, till they had drawn his
spirit away from God to Idols, and to serve their own base turn. Oh say they!
We are all thy loyal subjects and friends, willing to be thy servants: But we
see that except thou hearken in the point of Religion to thy people, they will
scarce continue in their loyal obedience: Wherefore it is much for thy safety
and honor to yield to them, and else it will create much trouble in thy
Kingdom: And even thus fares it with people of this rank toward their
Minister. For the love of their lusts, what will they not do? Oh, Sir, say
they, we see you are a man of worth and learning, and you make us good Sermons,
we should be glad to live and love together, and we hope you will be fair and
courteous to us: We love to keep our Church and live honestly: Indeed we are
shy of them that are so zealous and precise in their preachings, as to scare
their good people, we would be loath the hearts of your Parish should be
alienated from you, which we see will be if you be against our liberties,
pleasures and good fellowships: Hitherto we have lived well and like kind
neighbors, and we hope you will further rather then hinder it, and so doing,
we shall live in peace and good will with you: Oh how such smooth persons fret
like a canker! How easily do they prevail with such as are not armed with
prevention? Alas! they are taken and snared by such baits, and that little
sparkle of good which seemed to be in them, is soon quenched! But to finish
this Use, beware (O Minister of God) lest thou be deceived with such cunning of
men! and as for them that do so entice them, that they might the more securely
live in their lusts: Woe be unto them! they may seem to make a league with
hell, to provide a safety and immunity to their lusts: But the Lord will break
their league and put a spirit of division between them, so that they shall be
as bitter enemies as ever they were friends, and all because their union was
cursed, and tied by the band of their lusts: (As Sampsons Foxes were tied by
their tails with firebrands to do mischief) but not with the band of grace
and love, which would have held for continuance. So much for this point of
Terror.

Now a second Use may be Reproof of sundry sorts. And first, Reproof. 1.
Branch. Lovers of the Minister in general, yet con^ealing their doubts and
cases from them, reproved.
and comply with him in general; but still hold off aloof in point of
counsel and advice concerning their particular actions: Doubts they have many
touching their estates to Godward, also many difficulties they meet with in
their course in matters of weight; but they will never acquaint their Minister
with any of them, he shall be one of the first of them that shall be last
acquainted wi^h them: Partly through folly, strangeness, and darkness of
their spirit, partly through base fear, lest their wants should be discovered;
and especially because (in truth) they are not willing to be e^sed thereof,
but still to stagger, and are resolved to consult with flesh and blood, rather
then to be ruled by knowledge. Such as these the Minister shall never hear of,
till sorrow and repentance compel them to utter their folly; when they see
they have overshot themselves in their bargains, or marriages, till conscience
begin to sting them for their unjust and unwarranted courses; or God cross
them with losses, shame, enemies, then (too late) they come for counsel, which
if they had sought for in season, all this had been prevented.

Others, when they have taken their own course and bound sure, 2. Branch. such
as first vow and then enquire, do badly.
then for fashion, they will make show of consulting with a Minister, making
him believe that they advise with him upon equal terms; whereas in truth,
they make him but a stalking horse, telling their own tale so fair, that they
pull some word of allowance from him, that so they may say, they went to work
by advice; so if any thing befall amiss, he shall bear the brunt of it: But
if it fall out that he dissuade and oppose their purpose, they have made sure
beforehand to follow their own counsel: And I have had experience of such,
that whereas they have seemed to weep and bewail some lusts and corruptions
of theirs, or to hearken to reasons dissuading them from rash changing of their
callings, or entering upon dangerous marriages, or to restore goods gotten
badly, or the like; whereas the simple Minister thought they meant plainly as
they spoke; when he enquires afterward of such, perhaps he hears some of
these who so wept and bemoaned themselves, are ordinary drunkards, or unclean
wretches; others were sure of their changes ere they consulted, others continue
in their extortion or usury still; but none of them sought counsel directly,
but to make semblance of that, is not in them, or to get the opinion of
teachable ones, or to stop the mouth of accusing conscience for the present,
or to prevent some ill report of themselves, which they more fear the Minister
should know, then themselves should commit.

I have known some who have earnestly besought the Minister to come to their
house, and to meet with some friends to prevent haunting of their houses with
loose company, who (when the Minister is come) are about the practice of lewd
fellowship, and drinking the self same morning; and others who have pitifully
bewailed, how raging, shrewish, froward they are, vowing to curb these
passions, who yet are found to return to them after with more violence then
ever, when they have had some word of comfort upon hope of their humiliation.
Solomon has a Proverb of such as vow first, and then enquire, saying, it is
not good: First, to commit sacrilege, and then ask whether it be lawful.
These may mock men and their own conscience, but God is not mocked. And to
conclude this Use.

3. Branch. Very teachable men in show, yet persisters in those sins which are
reproved, are dissemblers.
Thirdly, this also reproves all such as pretend to be very fair and propense
in taking counsel, but when all is done, still they will follow their own
course. They are so tractable (in show) that the Minister seems to admire
them: For why? Whereas some are so rough and stout, that no man may speak to
them against their rebellious courses; lo, these are so fair, that you may say
what you please unto them; admonish, convince, rebuke and advise them, you
cannot perceive any word or passion to come from them which might offend. Who
would not now think these men to be the only obedient ones and to be ruled?
But mark them, still they are the same men, their tongues as unruly, their
families as ungoverned, their marriages as perverse, themselves as disordered:
For why? They are molded by a custom into this dangerous habit to suffer you
to say any thing, they have Asses ears, talk what you will, you shall have a
nod and be endured, but there is no heart in them to obey, no strength to be
ruled.

1 King. 22.
Thus Iehoshaphat hearing the false Prophets, would needs have Micaja sent for,
but to what purpose? Indeed he would hear him speak, and perhaps would have
wished Ahab to be ruled by him: But when he would not, did he tremble to join
with him, or desist from the enterprise? No, but still continued this trade
with him and his son Iehoram, and married his son to a daughter of that
Idolatrous family which was their ruin! Such a desperate slynesse, or
fillinesse, or weakness, there is in many, that wind themselves by this
smoothness, out of all men's fingers, that they may roll back into the arms
of their accustomed habits and humors, whatsoever has been said to the
contrary. Simil.
The thick hail falling upon the tiles of houses does as much pierce and
break them, as counsel prevails with these, as the one rebounds back as
fast as it comes, so does every drop of counsel pass away from these. Their
honor to the Minister, is to give him the hearing with both ears; but to obey
him in nothing: Far are these from him that said, Esaias 50.5.
The Lord has opened me an ear, I was not rebellious. But I have lengthened
out my speech beyond the due limits of the time: Here therefore I cease for the
present, leaving the rest till another season. Let us pray, etc.

The end of the Fourtenth Lecture.
THE FIFTEENTH LECTVRE Still continued upon this thirteenth VERSE.
VERSE XIII. And his servants came near, and said unto him, Father, if the
Prophet had bid thee do some great thing, would thou not have done it? How
much more then, when he says unto thee, Wash and be clean?

VERSE 14. Then he went down to Jorden, and dipped himself etc.


2 Kings
WE ended the last Lecture (brethren) with the latter use of Reproof, in the
process whereof, we were cut off: Return to the former use of Reproof.
But the point was, a sharp rebuke to all smooth people, who will hear all,
and say as you say, but hold their own and do as they list. They seem to
want a bottom, all that is said leaketh as fast out as it was powered in, for
lack of a digesting and retentive spirit, which their frothy vanity cannot
admit. It should seem that those Jews were such, Deuteronomy. 5.29.
who when Moses declared Gods covenant to them, told him the word of the Lord
was good, they would obey all: But the Lord cries out. This people have said
well in all they have spoken: But oh, that there were such an heart in them to
do it, to fear and obey, that it might go well with them! And this sin
seemed to run in a blood with them, Ezekiel. 33. ult.
for the Lord tells Ezekel thus, This people will sit and hear thy voice as
the voice of a musician, yea thou art to them as one that sings pleasantly to
an instrument, so are they caught with thy words: But they will not do as thou
say; for their hearts go still after their own covetousness: They are as
slye fishes, which will get out at one mash or other of the net.

To finish this Use therefore, let all such know, that as it is sinful
bashfulnesse for them, to conceal themselves from their Minister, whose lips
are to preserve knowledge: So it is double sin and subtilty in them to advise
with him for their own ends, and to use him only as a stale, when as their
hearts are bent their own way: The former are their own wors^ enemies: But the
latter trench upon the honor of God, the esteem of the Minister, the peace of
their own souls, and therefore must be renounced.

But to proceed. Exhortation. Obedience to the Minister urged.
This point in the third place affords exhortation to Esaias 50.10.11. 2 Cor.
5.20. and 6.1.
One solemn proof of obeying the voice of the Minister is, to believe Gods
promise. Receive not the grace of God in vain: Be reconciled to God. Who is
among you (says Esaias) that fears the Lord, and obeys the voice of his
servant, that walks in darkness and has no light? Let him trust in the
name of the Lord, and stay himself upon his God: Let him not compass himself
about with sparks, nor walk in the light of his own fire which he has
kindled.

Mark: This is a sound trial of obeying the Minister, Some Instances of the
obedience of love.
if we shall deny Naamans obeying Elisha, to wash and be clean; if Naaman had
obeyed twenty other charges besides, what had it booted him? But in this he
obeyed all. Do not then sullenly abide in thy darkness and unbeleefe still,
because thou art dark, but the rather, abhor that rebellious proud heart of
thine, which would keep thee in bondage or staggering, and come to Gods
promise, his light and heat, and that shall comfort thee, quicken thee, humble
and enlarge thee. As Naamans heart grew enlarged to God and the Prophet by his
obeying that one charge, so that he thought nothing too dear for them, so
shall thine. It will make thee free to obey, not (as he being crossed) to go
away sorrowful; but to lie down at his feet, saying, Speak Lord, for thy
servant hears.

So also, be exhorted not to rest here, but proceed to other obedience:
distressed? To serve God in thy time? Mourn for the abominations of all
states, and the miseries which they have justly procured? Oh then obey him! He
has warrant to enjoine thee, this task he himself obeyes with thee, and
suffers as thou do: Will thou leave him as an owl in the wilderness, and
not bear him company?

2 Cor. 6.11.12.13.
Thou know how to sting him, and how to cheer his heart! His honor and
content rests in thy hand, it is in thee to sadden or to solace him: Be not so
cruel as to destroy thine own chief prop under God: If he shall say, O dear
friend, as you love me, obey me in reforming and purging your family and
children of their abuses, their running out to drunken companies and
unseasonable meetings, their garish attires and proud fashions; I tell you its
your and my dishonor, that in other things you seem Religious, but in these
as loose as others. Perhaps ye will not openly set up M^y-poles and
Morris-dauncings to fret me, but you will suffer your servants to break the
Sabbath, which your selves would seem to keep: What shall we think of this?
Surely (to say no more) you shall give me leave to know my friends from my
foes in these your doings: How can you say you love me, Judge. 15.16.
when your heart is not with me.

Urging of the Exhortation.
Brethren, show what kindness you please in other regards to your Minister, pay
him his dues, send him what gratuities you will; but know, if he be a Minister
of Christ, the maine scope of his heart and pitch of his ambition, is, to sit
near your hearts in the power of his commands and Ministry; Tokens of our love
to the Minister in other kinds, are no marks of sound love, except obedience
follow.
all other things are but the killing him with kindness, and breaking of his
head to give him a plaster, if you obey not from the heart; love is always
content to be taught and to obey, not to teach or prescribe; be content then to
love him as he from God shall appoint thee, and not as thou thy self would,
and put case thou should persuade thy Minister thou love him (by some
other marks) it were his folly to think so, but it is nevertheless thy sin.
When thy Minister comes first to thee, he finds thee a man of a double heart
to God; he strives to draw thee to sincerity and plainness, he finds thee
very ignorant, and seeks to breed knowledge of God and thy self in thee; he
finds thee a man of an inconstant frame and not to be trusted, or proud,
ambitious and vainglorious, or perhaps contentious, covetous, stout, wilful
and rebellious, and labors to change thee; thou say thou love him: Jerem.
Does his love then prevail with thee to reform these vices, or art thou
still the same man, so that he may hope as soon to alter the skin of a
Black-more, as to alter them? Then I say thou lie, for thou love him not.
As that young man coming to Christ, told him many things that he did and had
done from his youth: But our Savior answers him, yet one thing remains, Sell
all, and all is well; so say I to thee, in thy paying of tithes, in thy
friendly assistance and countenance, thou do well, but one thing still
remains, obey him, and then it will appear, that the other are not done to
blanch and daub over thine hypocrisy, but from an heart of love and obedience.
I have known some loose professors who have sought to exceed all other their
neighbors in the love of a godly Preacher, and who but they, in their running,
riding, assisting of him? They have been as his right hand of trust and
service: But lo, in a short time these fellows bewray that which lay secret, to
wit, an unclean, covetous, voluptuous heart; and what then? Surely all men see
evidently that these clave to the Minister for their own base ends, and to
conceal their vices.

A special watchword to all Ministers of God to beware how far they engage
themselves in the love of any professors, A caveat to Ministers. See Joh.
2.24.25. Ministers reproach themselves in ascribing too much and trusting too
far such as they know not.
who make toward them in special relation: Try them thoroughly in their
obedience, as well as their pretended love; or else the time may come, when as
their baseness shall discredit your persons and Ministry far more then all
their love could prevail. If when all is done, they are so subtle that we
cannot espy them, the sin shall be theirs, we have saved our own souls,
and may wash our hands in innocence, because we have done our duties.

When all is done, (therefore) this will hold water if we obey: Heb. 13.
So says the Apostle, Obey them that are set over you: And Paul, I bear you
witness, you obeyed the form of doctrine delivered unto you: And again, you
received our doctrine, not as the word of man, but as the word of God: Every
good hearer should say to his Minister as Elisha did to Gehazi, 2 King. 5. end.
Went not thy spirit with me when I ran after the man? So, did not the spirit
of my faithful Pastor go with me when I was in such a company, recreation or
worldly business? Me thought it curbed me from lightness and vanity, from
deceit, from sinning in my tongue, or in any disguisement of intemperancy, or
cousenage, or covetousnes, to think, if he now saw me, how should I be ashamed
to do thus? Oh! he loves me tenderly and my souls welfare, and should I grieve
him thus? 2 Cor. 3.2.
This is indeed to be the Epistle of the Minister written in our hearts,
approving our love unto him to purpose. Not that there is not a stronger motive
then this, to awe and draw people from good to evil, for there is an holy
Spirit of anointing which is given to all good ones, which has shed the love
of Christ into their hearts, and filled them with the length and breadth of it;
this should hem in the souls of believers, (for so the word is, 2 Cor. 5.7.)
and compel them to watch over themselves: This must be the chief Monitor in
the School of Christ: If the voice of this great Prophet be not obeyed for it
self, the voice of the servant (as he is called, Esaias 50.) will be little
worth: For what wonder if they disobeyed the voice of Moses the messenger of
God, Heb. 2.2.3. who rebelled against that holy Spirit which set him on work,
and vexed it all those forty years, as it is Esaias 63.11. No it must be the
spirit of the Master which must make his Steward esteemed: The love of the Lord
Jesus, must make the love of the Minister compulsive, else it will prove
nothing but slavish fear, or to avoid base shame; as we see in many a
drunkard, or swearer, who for the presence sake of a sinful man, will (for an
hour or two) bite in their qualities, which yet they tremble not to commit in
the presence of God all the year long. Conclude this point then and say, I
pretend love to my Minister, how shall I demonstrate it really? As Cornelius
did, Act. 10. Its said, he fell down and took Peter by the feet in token of
excessive love and respect: But what, was this all? No surely: But this, that
he tells him, They were all ready to hearken to whatsoever the Lord said unto
them by him: This was a sure mark; love and fear make reverence, and thence
comes obedience.

When love is solid it works by fear, and causes a loathnesse to do any
thing which might grieve the Minister; it sits like Mary at the feet of the
Minister ready to obey: And that not only in slight matters to remove some
sin which may be spared, 1 Samuel 15.
as Saul that killed the lean cattle and the baser sort of Amalek; but even
the belovedst lust and most precious vice, even the fat cattle, and the King
himself: True love abhorres common evidence, its painful, it will be
singular, and ask, Matthew. 5.47. Joh. 21.
what singular thing do I to approve my love? When our Savior would try
Peter's love, he asks him, Love thou me more then these? As some think he
meant of his nets and occupation, as others of his fellow Apostles. Both will
do well: Love thy Minister by obeying more then others, yea love him more then
thy nets, thy beloved trade, thy lusts which bring thee in the greatest gain,
thy sweet usury, thy gaming, thy deceit, which others (who love him not) would
as soon lose their lives as forgo: The forfeit of these will import strongly
that thou love not him for any by respect, but as he is a Minister of God. I
remember a story of Pope Pius the fifth, (one that was reputed as humble as a
proud Pope might be) who being told of a base fellow that had much abused him
in a Pasquill; answered, I sustain two persons, one of a poor Monk, another
of Christ's Vicar, if thou have railed upon me as a Monk, I pardon thee, if as
Pope, I must punish thee. So there is no true Minister of Christ who looks at
himself as a man, but at the honor of him whose servant he is, and to whom he
desires all the peoples obedience should be derived. Try therefore whether thy
lusts can draw thee stronglier then he; if two loadstones draw both together,
the iron will go to the strongest: So let thy love go to him from thy lust.
Fleire not in his face, nor bear him fair in hand, when as yet thine heart
goes another way. Do nothing behind his back, which thou would not do
before him: In all thy doubtful matters consult with him, let him come within
thy bosom, know thy secrets, and hide nothing from him wherein he can inform
thee, for he is for God and Christ, 1 Cor. 5.20.
as a faithful Ambassador for thy good. Does he tell thee, O my friend, I
perceive your zeal quales shrewdly in this Laodicean age, you hear often, but
sleep much at Sermons, you jangle so much of earthly business upon the
Sabbath, that I fear you meditate little: Or, you are zealous, but you grow
not in knowledge, wisdom, tenderness, to manage your zeal aright from
rashness and censoriousnes: Or, you are noted to be full of words or a busy
body: Or, you are given to flout and jeere when you are in company: Or, you are
bold to dally with women: Or, you are too idle in your calling, and run up
and down needlessly: Or, you fail in compassion to the poor, or do small
good with that you have, you are hard and sore in dealings, or make no
conscience of keeping promise, in all which respects the Gospel suffers, and
the Lord (with your own credit and Ministry) lie at the stake: I beseech you,
if you love me, as you profess to do, amend these, I say obey him in all, and
be earnest with God and him to make thy love effectual herein, that thou
may appear not to love in word, but in deed and truth. And so much for this
Exhortation.

And for the Minister, one word let me add. Use ult. Ministers must love only
for procuring obedience to the truth.
That which in the green tree is not to be suffered, how much less in the
dry? If people must not equivocate with their Minister, much less may he with
them. Do not seek favor with the people, and seem to love them to any other
ends, save to draw them to obey thy Doctrine. If thou will needs seem great
with them, improve al thine interest for God and their good: Seek not to
idolize thy self in any man's heart and affections for thine own ends, that
thou might either magnify thy person above other Ministers, or get the
reputation of some great person (as Magus did) or enlarge thine estate and
preferments: But in all let it appear, 2 Cor. 12.14.
that thou seek them, not theirs; and as a servant of Christ thou seek to
set up him, though with thine own abasement. As thou usest thy self, so will
it appear in thy course what thou aimest at; and if once people smell what
thou seek, thou shall both draw flatterers enough, (as being meet covers for
thy cup) and deter all that make conscience from honoring thee from the
heart: For why? Under color of serving thy Master, thou tradest for thy self,
and discoverest thy self to be a mere Sycophant, not caring which end goes
forward, so thou can work thine own ends. Not much unlike those
timeservers, the Princes of Ioash, who came and did him great homage, but why?
To draw his heart from God to Idols, and their own purposes; and those
leaguers in France, in King Henry the fourth his time, for the aliening of his
heart from the Protestant Religion, which proved the ruin of them both. But of
this in the next Argument.

Lastly, here is Consolation to all such as second their affection to the
Comfort.
Thou can do little for thy Minister perhaps, but this thou do, thou
obeyest him: Its a sign unto thee that thy love is sincere unto him (and which
is better) to the Lord himself, to the message he brings; nay its a sign thy
heart is in love with the truths of God, his commands, threats and promises; It
argues thou love all the Ministers of God without dissimulation or
partiality, (a rate gift, and hardly found, for each man will have his own
Paul, Cephas or Apollo.) Nay, to conclude, 1 Cor. 3.4.
its a sign that there are many graces in thee, says purging thy conscience,
humility and self-denial, all saving gaces. This obeying is above all
sacrifices, and fat of lambs; yea more to be rejoiced in then so many Jewels.
Could but I prove this in you (my beloved) who throng to hear, and look me in
the face to pull out my words out of my mouth, I should not need to comfort you
or praise you: Matthew. 11.19.
Wisdom is justified by her children, your selves should praise you in the
gates though I were silent. Luke 1.
And as the babe sprang in the womb of Elizabeth when Mary came near her, so
should your hearts leap in your bosoms while you hear me speak; and as those
two Disciples going to Emmeus, Luke 22. so should you bear me witness this
day, and say, Did not our hearts burn within us while he applied his doctrine?
But well may this use come in the last place, for they are fewest whom it may
truly concern. And so much for this second Argument of the Servants, drawn
from his love to the Prophet. Now I come to the Third.

And that is couched closely, but effectually in these words, How much more
when he says unto thee, 3. Argument. The sincerity of the Prophet
Wash and be clean? As if they should say, Alas! What seeks the Prophet in
all this his charging thee to wash in Jorden? What, does he expect a reward of
thee? Doubtless, then he would not so effectedly have kept in and refused to
talk with thee, he would then have sought thy face as a Prince bringing great
gifts, flattered and fawned on thee for his own vantage: But now behold,
Explication of the ground.
he simply and sincerely tells thee Gods message, looking at nothing else: That
which he urges is nakedly this, that for thine own good thou might wash and
be clean. If he had sought from thee some great matter for himself, (though
no doubt, thou would easily have yielded to that also, yet) then he might
with more color have been suspected: But now, since he has no further reach
then thy cure and welfare, entirely desiring thy good, and loath to see thee
return home with thy disease, why should thou not yield to him and wash?
Shall he seem more heartily to wish thy happiness then thou thine own? That
were to be doubly blindefolded with passion, neither to see his love, nor to
wish thine own good. This being their argument, it affords us this
observation. Sincerity in a counselor, claims acceptance.
That its a strong motive to all (who are not perversely led by their own
self-love) to hearken to counsel, when it shall appear, that he who gives it
is sincerely affected to the party counseled, without any respect to his own
advantage. And in very deed, it is that argument by which (throughout the
Scriptures) the holy Ghost pleads audience. 1 Samuel 12.3.
Samuel being to urge the Israelites to repent and return again into covenant
with God, and to contest with them for their Rebellion, begins with this
argument, Behold here I am, witness against me, before the Lord, Whose Ox or
Ass have I taken? Whom have I defrauded or oppressed? Of whose hands have I
taken bribes to blind mine eyes? q. d. If it were thus, my mouth might be
stopped in my conviction. The Apostle Paul, Act. 20.31.23.34. being to press
those Elders of Ephesus to tread in his steps, and to conceal nothing of Gods
truth from his Church, urges his own pattern, I have coveted no man's silver,
gold, nor apparel, yea your selves know, that these hands have ministered unto
my necessities, and to yours who have been with me; and by this rule he bids
them proceed, pleading that golden speech of Christ: Its a more blessed thing
to give then receive. The same Apostle, 2 Cor. 12.14.15.16. being to draw the
Corinths to listen to his charges, cleers himself from all imputation of
seeking himself and insincerity: This third time am I ready to come unto you,
and I will not be burdensome, for I seek not yours, but you: I will gladly
spend and be spent for you, though the more I love you, the less I am loved;
but be it so, yet I did not burden you, yet being crafty, I taught you by
guile. Note how he opposes his craft to the false Apostles, their craft was to
catch that they had, but Paul's to catch them. Not to be endless, take another
Text, which reaches to another kind of falsehood, viz. the exalting of himself
in their thoughts, 2 Cor. 11. being there urging them against those Impostors
which disparaged his person, he says, 2 Cor. 11.7.
Have I committed any offense in abasing my self, that you might be exalted?
Or in preaching freely? I was chargeable to no man: and 2 Cor. 7.2. being to
join issue with the maine doctrine of Christ, he argues thus, Brethren,
receive us, we have wronged no man, corrupted, defrauded no man, q.d. you may
believe us the rather: The like we have in the entrance of this Epistle, 2 Cor.
1.12.
For this is our rejoicing, the testimony of our conscience, that in all
simplicity, and godly sincerity, and not in fleshly wisdom, but in the grace
of God we have had our conversation in the world, and more especially toward
you, q.d. else you might suspect us. So in the first Epistle, 1 Cor. 2.1.2.
When I came unto you, I came not with the excellency of speech, or of wisdom:
But my preaching was in the demonstration of spirit, q.d. therefore you have
cause to receive it. Saint Peter likewise, Feed the flock of God which is
among you, overseeing it, not by constraint, 1 Pet. 5.2.
or for filthy lucre sake, but of a ready mind.

Other Texts will offer themselves by occasion: One thing I will add occasioned
by my Text, and that is, That as insincere and selfe-seeking ends are always
sinful, so even the abridging of our selves of some of that lawful liberty
(which a Minister or other public person might otherwise use) is meet and
requisite, Ministers who will purchase interest in others, must forfeit some of
their own.
so often as we have to deal with weak ones and silly novices, who are not yet
strong enough to digest our privilege, but rather to stumble at us, and so
turn all our counsel and labors to mere unprofitablenes. To covet other men's
esteem or wealth, is simply evil: But as the case may stand, it is not meet to
urge the uttermost of our due, when thereby our Ministry lies upon hazard: But
so precious ought souls to be, and the preserving of the honor of our persons
and labors, (especially since there will ever be weak ones and ignorant, till
they see their folly by wiser experience) that even sometimes we must remit of
our dues, that so we may serve into the minds of men the more perswasively:
Which I speak not to disanull the Ministers right, or the right of succession,
when his dues are injuriously detained by those that are basely minded and
fraudulent: But according as a wise man's judgment would in such cases think
meet for a time to avoid greater peril: And so was it in the case of Paul, and
in those primitive times: And not unlike to it was the case of Naaman here,
whom the Prophet durst not in any wise offend, but aiming at the honor and
esteem of God and his worship, that it might be kept entire, would not so much
as come out before, nor after this cure effected, accept either more or less
at his hands, though otherwise Prophets accepted poor presents from men, as
appears, 1 Samuel 9.8. being the means of their ordinary support allowed them
by God. But from Proofs, I come to a few Reasons.

First, that deserves justly to be effectual which is from God. No argument
Laben in point of the marriage of Rebecca, Genesis 24.50.
what can we say? Neither good nor bad, but that is from God, and therefore
must take effect: Witness Gamaliel, Look to your selves (says he) what ye
do against these men, for if they be not of God, they will fall of themselves;
Acts 5.
but if from him you do but in vain to fight against God. Now mark, That
counsel which seeks not it self, but the good of the party counseled, comes
nearest to the point of divinenesse. For why? What is more like to be from God
then that which is for God? And what is more like to be for God, th^n that
which least savours of self-love and selfe-ends? Partly in respect of the
nature of it, because nothing does more resemble Gods excellency then Pureness
and Sincerity: And partly, because usually nothing does so much hinder and
forestall Gods glory and ends, then seeking our own: look one place or two, in
which both these are put together, as making to one and the same purpose. 1
Pet. 1.16.17.
Saint Peter pressing the Jews to believe his Epistle, uses this argument,
Because (says he) we speak without all dissimulation and cunning deceit: But
how does he prove this? Surely by this reason, because he preached no other
doctrine then that which had been taught him by his Master, We have not
followed cunningly devised fables, but that of which we our selves were
ey-witnesses, for Christ had it of the Father, and we had it of him. Mark how
he fetches the sincerity of his writings from the divine authority by which he
spoke. If then Divinenesse be so strong a reason to persuade our sincerity,
much more ought sincerity to prevail and persuade them whom we deal with. And
the reason is, because many may possibly plead truths as from God, who yet
plead them not in a due manner, that is sincerely, as we know that many preach
Christ of envy: But when both go together, that is, sincere truth, and truth
sincerely handled, what can be so powerful? 2 Cor. 4.2.
Saint Paul puts both together in the place forequoted, We walked not in
craftiness, but by manifestation of truth and the word of God: How? Commending
our selves to each man's conscience as in the sight of God.

Briefly then, the first Reason stands thus, Sincere counsel deserves
acceptance, because it cannot but be from God, and so carries with it the force
of a divine persuasion which must needs work more with the conscience then any
thing of our own, be it never so powerful.

Baals Priests brought in their verdict to Ahab very plausibly, Iehoshaphat
smelling their pretense to please Ahab, could not rest quiet, but asked, is not
here a Prophet of the Lord to enquire of? None but a perverted man by his
blinding self-love would hearken to them, because he believed that which he
desired. Therefore on the contrary, sincerity must needs carry with it the
powerful persuasion of all other: Now if so, then ought it to take most place
with men whom it concerns. What did so carry the silly ignorant multitude in
the darkness of Popery, after the persons and devotions of the Regulars,
Friars and Monks, from the counsel and ministry of their Secular Priests? Oh
the wonderful opinion of their sincerity and sanctity of life and doctrine,
and the apparent baseness and rottenness of the Secular Clergy! Not that the
one was one whit holier then the other (neither barrel better herring) but so
it was, that the one lived in their Cells and Cloisters, wherein all their
villainy was covered from the sight of men; they blinded the people by their
coorse fare, apparel, poverty, and counterfeit sincerity, being double
iniquity: the other sins brake out more openly in the sight of the world, and
made them most odious: and so did the other after the light had discovered it,
for then all men saw them so much the more vile, by how much they had lurked
and lain hid so long under their covert of shame. To end the Reason. Except men
be mad and besotted, those Arguments shall prevail most with them which are
in themselves most effectual, not those which savor of the contrary, to wit,
falsehood and dissimulation.

And thirdly, suitable to the nature of sincerity and falsehood, is the nature
David's could not with Saul (save for the present) yet will it (and that justly)
leave such an one altogether inexcusable. The issue is, therefore they are
monsters in kind whom sincere counsel persuades not at all, nay enrages them
the more both against counsel and counselor.

Fourthly and especially, therefore such counsel deserves to prevail, is not
so much touching the things themselves, or the divine grounds whereupon they
infallably rest, no nor the assured profit which they carry to the receivers.
These all are undoubted; but alas! That which must be looked at, is the
disproportion and uncapablenesse of the receiver, blinded with prejudice,
forestalled by error, ill custom, infidelity, sensuality: In these respects,
Gods counsels unto flesh and blood are as the Camel, or a Cable to a needles
eye, so that there must be collateral and by-waies used to draw such. Hence
came John Baptist, the Lord Jesus, the Apostles of Christ, with so strange
spirits, not only of gifts, but of self-denial, of humility, of sincerity, and
such other gifts of attraction and persuasion to believe those divine truths
they urged: All that heard them perceived that they sought not a Kingdom to
themselves, but made way for God, Truth and Heaven; the diet, the apparel of
John, the lowliness of Christ, that he had not so much as a bird or a fox,
nest or hole of the earth to hide himself in, the Apostles kept no money in
their girdles, but had their labor for their pains: this countermined carnal
sense in her own element, and gave unspeakeable evidence to the counsels,
they gave that they were to be followed, because they practiced what they
spoke, and so convinced the very sense of the hearer, and let in (as a needle
the thread) the light and life of truth into the soul by beating down that
which resisted: else had it been easy for men to reply, Tush these men seek
themselves, but now your mouth is stopped. And these Reasons may suffice.

Instruction. Judgment of controversall truths must be chiefly ascribed to
the most sincere counselors.
either for doctrine or practice, when there is endless contention in the
Church about them, and when the Scriptures yield not so punctual assent, or at
least their verduict is depraved and mistaken by men of contrary minds. Surely
in such cases let their counsel be taken, who out of question were men of
most sincere and incorrupt practice, such as were far from seeking their own
ends, honor, repute, wealth or welfare, these may be thought to be the most
entire witnesses to the truth, because they had the least corrupt affections to
bribe and defile their judgment; they were the cleanest boxes and sweetest
vessels to preserve the truth of God in, without weof or tang of their own;
look what came from John, Who these are, and how to be tried.
Christ or his Apostles, is most unquestionably best counsel; if there be any
express text of Scripture extant about it, we may buy and sell upon their
counsel, because most sincere: If there be not (as it is to be noted that in
some cases there be not, that God might try our honesty) then in the next place
consult with the practice of such as lived next them in the most incorrupt ages
and prime days of the Church, when truth was as a crystal stream which
might be seen to the bottom. Read the writings of them who lived not only in
times of prosperity and glory three hundred or four hundred years after
Christ, but in those times of purity and sincerity, when as yet truth had
received no mixtures, no defilements, by the pomp, the excess of them who
lived in them. Enquire of the days of old, when men were hunted, persecuted,
martyred for the cause of Christ: They to whom truth was dearer then their
lives, who were far from seeking great things for themselves, but carried
their lives in their bosoms to be let out with their life blood for Christ. I
deny not but they are much to be reputed who have lived since, but with
difference, the more arguments there be for their sincerity, the more they
deserve credit, the more they suffered, lost or forwent, or still are ready to
lose and forgo for him, when they need not the more (ordinarily) they are to be
trusted, except just reason may be alleged against them, to wit, that their
self-denial is contrary to the word, as Popish martyrs and the like: Look how
they preached, look what tenets they held concerning the aptness of men for the
Ministry, look what manners they were of, what contempt of the world, of
fashions, of carnal pomp, look what they judged fittest for the calling of
Ministers, the pure administration of sacraments, prayer in the assemblies,
collection for the poor, censures of offenders, admonition of the unruly,
frequency of preaching, that let us take counsel from them in: If they kept
the Lords day only as an humane ordinance, by the Apostles appointment
arbitrary, and Ecclesiastically constituted, or as the Lord Jesus his Agents
from divine instinct, and as a day perpetually to be observed for the honor of
our perfected redemption, then let us do so: look what Paul has thought of
free will, of election, of rejection, of the free grace of God, and so those
worthies who followed: look what those Martyrs ancient or modern, thought of
justification, whether by works or faith, of Purgatory, the Mass, Popish
Martyrs against the Scripture, not to be regarded.
or the adoring of Saints and Images, that let us cleave too, for they wanted
those blindeings of eyes which others had, (though honor must be given to some
without prejudice to any) and the reason is my Doctrine: Sincerity in the
counselor deserves that their counsel be regarded. And the like rule holds
still good, that those to whom truths are more precious then goods, lives,
liberties, or ends, other things suitable, are to be preferred in point of
advice and conscience, then those who are short of them in self-denial,
because the more of Self abides, the less Sincerity.

Secondly, it may be a caveat unto us in our judgments, Caveat how to judge of
meet or unmeet Counselors.
touching John Baptist, Joh. 3.30.
whose saying was, I must decrease, but he must increase: But these contrarily:
we must grow and increase, decrease who so will. Tell me, what one thing
belonging to their Kingdoms savors of sincerity, Popish falsehood in all their
way in particulars.
from the crown of the Miter to the foot? Nay, what was not first grounded in
counterfeit humility to catch silly souls, and to strip them both of their
bodily welfare and salvation? Even as the Ivy creeps out of the earth upon the
silly stock of the tree, but never lins till it have overtopped it, and sucked
out the sap and so destroyed it: Sure if only sincerity plead for audience,
then may all good Christians say of them, their doctrine, their lives, their
miracles, traditions, ceremonies, sacraments, Priests, preachings, prayers:
Genesis 49.6.
Into their counsel let not my soul come! Their scopes are carnal to set up
their own pomp, ease, bellycheere, to destroy the doctrine of faith, true
self-denial and mortification. Under the pretext of chastity, of poverty, of
fasting, penance, confession, sacraments, what have they done, but lived in
odious uncleanness, raked the treasures of whole Kingdoms into their Cells,
devoured whole houses of their votaries, puffed up themselves in the opinion of
more righteousness then the Law exacts, dived into the secrets of Princes,
hidden most cruel murders of lawful Kings, and enhansed themselves to such a
pomp and state, as made the whole Christian world groan under their tyranny:
Is it like that such should ever bring home souls to God, whose only study is
to bring sacks to their Popes mill. As he once said of the Turks horse, that
where he came no more grass grew: So I may say of them, so far are they from
sincerity in seeking men's salvation and Gods glory, that they waste and blast
all and every branch and blossom that tends that way. Nay their most seeming
holy devotions, what serve they for but to fulfill the flesh, to puff up the
heart with a conceit of her own goodness? Their counsels of perfection, what
tend they unto but to pride them in a thought of greater righteousness then
God commands? Their excommunications and censures, to what end do they aim,
save to live upon the sins of the people, to pick their purses, and spoil
their souls? Who ever by any of their counsels grew more chaste, devoute or
temperate, and not rather desperate, as knowing that money will answer all? And
when they write books, what intend they, but to flatter their Idol the Pope,
and tell him, although he draw milions of souls to hell, yet may no man ask
him, what do thou? The travells of those Jesuits attending the Spanish armies
into the East Indies, what scope had they? Surely in show for enlarging the
religion of the Pope, but in effect the murdering of infinite thousands
savages, and that contrary to oaths and vows, that so they might fill their
purses with their treasures and hoards of gold, till they made all Religion
stink in the nostrills of such as they pretended to convert. Luther after all
his experience of their Religion, professed it to be the cutthroate of the
soul, and the leaver thereof, at the brinke of despair. Do not their
attires, fares, attendance, Temples, exceed all the wealth of Princes, their
treasures are outward bravery? Are such like to save souls? Those Monks which
were sent for to wait upon Austin (the Apostle as they style him of England)
found him mounted upon a throne, and thence dictating his new laws and
devices, and therefore abhorred his counsel: Even so let us do, and let all
their nation, head and tail, branch and rush, be abhorred by us to the pit of
hell; for those who give not laws, counsel and rules, out of sincerity, but
for the setting up of the flesh, and destroying the Kingdom of Christ, deserve
no allowance, neither they, nor such as tread in their steps. So much for this
Use.

Admonition. Magistrates, Ministers, all Superiors, be sincere in their
censures.
Admonishers, Censurers and Governors of others, whether Magistrates or
Ministers, or Officers of Courts, or others in authority. Is it so? Can only
such counsel and instruction, claim regard and obedience, as comes from
simplicity and denial of our own ends? Is all other counsel unsavory,
unpowerfull and ridiculous? In the fear of God, then consider your places,
remember that the eyes of men are upon you, they look for uprightness and
conscience in you; Amos 5.7. and 6.12.
if they find judgment and equity turned into the wormwood and gall of your
own respects, they will scorn their counsels and warning, your selves have
lost your honor, and your counsel is as salt which has lost her savor. Ye
Magistrates first, remember that you execute not only the judgments of the
King but of God, 2 Chronicles. 19.6.
to him you are to give account; abhor covetousness, bribes, gifts, be not
perverted hereby: Let righteousness blind your eye from all flattery, fear
and falsehood: Let not these blind the eye of justice and counsel. Favor not
the wicked, pinch not the innocent, Prove. 17.23.
turn the edge of your sword against the vile, and the back of it to the
weldeserving, do not bear it in vain, as undoubtedly you shall, Romans 13.4.
if once ye be found unfaithful in your places: Do not for base respects
bear down a good cause, nor speak not booty for a bad: If inferior officers
complain and crave counsel and assistance against drunkards, Sabbath breakers
and disordered ones, swearers, lewd companions; beware lest a false heart,
savouring sin and distasting goodness, cause ye to shuffle and conceal your
own power and authority in beating down sin, be impartial: Say not falsely
you want law, and you should do more then you can answer, and you must have
good cards to show, this argues insincerity: Do not call the delinquents and
talk a few cold words of reproof to them, when both they and you know they
deserve greater censure, such counsel will never prevail, it stinkes, it has
a dead fly of falsehood in it. Will your admonitions prevail when they bewray
such baseness? No, no: ye strengthen the hands of sinners, Eccles. 10.1.
flesh them against good officers, dismay the good, and bolster sin; for why,
what do men say of you? Tush as for such Justices, they maintain Alehouses
and disorder in their own servants and Tenants, and for a base bribe, will
advance those sins which they sit in place to put down: What are you then but
painted walls under which a world of rottenness lurkes? Act. 23.3.
Ecclesiastical Officers.


So also you Officers (for I see this day some of all sorts to hear me) who
sit in Ecclesiastical seats, and profess to aim at Evangelicall correction
and censure, look to your selves; make not a mart of the uncleanness and
disorderly courses of men, let it not appear that a little money can blunt the
edge of excommunication, or admonition, let not men find you out to be takers
of gifts to pervert the way of Gods censures, do not openly rail against
sin, but after (for an underhand bribe) discharge an adulterer or other
sinner; this does but cast oil in the flame, increase sin, enrage the
offender; for why, he thinks of it according to the easy price he pays, and
what will not a man give to buy off shame and punishment? No, no, if you will
prevail, maintain the authority of Officers, if ye be from God, be for him,
and let sincerity arm your censures and counsels, Act. 5.7.8.
so that men may tremble and fear that great thunderbolt, and sin no more:
else they will esteem you and your counsel no more then men will do a crack
of thunder, which when its past is forgotten, and they will go to their trade
more fresh then ever. So you the sacred Ministers of God, Ministers.
in whom above all the wisdom and counsel of God should dwell: who should be
as Job describes himself, honorable and reverend, terrible as banners; such
as both young and old should rise up unto, Job 29.22.
hide themselves, and lay their hands to their mouth: Be you exhorted to
sincerity if you would preserve the honor of your persons, places and labors,
and not be made as unsavory salt, trodden under feet of men. Above all, the
Devil labors to make your counsels unprofitable, because thereby he brings
men's souls to perdition. If your carriage be seasoned with gravity, pureness,
selfe-denial, men will honor you, and your counsels shall bear sway where no
power of man can reach, even in the consciences of men: But if once they have
the measure of your foot, that any base lust defile your spirits, it will
presently make all that comes from you vile and contemptible: Oh brethren,
consider many things will pollute us! One thing only can make us and our
counsels savoury, and that is self-denial and sincerity. If men perceive us
to be leavened with the vice of sensuality, gaming, pleasures, company,
Alehouse and boon companionship, and yet perhaps on the Lords day lay load
upon other sinners: what will they do but laugh in their sleeves, and say,
Physician heal thy self, Luke 5.
and then I will take thy physic.

If they see us set another way to domineer over them as the best men of the
Parish, to maintain a great stomach and bring them under our girdles, to
stoop to us and know who we are; they will but scorn us, and tell us Christ
and his Apostles were humble and meek, and sought to be great in the
conscience, not lord it over men's persons: If they shall spy in us a jollity
and pride of life in our fare, apparel or course, that all is little enough to
maintain our selves, and our wives and children in the fashions of the world,
at the highest pitch, though we borrow, run into debt, and beg: Alas! what
will they do? They will slight all our words, Judge. 9.
disdain our counsels, and say, these men have forsaken their fatness and
sweetness, by which they cheerd the heart of God and man, and all to exalt
themselves above the trees like brambles: If they perceive all our bent and
stream to run after honors, dignities, benefices or preferments, in the
mean while, suffering the people to run riot, and to go to havocke, leaving
them to hirelings and Idols at our pleasure: If they see that we are all for
gold and gain, little caring for a flock, save for the fleece, raking all
from them to fill our purses and coffers, and letting their souls go to hell:
I pray tell me* will they care for our preachings or counsels? If we shall
now and then come in with a quaint Sermon or two, and speak like Angels, shall
our counsel prevail? When they see our lives, will they hear our words?
Shall not some poor simple Preacher, far inferior to us in learning or parts,
sway more with the conscience, then a thousand such as we? Cease therefore our
own base ends, do not fret against them who are above us in honesty, but
equal them in sincerity, and then we, our gifts and counsels, shall begin
to persuade, and as a needle, draw the thread of conviction after them. Feed we
the flock of Christ not of constraint, for base lucre, or our own ends, but
of a ready mind, and then the work will succeed and prosper. 1 Pet. 5.4.
Parliament men (...) Patriots.
The like I may say to such as (when occasion serves) are employed in weighty
matters of Church and Commonwealth: I am persuaded there be many good Patriots
in this Land who wish well to the public good; but what is that which has
hitherto hindered? Simil.
They say there is a fish (called therefore Echeneis) which will take hold of a
ship and stop the passage of it: And there is a weed (whins I think) which
will cause the plow (which rends up most weeds) to stand still: and I think no
less but that this self-love is the fish and weed which has thus long in
secret prejudiced the effect of our Parliaments, where Sages sit to consult,
but they have not cast out this Davus (as I may call it) which disturbs all:
such and such abuses I could reform (thinks one) and seek to reduce
improptiations to the right of the Church, but then I must restore many my
self, and that will pinch: Such Laws I could wish, but then perhaps I should
be the first that should suffer: If such a Minister were in my Parish as made
conscience, he would spy out my base ways, and reprove them, and then I should
be noted, and so it were better to live under a worse, that I may still sleep
in a whole skin: The truth is, this self-love is the canker which ruins
States and Commonwealths; whiles each man looks at the consequence of good
Laws, not at their goodness; what hurt will redound to my name and state, not
what good may accrue to the public.

And hence it is, that although for their own liberties, and the outward
welfare of the subject, each one is ready to strike in, yet for those things
which concern the honor of God, the welfare of his Gospel, and purging out
abuses, they are fearful to meddle: Oh, they fear they shall hereby bring
their names in question, and thus private ends cross the public! Oh, if men
in authority had sincerity suitable, the North wind does not so drive away
rain, as they might suppress sin! And when inferiors perceive the honest
bent of governors to make and execute Laws, neither turning to the right hand
nor the left, neither looking at flattery, fear or foolish pity! Oh how would
they quail and tremble! If in our Towns and families it were thus, that
Headborrowes would consult and govern according to this rule, not looking at
their own ends a squint, but with a single eye, what might not be done?
Whereas the most like well a good order, and punishing of the unruly in
general, till it come to my son, daughter, servant, tenant or kinsman, and
then they have the disease in the nose, called touch me not, then their wine is
water, and their silver tin, and their zeal turns to ashes. Others love and
like order, but they will not stir themselves, they love to spare their
travel, their purses, or the note of others; they love ease, and thereby sin
goes unpunished, or foolish pity marres the City, and sin grows so rife by
custom, that its past remedy.

To conclude, if husbands would sincerely counsel their wives, Husbands and
Parents.
without self respects, and parents their children, and Masters their
servants; what households should we have? But when husbands are afraid to
distaste their wives and choose rather to endure ill fashions, the loss of the
worship of God in family, then displeasure of their wives; parents choose rather
to lay the bridle on their childrens necks, then to cross them, (seeking
their own ease with their ruin, as Ely and David did) and Masters care not
how servants spend the Sabbath or carry themselves, so their work go forward:
how should it be chosen, but God and Religion must be cast out of the family?
So much shall serve for Admonition.

Exhortation to sincerity in Counsel.
so I might persuade all sorts (and especially such as whose counsel amounts
to the greatest good, or deepest evil) to sincerity and faithfulness. And
once again (my brethren Ministers) consider, you shall never be able to
convince by the sincerity of truth and the word, till you add sincerity of
conscience and intention of the peoples good. Evidence of truth from God, and
evidence of sincerity for God, must (as Aaron and Hur) always prop up your
Ministry on both sides, (as Moses arm) from flagging. Ministers do not always
prevail when they do thus, but never when they do otherwise. Act. 26.27.
Excellent was that speech of Paul to Agrippa, Oh I desire that thou were not
almost, but altogether as I am, excepting my bands. He wishes him well with
integrity of love: So thou were a through Christian, let the chain rest upon
me, I seek thy soul, no ease to my self. I know there be many of us who have
shot those gulfes which I spoke of in the Use before: And I know that we would
(many of us) abhor to crook the rule of Truth, to flatter others in their
lewdness and sin for our own bellies, hopes, or purposes; and to hold
correspondence with our betters by corrupt consciences. I know we dare not (to
curry favor, and shun the opinion of singularity) sow pillowes under men's
elbows, and cry peace, peace in their ears against the word, which were to put
out theirs and their own eyes both, Matthew. 23.^ Jam. ult.
that both leader and led might fall into the pit. But yet there is even in us
another dreg of Self to be purged out. We are men of passion (as Elia was)
and when the Devil sees that we will close with our calling and be painful,
or that we will not easily be seduced to open ambition, epicurisme, company,
pleasures and covetousness, (all which nourish false ends) then he has
another bait for us: That we may couch Self under our best reproves, and
sometime pitch upon them with uncharitable affections, revenge of such as we
distaste, too good conceit of such as we affect, or add some bitter gourd or
other of our own to mar the pottage. Numb. 20.11.
Thus did Moses being willed to speak to the rock, he would add of his own,
and smote it, that the people might see their sin, but it cost him dear, and
did no good: So hard a task it is for flesh to trade in Gods m^tters with Gods
mind, entirely and sincerely; if the meekest man was so, what are we prone
unto? And yet how may this dreg of ours hurt the receipt, even as if we made no
conscience at all? Brethren every man's temptations lie within his own element.
Perhaps we are faithful and diligent preachers, but our livings are not to our
minds, we think our selves not regarded to our deserts, here steps in our
own spirit and mixes it self unlawfully with a thing lawful: Its meet we
were well requited: But say we come short (we are never known while we be
tried) where then is our sincerity in doing our work, for the works sake, and
trusting our Master for wages who has set us on work? How do mutterings and
murmurings break in upon us, with complaints, discontents and unwillingnesse to
proceed? How does the unthankfulness of people encroach upon our spirits to
breed distrust and impatience, which rather should excite and improve our faith
to the uttermost? And this is so far from healing our sore, that it rather
incenses it more, and weakens both the opinion of our labors, and the supply
of our wants in the minds and practices of our hearers, who think thus of us
to be (not as we are, but as we should be) men void of self-love, and full of
sincerity for the true ends of God and their souls. Now (brethren) what peace
can we have within, while we are carnal in ministering of the spiritual things
of God, or vend his wares upon our own stall, fleecing the Lord of his dearest
jewel, his glory, and making him a stalking horse for our own game? The base
ends of other professions, as Physicians, Lawyers, Tradesmen, is not of so deep
a dye as ours, because the ground we stand on, and the Trade we drive is holy
and divine, theirs only civil and worldly. But how (will some say) may this

First, addict we our selves with delight, to attend upon reading, 1. Rules for
sincerity in Ministry and Counsel.
study, converse with one another, imparting our needs and aides in the
ordinances each to other, as immediately serving to breed and feed this grace
and to weane us from the contrary; refusing not only the usual pleasures,
profits and vanities of the world, (except meet and private recreations) but
even denying our own curiosity, in studies and abuse of gifts to ostentation,
or to vent our own way of quotations and conceits: Do not show your tools,
but your workmanship, and that you are workmen that need not be ashamed,
dividing the word aright, not seeking your selves but the end of your labors,
men think if they have once got them a name, they are made for ever. But let
us Demas, Diotrephes, Alexander, many in our own experience. If there be not
sincerity in our preaching-scope, it is a shrewd presumption, there is but
little in any respect, and then what may not befall us? I have noted some in
this kind, who by degrees have wanzed and betrayed themselves to be but
unfaithful in the maine, and for their ends have forsaken the cause of Christ
altogether.

Consider how little good is done at the best, 1. Some motives to sincerity in
Counsel.
when we are most sincere: But as for the other, how little or no good appears
to be done in the places where they reside. Who knows (in such a world as
this, so full of timeservers, so full of temptations, baits, fears) how great
need we have of prayer, of armor and watching, lest he that thinks he stands,
yet fall before he be aware? How many are our snares on every side, either by
the flattery of such as applaud us, or the unthankefulnesse of such as forsake
us, or the ignorance of such as will not acknowledge us, or the wrongs of such
as provoke us, the unprofitablenesse of our hearers, the cousenage of Satan, or
the falsehood of our own hearts? How

To conclude, often muse of the price of souls. It is Peter's argument, when he
urges Ministers to preach of a ready mind, not for gain, because the flock
of Christ is bought with his blood. And to conclude with that which he there
adds, That hundred fold which we shall reap for all our losses in and for
the cause of God and sincerity will fully requite us; if here we lose our
skin and fleece by wolves and dogs, which pursue and tear us: the great
Shepherd of the flock our Lord Jesus shall come, we shall have a Crown of
glory that fades not, better then all that we can expect, or men can gratify
us with. Thus much also for Exhortation may serve the turn.

Terror to all proud despisers of sincere Counsel.
sincere and faithful counsel, yea such as they cannot except against, to
proceed from unfaigned desire of their salvation, conversion and repentance,
and yet still live in a stout and wilful obstinacy and resolution, to abide in
their lusts and liberties without control. This is sure, while men can pretend
any sinister end in the Minister, they think themselves to have buckler enough
to bear off all blows. But even to you, this I say, that it shall not serve
your turn to cast this blame upon your Minister; for the power of the word
ought more to convince you, and scare you from your base courses, then the
Ministers insincerity to excuse you. But when all this your plea is gone and
cut off, and you cannot deny, but the evidence of the word goes with the
evidence of sincerity, and you cannot for your ears deny but that your souls
and selves have been sought with the denying of our own health, gain, nay,
that you have had some Ministers who have robbed themselves to teach you,
denied many succors for your sake, and been at their own cost to study and
preach unto you, and yet the day is to come, that one of many of you are won
from your blindness, Atheism, infidelity, hollownesse, pride, worldliness,
or the like: Oh what answer shall you make to the Lord when he shall load you
with this accusation! Saul himself in a pang, relented at David's simplicity of
heart in cutting off the lap, when he might have cut his throat: 1 Samuel 24.4.
but such confession was yet never extorted from some of you; I will not make
all alike in this kind, God forbid: But I wish all to look about them. Some
are so cursed as those hearers of Christ, who when he by the finger of God cast
out Devils, Matthew. 12.31.32.
yet enraged their hearts even against the very Spirit it self, by which he
wrought and preached in an high degree, whom he pronounced unpardonable: It were
enough to sin against any one doctrine, promise or threat, or command of the
Spirit, as thousands do daily, and many of you before me have done. Speak
before the Lord and answer for your selves, what one sound reproof, what truth
of Gods Spirit, either of Law or Gospel has pierced many here for their dead
hearing, tyring out the hearts of Gods Ministers, for their drunkenness,
uncleanness, base tongues, lying, and the like? But some there are, who have
set themselves against the Spirit it self of truth and sincerity in the
Preacher: Witness this, That the more faithful he is, the more they have
raged against him and rebelled; nay some have studied how to make the sincerity
of the Preacher his snare, entrapping him in those speeches wherein (perhaps
not with so much caution, yet with as great sincerity as is possible for
sinful flesh) he has expressed himself for their good: And if not so, yet
they wilfully have slept and lived in security under it: As Nicodemus told
Christ, Joh. 3.2.
that the Pharisees (his fellows) knew him to be from God in their conscience,
but yet smothered their light.

Oh fearful sin! How dare any of you provoke the wrath of God thus to smoke
against you? I remember that example of them who came to Christ and practiced
this treachery: Matthew. 16.22. Mark. 11.31.
Master (say they) we know thee to be from God, and teach the word
sincerely, not caring for the person of any: Tell us then, Is it lawful to
give tribute to Caesar or no? As if they should say, Thou preachest sincerely,
therefore we come to cut thy throat with thine own words. Worse then Herod in
this kind, who murdered John half against his will, Matthew. 14.2.
and afterward feared that he was risen, and could have no peace, because he
had slain so sincere a witness of God; but these would shed the blood of
such, and no whit blanke, but think they do God good service. But say that
all are not so vile, Joh. 16.2.
yet how many of us are there who being guilty in our own conscience of our
sins, and of the sincerity of the reprover, yet hold their own and will not
come in, will not discern a gift of God above any thing which man can reach
unto, but resist it. Partly by their slightness, partly that they are so full
of their own matters, contentions with others, covetous courses, politic
principles and self-delusions, with pride of heart, stoutnesse and disdain,
techinesse, and relics of some old bitter root which is bred in the bone, or
such like evils, and the love of them; will not be drawn by any sincerity of
the Minister to forsake these ways which long custom has hardened them in;
but rather become more pathed in their sins by much be^ting upon: To whom I
say, will you never bethink you? Will it not be bitterness in the end? What
will you defer all till death? And then (as others have done) cry out for the
Minister, and empty out your whole heart, The misery of contemners.
and say, Oh Sir, I knew of a long time that you spoke unto me from God, but,
what for one cause and what for another, I contemned the love and compassion
wherewith you spoke, dallyed with God, and sinned against my own soul, and
that tender honesty of your reproves and admonitions; Oh you have been patient
long and borne with my frowardness! Prove. 1.26.
But now if I live, I hope I shall see your affection, honor your Ministry,
humble my self under your terrors, believe the promises, reform my ways! Oh
do you delay till now! But who can tell whether God will not leave you at such
a time to the former hardness of your heart? Or if not, yet whether your
humiliation will prove sincere or false, as being on the rack? Whether God
will take you away in your dallyings or no, ere that day? It is not safe
venturing: But most wise and safe to yield to the sincerity of good counsel
while it is given ere it be too late. This know, that wheresoever God has a
sincere Minister, he shall never go without honor, although it be in the
destruction and final conviction of the gainsayers. Take heed you be none of
them whom this guilt ceazes upon.

1. Br^nch. Inst^uction. Gods counsels are most sincere. Romans 15.3. Romans 5.7.
what great reason God has to press us to obey all his offers, counsels,
exhortations, promises. To be sure (although we should say all men are liars,
and seek themselves) yet the Lord is sincere, faithful, he cannot seek his
own ends to our hurt. He cannot be benefited by us: his are the sheep upon a
thousand mountains, Psalm. 50.10. he needs not our wealth, but goodness
reaches not to him Psalm. 16.2. Who has given to him first, and it shall not be
restored? Nay the Lord Jesus our great Prophet, has even stripped and emptied
himself of all his excellency and glory to make us rich and glorious, Philip.
2.5. He craves nothing of us in all his counsels and dispensations, but to
believe and be saved, he sought not to please himself, but us, even to be
murdered for enemies, if we obey him, to be sure he has deserved it:
doubtless for the base and ungodly, none would dye: But when we could not
profit him, but were traitors, he shed his blood for us! all to break our
hearts: Give him but faith and obedience, and take the fat of Rams to thy
self; he taskes thee not to the cost of Jewish worship, or Popish wast: Do
but maintain his Ministers, and poor Saints, and there is all he ties thee
too: Oh then! if thou hear not the voice of this Prophet, so faithful in all
his house, who seeks thine ends in his own, how shall thou be able to stand
before him? Oh! thou should stoop and say, Lord thine honor and ends,
shall be dearer to me then mine own salvation: And thy Ministers shall
prevail the rather for thy sake, for they urge us to be reconciled in thy Name.

2. Branch.
Think not that God does enjoine him to be faithful, and leave you to your
liberty, to be hollow, to look between the fingers, and to escape in a mist:
except you get an heart of candor and simplicity, it will little boot him to
tear his tongue to the stumps, and kill his spirits in plain reproof and
counsel. No, as I told you in the former Doctrine, so now shortly I touch upon
it, and hasten to an end: Do as those Dutch did to their new elected Prince of
Orange, present a sincere Minister with a sincere heart; better then that
golden open heart which there I spoke of, as rich as it was: A man may be
faithful, and yet mistaken by unfaithful hearers: Therefore let people also
be meet and apt tinder to take this sparkle, People must be sincere and open to
receive counsel. 1 Pet. 2.1.
and kindle by it: let them bring all ingenuity and humbleness of heart to
embrace it, that so it may be well bestowed; else he does well, but thou shall
pay for it. To this end, take Saint Peter's counsel, Casting away all
superfluity of maliciousness, prejudice, distemper and envy: As newborn
babes covet the sincere milk of the word, that you may grow thereby. Receive
it as it is, it is sincere, and take it sincerely. His similitude is very
pithy: Simil.
A newborn babe looks simply and only at the milk that it may be nourished
and grow: Though it be the child of a Prince and suck the breast of a mean
nurse, yet it turns not away in disdain, but takes the breast without any more
ado. So I say to you, Take heed of curiosity, conceits, partiality,
fulsomenesse, if the milk and nurse be both clear and sincere, descant not,
but like a babe covet and embrace it, to thrive and grow by it. Alas! what
should it boot thee to conceit that the Minister means thee worse then he
speaks? Or what should it boot him to do so? If his words may bear a good as
well as a bad construction, why should thou fasten a bad? Is it not an
heathenish sin, Romans 1. to construe all in the worst part? Ezekiel. 18.
If he do ill and I take it well, my blood not be shed; but if his counsels be
sincere and I perverse, my soul shall pay for it. Rather think, although he
should not be sincere, yet the reproof is just, rather then cavil against him
being upright; however if thou be sincere to thy head, it shall be as balm;
for to snort in thy sin were deadly. Psalm. 141.5.
And say that a Minister should err, on which side were it better for thee to
err, whether in smiting thy impostume or smoothing thee?

Once an enemy wounded the side of another that fought with him, and let out a
sore which neither love nor money could do: Put case thou were under the
Ministry of a dawber and flatterer, Poor people have a pr^viledge above the
rich in this, that they be reproved.
were it not a plague? It is not the privilege that mean persons have above
the noble, the great and mighty, that the former may have sincere counsel when
the other cannot come by it? It is not their commodity, but thine, (though it
were to be wished to be theirs most of all) but alas it is denied them! They
cannot say as forelorne Nero did, have I neither foe nor friend to stab me? For
they have enemies to kill them by flattery, but few friends to wound them in
love. As of late it appeared in a great man (being in discontent) who visited a
Minister and desired counsel from him: The Minister dealing very roundly and
home with him, the Gentleman wondered, professing that no friend in the world
had ever said so much to him, and thanked him for it. This argues that great
ones meet with little plain dealing. If it be then the privilege of the
meaner sort to be sincerely counseled, who should be such a fool as to
forfeit it by his frowardness? Put case that sincerity see cause to deal more
roughly and sharply with us then we expected, and put some vinegar into our
sores; yet we know that milk sodden well ^^ough it run over) is better then
raw; so it is better to be told of our (...) too much, then murdered with
flattery; say we therefore to a sincere Minister, loving friend, here is my
heart hand and all; I am as thou art, and my horses as thine, mine heart is as
open to reproof and counsel, as thine is to give it. I dare not nourish a
lowering heart against thee.

Lastly, this affords Consolation to all sincere Counselors. For why? (...) to
(...) Coun^^^^ ^^^^^b.
Let them therefore count it their requital to themselves in that their virtue
is in it self contentfull. For why? A faithful counselor shall be honored at
last more then a flatterer, whose words go down into the bowels to rot them,
when as the other heal the inward parts. What although sincerity is justled to
the walls, hated, pursued to the death? As John's plainness by Herod, Micaja's
by Ahab? I doubt not but when the arrows stuck in Ahabs sides Micaja was
honored, first or last it will be so: There is none so desperate, but at a
time they adore sincerity, and call it a jewel. Even our very enemies being
Judges our faithfulness is honorable. Let us therefore hold on our practice,
and not be discouraged: Had these servants (think we) any cause to repent them
of their counsel when they saw him cured? No, they would not for a world have
concealed it; but now they were glad that they gave not place to their Masters
madness, or their own fear of his ill will; and that by this craft of theirs
(even of sincerity) they had conquered him: Oh how many temptations we have
within and without to lay down our counsels and give all over, thinking we
shall tire our selves and prevail little, purchase ill will for our love, and
hatred for our sincerity, and that would grieve us? Grive us: nay it would have
grieved us if we had been hollow; but there is no cause of grief now, whether
our counsel take or not, our labor is with God. Son of man, says God to
Ezekiel. 18. If thou see the plague coming, and shall plainly tell them of it,
thou have saved thine own soul, their blood shall be upon their own head if
they believe not. Here is the season of upbraiding by base Rebels for our
plain dealing. But be of good cheer, hereafter will be the day in which we
shall be admired: when the Lord shall arraigne all Sycophants for their
flattery, and spilling the blood of souls and the blood of Christ the price
thereof; then conscience shall rend them in pieces, then all their own ends of
gain or ambition shall vanish, and then they will cry out, Oh that we had
been faithful! Then shall thou be comforted, and they tormented: yea let all
such as have received good counsel rejoice and be thankful. David having
heard Abigails plain counsel was rapt into praise unto God: 1 Samuel 25.
Oh (says she) my Lord it will not grieve thee when thou shall sit upon the
throne that thou have obeyed thine handmaid, and not shed innocent blood!
Grieve thee: nay wonderfully glad thee that thou scapedst such a disaster. Oh
(says he) blessed be the Lord, and blessed be thy counsel which has turned
off my sword from this fact, which else I had committed! so shall thou bless
God for a counselor, and for mercy to persuade thee by it, and say, it was ten
to one that I took it; I had as many temptations to reject it as Naaman had
here, which if I had, I had gone on in my unbeleefe and pride to hell, which
gulf I have now shot. We need not ask whether Naaman comforted himself in
following the advice of his Servants. Concerning which, the verses following
entreat. Thus much for this third argument of the Servants, viz. the sincerity
of Elisha his counsel. There is yet one more which now I come to, and so
finish the whole Verse.

And that is in the last words [How much more when he says unto thee, wash and
be clean?] It is taken from a comparison of unequalls: Their fourth and last
a^gument from comparison.
Thus, thou pretendest great respect to the Prophet in greater things, this is
but a small one; if thou mean as thou make show, thou must needs obey in the
lesser, if thou meantst it in the greater, else thou should be but hollow
and not to be trusted.

The point is, He that is honest and upright, Doctrine. The faithful in
greater things, will much more be so in smaller.
if he be faithful in greater things, will much more be so in smaller. This
point attends the former very fitly: That called upon us for the brestplate of
righteousness: This puts upon us the belt or girdle of Truth: Both are pieces
of the Christian armor, Ephesians. 6. and the sum of it is, That where truth is,
there is proportion and equalness: A man may know where to have an honest man,
if he show forwardness in great things, by good reason, a man may expect
readiness to do smaller matters. He is but a mere boaster and hypocrite, who
makes great shows of doing this or that, but being pu^ to the trial, shrinkes
his neck out of the collar, even in trifles; no man judges such a one to be any
better then a gull. But to speak a word or two in the Proof, and so breefly
come to the Use. Luke 16.11.
The ground of it may be fetched from that speech of our Savior, If you be
unfaithful in the lesser things, (the Mammon of this world) who will trust you
in the greater Treasure? That is, if you may not be trusted in the disbursing
of a little pelf and trash that perishes, for the good of the body, and
relief of the poor, who will trust you in the dispensing of heavenly treasure
to the comfort of the souls of such as need it? As if he had said, The Law of
equity supposes that if you were faithful in a greater, you might be well
trusted with the lesser; but if the lesser bewray you to be unfaithful,
doubtless much more would you be so in the greater: If I should betrust a man
with twenty shillings to distribute it among poor folk, and the party should
deceive me and rob the poor of it, I durst hardly trust him to be my Executor
to disburse a great sum to their use. The reason is good and holds strong,
that baseness of heart which hinders him from the less by reason of a trifle,
would assuredly much more withdraw him by a greater booty, and try his
falsehood. And so by contraries. But I will add a Reason or two.

First, Religion agrees well with natural principles, and admits those
consequences which reason allows. Now there is nothing more common Sun)
contains the lesser, as the Moon: So in other degrees, greater strength
contains a less; in numbers, hundred comprehends scores; oftnesse comprehends
seldomenesse; in notions, the more unlikely comprehends the less; the more
difficult, the more easy; and arguments may easily be drawn from the one to
the other to convince any that is guided by sound reason. Therefore it must
hold in Religion also.



Romans 2. ult.
as well from the greater to the lesser: When great duties lie upon him to be
done, he argues thus, Shall I make conscience of smaller, secreter offenses,
and shall I not much more abhor the grosser? Do I provide for my own peace in
the smaller, so that the least gnat makes me strain, and do I not make much
more conscience of greater, which would more waste and weaken my peace? So in
good things: Do I make conscience of smaller duties, as to give an alms, to
rule my tongue, or a passion wherein God is lesser honored; and do I not much
more regard the maine duties of faith, and the purging of my heart and inner
man from hypocrisy, in which I should honor him much more? Again, when the
question is of lesser sins avoiding, or duties doing, then it disputes
another way: Have I found the yoke of God light unto me in those things which I
feared my base heart would never be drawn too, because of their difficulty and
danger, and shall I draw back in smaller wherein no such hurt or hardness is
to be feared? Surely this were to requite God evil for good, and to bewray my
lewdness, that I seek starting holes and excuses to shake off the yoke when I
see the least crevis of liberty to the flesh afforded; so that I will serve God
no more then needs must, and would shift my hands of the greatest much more, if
the necessity thereof, and the expectation of others did not compel me.

So then the point is clear: He that is faithful in a greater, will be so much
more in the lesser. Howbeit the point must be understood aright, Explanation of
the point.
and according to the natural meaning and intent of it; we must therefore
qualify (Greatness) and (Smalnesse) in their due measure, or else the point
will not hold.

First, we must qualify men aright in their opinion, for to some men

Again, in this case circumstances prove essentialls sometimes, as of

Also the preparation of the heart must be considered: In the general, David
may be thought to be readier to pardon Mephibosheth then Shemei, Shemei under a
true color, as set on by God to try him; but the other in a false, as
suspecting that a favorite should be treacherous which was nothing so.

So a general custom of corrupt nature may fasten greater degree upon a
lesser thing, and a lesser upon a greater. Act. 14. Those people Paul and
Barnabas, (as agreeing with a fleshly heart) rather then God himself, whom when
they were urged to worship, they took up stones to kill the Apostles. And
endless it were to show the variety of respects wherein this rule may fail:
But this I say, if the true natures of things and the judgments of men about
them, be reconciled, taking things in their due extent without error, then the
point always holds true, He that is faithful in the greater, is so much more in
the smaller. For why? A Christian is acted by such a spirit as teaches him to
do all things with sincerity, equality and proportion, both great and small,
one and another, lest if any flaw appear, it should breed a disproportion in
the eye of God, or of man, and cause an ey-sore to both: As when we see a
comely face joined to a crooked body, or a deformed and crooked back and
shoulders to a good countenance, presently there appears an indignation in us
at the eyesore.

I^struction. Its a shrewd mark of unfai^hfulnesse to be forward in great
duties, and backward in small.
Surely it is an argument of great unfaithfulness and impurity of spirit. For
if there were soundness, there would be much more forwardness in lesser then
in greater, as being joined with less damage and difficulty. But when the
heart is impure, there is no sure rule in a man to keep him in; he may be
frank in greater acts, and very defective in smaller. What was the cause that
moved our Savior to magnify the woman that cast in two farthings into the
treasury above them that cast in handfulls of silver? Mark. 12.43.
Not for the sum, but the different spirit of both: She cast in out of
devotion, and would have cast in more if she had had it: But the other cast in
out of ostentation, because they were seen of men, and cast in of their
superfluity and jollity of spirit; who (perhaps) if they had been moved in
secret to give here or there a shilling, where their gift should have been
buried, would have shrunk in their heads. Whence is it (think we) that many
jolly fellows are very forward to give scores of hundreds of pounds to
Schools, Hospitalls, or in a public sort, who if they see private reasons of
contribution to many a decayed Christian, or Minister, are hardly drawn to it?
Oh! because not the naked simplicity of the thing as to God, but the
observation, publickenesse, memorial and name of the one, better agrees with
their pharisaicall spirit then the other: whereas if the true end were, relief
of the distressed, Eccles. 11.1.
they would as well cast their bread upon the waters, as into an open stock. I
discourage none, nor censure any particular persons for their alms, these are
no days for it, I rather would speak two words to further, then one to
hinder; yet we know such a disease there is, Eccles. 10.1.
and who would spoil a whole box of ointment for one dead fly; do both,
scatter in private some handfulls, as well as power out whole bushells, and
then the suspicion is taken away. Once I remember a man who long profferd his
kindness to a College, but still left his gift sealed up till death, then he
would give all, but before nothing: Why? Alas! after death there is no
pleasure, which before there is, and men are willing to part with their wealth,
when pleasure in it, and power of it are gone. I tax none who give after death,
but desire to rectify them; (for ability permitting) who should not rather
choose (in part at least) to be his own executor then to leave it to strangers,
not knowing what it may come to.

Take an instance out of the six later commands, whereof every former exceeds
his later. But why (I demand) do many men seem to obey in the maine command
which provides for the life it self of man, when as the lesser which concern
his chastity, his wealth, his name, are slighted? He that does no murder,
dares defile his neighbors wife, steal his goods or traduce his name? Does
not this practice directly cross my doctrine? Yes, but then you must mark,
here is no honesty, no faithfulness in such a person. Where that fails, there
be many causes why the greater may tie them, who in the smaller will be loose.

First, because a lesser vice may be more natural to the constitution of the
body then the greater: All vices cannot root alike in the soil of a bad
heart, (at least providence bars and bounds our corrupt nature that it be not
endless) all vices cannot be nourished, corruption has a stream, if it
should scatter it self, one sin and lust might cross another. Thou may
regard the life of a poor man, although thou be an uncle^ne beast, because
that sin is thy beloved and predominant sin, and so matters the rest.

Secondly, this disorder may arise from terror and fear of horrible impieties,
horror of the penalty, unnaturalness of the fact, and such like bits and
bridles which God puts into the mouths of men, which if they were absent, the
rule would soon prove true; the committer of the greater, would make no bones
of the smaller. Eye for eye, tooth fortooth, skin for skin, and all that he
has, will a man give for his life: but smaller things are not so perilous.

Thirdly, this may issue from vainglory, when a man thinks he shall have a
deeper esteem among men for some greater work which in a lesser would vanish,
of which before: Or pride, when a base heart thinks smaller duties to be under
him, and not equal to his great stomach to undertake; though perhaps some
great ones he will stoop unto, as more suting to his greatness. We have a
Proverb, Eagles catch no flies. So the spirits of great ones think that small
matters are a dishonor to them, they will not foul their fingers with them.
So much for this.

This serves again for confutation of Popery. They would bear us Confutation
of Popery.
the best of us come short of it in these days of sensuality and fleshly
liberty.) But to go to our Doctrine. They tell us that the perfection of
self-denial stands in outward works, of Penance and Satisfaction, in
scourgings, in fastings, in abstinence from marriage, in course apparel, in
standing up to the middle in cold water in the winter time in pilgrimages and
such like; of which the Apostle says, Col. 3. ult. They have a show of wisdom
in will worship, humility, and neglect of the body, denying honor to the
satisfying of the flesh: Popish mortifications discovered to be false.
But nothing to the true mortifying of the spirit, the frame of that still
continues the same; proud, conceited, and imputing these to merit as if they
engaged God to themselves by them. But as for our mortification, which they say
is secret, and stands in the mortifying of our wills and concupiscence, lusts
and affections, the fruit of faith, purging the conscience, Oh this is but a
pretense of hypocrites, who come far short of their fruits in this case. And
to confess the truth, it were to be desired, that we Protestants discovered
our mortification in greater and more outward self-denial then we do: But as
for them, this I say, if they excel us so much in the greater, how comes it to
pass that they fail so much in that they count the smaller, I mean inward
humility, denying of their own affections? Is it not ten times harder to get
that grace of faith and change of heart into us, which should make us abhor our
selves in all our performances, then to tame the flesh for a while, that so the
spirit may gain thereby a deeper opinion of merit, and giving full
satisfaction to God for sin? Did not those thus in Mica 6. offer to God whole
flocks, and droves, and rivers of oil and wine, and their first borne? Did not
they esteem these great matters? But what says the Lord unto them? Does he not
convince them of their hypocrisy and tell them, That the things which he calls
for are within? Outward things he cares not for, but to walk humbly with him,
and to do justly, and show mercy: Therefore it is evident, they and these fail
in their account, and set a greater mark upon their devotion then God does,
and therefore are liars: If those things which they allege were greatest,
surely they who are so forward in them would not be behind hand in such as
they account the smaller. Esaias 66.2:
They would say of themselves when all is done, our righteousness is as a
menstrous clout, and count themselves (for ought is in them to merit) as
Publicans and vilest ones, unprofitable servants, whereas their building within
rises up to a greater height of self-confidence by their outward castings
down; for they think that not only they may merit for themselves, but for
others, and more then fulfill the Law, and so by equalling themselves to
Christ, they overthrow the sole sovereignty of his satisfaction and merit. But
O ye ^opish mortifiers of the flesh, add one thing more, get the power of the
word into you to divide between the bones and the marrow, Heb. 4.12.
to go between your hearts and your corruption, and to cast down those high
things of yours, those imaginations which set up themselves against the
simplicity of Christ, and then so far as the word warrants us, we will join
with you in outward fruits; wherein, though many of us fail more then you, yet
this makes your Doctrine never the sounder, nor justifies your defect in the
great matter of Sincerity and Faithfulness. Woeful hypocrites! who strain out
a gnat, but swallow a Camel, dare not eat an egg in Lent, but dare kill your
Prince. And although we will not wholly condemn all those patterns of
humility, whom you boast of, (for certainly many of your first Monks and
Votaries were honester then your selves) yet we know that their devotion had
much will worship in it, which cannot warrant yours, much less can yours stand,
which has neither honesty within, nor warrant of the word without to maintain
it. So much for this also.

Elisha persuades that Iehoram and his company, 2 King. 3.
to believe that God will give them water in that peril of drought: This is a
small thing (says he) for the Lord to do for you: For why? He will also
deliver the Moabites into your hands, a far greater thing. Suitable to which
was that which the Lord would convince Ahaz of by Isaiah, Esaias 7.
viz. the victory he should have of the Aramites: Is it a small thing (says
he) for you to weary the Lord, and to distrust his power? Behold a Virgin shall
conceive and bring forth a son, and shall call his name Emanuel, which is a
greater thing then to give you victory.

To apply this: Let us learn hence to sum up the mercies of God vouchsafed
us already, and let us weigh them in due balance: If we have seen him feed
seven thousand with a few loaves, Gods faithfulness to us in the maine, must
make us trust him in the smaller things.
do we distrust him to feed twelve Disciples? Do we find that he has
bestowed upon us the maine, let us beware of distrusting him in the lesser? For
he holds this rule much more surely then we: We will trust a friend that has
lent us an hundred pound, for the lending us twenty shillings, and shall we
distrust God? He that has made our bodies and breathed in our souls, will he
deny us food and raiment? Is not the belly better then meat, and the body then
clothing? Whence is then this our distrust? If he has given us his Son,
Matthew. 6.25.
will he not with him much more give us other things? lesser matters? If he
have made us a feast in the mountains, will he not much more give us ordinary
food in the valleys? Had it not been a base distrust in them that came into
Canaan, to think that God might suffer them to starve in the midst of a land
flowing with milk and honey, having before by a miracle nourished them with
manna, quales, and the following rock of water, in the desert? Does the Lord
urge us sinful wretches by a Law, which himself will not observe? If we be
faithful in the greater treasure, will he trust us in the lesser, and will not
we trust him? Let us boldly urge the argument upon him by faith, and we shall
prevail, Romans 8.32.
he himself has put it into our mouth: If it become weak, Read a special
place in Math. 16.8.9.
its because we have made it so by our unbeleefe, and let it fall to the earth.
We deceive our selves in the fundamental promise, and then accuse him that he
keeps not touch with us in the lesser: But if we would deal substantially in
matters of weight, we should find that other lesser things would follow our
hand with ease* and the great ship of the main promise would carry all our
smaller vessels of our secondary supplies after it without our rowing or
strife. But oh how basely do we deal herein with God and our selves? We dare
believe that God will save our souls, but whether he will keep us from poverty
or no, or bring us out of debt, or enable us to maintain our charge we cannot
tell, we have not so clear a word for that (we say) as for the other. Nay,
rather we yield more to sense and carnal reason in this, then in the other; or
else make our selves think we believe the former better then indeed we do.
Alas! if the greatest were believed, it were easy to cast anchor upon the
other: If the mountain be given us, shall a molehill be denied us? No, but we
are pinched more with unbeleefe in the lesser, then the greater; if we had the
like pinch of heart about the chief point of favor and pardon, would it not
(think we) dash the other, and make it nothing? Save my soul Lord, and for my
body do thou as thou will, for thou can not do amiss, thou art tied by thy
promise to the lesser.

How comes it to pass then, that those who have tasted how sweet the Lord has
been in easing us of a burden which we never looked to be rid of, that we
distrust him for faith in petty cases? As for the easing us of such a strait,
aiding us in such a cross of bad wife, subtle enemy, helping us in the loss
of a good Ministry or in the encumbrance of a bad, unprofitable people, or ill
and unsavory Minister, or strengthening us against such a lust, or enlarging in
us such a grace, or granting us such friends in our distress of body, or
blessing in our trade, or training up of children, or saving us and them from
the customs of this present evil world, or giving us our daily bread: Oh thou
of little faith! what will thou be heathenish? Shall the Lord cloth the grass
and deck the lillies, which labor not, nor spinne, and shall he leave thee
naked? Not if thou labor and spinne out the promise in special. Other of Gods
people have done so: Habac. 3. 1 Samuel 17.
Habacuc would not distrust God though no bullock were in the stall, no calfe
or sheep in the fold: David will not distrust God touching the Philistin,
having killed both Lion and Bear; and concludes, 1 Chronicles. 16.
that God will not forsake himself because he made a promise to his posterity.
So let us do. But if we want any gift, as of memory, prayer, asking questions,
conference, we distrust God, although we have received greater gifts of the
Spirit, which are only peculiar to sanctification. We love Christ, say some,
and his members without dissimulation, Esaias 26.
and our desires are to his name; but we have no gift in private prayer,
fasting or uttering of our minds, and wants: what then, does not the greater
circle include the less? If it be meet for you, he that gave you the chief,
can give you the smaller; if he do not, you shall not need them: If you have
got those that concern the Kingdom and righteousness of God, Matthew. 6.32.
the other shall be cast in. Only I add, seek God in the smaller, as well as
in the chief, and believe the particular as well as the general; else
although you have escaped a gulf, yet a shallow may endanger you. Iona was
abased in the whales belly, yet impatient for the loss of a gourd: Jona Cap.
3. and 4.
Our fools babble is more to us then a Kings Crown. If our bafe heart be set
upon a trifle, its with us as a penny cuttle, or a fine feather is with an
Indian, more precious then much gold: If God have kept thee in thy middle age,
he can keep thee in thine old age: If in thy long sea-voyag^, he can keep thee
from shipwreck in the haven, much more provided, that thou do not entertain
any base lust which should eclipse thy former honor. As Hezechia dyed with his
blurre through looseness. Phil. 3:
But if thou will look still forward to the price of the high call of God, and
not backward with pride for that which is past, not be high minded but fear:
God will not deceive thee; having escaped a Lion, a Bear shall not devour
thee.

Admonition and Exhortation.
even Faithfulness and Sincerity, for that will preserve in us that boldness
and confidence whereby we shall believe that he who has made us faithful in
the greater things, will not leave us in the smaller: otherwise nothing is more
easy for us to fall into then this. He whose head gazes up to the clouds,
soonest falls into the ditch; but he who walks with his eye upon his way
circumspectly and narrowly shall not need to fear it. Ephesians. 5.16.
The truth is, our cursed spirit is so beset with corruption of all sorts, that
no law, no rule of proportion can level and make our lives equal and suitable.
We think that because we have won the spurs in one great battle,
therefore no lesser enemy dare look us in the face: But let not any that puts
on his harneis, boast as he that puts them off: When the house is swept and
garnisht, then comes in the unclean spirit and marres all our logic and
confidence, 1 King. 20.11.
and makes many who began in the spirit, to end in the flesh. Behold and
observe the course of such men as want the bridle of God to curb them, there
is no certainty where to find them; Matthew. 12. Inconstancy in men's affections
and disproportion, argues fashood.
though at a time you may perceive them above the clouds in their zeal, often
hearing, vows of great reformation, yet you shall mark them in a short time
quite other persons: for why? Not a principle of grace acts them (for then you
should see a proportion in them) but a pang, an humor, soon up, soon down.
Some time in the clouds, in admiring such a Preacher, or Christian, none are
like them; by and by, (as the ship in the sea tossed from the tops of hills to
the lowest depth) none are so bad or mean as they, they thrust them down to
the lowest pit. Who abhors not so base and inconstant a course? Their proud,
prodigal, vainglorious, foolish, selfe-loving heart puffes them sometimes to
very deep protestations and purposes what they will do; but not wisely
weighing with themselves that they want stock to hold out, they who at
sometime will buy a good Minister into the Parish with great cost, at another
time will run and ride to hunt him out as fast; on their supposed death bed
they bequeath great things to the poor, but being recovered they do nothing
(nay perhaps grind their faces.) As those Barbarians, Acts ult. now made Paul
a God, but presently a murderer. Oh (says one) I love thee from my heart, I
would ride an hundred mile to do thee a good turn, an hundred pounds should
not part thee and me! who would not believe him? But there is no soundness
within, for at another time, he will deny you his horse to ride five mile, or
to lend you five pound if you should go to prison for want of it: what
Christian that fears God, would not look close to himself, when he sees the
world so mad and so unsettled through a false heart? When a tender body goes
abroad into the air, or foul weather, he puts on his cap and hood close about
his ears, and girds up his loins close, lest any the least dint or impression
of weather should annoy him. So will a tender conscience feel the smallest
distemper, and take heed of the least occasions of evil; whereas a base heart
is for all weathers, companies, occasions. Let us then seek to get into us a
principle of constancy which may undertake for us, else an inconstant man is as
a wave of the sea, and is unlike himself in all his ways: Jam. 1.4.
Beware lest by this malady men cast our Religion in our teeth.

What is so common as this: We have a good Churchman as any in the Country, if
he were as good out of the Pulpit as in it, and could play at small game as
well as at great in his worldly business, family government, liberties,
company, studies, or the like, as in his preaching, none were better: where he
does well (as he spoke of Origin) none does better, but where ill, none worser.
What a sad reproach is that to his steadfastness? So for Professors: Oh (says
one) for his Sabbaths zeal to God and piety, few may compare with such an one:
But come to the second Table to the duties of righteousness, mercy, keeping
promises, ruling his children, scarce one civil man in the Town, but is more
reasonable, compassionate, and keeps his day better. What, faithful in the
chief treasure, and yet untrusty in the smaller? What principle does this come
from? Who dare dispute for the credit of such a man as confutes all arguments
by his unfaithfulness? Job has a pretty allusion in one place, and bids us
try the Unicorne whether he will be bound to our yoke, Job 39.9.
or draw our cart or plough; meaning that his wildness will not frame to it.
Surely a man might as soon do that or tie the wild Ass to our Crib, as
bind an unstedfast man to one settled course in Religion or duties: Alas! he
is a man at his own hand, an outlaw, masterlesse, not redeemed with a price
from the service of himself and his vagrant humors, to serve God.

Conclusion of the Use.
To conclude, labor for truth as a girdle to compass thy soul, and that will
set this argument on foot for thee, and keep in thy sides as a corner stone
does the walls from flying out: this will set thy course straight: If thou
have been zealous in Gods matters, this will awe thee to a zealous care of a
suitable walking in the second Table: If thou have obeyed the Lord in doing his
will, it will urge thee to be as conscionable in suffering also for God; if
thou have denied thy self in the promise of salvation, it will compel thee
also to renounce thy self, liberty and life for God in the matter of
persecution and the cross for his names sake. It will always be reading that
maxim to thee, whatsoever is done according to God, is done equally.
Disproportion in Religion, argues great unsoundnesse: And as it will argue from
the, greater to the smaller for an holy sutablenesse, so it will do also from
the smaller to the greater for the procuring of the greater glory to God: For
alas! what is our greatest and best, but silly? Except he accepted us who has
said, Thou good and faithful servant, thou have been faithful in a little, be
ruler over much; Marth. 25.
enter into thy Masters joy.

Disconsolation to the unequal and unsound.
and men will honor them; and dismayment to all sly and subtle ones who cannot
be trusted. Let men plead for themselves as they will, and insinuate
themselves into the minds of some Christians as they can, thinking to encredit
and ingratiate themselves into their affections by their show of zeal at some
running pulls, or in their good moodes; yet God and such as are wise to observe
their inconstancy, will be so bold as to doubt of them by their leaves. Its to
be noted, that although Barnabas (for kindred sake) favored John, Mark, Act.
15.38.
to associate him to the work which himself and Paul went about, yet Paul and
the Church who had noted his staggering before in the same work, durst not
trust him then, and it was a just blur unto him. The Lord warrants us to
suspect the inconstant, and he will have constancy and sincerity to be
honored. Read the Scripture, and you shall observe a brand of infamy set upon
them who have withdrawn themselves from the yoke of God. Those spies how are
they blurred? Numb. 14.
Caleb and Joshua how honored? Phinees in the case of Zimri and Cozbi, those
Levites in the common defection of the Tribes to Idolatry, Exodus 32. how are
they graced? That curse of Iaacob was by this mean turned to a blessing, as
appears by the reason which Moses gives thereof, Deuteronomy. 33.7. If we have
observed a man not to be trusty in great matters of executorships, or other
trust reposed upon him though he be never so near thee, honor him not with
such a trust, for he has disabled himself. It is no uncharitableness at all,
but wisdom and caution. He that in a smaller office of the Town has been
slack and backed the bad, trust him in no greater; let him have the repulse
with shame. The like I might say in other cases. He that in marriage has lived
badly with one wife, let him not have thy voice for another till thou see a
change: Put not thy child to be a servant to him or her, who by their ill
government of former servants is disabled in in their credit. He that cannot
rule his own children well, commit not the education of thine to him, either
living or dying, for fear of unfaithfulness. And so much for this Verse, this
Doctrine, and Lecture.

The end of the Fifthteenth Lecture.
THE SIXTEENTH LECTVRE upon the Fourteenth VERSE.
VERSE XIIII. Then he went down to Jorden, and washed himself seven times,
according to the saying of the man of God, and his flesh came again as the
flesh of a young child, and he was clean.


WE are now by Gods assistance come to the 14. Verse, and the upshot of the
foregoing Story; wherein I told you (brethren) that the fourth and last
general head of the whole is contained, Transition to the ^ourteenth Verse.
viz. the issue of the counsel of the Prophet and of the Servants: That is the
cure of Naaman both bodily and ghostly. A very sweet conclusion of so sad a
distemper as passed between, and so happy as every one that would wish it a
good end, could not have wished it better then it fell out. In the which that
we may steer our course aright in the beginning, let us do with this as we
did with the former generals, that is analyze it into the natural branches
arising from it. The Verse in general contains the obedience of Naaman to the
charge of the Prophet, Explication and Analyze of this fourth general.
and it has two parts, to wit, the act of his obeying: Or the consequents
thence following: In the former we have three things: First, the time when.
[Then he went] viz. being by the counsel of the servants, and the persuasion
of Gods Spirit brought down from his former resolution, and mollified to an
humble spirit of obeying: [Then he went.] The Prophets message enraged him. But
the Servants counsel overpowres him. We may say of it as Deborah in another
case said to Barak: Judge. 4.
Thou shall not have the honor of the victory, but a woman. So the Prophet
must not have the credit of the conquest, but the poor Servants. The second is
the act it self, noting wherein the work of faith consists, even in the
obedience of the soul to a word of command and promise: He went and washed
seven times. The third is the extent of his obedience, it was full as large,
and no more then the word of charge and promise imported, for he did according
to the saying of the man of God: The sense of it is, he went not casually or
for his own ends, or by compulsion, because they would needs force him to it,
but of his own accord by the leading of the word. The second general is the
consequents hereof; and they are first or remote: The first and chief is the
issue of his obedience, partly expressed and partly employed; expressed at
large, as if the holy Ghost would be as full in laying down the issue on Gods
part, as he had done the obedience of the part on Naaman: His flesh became as a
child's, clear and contrary to the scurvy and unsightly flesh of a leper, and
he was clean, as if he should say, God was not wanting in his performance to
the uttermost, nay did more then he promised, cast in the cure of his soul, as
an overplus to the cure of his body. The other is secret and yet manifest
enough; for now the Text would give us to understand, That all his old wrath
and conceits were vanished, all was now on the sudden changed: Jorden was an
happy water to him, (but rather his faith) for that scoured away all his
distempers at once, never to be heard of any more. This for the analyze of this
Verse. Other second consequents there are, not belonging to my purpose and
scope in handling of this story, and they lie in the three verses after.

We come to the first of these, which (as I noted) the coherence of the verse
with the former, gives us to conceive of. To wit, that now at last seasonably,
(even as apples of gold and pictures of silver) comes in a calm after a great
and long storm. Who loves not to hear of rest after labor, and joy after
heaviness? Oh its as dew to the grass, and as drink to the thirsty! Naaman
was one whom God had a purpose to honor his grace upon at last; and therefore
lo, so must it prove, though it were long first, even after many defeats and
conflicts, yet he obeyes the Prophet, and is healed of his leprosy.

The point is, God has an appointed and set time for all his, Doctrine. God
has a time of accomplishing the work of grace in his Elect.
wherein after all their fears and distempers, he will vouchsafe them an happy
issue at the last. No corruption within them, no difficulty in the work of
faith, no malice of Devil, no discouragements by others, nor the longsome
delays of grace and mercy, shall finally deprive them of pardon and comfort:
But at the time appointed, God shall bring forth judgment unto victory, and in
the mean season support the soul from utter sinking under her burden. Psalm.
97.11.
There is light sown for the righteous, though it lie long in the moulds by
reason of cold snuffes of weather, yet a sweet day at last will come, and a
sunshine to fetch it up. Proofs of Scripture are so many that I must cull out
some few. Heb. 4.9.
That in the Hebrews agrees well with this in the general, There is then a
rest for the people of God, a Sabbath of grace, of pardon and peace, after many
unlikelihoods, and a Sabbath of glory after all their combats and conflicts
here. That which Elizabeth tells Mary, Luke 1. is true of all whom God has by
his Spirit conceived in the womb of the Church, there shall be given a
performance to them of all the things which are promised from the Lord. A time
there is for all things, as of toil, fear, doubts, resistance, so of ease,
rest, resolution and submission to the word: Eccles. 1.2.
They shall be as glad of it as ever they were averse and aloof from it. God
creates the fruit of the lips, peace to them not only who are near, and fair
for it, but far off, and unlike to speed of it. Esaias 57.17. Heb 10.37. Mal. 3.
Hos. 12.
He who comes will come and not tarry, and bring healing in his wings. He
will accomplish the warfare of his Sion, and be as one that takes off the yoke
from the jaws, and lay meat unto them. A most divine text is that of Esaias; I
saw his concupisence, and I will heal him: for why? He will not be angry nor
contend for ever; for then should flesh fail, and the souls which he has
made. The like whereto is that in his 54. Chap. For a moment in wrath I smote
him, I hid my self and was angry for a while, Esaias 54.7.
for a short time: But with everlasting compassions will I return to him,
says the the Lord thy redeemer. Mark, The days of peace shall not be as the
time of trouble, that's but an hour of darkness, but this a day of light: And
shall recompense the tribulation with a settled welfare. Job ult.
As Job when God turned his captivity, enjoyed all comforts with continuance:
yea the Lord adds, This is no casual thing but certain: It is as the flood
of Noah, which the Lord swear should no more destroy the earth, and his
covenant is as the Rainbow which when we see, we resolve there shall be no more
such deluge.

Luke 14.39.30.
but cannot finish. Now this were repugnant to the glory of his grace, and the
power of his might, unto which nothing (be it never so unlikely) is impossible.
Luke 1.


To rejoice in the misery of the creature, then should he lose his name and
honor with his people, and not attain his own ends, but fail of his
purpose: Then should the art of God in the way of conversion, be frustrate and
prove uneffectuall, as not being grounded upon certain foundations; then
should his promises incur the blur of unfaithfulness, and in a word, the soul
should become as one in a wood, wandering and wildring it self until at the
last it lie down in her own sorrow and confusion, utterly desolate and
desperate, which is the estate of hypocrites and selfe-deceivers, Esaias 50. ult.
and so God should put no difference between a poor humbled soul mourning for
him, and one that compasses himself with his own sparkles. All these being of
infinite absurdity, and ill consequcnce, it must needs be that God will not
be angry, nor contend for ever, but find a time, an accepted season, in which
he will ease the heavy heart of her distempers, and set her at liberty.

Thirdly, the Lord has the spirit of man, and the passages and ways Proverb.
which though naturally they run downward, yet by art and skill are
recalled, and derived to such uses as best serve to the benefit of the owners;
so that the question is not whether the heart would of it self incline, but
whether God enclines it.

Fourthly, the power of the Spirit is such, that it blows at it own Luke
5.3.7.
As Peter's nets lay by when the season was, so when the time of catching came,
all the fish came together and were enclosed under it. So the counsels of the
best, wisest, strongest must lie by as ineffectuall, when God is absent; the
heart lies as a stone frozen into ice: no axes, mattocks, strife of man shall
break it: But when his heart is enclining to man, and means him good, then
shall the Spirit lie in another coast, and suddenly thaw and melt the ice of
the soul, and dissolve those strong chains which bound it before, and made it
past man's skill to pierce it; so that as before nothing could soften it, so now
nothing shall harden it. Now then mark, If this power be in the Spirit of
grace, it must needs serve for somewhat, it is not needless: Therefore it must
serve to this end, to rid captives of their chains, to speak a word in season
to a soul that is weary, to carry the seed of life, and the promise into the
poor and fatherless spirit, and there to enter, open, and enlarge the soul
so far, that as it had no power to apply, to receive or embrace any light or
hope, now it may be as the eternal gate opened by the eternal Spirit, who
has the key of David, and have no power to shut it self any more, nor to
resist the Spirits power and persuasion.

Esaias 63.4.
Esaias 42.5. There is a special text of worth for this point, which I wish all
to observe. Esaias 57.17. I was angry with him, and he went on frowardly in the
way of his heart: But I have seen his ways, and will heal him, and restore
comfort, and create peace. What? While he goes on in his frowardness, kicks
against the pricks, and has no disposition in him to convert? Surely no: (for
all the work of Self is but the frowardness of a man with himself, because he
cannot have his will of God.) But then will God heal, that man may be set on
ground, and be convinced of his own impotency; for no reason can be given why
at last the Lord should so overrule him, save mere mercy to one in misery,
except any will say, that a froward heart can merit any mercy. So then, the
entire glory of the grace of mercy causes the Lord at last to finish the work
he has begun; that both the Alpha and Omega may be his, both warpe and
woofe from him. Thus much for Reasons. Now I proceed to some Questions.

Three Questions.
For upon that I have said, sundry may be made: Especially these three. First,
wherein does appear, that a soul in the way of grace, and under the condition
of it, may yet a long time lie under such distempers ere it come to apply the
promise; this may arise from the present case of Naaman, of whom the Doctrine
says, that the Lord now found a time of grace for him, though it were long
first: some therefore may desire to see it proved, that it may be long first,
wondering that it befalls not the soul as soon as she is under the condition
of it. The second question may be, why the Lord should permit such delays and
longsome staggering, since that it may seem it were better if it were speedy,
and put out of doubt at first. Thirdly, it is asked, by what marks it may
appear to a poor soul that the Lord intends to finish his work, and to set
her out of her old fears and distempers.

To answer the first of these, this I say, experience proves it, that
conversion is not finished in many a soul (which yet may be under a condition
Why conversion is not perfected all at once?
But many things befall one in such an estate, (I say not always but oftentimes)
which buffet and baske it shrewdly, put it into sad demurres, fears and
suspicions, that all will not prove well at last, that she has begun at the
wrong end, and therefore not knowing what to make of it self, sits in ashes
and heaviness a long time till God bring healing to her.

To mention some of these out of the experience of most men's ordinary
complaints: one may be this: Conversion h^th many preparations, althoug^ the
very act of it be at an instant.
yet by ignorance they are held down so, that they know not whether there be
any ease for them to be had or no: Satan so blindefolds their eyes, that the
way of God is hidden from their eyes; their conscience is oppressed, but they
do not feel that it it is a work of God preparing them to hearken after ease
and remedy; but rather esteem it as a most unhappy condition fallen upon them
to bring them to ruin, for they judge themselves by others whom they hear of,
who make away themselves to be rid of their misery: And indeed so it falls out
to many burdened consciences who live in blind places, having neither
Minister nor friend to succor them with counsel, they dye in darkness and
for lack of light, and so they grow to interpret the sense of their sin to
be a mark of vengeance upon them (as if they were Cains) and to be weary of
their burden till they have laid violent hands upon themselves: All such I
dare not simply condemn: Sundry instances named.
But I may say, their way is dark, and they are blindefolded by Satan,

A second sort there are, who for the present do not put difference
hypocrites, and lie down in sorrow: only the Lord will not suffer his to
perish in this error, but having manifested it, makes them turn a new leaf,
and break off their false confidence. But in the mean time, who wonders that
they attain no settling? For alas! Can their hearings, duties, affections or
services, take away the guilt of an ill conscience, and give them any sound
bottom? No, doubtless.





prevailing in them, abasing them, and making them stink in their own
nostrills, so that although God have begun to work in them, yet so long as
the stinch of their lusts, their ignorance, unprofitablenesse, hypocrisy,
inconstancy, pride, earthly hearts abides in them, and annoyes them, they
cannot think the promise concerns them. Oh! if they could find themselves
rid of these, they should have hope, else none.

Others cast their thoughts afar off, and think that faith carries with
Demas and Hymeneus, and so go to their grave with misery, without returning to
God, and besides bring such a stain upon the Gospel as will never be worn
out.

There are others discouraged by the long space of time since they

Another sort by these and the like distempers, wax sullen, and transported
much as any Minister can teach them: They will not be brought so much as to
consent that there is any better estate then they live in, neither do they
think that any can have any more assurance then themselves, if they see any
Christians merier then themselves, they presently judge them to be presumptuous
hypocrites, and condemn them. Others do not so much censure others as
themselves; and grow conceited against the means, will not be persuaded to
hear or pray, because they do but increase their damnation; nay (but for
necessity of nature) they would not eat their meat, nor drink when they are
athirst, nor go to any, nor suffer any to come at them, neither ask, nor take
counsel, for they say, these things belong to them whose they are: But they
are none of Christ's, and therefore have no right unto them. And yet even many
of these (setting aside the malice of Satan, holding them under with this
melancholy of body, or conceit of mind, or both) have given good signs of a
laden, broken and desirous heart.

Luke 11.
one thing being necessary; by little meditation, applying, pondering, and
incorporating the word into their hearts; by stumbling at the very point in
hand, thinking that seeing good only can and in time will releeve the soul;
therefore let all go, cast all upon God, and be lazy and secure.

2 Timothy 3.7.
and so always are hearing, but never come to knowledge. Why? They are foolish
and undiscerning. All is fish which comes to the net, and they embrace alike
one and other; whereas (although all be good) yet it concerns them to look
out such as might fit their needs, and further them in the work they aim at.
Tell a woman whose fruit is come to the birth of this tale and that, ask her
what linen she has, or what meat she will eat; does she savor such
questions? Are they not tedious? Does she not aim at one thing, that is, how
she may get strength to bring forth? So should an hearer that seeks the fruit
of his labor, not while himself with every truth less concerning for the
present, but harkening after such as may answer his doubts, clear his
objections, reveal that which he most wants, and which speaks most directly
to his heart. As for pleasing himself in being in the element of any truth
whereof he sees no use, it is irksome to a wise heart, although he reverence
all. And these may serve for a taste of many more lets, (which differ as men
differ) and for answer to the first question.

I come to the second. Since it is thus, what reason may be given to 1. Cause.
because the Lord herein looks at some gross sins which ruled and reigned in
the former part of men's life and in youth, which are as iron moles, and will
hardly be worn out of the flesh, being bred in the bone, save by tozing and
searching the heart thoroughly. Secondly, that he might breed some restraint in
youth, and curb them from such offenses as after must cost a great deal of
purging, plowing and harrowing, ere the soul will affoard good mould for the
word. For sure it is, the more rebellion the Lord meets with, the more irons he
loades the soul with, Esaias 28. Thirdly, that he might exercise each soul in
finding out her own special let, and not go to work in a fulsome
generalnesse. Fourthly, to breed in the soul a solemn and sad thought
concerning the way of God, and root out that giddiness and vanity which
puffes up the soul in a vain presumption and ease. Fifthly, to occupy the
mind of the Minister in right and careful dividing the word, and studying to
approve himself as a workman not to be ashamed; striving to be faithful both
in the gift of discerning spirits, that he may speak to the purpose not at
randon; as also to be painful in catechizing, which contains the wise and
leasurely way of God, to scrue and dive into the hearts of men by degrees, and
to soke the heart in the principles of faith, which they that want may be long
enough in hearing Sermons ere they conceive the order of the mystery of faith,
and how the soul comes to claspe with the promise. Sixthly, the Lord hereby
corrects those most wicked evils which have carried the soul in and under the
Ministry of the Gospel, especially the dallying with the seasons of grace. 7.
That by this mean the Lord might cleanse the heart from Self in every kind,
and twitch up every root and rind of self-love which would dangerously mix
it self with the promise. Lastly, that the Lord (as I touched before) might
prepare way for himself in the honor of the soul when it shall find by
experience, that all her salvation is of him, and he could bring it out of
nothing, nay worse then nothing, when as the soul lay struggling with herself
without hope or remedy. So much for answer to the second question.

The third and last question is, how the soul may find by marks, moulder
away as wax before the Sun, but obtain the fruit of the promise in Gods due
time. For answer whereto, this I say, it may be known by the contrary to
those marks which bewray hypocrites.

Gedeon did those enemies, Judge. 7.
while the sent was hot, lest he should be defeated. Thus does a good heart
watch her time, always being upon wing for her prey, and loathes carelessenesse
of the watchwords of God. No sin stings her more then former dallyings with the
Lord, nothing brings her upon her knees in secret more then this sin, and the
sad fruit of it, nothing puts her in more fear lest God should forsake her,
and suffer his Spirit to give over all saving strife with her; nothing more is
desired then that the Lord would forget her many provokings this way, and stir
her up with threefold alacrity to redeem such seasons for time to come.
Whereas an hypocrite sees not such mercy from God, or else vanishes in the
fruit of them, lets all go, and nouzles himself in a blind hope all shall be
well, whiles yet old sins and dallyings are upon the score, unrepented of,
and unforgiven, and the soul hardening more and more, and waxing daily more and
more crazy, and unfit to be wrought upon.

Jonah 2.8.
and dares not yield when yet she is almost foiled; but discernes a base body
of death from the desire of her own heart; and because she feels a dying, she
judges herself not wholly dead, but to have some life under the embers, which
she makes much of, and nourishes as one would hatch up one coal of fire upon
dry straw lest it should go quite out. Such a soul abhors a daily deadish and
sad heart, more then death it self; labors to revive it self by all hot
waters from swowning and dying; rejoices when she recovers, exercises her self
with others (as well as in secret) to whet up that dull and weak edge of life
and faith which remains, and is glad to feel that it is not always alike with
her in this kind. Whereas an hypocrite who never attaind to this sweet life,
is feign to shuffle as he is able, to counterfeit life and zeal, and when his
endeavors succeed not, he commits all to hazard, and shifts off a dead heart
as he can with head and shoulders.

Thirdly, these persons may be known by this, That they discern Opposite to
the ten former Objections.
and held them off from the promise, as may appear by these particulars,
opposite to the former objections named in the first question. First, they
discover a mercy in their deep castings down and fears, and in the spirit of
bondage which they feel, they look upon it not as a mark of wrath, but as
the entrance upon the way of God, for their further humbling and making their
heart tender, acknowledging it could not be spared, and looking into the
promise for some hope of redress. Secondly, they wisely consider, that the
condition of faith, and the gift of faith it self, differ much; and therefore
for them to rest in any such work of preparation, as will not stablish their
hearts in peace through the blood of the Covenant, were a deceit of Satan,
causing them to lie by the way when they have a further journey to go.
Affections and Ordinances they embrace, but rest not therein, as wanting a
bottom of the satisfaction of Christ to Gods justice, and therefore in that
they only dare pitch their rest, renouncing whatsoever of their own might
satisfy them. Thirdly, they wisely cosinder what degrees they have atained in
grace, and dare not forget or deny what God has already done for them,
confess that thousands want that which they have; yea that its nothing but
self-love which buries all former mercies under a clod of discontent for that
which they want, and with the lowest humbleness acknowledge themselves the
least of all others, and that whatsoever is not hell, is more then God owes
them, they count themselves not worth the ground they tread on, submitting
themselves unto God to do with them as he pleases, and willing to be as he
will have them. Fourthly, they moderate their own judgments touching the
matter of faith, and desire to look at it as that gift which God in wisdom
uses for the saving of his; neither on the one side making it less, nor on
the other side more high and solemn then God would have them, for though it be
too good for them to enjoy, yet not for God to bestow, whose gifts although
very precious, yet are most free; and so they shake off that base slavery of
heart which possessed them. Fifthly, they consider themselves not as they shall
be when faith has cleansed them, but as now they lie, and are objects of mercy,
such as God purposes to declare the riches of grace upon in due time; in the
mean season they are the vilest of all sinners, as also Paul and others were
in their corrupt estate: They consider that sin causes mercy to abound, so it
be not wilfully committed: See Acts 2.34.35.
And this is the honor of God to beteame it to enemies, hypocrites, proud,
unclean, profane ones, yea Christ died for sins against the Gospel, an
hard, dead, rebellious heart of unbeleefe, as well as against the Law:
Therefore they see in that dunghill of dross (always steaming out of them) an
occasion of mercy in God, not of despair, save in themselves. And if they were
as they would be, void of such corruption, they should need no mercy, they
might plead merit. Romans 3.19.
Christ came to save sinners, and has shut up all under disobedience, that he
might save some, even the weakest, unworthiest of all others; for these will
cun him most thank: Pharisees need him not. As for the dogging of their
corruptions, they consider Satan most clogs and dogs that soul which is most
earnest to be rid of them, whereas others are shut up in false peace, and fear
nothing.

Sixthly, they grow to this resolution, not to cast fears aforehand more then
they ought, Micah ult. ult.
if God will pardon them, they doubt not but he will afterward purge them,
subdue their corruptions for them, and finish his work with perseverance. They
were not fit judges to speak of time to come: What has he who wants faith, to
do with the condition of him that has it? They will therefore attend one
thing at once, and not many: If once they can obtain faith in that, they shall
have the rest: For why? Faith will purge the conscience and set the believer on
work to preserve in himself that which is already planted: Therefore they see
it were a great folly to hinder themselves of a present mercy through the
distrust of a future. Seventhly, they repent them of those ungrounded cavills
from the length of time, the example of others, and the fear of election; and
with a mourning heart for that hardness and unprofitablenesse of theirs, they
acknowledge it to be none of theirs, but Gods privilege to appoint the times
and seasons of grace: They ought not to forestall God in this kind, but wait
his leisure: They must not grudge at others but follow their example: Others
are not gone so fast before, but mercy can send them after with as good speed:
And as for election, it is not for them, its Gods secret, they know no such
matter that they are reprobated, but when they shall believe, they shall know
that they are elect: Let therefore God alone with his secrets, confess his
Sovereignty and tremble, but apply themselves to the revealed way of God, and
behold his ladder and cords of mercy put down unto them into the dungeon, and
clapse about them as they are commanded to do. Eighthly, they look up to the
promise, and thereby shake off their melancholy and sullennes of heart, see the
emptiness, the absurdity of their froward hearts, which God does as much
detest, as they admire: They see a world of pride, self and rebellion in it,
and therefore desire to send it to hell whence it came, and to turn their
censure of others into imitation of their grace. Ninthly, and especially,
whatsoever has witheld them from the promise and from beholding the excellency
of it, in the meaning of God, in the bounty, truth and fidelity, constancy,
stablenes, fullness and sufficiency of the same, they shake it off: Jonah 2.8.
they forsake other vanities and conceits of their own, their moral contents,
their busying themselves about many things, whereby Satan (as by his golden
apple) would keep them from the silver Bell; and therefore now, they resolve to
lay all other sacrifices by the Altar till their reconciliation be made; to
which end, they trade with the promise by meditation, and use all means to
dive into it, and to look into it, as the Angels into the Mercyseat, till
their misery for want of it, cause them to venture themselves, and jeopard
their salvation upon it.

Lastly, they correct their loose and general hearings of the word, purposing
to bend their minds, (as to all the truth of God without neglect, so)
especially to those maine truths which they most stick at, and come shortest
of, that their insight into Gods method and way may be more evident unto them:
As for novelties and fancies of men of unstable minds, ready to carry them away
from the simplicity of the Gospel; whether erroneous opinions, or things which
have some truth, but yet for the present are not pertinent or profitable, but
might (under some pretense of zeal and devotion) withdraw them from their
grounds ere they be settled, (which I observe to be a notable trick of the
Devil to disorder the course of a soul traveling toward heaven) they are
shy thereof, and cannot close with it. Let every one that desires to know
himself to thrive to Godward well, mark this whole Section. So much for this
third mark.

Another is, That such a soul strives after that which makes most Paul, if by
any they may attain faith at last. They do not as Ahaz, who being willed to
ask a sign from God to confirm his promise, refused it, and let all go at
six and sevens, pretending that he needed none, but would leave it to God
without such ado. Esaias 7.
But he is rebuked for greeving of God by such slightness, who loves that his
people should take order to resist their infidelity, and hasten to believe,
using every ordinance, each occasion for the atchieving of such a grace. Such a
restless spirit they are led by, who keep the price of the high calling of
God in their eye, loath to lose it, Phil. 3.
and preserving the tender care and inquiry after it in their souls, as an
object of greatest excellency. A bottomless, careless spirit to get and lose
as fast, and to spill that precious liquor which God has been long putting
into them, they loath and detest, 2 John 8. and still seek to make up a full
reward to themselves, and cannot be quiet till the Lord give into their bosoms
measure heaped up, and running over, that they may be at rest. If they have any
bottomlessenesse it is for the world and the cares of it, but as for grace they
keep all they have, and still are on the gaining hand till they attain their
desire. Psalm. 84. No faintness there shall be; but from strength to strength
they go full fast, till they appear before God in Sion.

Fifthly, as they are always hastening the Lord, and impatient in Psalm. 70.5.
so yet they are patient in respect of discontent and unweariedly waiting upon
the Lord for the accomplishing of their petition; They have learned that lesson
of the Psalmist, Blessed are they that wait upon him: and of Jeremy, Lamen.
3.25.
It is good to wait patiently upon the Lord. Its much to them that the Lord
will come and bring healing in his wings at last, requiting long delay, as
Malachi speaks, with speed, Mal. 3.
and as for urging the particular time when he will come, and how soon, they
leave it to him, whose the seasons of mercy are, by whom only the day of
sealing is appointed, they must wait. They attend upon a Sovereign God who
shows mercy to whom and when he pleases; Romans 9.
yet also his mercies are fare to them whom he has called to the hope
thereof: Therefore their part is to get the spirit of supplication (always
attending the Spirit of grace, Zach. 12.10.) which will hold out with the Lord
without fainting, and concur with him in his time of ease: In which respect
it makes not haste, but considers that each day hastens Gods time. For as it is
in the second coming of our Lord Jesus, Matthew. 24. end.
so it is in his first: None knows whether he will come at noonetide, or at
the evening, midnight or cockcrowing, but come he will: So whether in youth, or
middle years, or old age, thou know not; whether in a short time, or after
a long season, whether in thy hearing, or at the sacrament, or in prayer, or at
a fast, or in some great cross, or at thy death, its unknown: Thou have a
promise come he will, and therefore wait upon him, thou art not too good, and
when he comes thou shall not repent thee.

Esau a mess of pottage, and his longing is satisfied: Give a child a bright
counter, Heb. 12.
and he will forgo a gold angel: It pleases a fool as well to have his babble
as a Kings Crown: why? Because he is a fool and discernes not; so a wretch
that never came in the favor of mercy, will equal it to any common thing,
fill his belly, give him ease, cloth his body, fill his purse, and you may rob
him of his birthright. So he have content any way, and for the present he is
well. Not so that soul that longs for mercy: For why? It compares one with
other, and makes as much difference as between gold and dross; holds firmly
the esteem of mercy to herself, and will not suffer the base vanishing creature
to come between her and home, and steal her heart away by such rattles and
feathers as these are. Zach. 12.10.
It comes here to mind what Zachary speaks, That the spirit of grace goes
with the spirit of compassions: There are such compassions toward the Lord in
a poor soul, as there are in the Lord toward it: In the Lord there are
tender mercies, as that other Zachary speaks, Luke 1. [Through the tender
mercies of our God] mercies of tenderness and compassion to a poor miserable
lost sinner reaching to forgiveness: These are peculiar; not common, or such
as he bestows upon them whom he pitties not in their misery: Now therefore
that soul that partakes these tender mercies, is as tender of them, and does so
prize and esteem them that no other mercy can steal away the affections of the
soul therefrom, nor stall the heart therein, much less make tender mercies to
wax stale and common, but still the price thereof rises till the Lord fill her
therewith.

Naamans example, That a perpetual and sure mark of a man who is grace and
faithward is this, that his old perverseness, pride and stoutnesse begins to
quail, and his great stomach comes down. That heart which before was the
heart of Leviathan, as Job describes it, hard as a stone, now melts, and
becomes soft as wax. This is a sign indeed of mercy drawing near a poor
soul: that even as before all turned to gall and bitterness, Job 41.24.
and like bad physic wrought by contraries; so now the Lord purposing to
perfect his work with power, lo all goes right, and the omnipotent arm of God
subduing and casting down all high things that before caused the heart to
swell and bluster against the way of God, now molifies the hard heart and thaws
it as the frost by the southwind. Oh what a strange alteration does the rising
Sun cause in the horizon? Fogs and mists, and darkness vanish and disperse
themselves, and all the coast is clear again, as if there had never been any
such? And mark it who will, thus it fares with every soul which comes to God;
the nearer it draws to the Sun of righteousness, the more melting and humble
it is; all old quarrels and cavills, all old rebellion and stoutnesse of
spirit are scattered; when Christ once arises to rebuke the boisterous rage of
the sea, (for such is every wicked heart, Esaias 57. ult. even foaming, and
casting up mire and dirt) then on the sudden all waxes mild and calm, and
the place where frowardness and distempers grew is no more found. Thus much
for the third question.

I come to the Uses of the point, which are many fold. First, it instructs
Instruction. 1. Branch. Hypocrites and elect ones differ in their issues.
Matthew. 12.
There may seem no great odds in their pains and endeavors, both may seem
earnest and longsome, both hear much, pray and live in the element of means
constantly; both have their terrors, their hopes, their flashings of light and
comfort; both have their ebbings and flowings, sorrows and joys; but the one
has not the issue which the other has: The end of the one is to go out in
darkness, the other to overcome and break forth into victory. The end of the
righteous (mark it Psalm. 37.) is always peace, though after long toil and
hazard: The righteous are saved, (though scarce and with much ado) and at last
they come to the haven. They are like to them in the ship wherein Paul sailed,
Act. 27.
though they had so toilesome a travel of it all the winter, yet God gave to
Paul all the souls that were with him, and bid him be of good comfort, for all
should safely come to land at last. The truth is, there is an ods between them
from first to last, in their knowledge, in the work of the Law, their terrors,
and of the Gospel, their sorrow, their desire and the rest: But that is not so
easy for us to discern. God only sees that. But in the upshot it is manifest:
For then it appears that there was a different principle that acted them, the
one from himself to himself; the other from the Spirit of grace, for the
honor of grace and the change of the heart. As Saint Nazianzen once spoke of
one of the Counsels, that neither it began with God, neither would end for
him. Look well about you (brethren) for, God help us, the work of faith
seems to be perfected in few of us to any purpose; preaching in and out of
season, we have long had and all follow it; but to behold the sad and dead
point which many of us do, and long have stood at, would flait any honest
heart to think of! one would think those former trialls should exercise every
one of us to see what at last will come of all our struglings and strifes; I
pray God we prove not of the baser sort, that enter not, but fail of Gods
grace! though it be long first, yet if at last our success answer our pains,
it will be well.

An item to these persons.
But its not amiss for some of us to suppose the hardest, and say, what if I
should not be of them, who shall end in comfort? All shall not: If I be one,
what do I running this round, and treading this maze in vain? As near at my
death, as at my entrance: And like to one wildred all night, and in the morning
coming to the place he set out! I beseech you look over those marks above,
hurt it can do you none! God sets us not to this task of hearing and
profession for policy, and to keep us occupied, and from idleness: No, he sets
us to heavenward, if we see not his scope, we may wander all our lives and
never the nearer, and what a sad woe would that bring with it? Many poor
souls are afraid that death will come ere grace be perfected: But I pray God
it prove not the portion of many that fear it not, but are confident that the
upper millstone running upon the nether, the corn will be grownd; whereas alas!
they have no corn between the milstones, their souls la^ not in for any such
matter as to get their souls saved and broken. Esau thought nothing when he
dallied with his birthright; but after it was gone, all his howling could not
recover it: Be wise therefore, look still at the scope; the end must pay for
all; be sure your growths to heavenward be sure, though slow; be sure your
conception be good, and that the seed of God is in you; then shall all your
combats and strifes be as Rebecca's, whom God told she had twins: So be sure
there be a child a breeding, and true life, for that will bear you through,
and at your birth you shall forget your sorrow. Otherwise as the unhappy woman
who carries a mole orabortive in her, has many fears, and says, either I go
with child, or with my death, so shall it fare with you. So much for this first.

2. Branch of Instruction. Censure neither our selves nor others in the matter
of Grace.
Again, it should teach us neither to censure others, nor our selves in the
passages of our endeavors and strifes for heaven. Not others: To say thus and
thus long they have been striving and making toward salvation, and yet they
daily complain as men that have got but little; always in their complaints,
doubts and conflicts: Surely I fear there is little in them! No, say not so:
If they be the Lords, the issue shall be good. Reasons why God justly permits
it thus, I gave before. Now I add, that these rash censures are commonly
theirs who are little acquainted with the trade of faith: Alas! you know not
what the ventures of this Merchant, and the toil of this husbandman are!
Think not sinisterly of grace for the pains, and the several troubles that
it brings with it: If it be more easy with some then with others, bless God
you have avoided many a rock and hazard that others meet with: But therefore to
judge others do it not: Say that their own rebellion has made an easy way
to become hard to them, what then if they be saved any way, what skills it? The
harder it is, and the more it cost, the sweeter it will be, and the harder to
forgo: Look rather to thy self that thy strivings be lawful, then judge
them whose strifes are difficult; for so it must be till God have brought a
base heart to lie down at his feet with shame: Many a noise must pierce a dead
heart ere it live; many a terror, and many a pang of self-love, many a
contradiction, fear and hope must come in his way, who arrives at heaven;
only this is the comfort: No enemy shall finally deprive such of their labor
as are called to the hope of salvation unfeignedly. Nay rather, Romans 14.13.
if thou get thither more easily, fear that there may be in thee many an old
dreg which perhaps is purged out of others by sad medicines, but how ever judge
them not: The end shall make all manifest, 1 Cor. 4.5.
judge not another man's servant, he stands or falls to his own Master. Pity
such rather, and pray that God would ease their travel.

And secondly, much less condemn thy self, 3. Branch. Instruction.
Christians must beware of condemning themselves. Esaias 40.2.
because thou find the work of grace to hang long in suspense and not to
come off with such ease and haste as thou desire: Do not entertain base
fears into thy heart, nor tempt God by putting thy self amongst hypocrites,
and reading thine own doom; look to those marks I set down, and then
conclude, its not in thee, but in the Lord to shorten thy travel, and to
determine thy warfare; it is his work, who can neither be shortened, nor hastened
by thee; he only knows what corruption must be tamed, what grace quickened;
hurt it shall do thee none to be tried, if thou be sure the work was not of
thine own beginning, but Gods, know he is faithful who has begun, who also
will finish in due time. Thou would be loath thy wife should come before her
time, as much as thou longest for the fruit of her womb; but art desirous she
should fulfill it: And thou do well: Do so here in thy own case: A thousand
years is as one day with the Lord; 2 Pet. 2.
to teach thee some of his patience; when his day is come it will seem no whit
too long: And in the mean season, who upholds thee from sinking? Is it not the
Lord? But perhaps thou will say, Thou feel but small hope, and much sadness
and deadness of spirit! I answer thee, That may be thy discontent and
impatience: For why? Although thou feel no thrivings, yet perhaps thou
may thrive and grow nearer thy hopes then thou art aware. The infant grows
toward birth daily whether it be strong or weak. None of Gods cost shall be
lost upon his, no drop of his precious seed can be spilt: Though thy course
seem dead to thee, yet if the Lord attend thy fruit within, and ripen it,
form and fashion it in thy heart by secret and unknown degrees, is it not
well? Thou do not know how one bone or one joint is framed in the womb,
Simil.
yet they lose no day, no hour of their appointed time: Thou see no hairs
breadth of growing in thy corn, yet it increases daily; and even that winter
life thereof which stands at a stay, and seems dead, yet gathers secret heart
and strength at the root, which after in the spring makes it shoot and branch
forth. The Lord is now doing for thee that which thou know not of, but shall
know hereafter: That is, Joh. 10.9.
that grace cannot be wrought out with thy sweat and care, but by his spirit,
and he is the Sovereign God who will be adored by all that come to believe:
They must come to a low point in themselves, and confess that God has them at
the advantage to save or destroy, which when it has tamed them thoroughly under
this mighty hand of his to be at his dispose; then perhaps he will not take but
release the vantage for the glory of his Grace; yea truly, although the Lord
should respit his work till thy death, yet mutter not, but know, that he
chooses that time, because then commonly, the soul is brought to the narrowest
point, and sees no props to support her, nor helps to cling to; then being at
the greatest strait either to trust to a promise or to perish, it is put to it
and forced to resign all, and to cast it self upon mere mercy; which (while
she walked at large in the world) with many false props about her, she found
it not so easy to do. Thus much for this Use.

Reproof and Confutation.
in their backbiting the Ministers of the Gospel, and contrarily for the
encouraging of the Minister in his course of painful persisting in the work
of persuasion.

Quarrellers against the Ministers unablenesse to comfort the distressed, most
sinful.
For the first of these: There be many profane ones of this sort in all places,
who cast reproach upon the Gospel and Ministry, as unable to effect that
which it pretends. Oh say they! when these Ministers first preach the Law, they
bear people in hands, that it is the way to raise up their souls to hope; but
for ought we see, such dejected spirits complain every day that their
condition is more and more heavy, they see themselves further off then ever! I
had rather be as I was (says another) for before I was quiet, but now I see
the gulf in which I lie to be deep and terrible! But oh poor wretch! Is it
thus with all? Are not some daily raised (through mercy) as well as others cast
down? What? Do thou expect as soon a lifting up, as thou feel a
consternation? Art thou better then he that said, Psalm. 85.8.
He would hearken what the Lord would say, for he would speak peace to his
Saints? Surely its to be feared, thine humbling is but violent, and then thou
may cavil long enough, for thou shall revolt quickly to thine old vomit.
Gods matters are too hot, Job 15.11.
and too heavy for thee. But say thou art no such; yet tell me, Are the
consolations of God such vain things with thee? Is it not more eligible to be
under the hands of a merciful God (who in his good time can persuade the
unconvinced spirit, and bring it to the bent of his bow) then to be under that
bondage for a time, which the Law by sin has brought upon thee? The like
speeches do many use concerning others. How do base parents, husbands, wives
and kindred cry out of the word, when it has begun to ceaze upon their
children, wives and husbands or kinsfolk? Oh (they say) its pity such
Ministers should live; they serve for no other, save to gaster and unsetle men
who are in peace! They have done that with their words, which all their labor
with both hands cannot undo again. Oh woeful wretch! Is the Minister able to
go beyond the Lord? Is he not a servant of God to do what he will use him
for? Esaias 10.15. Romans 9.
Shall the axe exalt it self against him that cutteth therewith? Or the clay
say to the Potter, why do thou make no more haste to fashion me? No, its
enough that he shall heal whom he has wounded, and make up the breach he has
made when God will use him. In the mean time, perhaps thy cavilling at the
means binds Gods hand behind him; thou need not wonder that he does thy
wife or child so little good! rather cease thy rebelling (as bootlesse) and
yield thy self to come into Gods order, that he may work upon thy heart as he
has done theirs.

And so let it (by the way) encourage the Minister of God who pleads for the
glory of God, and travells with a soul burdened, and despairing of ever
seeing good day! Oh Lord (says many a such one) Encouragement to the Ministers
of God. Ezekiel. 14.9. Romans 3.7.
thou have deceived me! Oh if I should leave any poor soul in the briars, and
never see the work of faith finished in him, I should be accounted a liar for
God! what a dishonor were this? Lord put to thine hand, help thy weak
servant, save thine own name and my credit! Disable me not from being
believed, leave me not a reproach to vile ones! Alas! They whom I have to deal
with, are a sturdy and a rebellious people, cavillers, and such as will
disgrace me, if thy word should not prove true; honor me therefore, and set
thy seal to my poor labors, that in my truth thy name may be glorified; 2
Cor. 10.4. Esaias 57.18.
batter and pull down their high stomachs, plunge them into horrors, and then
create the fruit of the lips in them, and strengthen me to be an able Minister
of reconciliation, that so the mouths of them who would traduce thy Messengers
and Ordinances may be stopped. Even as the Lord Jesus, Joh. 17. prayed his
Father to glorify him for the sake of them whom he had given him, so do thou
entreat also: Oh in thy weldoing be not discouraged by such, nor be too
sollicitous for God! fear not, Esaias 42.8.
he will not give his glory to another, he will not be laughed at as unable to
go through that which he has begun! These poor servants of Naaman were
weak instruments to speak of, but yet made strong enough by the Lord to
conquer their Master; so thou shall perhaps be the instrument to water that
which others have planted: Gal. 2.
And what if others enter into thine? If God may have a Temple built by
Solomon, 2 Chronicles. 28.14.
David will lay in Timber and Cedars, and willinglly forgo the name thereof.
And therefore distrust not God, nor faint in thy service.

Thirdly, let this be use of Admonition to us, that since God has Admonition.
Clear and justify God in his delay of grace.
therefore we judge not amiss of God when we see the work deferred, as if he
did deserve the blame; but rather clear him, and say, He cannot lie; the fault
lies some where else: The truth is, we hear of few who honor God in the
improvement of this promise; (though it be not the fault of all, for many do
bear witness to God in this kind:) But why? Because they wilfully make it a
long journey which God makes short: And first they will not confess that which
God has done: They think faith to be such a sensible, effectual grace that
none can have it, but by and by they shall see the flame of it; and so not
discerning any excellency of effects, they consult with their own feelings,
and conclude, there is nothing at all: Alas poor souls! the beginnings of
faith are poor, though the increases may be great: Job 8.7.
Spiritual things in a carnal subject are as hardly discerned, as a pearl
among much dung; that which is our own, appears easily and dismaies us: But
that which is Gods is more secret. Again, many look more at their own
stirrings of the poole then at Gods. I can speak it by experience, that whereas
one has made complaint of his not clasping to a promise, and mourned simply
for unbeleefe, ten have bemoaned their loss of the affections which they have
had in hearing, prayer or conference: A sign that their own is nearer then
Gods work with them. Faith is not always a victorious sensible and reflecting
grace upon the soul wherein it is: But a casting of her self (after all her
fruitless wrastlings, as being convinced of the insufficiency and invalidity
of them all) upon the stream of the word to carry her to the haven of peace.
If then you have lost your first feelings and zeal, give not God over, but
still seek him for a further spirit of recovery, and increase upon the best
grounds. Naaman here had lost his first hopes, yet you see he recovers them
again by better insight and persuasion, and that ere he looked for it. Pray
earnestly, O Lord, thou have power to set the Sun ten degrees back: Lord set
mine ten degrees forward: Thou oh Lord have all instruments, means, seasons,
persuasions, blessings, crosses in thy hand to work by; apply them Lord, and
suffer not my soul which is sunk into giddiness, ease, worldliness,
discontent of spirit, and dead sullenness to lie still in that dungeon. Drive
me out of my carnal tracke, into thy Royal Rode, and if I must be delaid, yet
keep me in thy way; press the Lord with his own word, and say, Thou can
discover to me all my steppings out of thy way, all my stops and lets: Thou
can uncharme Satan's spell: Thou can multiply persuasion and weaken
disswasion: Thou can remove that utter unwillingnesse and uncouthnesse of the
soul to this work, and cause lythnesse and complying therewith: Thou can
pull me out of those snares which enwrapt me in bondage, as the weeds did
Jonah: No rocks shall split me with fear, no Sirens shall inchant me with
baits if thou assist: Thou can menage thy Spirit with so strong an arm,
Esaias 55.8.9.
that it shall prosper to do what thou will, and cause that no rain, no snow
shall return in vain, but do that for which thou sentest it. Take heed, give
not God over, trifle not out thy time; improve fasting to cast out the Prince
of Devils Unbeleefe, and frequent the Sacrament as Gods sealing Ordinance, and
then know, that he who has begun will finish, except thou be out of the way
when the hour of performance is come.

Consolation to all who have found God in their conversion.
you who have long waited for this day, behold it here, even the day star of
consolation arising in you hearts, 2 Pet. 1.19. I dare say for you, you do not
gape after comfort to spend it upon your lusts, but to hear what God will say,
That you return no more to folly, to your old distempers: To you I apply this
blessed truth, to you I say, whose big hearts are come down, and lie at the
footstool of mercy, and mark what I say, Come out of your ashes, take unto
you this white garment of joy and put it on, your warfare is accomplished: Oh
that this day might be the time of your lifting up! (perhaps it may for ought I
know) take this handkercheife and wipe away all your tears with it; let this
Sun beam of comfort chase away all former mists and fogs of darkness and
distrust, and let it be as old Eli, a voice from God to your sad spirits, that
(with Hanna) having received your answer you may be heavy no more: 1 Samuel 1.17.
1 Samuel 7.12.
Set up your altar with Samuel, and say, Hitherto the Lord has helped us, and
add moreover, he will give me the hand and help me over the hill of
difficulties that remain. Be so far from distrusting this, that you proceed
and say; He that has thus fulfilled his word in one kind, he will do it in
all other, set me beyond gunshot of all corruptions, temptations, Devil,
opposition and malice of his instruments, and keep me till his coming, and
till I obtain full redemption. Rather then the Lord would not accomplish that
promise which was 4000. years old, of sending the Lord Jesus, he would even
strip himself and be made sin and shame of holiness and honor. Did he so
deny himself, Galat. 4.4
and all to keep that maine promise, and dare I distrust him in the rest and
the smaller? No surely. Therefore, poor soul, that thou may be established,
come in, and believe this maine one: The night is past, and the hour of
darkness is gone. Now the Almond tree blossoms, Cant. 2.11.12.
and all the sad disasters of the Winter are passed. Now in this Garden of God
come meet thy beloved, and let him give thee his love. Henceforth say, O my
soul, thou have marched valiantly: Thou art above all thy former fears and
sorrows: Thou were afraid lest death should prevent thee ere this day; but
that was impossible: for then Gods word had been of no effect. Say thus, Now me
thinks, in the comfort of this truth, I could leap over a wall: Oh that I
should see it no sooner! Now the time of God is come, it is so clear, that I
wonder I should ever stagger or distrust it: I see it must be wholly spun out
of the Promise, and not out of mine own Bowels. Genesis 28.16.
Surely God was in this truth heretofore, and yet till now I was never aware of
it. Now I am, now I bless God that ever I lived to this day, that God should
in such a comfortless world, reveal such glad tidings unto me, and make me to
see his salvation. Often have I heard of him with mine ear, but now I see him
with mine eyes. Now I can say, Job. 42.3.4.
That which I have long sought, I have found, I have found him whom my soul
loves.

Why should thou not say thus? Psalm. 43.5.
Why does thy spirit fret within thee, and why art thou so sad, when the Lord
has given thee the oil of gladness? Do thou not know that it has been the
portion of sundry Saints of God before thee? Oh then climb not up to heaven,
nor go down into the deep to fetch Christ: Thou shall not need. This day is
come thy accepted time: The promise is near thee, Romans 10.
even in thy heart to believe it. As the Angel said to Peter, Arise and follow
me: so do thou, and say, Now of a truth I see the Lord has indeed delivered
me from Herod and the Jews. Acts 12.6.
How went that Eunuch away from Philip rejoicing? Acts 8. end.
What made Glover to speak when he saw that Chariot of fire to carry him to
heaven? Oh! he is come, he is come. And another at the stake, to take her
leave not only of her Husband, Children and Country, but of Faith and Hope,
saying, Farewell you, and welcome Love. What a triumphant speech was it?
Special examples of souls deeply and long laden, yet at length comforted.
Another, whose tenderness over her children had not been ordinary, and her
fears great, being very sick, to cry out, I take no thought for them, I leave
them to my God: and as for my distempers and temptations, I have none, I know I
shall be saved. Another fearing he should live in a great sickness, asked,
Do you think I should ever keep this assurance, till another sickness and
death come? He was answered, Yes: and so four years after at death, he lay as
before, rapt and ravished above world and all: and being asked how he did, said:
I am new out of a Trance, I have had a door opened, and seen the glory of
God, and now the door is clapped to, but I peep at the crevis, to keep the sight
of it, how loath am I to forgo it? To conclude, another poor creature, very
weak to hold any thing all her life, yet most constant in means till death,
when all thought her near gone, bade them weep no more for her, nor take no
thought, for she knew she should do well. Oh the faith of these, and
hundreds more we have seen, and all to evidence this truth. Oh! let us tread
in their steps, and follow their conversation; and when thine end shall come,
Christ shall but stoop down, and write upon thy heart 2 or 3 words, Be of good
comfort, Joh. 8.6.
thy sins are forgiven, but all thine accusers shall go away, and thy self
be acquitted for ever. Oh be thankful to think of it, and let no stranger,
world or lusts, enter into this thy joy to defile it. Thus much for this fourth
and last use, and for this doctrine. Now I hasten to the next.

True humility scorns not to learn of the meanest.
He went down and washed himself in Jorden. Wherein although the main thing
which I intend, is the Act of his faith, yet one thing I must tell you of
first, viz. an amplifying of it, by his humility, that he was thus subdued by
his servants, and glad to yield at their instance and counsel, though their
Master a great Prince. An unusual and unlikely thing, that such a favorite to
his Prince as he was, and so great a Warrior, should now be subdued by a few
followers, who had so stouted it out with the Prophet himself. But as the Lord
used this course to abase his pride: so he effected that which he sought, and
now makes him a tame Captive to mean Conquerours. The point then is, An humble
heart will not scorn the counsel and help of the meanest. The proud give
great words, and scorn mean ones, thinking it a disgrace to be dealt with by
such. But it must be a poor thing indeed which an humble soul will despise in
the way of God, Romans 12.13.
and his souls welfare. This is that which Paul Romans 12. urges at the hands of
Christians, That they condescend to them low degree, and think themselves
equal unto them. And yet see how Apollo that learned and eloquent man, Acts
18.26.
disdained not to learn the way of God more perfectly even from Aquila and
Priscilla, Tent-makers. See how Paul consorts himself with young Timothy, 1 Thessalonians. 1.1.
and calls him his fellow laborer, how honorably he speaks of private men,
and craves the prayers of poor Christians. Our Lord Jesus, how did he in his
agony, Matthew. 26.37.
seek the help and prayers of poor sleepy Disciples? But I will add a few
reasons.

no such stuff, but judges by the inner man, and the virtues of the soul,
which if an inferior do excel him in, he neither despises him for his
meannesse, nor exalts himself for his complements. Both are of one seed, one
flesh, from one maker, Acts 17.26.
tending to the same death and dust. Counters in a sum differ not, save in
opinion, although the one stand for an hundred pound, the other but an
halfpenny.

Secondly, by this equalling himself to a lower degree, an humble

Thirdly, by this means it concurres with Gods wisdom, and Prove. 6.6.
Go thou sluggard to the Pismire.

Fourthly, by this means we imitate the Lord himself, who has Philip. 2 8.
emptying himself that he might be equal to them of greatest baseness: nay
more, might be baser then thousands of them, who yet had been extremely base,
if he had been the son of an Empress. So the Lord himself, Esaias 57.17.
though that holy one and inhabiting eternity, yet looks down upon the poor
and lowly, that he might dwell with them and be strong with them.

The use (to be brief) is first, to all inferiors, either Ministers or others
Inferiors must not pull back their service from their betters if God call them.
not to withdraw their service in this kind from their superiors: I say, when
God calls them to advise, rebuke, exhort, not to pull back their neck out of
the Collar, through indirect and sinister conceits. It is the sin of the
inferior, and the misery of the superior, to be so handled. I ascribe the
horrible debauchednes of great ones at this day, and their sinful unlimited
courses, (next to their own natures) to the desperate baseness of such, as
being set in place of Ministry or attendance, neglect their duty toward such,
being eyewitness of their sin. What, says one, shall I, one of the puny
Chaplains, speak to my Patron, or great Lord, of his unclean courses? then
he might cast my boldness in my teeth, when ancienter, learneder, wiser, and
more experienced, fear his displeasure, distrust their own strength, shall I
begin? Truly, the very servants of Heathen great ones, shall rise up against
such, as stay not their Masters in their riots, but connive and correspond with
them. Alexander himself had one lover of Alexander, though most were lovers of
the King. And are we only lovers of men's greatness for our own ends, and not
of their souls? So men that have others but a little above them in place,
Ministers having Gentlemen in their Towns, dare not speak for fear of them,
I shall do them no good, and my self much hurt, Persuasions to it.
say they, by speaking: and so, for lack of the service, they shall rot in
their sin. For why? First, why should thou distrust God? If thy heart be
not false, cannot that God, who has given thee a wise and loving tongue to
reproove, give him also a wise and inclining ear to hear? When Moses answe^ed
the Lord, Send whom thou should to Pharaoh, Exodus 4.12.
for I am a man of a stammering tongue: does not God answer him, Who made the
tongue, or ear? have not I? Cannot I give thee gifts for mine own work, and
him the grace of harkening? But put case we prevail not. No more did Jeremy,
Jerem. 1.18.
whose face yet God made as brass, to speak to a rebellious house: But then,
says God, thou have saved thy soul, their blood shall rest upon their own
head. So then (to end this) do thou thy duty, O inferior, and trust God for
success. If Naamans servants had now neglected their du^y, what had become of
their Master? Be encouraged by their success.

Admonition.
to all sorts, to lay aside that pride and prejudice, that coyness and
stateliness of spirit, which fore-stalles it from learning of the mean, and
inferours. It is the phrase of proud Ajax in the Poet: He that encounters me,
let him think himself honored that I will vouchsafe to foil him. Some are
of so arrogant spirits, that they scorn to receive a good turn from their
inferior. But, O proud fool! who art thou? May not thou dye in thy nest for
want of a mean helper? As once a great woman ^id, who scorning the poor; at
the last, being in her country house, smitten with the plague, was forsaken of
all: and then cried out, that God was just. I observe, that it is the honor of
brave Soldiers, that when they are beaten almost out of their Castle, yet they
will capitulate for their honor to go out of their harbor, with their pikes
traild, their match light, and in array, or else they will dye ere they stir.
That bravery is in most men, they will lose their lives ere they lose their
great stomach. I confess, in civil cases there is some reason in such
things. Alexander is commended, that being challenged by a mean fellow to run
at Tilt with him, he scorned it, and said, Kings must run with none but
Kings: for they can get no credit by victory, but lose much by being foiled.
But in matters of God it is otherwise. Be willing to be taught, reproved by
any, be they never so mean: if there be grace, be there never such infirmities
and contemptiblenesse. It is a good Motto which he gave: Not always there is
good in the great, but always there is great in the good. Let the honor of the
grace, and the pretiousnesse of a Christian, cover his outward, and discern
that which is within at a narrow crevis. Be not of this mind, I will hear
none save the greatest Doctor, and learnedest man in the Country, such or such
a man of fame and note: As for these ordinary Preachers, I slight them. Those
whom thou admirest, are unwilling to take the pains, and those who take the
pains thou art unwilling to hear: and so between both, a proud heart brings
to destruction. That Heathen King Eglon, when as Ehud a lame man, came to him,
and told him, he had a message from God, arose off his Throne, Judge. 3.20.
and came down to speak with him. In base and common things we disdain not
the basest: Gentlemen will be hail fellow well met with base Jesters, swearing
Falconers, or hang-byes, if for their ends, and Ladies will send their children
to dance or sing; or to learn fashions of base peasants, and not disdain it.
But to learn of a good man or woman, the trade of God, to hear any thing from
them which might rectify either their hearts or manners, they despise it
exceedingly. Shall not their own practice confute them woefully? If Religion
were any of their ends, would they not do as much, and abase themselves as low
for that, as for the learning of prick-song, or the like? And whereas thou will
say, I will not do so mean a fellow such honor, as to subdue my spirit, or
put my neck under his girdle. I answer thee, Look thou at God, not at him: but
if this defeat thee of cure, thank thy self: he is but very little hungry, or
thirsty, who will not do a stone or leather pot or vessel the honor to
quench his thirst; nor eat any meat, except out of plate, with a silver
forke. Note.
They that will not honor others so much as to learn of them, must be content
to shame themselves so much as to perish. Oh young man! see thy face in a
glass, how is sage Solomon feign to flatter him, and to say, My son, Prove.
4.1.2.
hear instruction, let thine ear hearken to my counsel. And all because a
proud heart is wonderously averse from the counsel even of our betters, yea of
a King speaking for God: How much more hard then to harken to mean persons,
when we are great? Alas! this is grown out of the world: yet N^aman had been a
Leper but for mean ones. It were better that the Lord did abase thee very low
with some great cross, to pull down thine haughty heart, then suffer thy
pride to usher thy destruction. When Darius was pursued hard by enemies, and
very dry and thirsty, he saw a puddle with a little water in it, and having
drank it, said, he never tasted sweeter in all his life. So should the counsel
of the meanest be to thee, if stung in conscience, or lying upon thy death bed.
But if thou despise them before, who knows whether God will so far honor
thee then?

Thirdly, let this be examination Examination.
and trial of thee, whether in truth David could abase himself thus, even to
hearken after the meanest, and to make them of his house, Psalm. 101. 1 Samuel 25.
And poor Abigail was precious to him, and her counsel blessed, though he
were heir apparent of a Crown. Let us note this: for even in Religious
persons, this secret tang of baseness may lurk, as we see in St. James,
James 2.3.
who brings in rich Christians despising the poorer: You say to them who have
rings upon their fingers, Come up hither; but to the other, Sit at my
footstool. A sign that this base corruption is very closely lodged in us, to
underprize goodness and counsel, because it dwells meanly. A poor man was
forgotten, though wise, says Solomon, and one that delivered the City by his
wisdom. Eccles. 9.15.
If thou do so highly esteem grace, as to take it out of the poorest
creature with a thankful heart, (for as he said of Ministers, that they were
goldenest when the Chalices were of Wood; so I say, the man may have a Pearl
in his bosom, when he wears but a bare coat) it is a sign of some humility.

Lastly, let it be exhortation to us, to bear humble minds, and lowly
spirits, not to disdain to learn of the meanest: Nay, let us be thus vile,
Esaias 1. Psa. 32.8.9.
and if the world think us so, let us be more vile; let us learn of the
Pismire, and the Lamb, and the Storke, and the Swallow, and the Lillies, yea
the grass: for we are very ignorant, even as the Horse and the Mule, and had
need to be set to School to all Masters, and yet learn but little. The very
bird that lives in a Cage four inches square, being naturally bred to fly
abroad in the open Coast, should teach us self-denial and contentment: she can
sing and make her prison a Paradise; our base hearts disdain to be content or
thankful, when as we abound in all mercies, and have the world at will. An
whole Council once condescended to the judgment of one Paphnutius, a mean
person, speaking from God; choosing rather to hearken to a mean person, then to
persist in their error. If so many learned Bishops, sage and ancient persons,
disdained not to learn of so poor a counselor, what should such as we do,
who are yet as much more stout then they, as they were wiser then we are? And
so much for this point.

Then he went and dipped himself. When, I pray you? Surely, when his stomach
was brought down, and sunk in him, then he went and dipped himself in Jorden;
when that which all this while let, was removed, then did he obey, believe,
and do as he was bidden, and that in a moment. The point is very special to
prepare us to the point following: for it acquaints us with a main bar and
stop which lies in the Preachers way, and the Spirits way, to wit, a rebellious
and selfe-conceited heart: and with that which makes easy, and sweet, that is,
an heart convinced, and yielding to the Word. No man, I suppose, will expect me
to be large in much opening of this disease: for I have spent many Sermons in
the handling of Self, Self-love, carnal Reason, Rebellion, and coy Pride in
Naaman, when I went over the 11. verse. Now I take all that for granted, and
from the issue of the Lords working thus long upon Naaman, and his humbling of
him to the command, Humility always goes before grace.
compared with the effect of his obeying, I would present unto your eye, this
point, That always when the Lord means to create faith in the soul, he does
immediately put an end to all that stoutnesse of spirit that hindered the same.
The point is clear: No sooner had the Lord emptied Naaman here of his opposing
heart, but immediately follows his obeying the charge. So true is that golden
speech of Jeremy, Jer. 31.18.19.
I heard Ephraim bemoaning himself: Thou have chastised me, and I was
chastised, as an Heyfer unaccustomed to the yoke: Surely, after that I was
turned, I repented, and after I was instructed, I smote upon my thigh, I was
ashamed and confounded, because I did bear the shame of my youth. The sum of
the words is, That all the while that Ephraim was proud and wilful, no grace
would enter into him: But as soon as the Lord thawed his spirit, and made him
humble, lo, he presently submitted, and bare Gods yoke with meekness and
obedience. Prophets there were before, who did beat upon him, and tozed him
with rebukes and terrors: but alas! they were but as the blows of the Smith
upon his Anvill, which is the more hardened. But at last God cast into his
heart, a secret thought of his long rebellion, and how little good it had done
him; then by and by he listened, and smote upon his thigh and repented. Even
so, all the day long (says the Lord by Esaias, Chap. 52.) ult. have I stretched
out mine arm to a people in vain. None has believed my report, the word of
God is revealed to none. Why? He adds, because it is a stiff-necked and a
gainsaying people: q. d. But for this, they had believed long ago. This is
that which elsewhere the Prophet foretells under the Gospel, that such as
should be converted unto God, Esaias 2.4. Esaias 2.12.17.
should turn their Swords into Mattockes, and their Spears into Sythes, that
is, of warlicke and turbulent ones, become peaceable Husbandmen and
Inhabitants. The Aspe shall suffer the young child to play at the hole of the
Aspe: and the Lion shall feed with the Lamb, and the Bear with the Bullock;
meaning, the savage and wild dispositions of men, should turn meek and
tractable. Job in one place brings in the Lord asking this question, Job. 39.5.
Will thou tie the Unicorne to the furrow? or will thou make the wild Ass
feed at thy Crib? q. d. No, their nature is unbroken; thy Ox and thy Horse are
fittest for that, whom thou have tamed to the work. Even so assure thy self,
the Devil and Christ, Light and Darkness, may as soon comply, as a stout
rebellious heart and grace. Rebellion and Unbelief yoke together, so do
Self-denial and meekness of Spirit, with faith and obedience. As while the
sinews of man's heart is of Iron, the Lords heaven is Brass: so when the soul
begins to melt, the Lord begins to turn and convert it. It is with the soul
in this kind, contrary to that it was with them in Acts 27. If these go out
of the ship, it must needs miscarry. But if pride and rebellion abide in the
heart, no grace will grow, the man must perish. Ottomans horse (they said)
wheresoever he became, made the grass, that it could not grow: so does a stout
heart keep grace from the heart. There is a secret intelligence between hell
and a proud spirit: And contrarily, there is an intercourse between an humble
heart and heaven. Hosee in one place tells us, Hos. 2.21.
That the Lord would speak to the heavens, and they should hear the earth
with rains: and then the earth should hear man with fruits: So, first heaven
must grant the heart tenderness and relenting; and then that will hear the
Lord commanding and promising. The winds being very loud, the air is dry, but
if they be down, then presently we have store of rain: See that, 1. King.
19.12.
So is it here, when the tempests and storms of the heart be up, whether in
moral sins against the Law, or spiritual rebellion against the Gospel,
there is no obedience: but if they be down never so little, the clouds will
follow after rain; that is, faith and obedience will ensue, Prove. 15. ult. The
fear of the Lord is instruction and wisdom. And before honor goes
humility. Whom shall I teach Doctrine? Esaias 28.7.8. Even him that is weaned
from the Milk, and drawn from the Breasts. The sweet milk of the breasts of
Self and carnal Wisdom, are always opposite to the wisdom of God.
Sacrifices thou would not; but an ear thou have boared. Why? That I might
do thy will, O God, who before did mine own.

Instruction. Why the most hearers are pestered with unbelief. Because the
heart was never brought down.
and why the Lords persuasions have so little prevailed to make us believe.
Surely (if you doubt, as I fear few need to do) the enemy is this wicked
Haman of a rebellious heart. Perhaps some of you are of another mind, because
you can so color and crust over this sore with courtesy and good words: but
the truth of it is, There is an heart within, big and high, and stout. This is
the Camel which suffers not the soul to go through the needles eye. Somewhat
is the cause why the felon upon the hand swells: it is an humor which is not
yet let out; if that were out, the felnesse would cease. Enquire and consult,
either a cursed heart will keep some base lust, which God will have out, and
there the Lord and it are upon debate: or there is a cursed natural antipathy
between the Lord and the way of salvation: or the soul is full of teches and
pritches against reproof: or, it hatcheth some false conceit, that it has
obeyed when it has not, which it will not see: or puffes and snuffes against
some other thing, the Minister, the Ordinance, the difficulty of Religion, the
uncertainty of the promise: Whatsoever it be, it is a distastfulnesse of heart,
and a resistance against God, which if it were not, the soul would nakedly
come in, and obediently submit to the Gospel. But this disease has this
misery, that the more dangerous it is, the less it will be convinced of such
a thing; and this nourishes the heart in her wretchedness: it is not time
alone which will heal it; rather it causes it to rankle, and wax worse and
worse. Men ascribe it to other matters, being willing to gull themselves,
because they have no will to be rid of it: They say, they have weak memories,
little capacity, and the Minister is too high for them. But in very deeds,
their hearts are too high for him; till the Word come nearer, 2 Cor. 10.4.
and work inward, to cast down all imaginations and high things, no
submission will follow to the obedience of Christ. The effect every one dare
confess, but the cause they will not see: it is not unprofitablenesse, or an
ill memory, that has caused your hearts to be so surly and perverse; but it is
a proud and gainsaying heart, Acts 28.27.
which has so long made you unprofitable. Do not lin till you are convinced
hereof: for till the cause be seen, it cannot be removed. Do not lay the
fault where it is not: do not blanch over the cause with fine words, mitigate
not the extremity of the sin with gentleness. Perhaps you do not live in
wrath and rage with your wives, family, neighbors, you make a shift to comply
with men courteously, so long as no body hurts you: but truly, if you believe
not, in all this while, there is a pad in the straw, your spirits are not
inwardly brought to that tender softness and self-denial, to think equal
thoughts of God and his way, something sticks in your base stomachs, which
will not suffer the word of God to go down, and pierce into you, to persuade
you. If you would but bethink you what a great let this is, which hitherto you
have not seen, or if you could think how the case would be changed with you,
if once a tractable coming and inclining heart were in you; how the Ministers
of God, the Angels, ^ea the Spirit of grace it self (which you have so long
grieved and resisted) would rejoice in the change: Oh! you would never lin with
your own souls till you had cast it out; and having shaken it off, you would
think it a greater ease then ever that Martyr of Christ did, B. Hooper.
when he had cast off all his Popish trash and furniture from his shoulders.

Secondly, it is reproof Reproof.
to many Professors, who (in hope) are of Christians of crabbed, peevish,
stubborn hearts lose the grace of faith.
yet by the dregs thereof remaining in them, and nourished, dampe that
obedience of heart, that life of faith, and self-denial; yea that peace, joy,
and open heart to God and goodness, which else they might attain. It is
strange how some Christians dare give place to their corruption in this kind:
yea, grow to think it their praise. Some are sour and crabbed, (as it were)
steeped in vinegar, so censorious and uncharitable, that none can escape their
censure: some so suspicious and jealous, that none can live by them: some so
sullen, that no estate can content them: some so selfe-loving, that none can
please them, save they who humor them in all their passions and pangs: some so
implacable, that if once offended, they can scarce look a man in the face to
rights: some so eager in revenge, that nothing else will content them: some
always stirring up debate between neighbors, so busy in Law, and in matters
of contention, as if they were Salamanders, always living in the fire: others so
eager in spirit, so lowering and sad, that (though they break not out with
others, yet) they never agree with themselves, nor walk with a cheerful
countenance. Why? Save that the sweet oil of gladness has not suppled them,
nor the peace of God (which passes understanding) has possessed and
stablished them. Oh friends! How dare you dally, and venture to abide thus? How
sad a reflex will this be upon your deathbeds? You will say, It does often
trouble you, and you are grieved for your waspishnesse and anger. But what
then? Is that an amends to God, to vomit up that at an odd time, which
afterward you do return to and lick up ugaine, without sense or feeling? Oh!
it were meet for you, to be so heart-sick of it, that you might for ever abhor
it. Christians should mark the secret creepings of such poison, how it dogs
them, chokes humbleness and cheerfulness in them, and makes them walk
unfruitfully and unsetledly, from time to time. And, say that sometimes you
fast and pray, and vow and covenant against them; yet if the corruption and
your souls are so incorporated together, that when it steals in upon you with
the old sweetness, it inchants you, and disables you from resistance, what
cause of boasting have you? None surely, nor shall, till the Lord come between
you and home, with the spirit of true remorce and sorrow for it, unto
repentance never to be repented of: and till your beloved lust become your
bane: See and apply that in James 4.1.2.3.
till the Lord in secret chasten your spirits, that you can sit and bemoane
your selves with Ephraim, and say: O Lord, what is the cause that I am so
enthralled to this stout and unbroken heart! Alas! No word of thine, no
patience of thine can enter, while this sin harden me. I am not fit to be
wrought upon by any cross, blessing, meditation or ordinance. All washes away
as it comes. Oh! shall I never be rid of this misery, this chain? When, Lord
will it once be? Who shall break off the slavish custom of my heart this way,
and set me at liberty? Oh! if once it may be, I shall even account it as a
second resurrection from the dead. Oh! set such a guard over me, that I may
never be surprised any more with it. Let me think the Devil not far off,
when I see this messenger of his at my heels, so to dog and buffet me. Let
thy Spirit from above, which is pure, peaceable, Jam. 3.i5.
long-suffering, merciful and patient, humble and loving, deliver me from this
spirit of envy, sullenness, Self and her fruits, most earthly, sensual and
Divellish. But as for nourishing this naughtiness in your selves, and
stiffness in it, to keep your fashions, attires, to speak your own words, as
if no Lord should control you: Oh! how horrible is it? Shall God bear your
name, and be as your husband; but you will eat your own bread, wear your
own cloth, and be at your own hand and finding (as those women in Esaias speak?
Esaias 4.1.
) Then surely you must be content to live upon your own wages, and so l^e
down in sorrow.

Terror.
to all openly proud, scornful and profane persons, who proclaim their sin
as Sodom, whose hearts cast up mire and dirt like the raging Sea, Esaias 57.21.
Those carry themselves aloft, and live at the full height of a big and high
heart, without any sense of their danger. Such as maintain this rotten
principle, It is good to be some body in the view of men; because as a man
thinks of himself, Jam. 4.7.
so will others think of us. Which as it is false (for God resists the proud,
and crosses them) so what if it were true? Surely, so long as my doctrine
continues good, there is no possibility for thee to obtain grace and
obedience while this spirit lasts. Naaman was a great one, Proud hearts
ter^ified by Gods resisting.
and might as much stand upon it as thou: yet till his stomach came down, the
word of his cure was not believed, he was a Leper still, so art thou, and
worse in Gods sight, so long as thy lofty heart dwells in thee, thy high
thoughts of thy self cause mean thoughts of God, contempt of his word, and
disdain to be a captive to Gods truths. Nay, it takes away all capablenesse,
judicious discerning, remembering, affecting, applying or practicing of any
thing thou hear, save to pride thy self in thy knowledge, and to strengthen
thy self in a rotten peace. Jerem. 48.11.29.
Alas! as the Prophet describes Moab, that she was very proud, she had not
been rolled about, and therefore was settled upon her dregs, her sent still
abode in her: so is it with every proud wretch, his own savor is in him still,
he is as he was, as you leave him so you find him, a proud wretch, rolling up
and down upon his own hinges. As for suspecting all is not well, or laying any
thing to heart, he is far from it. No wind shakes his corn: he applauds
himself in his own conceit, and says, I shall have peace though I walk in
the stubbornness of mine own heart. Mark how careless pride is. But what
comes of it? Does he meet with any grace in such a condition. No, the Lord will
set himself against such a sturdy wretch, Deuteronomy. 29.15.16
break his iron sinew, and the staff of his pride: the wrath of God shall
smoke against him, and resist him, till his heart feel it, and desist from
fighting against God.

And surely, if such find small favor with men, save from teeth outward, they
find much less from God. Should not this scare every such man out of
himself, saying, The more I magnify my self, the more God vilifies me, I see
it hard to curb pride, but it is harder to endure wrath, and to be cast out
from God, who counts none precious but such as count themselves vile. Beware of
it then, the sin it self is sad; but that it should be the canker that should
eat out the foyson of grace, and destroy all my hearings, and make my
devotions as odious as the cutting off a dogs neck, Oh! this consequence of
the sin, is worse then the sin it self. Many sins are worse in their fruit
then in themselves, and this is one of them. And to touch the particular of
Naamans sin here, which was blustering at the Prophet, and cavilling against
his message, we see here, how God abased this spirit in him ere ever he could
obey. But when that was gone, then the other succeeded. And so I say to all
proud cavillers, The terror urged.
here is terror for them: While cavilling lasts, no grace enters. Look upon
this pattern all you cavillers, and see God branding you with a graceless
heart, as long as this humor lasts. I have noted the end of such, as have
vented their pride in cavilling and picking knots with the Minister and his
doctrine: such as cannot receive or stand under a solid and sad truth, with a
meek heart, and I never saw such come to good; God has betrayed them to shame
and ill report: Their knowledge has puffed them up, They have some grown
Alehouse-Keepers and haunters, embraced the world, fallen out with their
brethren, and forsaken their fellowship, been foully tainted with gross evils,
uncleannes, the world, contention, censoriousnesse, uncharitableness. Some
have proved Brownists, Poynters, Schismatickes and Libertines, and lost their
honor with God and his Church. If there be any drop of humility in you, let
this affright you, lay down the bucklers; and as you have been proud, so now
be humble. Say not with Gardener, I revolted with Peter, but I have not
repented with Peter: but with this poor Proselyte Naaman, I have been as stout
and proud as he, and now behold I repent and am humble as he: Lord give me
grace as thou gave him. Oh! the servants of Naaman had little cause to repent
them of their counsel, when such an effect followed: Neither should I of mine,
if I could prevail as they did. God grant you and me this grace.

The fourth and last use shall be exhortation to us all, Exhortation and
comfort to humble souls.
to embrace this and mercy follows her at the heels. Self-denial and an
humbled soul, are special ingredients of this receipt of Mercy, and faith to
apply it. When the soul is full of her own, it is empty of Gods: he counts
all grace put into such a soul, as water put into a top-full vessel. The
empty, the bare the naked and poor soul, is that wherewith he will betrust
his grace: J^mes 4.7.
be earnest for this, as you would have faith herself. 1 Cor. 25.
As Paul calls death the last enemy which must be subdued ere we have glory:
so may I say, that a proud selfe-sufficient heart is the last enemy which must
be cast out, ere we can come by any grace. It is the last brat of the house
which goes out. The only vice which keeps possession for old Adam to keep out
Christ. When we see Gods tokens, Simile.
we count the plague incurable: and when mercy cannot conquer a rebellious
heart, it is past all remedy. And contrariwise here is comfort to all such as
are thus tamed by God, they are brought to the bent of his bow; I may say to
thee as Martha to her sister Mary, Thy Lord is come, and calls for thee: And
as our Lord Jesus himself said to Zacheus, This day salvation is come unto thy
house, in as much as thou art become a son of Abraham. Luke 19.7.
Thy Regions are white unto harvest, thy staff stands next door to grace, and
thy redemption is near, nay the day of the Lords redeemed is come, Esaias 63.4.
Oh! thou may lift up thy heart unto God, and say, How is it that the
Messenger of the Lord is come unto me! Lo, on the sudden I feel mine heart so
strangely thawed and teachable over it was wont to be, that I can give no
reason of, except the Lord means to save me. I therefore interpret it as a
sign of favor: yea, thou may be sure of it, and therefore repent thee not
of all thy pains, which thou have taken for it, seeing thy reward will
abundantly answer thy travail. And so much briefly may serve to have said of
this use and of the Doctrine.

The chief doctrine of the whole verse opened at large.
I hasten now to the point it self of Naamans obedience: The greatest and
chiefest of all other which I aimed at in the handling of this Scripture. Then
(says the Text) he went and washed himself seven times in Jorden. What was
this? A common act as others were? No other then the former, to come out of
Aram, to go to the King of Israel, or to stand at the door of Elisha? Oh yes,
those were his own, this is Gods: those he made no bones of, but this was that
which had made all this pudder: it was the Lords own way and device for the
trial of his faith in the miracle, and the subduing his heart to the naked
obedience unto him. And lo, now his stomach is come down, the let is removed,
and therefore he does as he is bidden, and goes and washes seven times in
Jorden. Mark the point, it will cost us some time to handle. Every soul
within the condition of mercy, ought to believe.
within the condition of the promise, may and ought to cast himself upon it,
obey the command of God, and believe. For the proof of the point, it will be
expedient that first we clear the ground of it, out of the example of Naaman
in general; and then by some evident texts of Scriptures, with a brief reason
or two. And having so done, we will proceed to the explication of the contents
of the Doctrine. For the general correspondence of Naamans case with this
point, some may doubt, how it may be said of an Heathen, in the point of curing
of a bodily disease, how he can be said to be under the condition of a
promise, and so to believe? For answer Naaman, may not be proportionable unto
those which are wrought in such as are converted to God. That Naaman was truly
brought home to God, besides the sequel in the Chapter, me thinks this is
sufficient, that not only God would choose him as the only Leper whom Elisha
should heal: but also would order the circumstances thereof in so set and
solemn a manner, that all men may behold a gracious work as well as a
miraculous. For I demand, what should need so many interruptions and defeats in
the miracle, such a trying and searching of a man's Spirit, and such a purposed
drawing of him, to see more then an external hand in the thing, except more
then an outward cure had been intended by God? A very small and short matter
might else have been made of it, if the Prophet had been used only to heal
his body: and (as Naaman thought) the bare coming out, and laying his hand on,
or speaking two or three words, might have served the turn. But now the
Prophet must not be seen, Naamans weakness must be discovered to himself;
and hence it appears, that the Lord would have his Spirit and Soul acquainted
with God as well as his outward man. So much for the answer of the doubt: And
so I come to show what conditions were wrought in Naaman before his cure, and
then how his obedience must be an act of faith, issuing thereupon: respiting
proofs and reasons till the Doctrine be suited to the Text; till which it will
not be seasonable to settle it upon her bottom. But this we will refer to
the next Lecture.

THE SEVENTEENTH LECTVRE upon the fourteenth VERSE.
VERSE XIV. Then he went down and washed himself seven times in Jorden, and
his flesh came again as the flesh of a little child, and he was clean.


I Having showed you (beloved) in the end of the former Exercise, that Naamans
example may well yield us the consideration under our hand, referred the
particulars unto this Sermon. Naaman then may be conceived under the condition
of mercy in the purpose of God sundry ways: In respect of the order that God
took with him, both in preventing him, and assisting him before the cure. In
the former we saw how the Lord by a bodily disease made him in the general
case of one needing ease: for he abased his person (in the midst of sundry
other happinesses) with the noisome disease of Leprosy, which was in it self
a mavelous yoke, and (as God guided it) a very pinching one unto him,
burdening him more then in a common manner. How Naaman was under the condition
of of cure.
If this had not been, the first ground of the work had been removed. Next
hereto, the Lord prevents him very sweetly with the news of one who (in such a
desperate case) is credibly reported unto him, to be a man like to heal him,
and this comes to him by a special providence appointing a skirmish between
Aram and Israel, wherein a Damsel might be taken prisoner, and such a one
(one of a thousand) who had taken notice of Elish^'s worth in this kind: and
this being by Naaman apprehended, took off utter despair of incurablenesse,
and put him into some hope of a possible cure. Thirdly, hereupon he slackens no
time, but addresses himself in the best manner, to use the most apt and likely
means for the commending of his business to the Prophet, and for the bringing
of him to the speech of the Prophet, having (no doubt) a special desire to
obtain that really, whereof he saw possibility before. Fourthly, by his
travel and furnishing himself with gifts, attendance, coming to the King of
Israel with his message, (wherein he was greatly defeated) he is by the Lord so
mercifully assisted, that he ceased not till by the Prophets own intimation,
and further light and assurance not only of a possible, but also of a likely
cure, he comes to the Prophets own house, and stands there to receive his
direction: Which showed how restless this hope of his made him, and what
singular estimation was bred in him of the Prophet. Fifthly, he standing at the
Prophets courtesy, hearing the errand, is marvellously offended at it, as too
slow and leasurely for his hasty spirit; and bewrayes thereupon what a deal of
scurfe lay within, to cavil against it, and to break off his former hopes and
likings, unto an utter distaste and rebellion against the way of God, with a
furious resolution to give over, because he neither could speak with the
Prophet, nor brook his direction: which yet was all by God sweetly governed
so, that being upon this tickle point, yet was he not suffered to depart and
go out of Gods blessing into his own warm Sun, and to sink in his own
carnal self-love: but stronglier assisted then ever, and set upon by such
powerful persuasions to obey the Prophets counsel, as (although very unlike
to prevail with such a spirit) yet wrought out self-love and pride, and made
his spirit, at the last to come down and submit thereto most readily. And
these were the passages of Gods prevention and assistance. Now for the
perfecting work of God, it is most clear in this verse, wherein, his heart
being humbled, he assents to the Prophet both commanding and promising: and (as
a man in a fit condition for the purpose) does that which before he was very
unfit for, obeyes, believes, goes down and washes himself in Jorden.

Thus having made way to the point collected hence, Proofs of the Doctrine.
I proceed to prove the truth thereof by Scripture; which is not more fertile
in any one thing then in proving of this. For although the words of [condition
of the promise] be not in the Scripture, in terms; yet are they equivalently
and in effect everywhere in the word both in the Old and New Testament. As,
when our Savior says, Luke 5.31.32
I came not to call the righteous, but the sinners to repentance: And, the
whole have no need of the Physician, but the sick: not stomack-sick, who can
ease themselves by vomiting, but the heart-sicke; and not only so neither, but
those that are so deadly sick, as no other Physician can heal. I am no
Physician for fees, but in mere mercy, when no mercenary one can help, then
for mere pity, and to save life, I will help: rather then a soul should
miscary, and rather for the honor of my skill, and mercy, Esa. 55.1.
then for gain (for I take neither money nor price for my cure) I will heal
him, Esaias 57.17. Esa. 57.17.
Mark upon what terms and conditions Christ cures: even as Jorden cured
Naaman, when Abana and Pharphar were out of date, and himself at a plunge: so,
when a sinner is such in his own sense, (all are so, but yet in their element,
as a fish in the water, feeling no weight of it) feels it, is convinced of it,
and near to execution, for ought is in himself. What else save this
condition, is employed in all those Parables of the lost sheep, lost groat, Luke
15 4.8.11. Matthew. 15.24.
prodigal Son? Those that were never lost, always found, always with their
father, no fatherless children are excluded out of this number. Why must that
son spend all, try the hard world, be forlorn and forsaken, ere he knew the
true worth of a father, ere his father comes out to kiss him, to put on all
those abiliments upon him, to kill the fat Calf to welcome him? Why did he not
so to his other good Son, who was always with him, and therefore needed no Kid
nor Calfe? Because he was always well, and therefore it had been ridiculous so
to express himself to him, he would have thought his father a fool in so
doing. Thus Hosee expresses the Condition, Hosee 13.3.
Ashur shall not save us, we will not ride upon horses. Why? It was no course
to thrive: But with thee the fatherless find mercy. Why? Because it is Gods
condition and qualification of such as he will save. So Esaias 57.16.17. I am
high and holy, but I look down, and pick out some above others, to make my
favorites. Esaias 28.9.
Who are they? The humble ones, to revive the contrite ones; and what will he
do to such? He will create the fruit of the lips (which is faith, and
thereby) peace, to the near and to the far off, and restore comfort to their
mourners. So elsewhere, I will power water upon the thirsty grounds, Esaias 44.3.
and thirsty lands, such as are scorcht and gape for my raines to refresh them.
Again, whom shall I teach wisdom? To whom shall I give instruction? Not to
all, but to such as are under the condition of it, humble, trembling ones, and
weaned from the breasts, fools and Idiots. Small credit is to be got by such
as have more wisdom then seven men besides, such as are full of it, but to
make a fool wise, is somewhat worth. How often does the Lord Jesus in one
Chapter urge this Condition? Blessed are the poor in spirit, Mat. 5.3.4.5.
the hungry after righteousness, the meek in heart. Theirs is the Kingdom,
they shall be satisfied, and the like. Why not others? Do not they want it?
Yes: but they need it not, it were ill bestowed. The Kingdom of God is like to
a Merchant, Mat. 13.43.44
who sought a Pearl of price; which having found, he weighed the worth of it:
he hid it; he went and sold all his real estate, and bought it. Every one
could not so value it, venture all upon it. Jam. 4.7.8.
Submit your selves under the mighty hand of God (says James.) And what then?
When you are down, the Lord will raise you up. Those that be raised already,
care not for this preferment. And to finish proofs, what means the holy
Ghost, by describing all converts by this condition? what went before the
conversion of those murderers of the Lord of life? They were convinced of their
bloody malice, and of the mercy of Christ, who was willing to save them that
slew him; Act. 2.37.
and then they were pricked in heart. What then? Men and brethren, what shall
we do? What made their bowels earne, and made them glad to learn of the
Apostles? The same grace that made them humble. What caused the Iaylor to come
leaping in to Paul and Silas, whom he had whipped and wronged? His heart was
broke to see the mercy which God showed him, Act. 14.
and in the keeping in of the Prisoners to save his soul. So much for proofs.

but still remain incorrigible, impenitent, secure, carnal, and in their
sins. If others were (in Gods ordinary way) and also in their own
disposition (and frame) capable and meet for mercy, others might as well
partake it. We call not Gods prerogative into question, or what he can do, but
what he will do in his revealed will: Now this being put, then secondly I
add, All such ought to embrace it by the mean which God has appointed for
that end; and that is by believing, as the holy Ghost in all places urges,
Acts 13.38. Ephesians. 2.8. Ioh. 3. end. Mark. the 16. toward the end: and a
thousand more. For why? Otherwise it might be, that Gods election might be
frustrate, and his ends defeated: For by this condition of grace, they are
called to the means: Therefore if the end of calling should not follow in
faith, God might possibly lose his ends, which neither Devil, and gates of
hell, world, and envy of wicked, or corruption of man can ever effect.

Else God should be the God of disorder: For why? The condition

These persons thus qualified, must and ought to believe, because it

Because the promise of believing contains in it the effect of all the

If these thus qualified might not believe, then none might (for none

Lastly, the Lord conferring Baptism before hand to infants (only Seal
before hand to ratify it; which Seal can have no other realnesse it, save in
relation to his faithful meaning, to effect and write that Covenant in their
hearts, which he has before hand sealed unto them. And so much for Reasons.

Now I should come to the Use: But because some questions do here arise,
first, about this Condition, of what nature it is, and wherein the steps of it
stand. And secondly, about Faith, what I mean by it, and how it is wrought.
Thirdly, why I call it Obedience and Consent: therefore I will a little lend my
help for explication hereof, and so come to the uses. For the first, concerning
the nature of this Condition of Faith, my purpose is not to bring in large
discourse into a Sermon, nor to satisfy cavillers about it: I have already
done that (so far as I think their mouths worth the stopping) in another
place. In my Catechism, Part. 2. Artic. 7.
That which here I will add, shall be but this; That whereas many carp at the
condition of faith, who yet understand it not, let them know, there is a
twofold condition; the one procuring, the other signifying. Condition of faith
is no procuring, but only a signifying thing.
Procuring, deserving, and working conditions, we abhor; but signifying
conditions we allow: not as our own works, but as Gods previous dispositions
in us, signifying what he has wrought in us, and thereby evidencing what he
further intends to work. And hereof there is great use: both because, as sin
was not brought to ripeness all at once in us, so neither is grace: Also,
because the work of it being but leasurely and graduall, hardly perceived, we
should not be privy to it, if God did not point at it by sensible and
discernable affections, as of hope, desire, sorrow: but the work would seem
to lie dead in us. Lastly also, because the case so stands with some converts,
who are called out of a profane estate; that if their turning should be all at
once, and on the sudden, they would fear lest it would prove but some violent
pang and extremity in them, not like to hold long. But when they can perceive a
sensible change by certain steps successively, Why this condition is requred.
they discern a more divine hand therein, and are much stayed and satisfied.
Add to these, That the Lord in this case does not so much look at his own
power, what he could do at once; as at the disposition of such as he works
upon, whose narrow necks cannot receive much at once, but by drop-meale: and
all, through that unspiritualnesse of our heart, not easily capable of holy
things. A crooked cry some does not look upward with more difficulty, then our
frame receives grace.

The worker of it.
Secondly, take knowledge of this, that the immediate worker of these
preparations, is twofold: The former is the convincing power of the Law: the
latter is the succeeding conviction of the Gospel. And touching this latter,
know that although the same thing works faith it self, which works this
condition, yet by a diverse measure of assistance, according to the capacity of
the Soul: which at the first is drawn to see so much light in the promise, as
winnes affections to the same, for that excellent pretiousnesse, gain and
happiness which it hears to be offered therein. But in time it sees not only
so much, but more closely also applies it self thereto by faith and affiance
of soul, as a thing in special offered and belonging unto herself; yet both
are wrought by the Gospel, and neither comes from our selves: both proceed from
free grace, so that we must not conceive, that the Lord does offer Christ to
such as can work their own hearts to sorrow, desire, or esteem of grace, (for
what is so contrary to us as these things?) But the Lord in working them upon
us by the Spirit of Grace, in a weaker degree at the first, and unshapen, does
at last by the same Spirit bring them to a more full and formed degree, in such
as are to be saved. Thirdly note, It is a middle thing between mere
corruption and grace.
that this preparation stands in a middle nature between mere corruption and
the gift of grace it self, peculiarly so called: Preparation is neither to be
called mere Nature, nor any thing which nature alone can afford: nor yet can
it be called Faith; but a previous supernatural work, which in them that
perish by suffering it to decay, comes to nothing: but in the elect, ends in
effectual calling and believing the promise. Fourthly note, that yet this must
not be trusted unto, as if it were in it self sufficient to make the soul
happy: for still, that which the poor sinner must cling and cleave to, for her
pardon and peace, must be that only blood of Christ, the sati faction of
justice. She must lay hold on this, and make it her own, by faith in the
promise. Thus much for the present comes in my mind, to tell you, touching the
nature of this Condition. Now I come to the steps of it.

The first property issues from the convincing power of the moral Law, It is
not to be trusted to alone. The steps of it: 1. Loading by the Law. A Laden
soul what it is, and the marks of it.
working the conscience to be laden through the spirit of bondage. To speak
much of any thing in special, would spend more time then such an Audience and
exercise admits. I must take these things for granted, having taught you them
in my course of catechizing. One thing I will add, (which there I omitted)
viz. to lay you down some marks, whereby you may discern this condition of
the Law. All that are laden, lost, deadly heart-sick of the Law, are bidden to
come to Christ: But who are these? 1. Such as cannot look back into their
former estate of jollity, liberty, and life in sin uncontrolled, without
wondering and detestation of themselves. 2. A laden soul feels her self
discharged quite from those false shoulders that suffered not so intolerable a
load of sin, and curse to be felt, but kept the soul in a rotten peace. The
Law abandons ease, security, boldness, peace, pleasures, mirth and company,
ignorance and self-conceit, which would not endure sin to settle upon her
right subject* and lets in a vein of vengeance in stead of the vein of vanity
and carelessness. 3. The soul in this case fares as a thing oppressed with
that which exceeds it. As in all natural excesses, there is either a weakening
or destroying of the Patient. If light or heat be too excessively offered to
the eye, or fire to the touch, they destroy both: So this wrath of God ceazing
excessively upon conscience, does spiritually kill it. 4. This loading is such
as exceeds all concealment, or biting it in by modesty, or patience; it must
vent it self, Act. 2. Men and bre^hren what shall we do? 5. It is glad to
hear of the least ease: not cavilling with the Instrument, but joying in it.
6. She confesses God might justly crush her in pieces, without any purpose to
redress her. 7. She walks for ever after, much more warily and tenderly
against sin, then such as never felt this load, though their knowledge be
greater. 8. This load is unto the soul, as a venomed Dart sticking to the
flesh, or a burden nailed to the shoulder; not possible to be pulled off, but the
more she struggles, the more it settles. 9. Other men's loads trouble her not so
much as her own: she has no leisure to jangle of them, having so much to do
at home. 10. Though God should ease her, she would not readily return to her
old vomit. 11. It is not such a load that crusheth a leg or an arm; but such
as oppresses the whole man in each faculty and member. 12. It is not such a
load neither as quite destroys; but the soul is sustained by God from utter
sinking, till she hear further. Thus much of the Legal.

The second work is from the Gospel.
Before any further preparation is wrought, the Lord ministers to the soul a
further light, and that is the Gospel, which brings news to the soul in such
an estate, of a possible remedy, through the grace of Christ. I must not insist
in things largely handled elsewhere; but take them for granted here: The sum
is, that the Lord in the view of that full satisfaction of the Lord Jesus,
offers full and free deliverance and ease to a soul thus laden, without any
equivocation or fraud: And withal discovers to her the most precious view of
all the good things of God purchased for her; though pardon immediately, yet
consequently all other, whereby she may be made perfectly happy, and rid of
her thraldom. And according to the souls measures in the revealing of this
light unto her, she comes more or less forward in those affections and
dispositions, which we call Evangelicall preparation: of which, there had
rather be a volume made then a Sermon; and (as elsewhere I have promised) I
intend a special Treatise of them, if God grant life and liberty: (at least of
so many of them as I have not already handled in other Treatises. Evangelicall
preparings either Negative or Positive.
) Now it shall be sufficient to point at them (this being the least part of
the Doctrine under our hand) and then I will come to the latter branch. This
Evangelicall preparation is of two sorts: The one negative, and of them I point
at these four: First, a stopping of the Soul from her old courses, and from
relapsing into them. Secondly, a great sorrow of heart for sin past. Thirdly, a
special aversation and abhorring for time to come. Fourthly, Self-denial.
The other sort of these I call positive; and here take these four also: First,
an hope raised up in the soul, which causes her to hold still on with God in
his way. Secondly, desire increasing more and more after mercy. Thirdly, an
high prizing of it, above all earthly treasure. Fourthly, restless diligence,
in use of all means, till her desire be accomplished with fainting under
delay. All these are the fruit of the Gospel, drawing the soul to be willing
to hearken after God, although as yet she cannot incorporate herself into the
promise, nor put Christ on as a garment made fit for her; yet by these she is
drawn to look toward him: And therefore to speak a word of each, not as I
named them, but in their order: First, I say, Such a soul is loath to give over
that little taste she has of him, nor can be pulled from her hearings,
duties, prayers and means, nor persuaded to revolt to her old vanities. Psalm.
85.4.
As David says, Such as hearken after God s mercy, return no more to folly.
Secondly, such an one, by the Gospel conceives an hope a far off, as it were
a glimpse of light through a cloud, that her estate is not quite forlorn:
whereupon the extremity of her former fears is much alayd, and she put out of
despair, into some expectation of better things, although (as in the twilight)
much mixture of old terrors remain not quite banished, as the Canaanites among
Israel, to teach them war, and to occupy them in combats. Thus was it with
those Ninevites, who by the instinct of mercy darted into them by the Lord
secretly, lifted up their heads a little toward hope of not perishing, and to
the musing upon the benefit of deliverance. The third is an holy compassion of
heart toward him whom the soul has pierced by sin, even the Lord of life,
who yet was well content to be murdered, lest his murderers should perish.
The due meditation whereof melts the soul into mavelous heaviness, that she
should seek his ruin, who sought her making. Not as mourning for his death
(for else she must have for ever been damned) but for her treachery against the
mercy of a Father, who cut off his Plea; and the love of a Savior who gave his
life for her. This makes her impotent in her mourning, and steeps her in gall
and wormwood, Zachar. 12.10.
as not able to utter indignation enough against her self for it. Fourthly,
yet as one borne down with the singularity of such mercy, and the fullness of
that price which is paid to justice for her sin, she is loath to let it pass
without a desire to partake it; yea, and an ardent affection after it, as one
that is famished for lack of bread or drink, can be satisfied with nothing
save that which it longs for, though she were offered treasures in stead of
it: yet she still cries with Rachel, Genesis 30.1.
Give me this, or else I dye. And fifthly, here she stoppes not, but warily
looks about her, that she bind not the hands of mercy from bestowing her
desire upon her, by her boldness and loosnesse of heart and life, and therefore
she is watchful to her self, lest in this her pursuit after mercy, she should
offend it any way, by her pride, frowardness, base words, passions, or
behaviors, worldliness, commonnesse of heart about her earthly lawful
business, loose hearing, forgetfulness, or the like. Sixthly, she is
mavelous restless in the applying of her self to all such means and
ordinances as might further her desires, and reveal unto her more light and
evidence of Christ; fearing lest by any defect of hers, and letting slip the
opportunities and seasons of grace, and stirring motions of the Spirit, she
might provoke the Spirit of grace to give her over to her own
unprofitablenesse: she tries all, as ascribing that honor to God, to choose
what he will work by: to these horns of the Altar she will cleave, and if
she must dye, she will dye there. Seventhly, the more she grows in
understanding of the way, and mystery of salvation by Christ, the more she
compares it with the best contents which this world in any kind did ever
present unto her; and finding them light in the balance, and far from being
what they seem, or performing what they promise: nay, although they could do
both, yet in comparison with mercy, she stamps them under her feet, esteeming
them all as dross and dung. Phil. 3.
Lastly, by this means she resolves fully in her last thoughts, to sell off
all whatsoever might seem precious unto her, lusts, liberties, virtues,
Religious duties, yea, that only stop of grace, the mixture of Self with
Christ, that so she might in the loss of all, make up a price of grace, that
is, that she may come with nothing, and make a price of no price, and so buy
the Pearl; till which purchase be made her own, she can have no peace: And this
purchase stands in her faith, which as an hand takes and accepts the seasin and
delivery of the Lord Jesus, given to her by the hand of him that surrenders him
unto her, by the promise. Touching the which act of faith, it remains that we
speak a little, having said of this preparation so much as for the present we
think meet.

Touching faith what it is, and how it is bred in the soul.
Concerning which, and first of the nature of it (so far as it is the act of
the soul obeying and yielding to a word of promise) I will say a little, as
may best suit the Text here under our hand. Naaman then (we see) overswayed by
his servants, does submit himself to the word of the Prophet, and he goes to
Jorden, and washes. Faith then (to tell you first in what it stands not) is
not properly an habit of assurance or certainty of pardon, through a personal
and particular appropriation of Christ to her self. Although asrance be never
without faith, yet assurance is not the proper act of Faith.
The original of this error proceeded (as many others have done) from heat of
confuting Papists, in their opposing of possibility of Assurance. That we
might the mo^e fully confute them, our first defenders would maintain, that
the nature of justifying and saving faith stood in assurance, which Tenet was
indeed more then a confutation: for although it is the portion of none save
believers to enjoy this assurance, yet neither is it the portion of all that
believe, to attain it (but only some special ones to whom it is granted)
neither is that assurance which such have, the formal act of their faith, but
rather an effect or co^sequent of the act of believing, and of an higher
measure then that is. For sure it is, the greater our feeling of assurance is,
the less our faith is. To show then what it is: It is such an act of the
soul, as upon good ground and warrant, casts her self upon the promise for
pardon and life. By [casting her selfe] can be meant no assurance within her
self, but a submission and resigning up of her self to the promise, in
respect of that power and truth of the Promiser who bids her come, and he will
ease her. This is a sure word, and has neither trick nor device in it, neither
hook nor crook, but is that which it imports, and cannot deceive: And this
sure word is the object which faith looks at: She looks not so much at the
assurance which she feels within her self; but at the certain and
infallible truth of the Word without. As for her self, she knows she is
full of doubts, fears and unsetlednesse; but so is not the Word of God, nor
himself that speaks in it. She even in the very act of believing, is full of
strife and struggling. For the making of this plain, consider faith in all her
passages, and you shall see it.

revolt to thy former pleasure in sin, for in that course there is no hope,
thou art then in a desperate case: Proceed rather and go to the promise, for
thereby its possible thou may find some redress. What does the soul in this
strife? She compares the argument of the word, with the counsel of the flesh,
and finds it better then this; because it is far more safe to choose a
possible redress of misery, then to fall upon the assured pykes of certain woe
and despair. Here we see a fight, but no victory, no assurance; only that rest
which the soul has, is not from any thing she feels within herself, but
without in the word.

Secondly, here comes in a second doubt, and therein Satan tells John, thee
Thomas, etc. But he has said, such and such I will pardon, so and so
qualified: Now she assumes this qualification to herself, and therefore she
concludes, that to her it belongs. This is another word of the Spirit, which
still draws on a poor soul to be willing to believe.

But now comes the nearest work of the Spirit in the word, and How shall I
know in special its mine own?
Perhaps it may belong unto such a one as I am, but many things belong to men,
which yet they are by one means or other defeated of: How shall I know that
God will give it me in special, and grant me the gift of faith to believe it?
In this, the word grapples closely and nearly with the soul, and brings it to
the strict point of believing, and tells the soul, That all to whom the
promise of pardon and life belongs by the allowance of God, he will most
undoubtedly bring it to pass for them, and confer it upon them; yea and give
them faith to cast themselves upon it. For in saying, Come unto me all you
laden ones, and I will ease you, he means not only you may, but you must
come; not only it belongs unto you to come, but I will, in my calling you,
enable you to come, and put strength and power into you to come, that is to
believe, and by believing, ease you. By this, the word setles the soul upon
the promise, as being that which it seems; she sees God is willing she should
believe, and therefore will confer it on her: And in so doing, the Spirit
causes the heart which is willing, to become effectually willing, that is,
takes away all fear of defeating, and tells her, she shall speed of her
desire; and therefore now she dares venture, and cast herself upon the
promise, and if she perish so, she is content, for she dares jeopard her soul
upon Gods Truth. Now we see this casting and venturing upon the promise is the
best of all these three acts of the word; and yet here is no assurance, for the
soul, in respect of herself, is nevertheless full of doubting; all her
bottom is this last word of the promiser, that he will effect that in the
soul which he has promised: By all these I infer, The act of faith is no
assurance within, but an evidence without, resting upon the word; which word
the more evident it is made to the soul, the better and stronger is the act of
believing, but the best of these is no assurance. Ephesians. 1. Romans 8.
but that stands upon another bottom, and that is the immediate evidence of
the Spirit in the conscience of one who is already a believer, making her to
know that she believes. This is not by the word directly, but the Spirit of the
word which reflects that into the heart with knowledge and feeling, which
before she only had by the fidelity of the Promiser. But, this (as I said) is
not faith, (for then none should have faith who want this, which God forbid;)
but an effect of faith in some special persons, and not all that believe. Thus
much for the former question. Now for the latter, viz. how faith is wrought.

The sufficiency of a promise, is the object of faith.
You see brethren it is evident, that the nature and work of saving faith
stands not in any fullness of sails, or reflex knowledge and overpowring
sweetness of persuasion: But (as I said) in a grounded casting herself upon
the word: For by this only mean faith is wrought. And I call it (grounded)
because so weighty a matter as the resting and casting of the soul upon a
thing, requires, that the thing be a foundation of great warrant to bear up a
soul from revolting again. Nay, when the conscience is come thus far, as to
fasten upon the word, Oh! she has thousand objections against the sincere
meaning of God in his word. Hence it is, that the word is so full of places
wherein this sufficiency of the promise to rest upon is urged: Sometime the
Lord contests with them that quarrel against it. Is the Arm of the Lord
shortened? Has he said it, and it shall not come to pass? Hezechia tells us,
Esaias 38.15. He has spoken himself unto us, and he has done it, Heb. 13.5.
For he has said, I will not fail, nor forsake thee. So again, The mouth of
the Lord has spoken it. Among men its called an unsure argument to prove a
thing by authority, because men are liars further then their truth will speak
for them: And yet some great persons have born such sway and authority in the
hearts of their Disciples, that their bare word has carried assent with it.
But to be sure, this is a sure argument God has said it, therefore it is true,
as in all the words which ever went out of his mouth, so especially in his
promise, Phil. 4. 2 Cor. 1.20.
that above all, pleads certainty. Faithful is he who has promised, who also
will effect it. And Elizabeth, Luke 1. tells Mary, There shall be a
performance from the Lord to his handmaid of that which he has promised. All
the promises of God are Yea and Amen in Christ Jesus, with a thousand more. But
general texts satisfy not a scrupulous soul in so weighty a matter; and
flesh is ready to say, what sign from heaven show thou us of these things?
We would see some sight, or hear some voice to confirm the word. Ah poor
soul! I may say of thee as the Scripture speaks of Samuel, 1 Samuel 2.
thus did he ere he knew the Lord; so these are thy crotchets ere thou knew
the promise: But afterward thou saw more in that alone, then in all other
ways; for the Promise and Testament of Christ, 1 Samuel 2.
is written with the finger of God by the pen of the Spirit dipped in the blood
of God. But (to utter what God is willing to have spoken) I must say that he
who might claim this absolute power over the soul to be believed upon his
bare word: yet, seeing the sensuality of man, and our woeful distrust, is
willing to allow us all the means of strengthening our souls in his promise,
both by such seals and witnesses as confirm it, yea Miracles, Sacraments, and
oaths, annexed to his Covenant, and especially by those properties of a
promise, and of him that makes it; and all to conclude and set the controversy
beyond questions. And by this mean faith is wrought.

In the which course of God, appears his great love and wisdom; for herein
he has endeavored to answer all our doubts and carnal objections; we are
not so ready to cast in fears, as he by this mean casts them out. For why, O
poor soul do thou suspect the Lord will not satisfy thy desire in giving
thee Christ? Either it must be because there is no ground or cause for which
he should do it, The ingredients of a promise.
and this is answered by his freedom and graciousnesse: Or he is a God just
and revenging sin, but this is taken away by satisfaction made and taken: Or
because he cannot, and this is false, for his power is omnipotent: Or because
he meant it not eternally: But the promise is from election: Or wills not in
time: But that he does, for he invites and beseeches us, Or he is not wise
enough to compass it: But that he is, for he is wisdom: Or he is untrue in
his performance: But that he is not, for he is faithful: Or he may change, but
that he cannot, for he is immutable: So that let us but set perfection of
nature and grace in him, against that which is in us, our distrust and
unbeleefe, and we shall see every sore has his plaster, each distemper has
his medicine. And all these are included in a promise: So that whosoever has
the gift of ripping up a promise aright should behold all Gods riches in it:
But is a great skill, and the promises of God lie in the Scriptures, as gold
and jewels lie deep in the earth, at least in the field of the Gospel, and we
are not aware of them, nor acquainted with that fullness and perfection which
is in them: And many confess one of these, who will not acknowledge another;
grace comes in drop by drop, else, we should look upon a promise with other
eyes, then (for the most part) the most of us do. A word or two of each of the
branches.

For the first: Freedom: true it is, 1. Freedom.
there is nothing in thee to procure such mercy; but he is of his own accord,
for his own sake, Esaias 63.4.
cut off his plea, and thought thoughts of peace, he has done it for the glory
of his grace, even because he will show mercy; it better pleased him so to do,
then the first creating of Adam; for now by his fall, he adds mercy to
goodness, and magnifies himself in many attributes more, Justice, Wisdom and
Truth: He seeks nothing else, save the winning and binding of the soul to him
for ever in covenant which else so treacherous an heart as ours would never
have yielded to: So that thou may well trust him in this respect, if thy
faith can but get in with the Lord; for if he do it not for thine ends, yet for
his own he will, so that thou can set thine own under his; so that thy best
prop will be, the preciousnesse of his glory, which he will not give to
another, and therefore thy unbeleefe shall not rob him of it. 2. Strength.


Secondly, satisfaction is made and taken; therefore he has ground enough to
settle his graciousnesse upon. Justice could not cry it down by revenge, rather
then it should, a satisfaction made by the blood of an only Son, the blood
of God and man shall stop the cry of it: upon this, both made by Christ, and
taken by our Judge, lo, he turns wrath into mercy, and his bosom is set open
and unlocked as a fountain, 2 Cor. 5.20, 21. He offers us reconciliation,
because he has made him sin, and curse, who knew none, that we might be
his righteousness. And this is called the Lords strength, Esaias 27.4. that is
the bottom whereupon mercy maintains herself against all quarrel of
justice, and this has taken away the dint of it, so that he truly professes,
anger is not in me; therefore come in, not to an enemy, 3. Omnipotence.
but to a father, fear not.

Thirdly, he is omnipotent: He can do what he will: His power ushers and
attends his love as an handmaid, Esaias 57.14. The high and lofty one who
inhabiteth eternity, yet looks down, that he may be strong with the humble
and contrite ones. His power is no crushing power, save of our enemies, and all
that hate us: But a releeving power, an outstretched arm of salvation; Not to
destroy, but to build up, Esaias 63.1. He that comes from Edom, dyed red with
the treading of the winepresse of wrath, is glorious in his apparel, travells
in the greatness of his strength, and is mighty to save: Be the thing never so
difficult to us, with him nothing is impossible. Can the Lord (say they) spread
a table in the wilderness? The answer is, can he not? What is it which he
cannot do? Except it be to deny himself, and that, nothing, no not thy
unbeleefe can bring him unto. This power of God cannot be severed from the
former satisfaction.

4. Eternity. Prove. 22.8.
Fourthly, he meant it from eternity (as I said in the first of these) he set
down with himself the frame and way of his own grace, long before Adam was,
or sinned, the disease was foreseen, the remedy fore provided: Its a secret
which lies deep and hidden in the bosom of eternity, though not far above us
in point of participation in this life, yet in comprehension we must not look
to reach it here: We may cry out, O depth unsearchable, and past finding out!
But till we come to heaven, Romans 9. end.
and behold it in the face of God, being made one with him, we cannot gage it:
our happiness is, that it is really so great that we cannot.

5. Willingness.
Fifthly, he wills it most cordially in the revealing of it, for who shall
construe it otherwise, who hears how many sweet invitations, cords of
persuasion, arguments to enforce, terrors against despisers he uses? Esaias 55.1.
and 2. verses: Read that Chapter, and mark his offer, Come, all you that
thirst, drink freely: His contest verse 2. Why lay you out silver for no
bread? His compellation, Incline thine ear, hearken unto me and come, etc. He
that concludes not hence, that the Lord is willing to communicate his grace,
nay, takes thought lest it should not be accepted, and would rejoice if it
might; must needs call God a notorious dissembler, which were hellish
sacrilege: And this a main point for all who confess Gods power and are
convict, yet are not so of his will. If thou will thou can heal me. Luke
5.12. 1 Timothy 1.17.


Sixthly, he is Wisdom it self. 6. Wisdom.
When the Apostle had spoken of this mystery, he concludes, Now to the only
wise God be honor, etc. Why so wise? Because of all other ways he thought
this the best; he would in the best of his counsels find out no other, nay
could not find out any so good as this; for then, who is only wise, would. And
the like I may say of the manner of publishing of it: By men like our selves,
of like infirmity, who might familiarly insinuate themselves: By a promise
(rather then by any ways of old, as visions, miracles, or voice of his
immediately) as more spiritual and effectual. So that the very Angell^ look
into it with admiration; how much more should we cry out, Oh the depth of the
riches of the wisdom of God! Heb. 1.1.
To all unbeleevers a stumbling block and foolishness, Romans 11.33.
but to us that believe, the wisdom and power of God.

Seventhly, his faithfulness. It is a principle. 7 Faithfulness. 1 Samuel 15.
Luke 1.
God is not a man that he should lie: The strength of Israel cannot lie: God
will not be mocked, therefore neither will he mock any. And therefore he has
bound it with an oath to Abraham and his seed, Surely in blessing I will bless
thee: Therefore Simeon says, To perform the covenant which he swear to our
father Abraham, that he would give us: They are called the sure mercies of
David, and Heb. 6.18. In the covenant and oath, add thereto the seal of his
Sacraments which speak to each soul in particular; in Baptism thus, I
baptize thee; in the Supper thus, The body of Jesus broken for thee, The blood
which was shed for thee. And as himself is, so is his word in each part,
Heaven and Earth shall pass, but not one jot or tittle thereof shall pass:
Above all, his promises cannot, which are his first borne, and carry with them
the birthright of his faithfulness; and therefore are a maine bottom to rest
upon.

Lastly, his unchangeablenesse. His nature is so, as Job says, Job 23.13. 8.
Unchangeablenesse.
he decrees and changes not: Far above all decrees of Medes and Persians.
Although we read often in Scripture, that it repented God of some things; yet of
this he says, I have sworn and will not repent, Thou shall be a Priest after
the order of Melchisedec. If four thousand years could have changed the mind
of God, Christ had never came. And look how the Lord was in the great promise,
Gal. 4.4.
so is he in all that follow thereupon. God willing to show to the heirs of
his Promise, the immutability of his Counsel, and again, that by two
immutable things, wherein it was impossible God should lie, we might have
strong consolation in our taking refuge. So that nothing can separate up from
his love, first nor last. Thus in these few particulars, I have showed what
bottomes faith may have to cleave to a word, and to cast herself upon it for
pardon and life. And so much for the first Question. Now I come to the second.
If any desire further light in this, let him consult with my book of
Sacraments in the trial of faith.

And that is, why faith is called Obedience and Consent? This question arises
from the ground of the Text: For Naaman (you see) being convinced by his
servants, Quest. Why faith is called Obedience and Consent?
obeyes and consents, and does as he is bidden. Esaias 1.19. If ye consent and
obey, you shall eat the good things of the land. Hence I call faith by these
names, only observe that one and the same faith in diverse relations, has
diverse names. As it relates to a command of the Gospel, so its obedience: As
to a persuasion, so it is consent. As Naaman then in one act, both obeyed the
command of the Prophet, and consented to the promise, or persuasion thereof; so
does faith obey God commanding, and consent to him promising or persuading.
This is the Commandment of God that you believe in his Son whom he has
sent. Luke 5.
As Peter to his Master, so faith says to this command, At thy command Lord I
will let down my net, although it seem never so absurd. As Abraham being
commanded by God, went down right, without looking at the absurdities or
objections: first, he would kill him, and then think of them, and drowned them
all in the charge: so does faith nakedly obey against all stops, and then casts
them upon him who set her on work. So again, she consents to his promise and
persuasions: Genesis 24.28.
Much like Rebecca having heard and seen Isaacs motion and tokens, answered I
will go with the man: She saw enough against it, but the persuasions of
Eliezer were more potent to overpoise her Spirit. So does faith, she has a
thousand cavills and disswasives; yet she breaks through and consents, and
then she hears no more of them. Thus Abraham hearing the promise of Isaac, is
said not to look at Sara's womb, which was now withered; but he looked
simply at the promise, and cast them upon God. So that this act of faith
casting herself upon the word, does both obey nakedly the word of command, and
consents to the promise, as Naaman here does to both these words of the
Prophet, Go wash, and be clean. So much also for this second question. Now it
is time to come to the

Terror for all such as live profanely, and yet think themselves within a
condition of mercy.
And first I will insist upon the condition of the promise: First then, here is
Terror for all such as are so far from the condition of faith, that they
utterly reject and cast it off: And of these there are two sorts: The one
profane, the other schismatickes. For the former, They please themselves with
this, That God bids all sorts indifferently be reconciled to God, 2 Cor. 5.20.
be they never so base and lewd, yet Christ came to save them if they can
believe; but as for this preparation, they cannot tell what it means, they
will let God alone with that, so they can believe they shall do well. And that
they hope they do, and had always a good faith to God, and a good meaning to
men: They confess they break out sometimes, as others do, but so long as
they cry God mercy, they shall do well; for they understand that Christ was a
loving Preacher, and kept company rather with the worser sort, then the better;
many Publicans and sinners, yea harlots, and was the sinners friend: And it was
not they who put him to death, but such as went for the devoutest and most
precise in those times: But oh ye deluded fools! Do you think that when
sin has incorporated herself so long, and like a fretting leprosy seated
it self in their bowels by long custom, that all on the sudden you should
be changed by the conceit of their believing? What? Matthew. 3.1.2.
Are there no steps of calling to be observed? Why then did John Baptist go
before Christ in the Spirit of Elija? Why did he batter down the rebellious
spirits of men? And why did he cast down every high hill, and fill every
valley? Why did he prepare a way for Christ in the souls of people, crying,
Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand? Why did he plow up men's fallow
grounds? And turn the spears of men into mattocks, and their swords into
plowshares? Oh take heed! I will not say, all your abstinence from sin can
save you; but your jollity and boldness in it may so harden you and increase
your chains through rebellion, Esaias 28.
that you shall find it an hard thing for mercy to pierce you! Therefore take
counsel; think not that mercy can save you in the midst of your lewdness,
when you come steaming out of the stews, or from your alebenches, or in the
midst of your sports and pleasures: What God can do, I ask not; its not safe
for you to trust to that; look what he will do: Therefore, let the point of
the spear of the Law pierce your sides, let it taw and break your fierce
spirits; go not on to sin against light: Defile not your consciences by
wilful rebellions, covetous, drunken, contentious, treacherous and voluptuous
courses: look not that God should meet you in your cursed way, when as he has
appointed you to meet him in his own way! Rather apply your selves to his word
to prepare your spirits for mercy: Repent, that is break off the custom and
jollity of your sins, the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand: This counsel to
suffer affliction, and the spirit of bondage, by the sense of guilt and wrath
would be an wholesome Schoolmaster to bring you to Christ.

Oh! A caveat. Ministers should gaster profane people out of their
profaneness and errors.
if you (my brethren the Ministers) would remit a little of your pleasures and
liberties, and apply your selves to a right order of preaching the Law and
Christ, and give them a view of the way of God to heaven, you might the more
hopefully leave them to God; else how should blind people, laden with sin,
stumble upon Gods preparations? Will they not rather abuse the grace of God,
and wax insolent in turning it into wantonness, making the remedy worse then
the disease? Oh! scare them out of their profaneness, corrasive their festred
sores, sow not pillowes, ferret them out of their dens, their starting-holes,
errors, excuses and covers of shame. Alas! they have a thousand of such tricks
to seduce them: Base conceits of the Ministry, the difficulty of faith, of
repenting, and forsaking their lusts, false opinion of the way of God of them
who profess it; they are poisoned so deeply by Satan and base customs in
sin, so leavened with a conceit, that either there is somewhat in themselves
to demerit God, their good meanings, setting of their good deeds against their
bad, and such like: or else thinking that Christ serves for no other end, save
to be their stalking-horse, Romans 4.
under whom they may sin securely, that grace may abound the more. They dream
that because the World is hard, therefore men are set here to hear the Word,
to keep them from theft, to hold them in awe, from outrages: and so, if they
can work, and pay their debts, bring up their charge, and get money, they are
well. Oh! labor to season them with this salt of preparation, that their faces
may be sharpened to look heavenward, and to break off their lewd ways, that
they may so come within the bounds of the Kingdom, and not live like Salvages
and Epicures, or worldlings, whose hope reaches no further then this life. So
much for this former sort. 2 Branch. Schismatickes, who reject all steps and
marks of conversion, cleaving to the spirit of free grace, confuted.


Again secondly, this is for reproof of such Sectaries as are lately risen up
among us in sundry places, who are so spiritual (forsooth) that the Doctrine
of the condition of faith, and casting of the Soul upon the promise, are
beggarly elements with them; they esteem them carnal matters and devices of
men's brain. They hold indeed there is use of a Law and Gospel to tame men
first, and then to comfort them: But in this Gospel they have found out a new
and more compendious course then others: For they say, there is a grace offered
in the promise by such a Spirit of freedom, that it will not endure any
bondage of the letter, nor suffer men to be puzzled and enthralled with these
conditions of a Promise, nor to tie themselves to a promise, and the marks or
signs of believing. This they count base, and unbeseeming such a Spirit of
free grace as they have found out: and therefore they scorn all those who busy
their thoughts about such works of preparations: and tell them, they will get
more comfort in an hour by the Spirit of this their free grace, then these
lazy and leasurely believers can do in seven years. But oh you fantastic
and deluded ones! where learn you in the Word, that there is a Spirit which
works without a Word? Or by what means come you to lay hold of this Spirit,
save by the Word? If by the Word, then of necessity by such marks and prints
as the Word works. And although there is a Spirit spoken of in the Gospel,
which witnesses to our Spirits, that we are the Lords, yet how does it
witness it, save by the Word? Is every hearer at the first dash so ripe and
perfect, that presently (as a fledge bird flying out of her nest, and leaving
her Damme) he can soar aloft in the sky, and mount up to heaven by the Spirit
of assurance? So that he shall no more need any promise, any conditions, or
marks to testify the grace of God wrought in him? Put case that God has some
special ones, to whom (after they have believed) he has given the Spirit to
seal them to the assurance of salvation? Is this the case of every novice, as
soon as he hears that Christ freely forgives sinners, to be hoysed up with
such a spirit of freedom, that needs no word nor promise to support them? That
presently they are past all doubtings, and need no prayer for pardon, being
past all gunshot of corruption or unbelief, Devil or temptation? But I have
confuted these elsewhere in a Treatise for the nonce, here I will pass them
over.

Of Reproof. Repentance goes not before Faith.
And, because they hear, that God usually works the condition of faith, ere
he work faith it self, therefore they say, that the grace of repenting goes
before the grace of believing: Thus confounding the preparations of the
Gospel, with sanctification the fruit of faith: Or making sanctification the
general, and repentance and faith two specialls; and presupposing a needless
faith, for what needs faith to such as have repented, and are converted to God
without it? And yet a^ ^^surd as this error is, it is strange to think what
abundance both o^ ^^nisters and people are rooted in this error! Nay, and
dispute strongly for it too: Oh! say they, Does not the Scripture say, Christ
will not dwell with corruption? Light with darkness? Does not John Baptist
bid them repent the first thing he does? And Peter Act. 2. Repent and believe?
Oh ye blind guides? See you not how under the pretext of your devotion, you
overthrow Christ? Saint Paul says, 1 Timothy 4. ult.
That Christ is the mystery of godliness; as if he should say, there is no sea
but water, nor grace, save Christ: but you will make grace to stand in a
repentance before faith: No, no, repenting cannot be conceived of without
purging of the conscience first. Now faith is the first and only purifier of
the heart. We cannot of our selves dispose our own hearts to grace, to
pureness: Therefore amend your errors arising from the mistaking of the text:
John Baptist calls legal humiliation repenting; as is evident by the words
following, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand, by which he means the
Gospel was approaching; therefore it was not come already. Saint Peter so
places repenting before believing, not as settling any order of the graces, but
as making both essential to conversion; for in other Scripture we read
otherwise, Believe and be baptized, and then repent. Acts 16.31. 2 Cor. 6.15.
Touching the place of Paul, it touches not the order of graces in conversion,
but speaks of them who were converted already: saying, That they sinned foully
in mixing Christ with Idols, that is, offending weak consciences in their
eating things sacrificed to Idols, and so partaking with heathens. So much for
these: only I add, let no man think that I maintain any succession of graces
in conversion: for all Christ is given at once to a believer, yet in an orderly
understanding, that which has the nature of a form first, Note this.
and then that which is a formal consequent thereupon.

Thirdly, this is also reproof and that sharp, 3. Branch. Dall ers with the
Gospel, or attenders upon, it for a season, reproved.
to all such as although they affirm the same truth in doctrine with us yet
deny it in effect, and apply not themselves wisely and humbly to this way of
the Gospel. If this point be true, that none save those who are under the
condition of the promise, may cast themselves upon it: Then those are very
faulty that dally with the Gospel in the offer of salvation, feel no gracious
preparations wrought in them thereby, no sorrows, no desires, no pains, no
love, joy, care to use the means, no restless heart after faith: But wanze
away their precious time, as if one should set up a candle in a dark house to
do no work by, but to prate and jangle, play and be merry, and tell tales:
Others also who at the first news of the Gospel, were a little joyed, and
counted the feet of the Minister beautiful; but neglecting that season of
grace in which the Lord offered to work in them, and contenting themselves
with knowledge, or the good opinion of Preachers, or some sparkles of their
own, never proceeded further to try whence they came, or whither they tended;
much less can prove that these were wrought in them by the promise, or that
they were truly laden, so that nothing else could ease them but Christ: And
therefore such are not willing (...) ^ring their sorrow or desire to the
touchstone, but after a long p^^^sion, when trouble comes, or their Ministers
are taken from them, and so the sive is taken out of the water; on the sudden
all which they seemed to have, Luke 11.23. Matthew. 25.29.
wanzeth away: They gathered not with Christ, and therefore scatter as fast.
And in these, that sad speech is verified, To him that has not, shall be
taken away even that they seemed to have. Dally not with the precious things of
God, abuse not the Gospel and your hearings to please and pride your selves:
Consider well the scope and end of your traffic: It shall not be asked of you
in the day of accounts, how many Sermons you have heard, or what affections you
have had; but what your selves are? Be wise therefore, and amend both these
errors. First, behold such precious patterns of wisdom as God has set before
you, of such I mean as began but ignorantly, yet by their diligence have
attained to much light and hope, much godly sorrow and unfeigned desire after
Christ. Tread in their steps, and get you under the same condition of grace
also, and let your vanities, pleasures and base hearts be renounced, with ease,
and love of your lusts, which have hitherto kept you in slightness and
saplessenesse, and dalliance with grace; learn to esteem matters of weight
weightily. 1. These. 5.15.
But as for the second, To quench that Spirit of grace which formerly has
striven with you, and stirred up motions in you to take hold of God, beware of
it; if you be guilty, labor to recover that Spirit again ere it be damped,
lest your hearts be given over to such a frame as will not be softened, nor
wrought upon: And try the soundness of such affections, as the word has
wrought in you, that you may not decay and lose your labor, 2 John 8.
but get a full reward. And so much for this.

Bless God for bringing us under the condition of his grace.
both to bless God for it, and to improve it wisely for their own
encouragement to proceed on to the grace of believing. Be heartened to trust
God who has brought you thus far, that he will not forsake his work till it be
finished. Many stops I told you of before in the first Doctrine upon this
verse, which assault poor Christians under the condition: I will name them no
more, look there and read them; let none of them come between bark and tree
to defeat your faith and conversion: As once a noble man having his picture
drawn fair, wrote underneath, (One thing still remains, to dye well:) So say
you, Hitherto Lord thou have helped me, and brought me under a condition of
mercy; now Lord give me thy perfecting grace too, the upper and nether springs,
Judge. 1.
(as Caleb to Achsah) suffer me not now in the haven to make shipwreck, but
give me thy hand, help me well over this last hill, that so I might be past
all danger; this one thing remains to set the fair Crown of faith upon the
shoulders of the condition thereof, and the work is at an end. But together
with thy seeking of God (for he will be sought for it, Ezekiel. 36. end) quicken
up thy spirit to look for it, and lot upon it, that he will do it for thee.
If such a one as is under the condition of the promise, may and ought to fasten
upon the promise, and cast himself upon it: Plead hard for faith, if once we
be under the condition.
argue for thy self from this ground, and plead for faith as thine own
portion. The misery of the most hearers is this, That they live in a perpetual
pudder and uncertainty between these two rocks, Whether they are under the
condition or no: or if so, then whether they can believe or no. Therefore do
one thing at once: First, hold thy self close to the condition, if thou be
under it, and let not the Devil, nor thy own fears pull thee from it. It is
that portion which God has allotted thee as a pledge of more. These are the
Suburbs of Hope, to bring thee into the City. Perhaps thou say, Thou have
nothing at all wrought in thee. As for the sorrow and desire which are in thee,
alas! thou make nothing of them, but comparest thy self with them who have
gotten beyond thee: But learn to say, It is mercy that I have any thing, that
I breathe in the air, that I am not in hell: But much more to enjoy a desire
after mercy. I tell thee thou may plead for it: For why? Mourners for their
sin, and thirsters for Gods favor, have a promise to be comforted and
satisfied: they want nothing save to believe it. Oh then, see thy privilege,
and make use of it!

Do not say, The Lord may yet leave me: for I do not believe as yet, I may dye
ere that day: Much less, give place to thy sullenness, weariness and
discontent. It is said of Manoahs wife, that when her husband abused the
condition of a promise made unto them, and said, We shall dye: She replied, No
husband: If the Lord had meant to have slain us, he would never have appeared
unto us thus: and how should we have a son, if he slay us? So should thou
argue against thy fears, because the Lord does nothing in vain, therefore he
will give me faith in deed. Nay, hold fast, and close to the condition, as thou
would reach the promise. So did Elisha in another case, 2 Kings 2.6.
when Elija told him, that he had asked an hard thing, to have his Spirit
doubled upon him: yet, if he saw him ascending, he should have it: what did he?
Did he break the condition? Did he go aside, and leave his company? No,
although he were solicited strongly to it, yet he swears, As the Lord
lives, I will not leave thee till I must needs: For why? There lay a great
issue upon it, the forgoing or enjoying of a double Spirit of his Master:
Therefore to show how he closed with the charge at their parting, he cried, My
Father, my Father, Verse 16.
and so obtained the Promise. So do thou; hold that thou have, and let none
pull it away; but by the trial of what thou have already got, learn to trust
God the better for that which still is wanting, and suffer none of thy
staggerings to bereave thee. Eliah having tried Elisha three or four times to
leave him, and not prevailing; lo at last he granted his desire. Matthew. 15.
When that woman of Canaan had gotten a condition by the end, viz. That Christ
came to save the lost sheep of Israel, whereof she (although a Dog in
account) took her self to be one, and would not be beaten off by all our
Savior his buffetings, at last she sped: Since there is no remedy, says
Christ, but thou will have thy petition granted, take it. Sure it is, the Lord
will try thee of what metal thou art made, if he mean to trust thee with
faith. If any thing will beat thee off, or make thee subsist and stop ere faith
be wrought in thee soundly: if only a condition will serve thy turn, and
thou art content there to rest, Judge. 6.
thou art not fit for Gods battle. Even as God tried the lappers of water from
the soopers of it, for Gedeon: so will he try thee. Be wise therefore, and so
hold the condition, as yet understanding, that the excellency thereof stands
rather in her relation, then in her self: for if it could be, that faith might
be severed from desire or sorrow, it were not possible for thee to be happy.
But to sever them in the elect, it is not possible. And thus much may serve to
have spoken of the former part of the doctrine, to wit, the condition of a
promise, and the uses thereof. Now the second and chief scope of the Doctrine,
and the uses thereof, remain, viz. that such an one must cast himself upon
the promise for pardon and life. Of the uses hereof in order: for this is the
maine point. 2 Part.


Terror to all carnal ones, that savor not the spiritualnesse of faith.
is strong terror to all those who are so far from closing and casting
themselves upon a Word, that alas! they are far from so much as conceiving,
or reaching what manner of thing faith is, or what it means to cleave and cast
our selves upon the bare Word of God (without any other mixture) for salvation.
Alas! they think they were as good cast away themselves altogether, as to
purpose it. Tell us not (say they) of such spiritual matters as these, they
are above our reach and capacity: we are plain folk, commit not such riddles
to us, we forget them as fast: we love such things as we see, feel, taste, and
handle: If ye will tell us a tale, or play a jigge, or show us a play and fine
sights, or sing sonnets in our ears, if you will bring us to merry company, or
a feast, if you will show us some new fashion, or if you will help us to a
good bargain, where we may put out our money to use, for eight in the hundred,
or tell us of a warm match for my Son or Daughter: if you will show us how
we may get the day of our adversary, or if you can tell us of some curious
project for gain; or but talk with us about our corn, or croppe of hoppes:
these have some tack and savor in them: there we will be for you: Or if to
drink and swagger all day and night at the pot, or Tobacco, have at you: these
things taste with us, here you have us tied by the sense, and carnal wit can
reach them: But alas! we know not what you mean when you speak of such high
learning, as to cast our selves upon the Word for pardon. O ye brutish
creatures! Acts 18.14.
read Gallio's answer to the Jews in Paul's case: O ye Jews, if you brought
unto me a case of right or wrong, I would hear and answer you; but as for your
questions of superstition, and your sects and devotion, I will have naught to
do with you, get you from the Bar. Art not thou such a Swine? Nay, I do
Gallio wrong to compare thee with him: for he was not only a learned man, and
good Justicer, but (as appears by story) a deep Moralist, only abhorred what
he thought superstitious. But thou as a bruit beast (as Jude speaks verse. 10.
and 19.) do defile thy self in the things which thou should know, being
sensual, and not having the Spirit. We (say they) know what it means to cast
our selves upon a good Counselor at Law in our suits or a Physician in our
diseases, or our friends that are well monied when we are to pay our debts, nay
sometimes good witches to do us a good turn in our cattle; such things as
these are better bottomes to us: As for a word of God, or a promise, tush! as
good offer a chip to an hungry dog, as these matters to our palate: Oh woeful
Idolaters! Are you so carnally besotted with the creature, so sensual that no
savor of a word can pierce you?

As it was with those Israelites, Exodus 32. This Moses our spiritual man (say
they) is gone up to God in the mount, he is too heavenly a creature for us, we
love to see our God, and to kiss him, and dance before him, to feast and be
merry, and so doing, we are content to thank him for our deliverance out of
Egypt; even such an one art thou: Thou love Religion too, perhaps thou art an
ace beyond them I spoke of; But thou would have it stand in thine own way
to be a moral civil man, to follow thy trade, to pay every man his own, to
give alms to the poor, to love devotion, to keep thy Church, and live in the
Town as a good neighbor: This we love, and feel some bottom in it too: But
as for casting our selves upon a bare word of God, or making that a real
foundation for our souls to rest upon: God help us, we know not how to feel
our feet under us; you seem to bid us hang in the air, and to subsist upon
nothing. Ah woeful wretches! we bid you subsist upon no less or weaker bottom
then that whereupon the world depends, even the Sea and the Earth and the
Heavens, Heb. 11.2. and 1.2. and the creature whereon you dote, all were framed
by this word, and by the power of it are supported: And is this so senseless
to conceive of, that this word of power and faithfulness should support you?
As Paul told them, 1 Cor. 15.10.
so I much more you, (though as heathenish as they) Is this so strange unto you
that the dead should arise? That by casting your selves upon the word, you
should look for salvation? Is that only ancient way of God so trodden by all
both Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles and people of God from Adam, till now so
uncouth and so dismal a thing unto you? Beware, lest you prove to be rank
Esau's, Gargazites, and such as Peter in 2 Epist. 3. Chap. speaks of Atheists,
who would believe no more then they say: Where (say they) is the promise of his
coming? For all these things are as they were from the beginning! Oh woeful
ones! How righteous were it with God to leave such as savor not his way, but
live by sense, even to a desperate way of distrust, not to trust that they see,
but to be drowned in infidelity? has not the Lord Jesus convinced thy sensual
heart by sensual arguments? If thy sense were not left handed, thou might
with thy right hand bear down thy infidelity; for God has given assurance
sufficient by his Son unto thy very sense, if thou were not brutish? Has he
not sent Majesty down from Heaven to be a worm, a servant, to work out
pardon and salvation here upon earth, was he not seen, handled, and conversed
with a long space? See 1 John 1.1. and Heb. 2.2.3.4. were not his active
services; and also his sufferings manifest to the eyes of all men? And may not
promises grounded upon so real, sensible and convincing demonstrations, claim
credit at thy hands? Do thou esteem a word, a promise, so dark and far
off, when the word is come so near thee, even into thy mouth and heart to do
it? Ah poor wretch! is not he able to provide thee earth by his word, who
thereby has purchased heaven for thee? Is there nothing but the creature, the
creature which will down with thee? Is this the burden which hangs on so fast,
and does so much inchant thee that thou can not cast it off freely and
roundly, to cast thy self upon the promise.

Application of the terror.
Well, take heed then lest God plague thee in that very thing wherein thou have
sinned against his promise: I mean thy distrust. I tell thee many sad
spectacles there have been among us or about us of them, Judgments of God
upon carnal and wilful unbeleevers.
who have been plagued by God in their own kind; some of great estate, who
yet thought they should dye beggars; others distracted, and saying, that their
wife was none of theirs, their houses, cattle and servants, were none of
theirs, no wealth they had was their own, they had no right to it: Sometimes
they have waited whiles they should be carried away quick, and never more be
seen in their houses, or that the earth should cleave under them, and swallow
them up, or that the King would seize upon their estates, and bereave them of
all they are worth: Others have been cast into fears that they should dye in
such a fearful sort, Note well.
as never did any, and be made examples for all the Country to wonder at:
Others have died of very conceit, that they were out of favor with their
Prince and Country: Others are troubled with distrustful fancies, viz. That
they should die suddenly, or that they should be forsaken of all help and
left to shift: And others ordinarily will say, I doubt I have enemies who will
accuse me of treason, and undo my children, or take their oaths against me for
some mortal offense: Others who have boasted much of their skill, and what
they have gotten, will say, what if I should lose mine eyes, or be taken lame
in my hands or feet, or unable to get my living, or lie upon my poor husbands
hand till we be not worth a groat, with a thousand such crotchets? Are not
these just plagues of old unbeleefe? Do not men upon their death beds, cry
out, It is just with God thus to handle me, for I never could trust him, nor
his word, further then I saw, felt and tasted him! Oh, God has met with you!
Did he not threaten the despisers of his Law with astonishment of heart, with
hanging by the eyelids, an heart of heaviness and sorrow, saying in the
morning, would God it were evening, and in the evening, would it were morning!
Read Deuteronomy. 29. that roll of curses; what anguish of heart, fears and
perplexities the Lord threatens to send upon such as applauded themselves in
their rotten peace, and the stubbornenesse of their unbeleefe? Surely we may
think then, its juster to smite them that have abused his Gospel with
spiritual penalties, making a scourge of their own cords! And yet all this
will not serve to drive men out of their profaneness, and dallying with the
word; still they will cavil against faith, and say, Tush, these men of the
Spirit would have all men like to themselves; but we cannot be so heavenly,
our time is not yet come, when God will it shall be, and till then, it is but
folly for us to struggle, we will do what lies in us, and put our helping hand
to Gods, and then hope the best. Others tell the Minister, they think it is
impossible for any to know themselves happy in this life; or if it be not, yet
it is very difficult, or very unlikely: Oh say they, we cannot forgo such a
lust, or ill custom; and this faith will bereave us of all our sweet pleasures
and liberties; we shall never have done with it, if we once begin, others
come by it easilyer then we, we are dull scholars: poor men must do as they
may, and cannot follow this learning so hard, our business and work hinder
us, and our memories are shallow, we see these believers are as little set by
among men as any, a thousand of these base cavills men have. But remember that
these vanities will make you forsake your mercy at last, Jonah 2.8.
and then he that will bring you but once word to rest upon in your horrors,
should be as one of a thousand: but then it will be too late, Esaias 27.11.
then terrible sentences will come into your thoughts, That he who made them,
will not save them, and he who formed them will show them no mercy: And then
shall that be verefied, Acts 13.40. Behold ye despisers, wonder and vanish! I
work a work in your days, which if one tell you of, you will not believe;
you that wilfully stopped your ears against Gods word before, shall now wish you
could see the truth and believe it, but if you would give a world for it, it
shall be denied you. If there be any spark of sense in you, let this move
you! else you shall then catch at a word of God to comfort you, but none shall
be granted you: So much for this first Use.

A second Use is Instruction, to teach us the most precious and excellent
Instruction 1. Branch. The nature of Faith is most precious. 1 Pet. 1.8.
we see this only, and no other grace is allotted the soul for this end, to
fasten and take hold upon the Word and Promise: As the Word is the only thing
which bears witness unto us of good, and his way to heaven, (for we see
nothing, as Peter speaks, yet believe) so, the only gift to cast the soul
upon this word is faith. And therefore it is the offspring of God, that grace
which has the birthright of all the rest, and is the Reuben and strength of
God, such a one as if the Lord would even study how to dwell with us, and in
us, Prove. 8.31.
(as wisdom says in the Proverbs, She delights to inhabit with men) yea, how
to make us partakers of the divine nature, and restore his Image in us, he
could not do it by any other so excellent a grace, as by this of faith:
Therefore Esaias 57. its called the creation of God, 2 Pet. 1.2 3.
(I create the fruit of the lips, peace; if the daughter, peace, then much more
the mother, Faith:) its that grace which only can say as Job did, Job 23.12.
I have esteemed the words of his mouth; it counts one word or promise of God
as a deed done; for faith is, when that is done which is spoken, it gives a
realnesse and being to the word and promise: and as you see a mould presently
fashions the metal according to it self, just like it; and as the seal
printing upon the soft wax leaves that impression upon it, which it bears it
self: even so it is with faith, it fashions it self according to the mould of
the word, and bears the same stamp upon it, which the seal of the word bare:
look upon the one, and behold the other. Nay its the instrument of the Spirit,
without which it works not. As Samuel said to Ishai of David, send for him,
for we can do nothing till he come: So till faith come into the soul to be
the organ of the Spirit, to work in us by it, alas, the Spirit is a stranger
to our souls! Its that coal from the Altar wherewith the Lord touches and
inspires the soul; the soul is the life of the body, and faith is the soul
and life of the soul, causing it so much to excel it self, as an Angel does
a man. Briefly, the word is a dead letter to us, if faith make it not a
powerful word, a word of life in us. Its that which causes out of the belly
of the soul (even as water from a spring) to flow rivers of waters of eternal
life; John 7.38.
even of peace through pardon and of joy unspeakable and glorious. 1 Pet. 1.8.
2 Pet. 1.2.3.
By it as Peter says, Most great and precious promises are given to us: so
that if that hand that takes rich gifts be a precious hand, then surely so is
faith which only receives the gift of Christ, and all he has, and hoardeth
them in the soul: That Christ Ephesians. 3.14. may dwell in your heart by faith:
That you may comprehend all love, even the length, depth, and all dimensions
thereof (as flesh here is able to do) as all Saints do: says the Apostle. No
other grace is ordained to this end, save this: It was the instrument of
receiving Christ into the womb of the Virgin, by which all generations should
call her blessed, and so it is still the same spiritually, Luke 1.38. ver. 48.
Prove. 31.29.
and therefore may say as Mary did, The Almighty has magnified me above all my
fellow graces. Many daughters have done well, but thou have excelled them all.

2. Branch. Prerogative of Faith.
And secondly, the prerogative of faith is suitable to her nature: for although
many things are very precious in nature, as jewels which excel in luster and
brightness, which yet equal not the price with any real use; Job 28.19.
yet this precious grace is as useful also, and therefore well might Solomon
say, and so Job also, She is more precious then Rubies, and the Topaz of
Ethiopia shall not be taken for her. And that appears by this, that she is
the doer of all in all in the soul, both for light, In sundry respects.
direction and strength. First, for light: as the Sun is first subject of
natural light in the world: So is Faith in the supernatural Matthew. 6.22.
the foot, the members are all light, if the eye be clear. And as the Ephod
or Urim were to the Priest, so is faith to the soul, even the oracle of it,
and conceives the deep things of God, and reveals them to us, to whom before
they were hidden. And if it be true (as its most true) that we know no more in
Gods matters then we believe; then surely faith is the key of all true and
saving knowledge his, so Faith says to hers, Do this, suffer this, conquer
this, come, go, and they all obey. If a cross come; go Patience, endure it:
If a blessing; come Sobriety, use it temperately, as if thou did not use it:
If any duty of mercy to soul or body to be done, Charity and Liberality must
do them: If any hard task, then Wisdom, Diligence, or Self-denial must
step forth: and to these Faith gives their charge, and orders their work.
Thirdly, she is the strength of all other graces 1 John 3.9.
all the graces of the Spirit fetch their being and support from Faith: She is
the seed of God in the Soul, and she is the strength of God also. His seed,
because whatsoever divinenesse is in the gift of patience, long-suffering,
thankfulness, mercy, love, hope of salvation, it comes from the fountain of
Faith. She is the Merchant Royal, and all other Chapmen have their wares from
her Storehouse. Then she is the strength also of God in all graces. Whatsoever
thou see excellent in a Christians frame or graces, if thou had an eye to
see, thou should behold them all in one faith: out of whole Forge and Anvill
they are all formed.

For why? Faith taking hold of Gods maine strength to save, carries away all
his strength to obey: if God will save me, surely he deserves my love, my
patience: and surely he and his love will put me forth, and uphold me in
doing for him, in curbing my passions, in mortifying my Giant-like corruptions,
the great sons of Anak, those Emims and Zanzummims, 2 Cor. 5.8. Esaias 26.12.
which are above all the rest in fierceness and strength. So that now mark,
this Doctrine of Faith, casting the Soul upon the Word and Promise for pardon
and life, argues the most excellent nature and prerogative of faith above all
other. It is evident by this, whatsoever the Lord works in man, he works by
the Word and the Spirit: and whatsoever these two act in the soul, they act it
by faith, as their only instrument: so that Faith is the only Intelligencer
to the Soul, from the Spirit and from Heaven: and that grace which Ephesians. 6.16.
but also to fence off blows and affronts from all the armor it self, so
that the dint come not at the head-peece, or corslet, or the rest. Only faith
brings the Lord Jesus into the soul, to do all her works in her, and for
her; and when all is done, to pardon the wants, and to cleanse away the spots
thereof, by clothing her with that robe, under which God sees no deformity to
impute or punish it. To conclude, I say (brethren) that I press this
purposely, that as I have spoken much of those things (in this Book) which tend
to faith: so, I would persuade you to think no pains too great to bestow in
the getting thereof; because this grace being once gotten, to cast the soul
upon the Word and Promise; yea, God himself in Christ. By this mean, she has
all, because she encloseth him who is all in all: in whom are hidden all the
treasures of wisdom, who is the fullness of God, in whom we are complete. And
so much may serve for this use.

Of Instruction. Faith has two parts. 1. Self denial.
by showing you of what ingredients the receipt is made, or of what parcels it
consists. And they are two: The former, denial of our selves: The latter,
resigning up of the soul to Gods Word. For, to cast the soul upon the
promise, implies both these. Self-denial then first, is one parcel of this
grace: For why? It is impossible that the soul should cast it self upon a
Word, till she have cast off all weights and clogges, which might hold back
and withdraw her from this free and full giving up her self to God. Simile.
I make this plain by a similitude: A Clergy man has a Benefice, which by
his error is fallen into the lapse: if he will still plead a true right by
his preaching of his Sermons, or serving Cure, he loses his living, or if his
stomach be too great to confess the lapse. But if he will acknowledge his
lapse, and have his friend ready in the Court to beg it of the King, to whom
it is fallen, he may possibly save the lapse, and recover his living with a
better title then at first. So here, Grace is fallen into the lapse, by Adams
and thy sin: by this the right of it is forfeit into the hand of the King of
heaven: if thou will now confess the forfeit, and renounce thy crazie title,
if thou will resign it up into the Kings hand, going to thy friend the Lord
Jesus to beg it for thee again, thou may have it better confirmed then
ever. Else, Simile.
if thou plead thine own righteousness, thou losest Gods. Another Simile: As
it is in the marriage union, A woman cannot wholly resign up herself to a
man, except she wholly be free from all her own cavils and exceptions which
might hinder her resolution. If either her mind stand to live a virgin (as
distasting the married estate in general:) or if she like it, but yet refuse,
except she may have her own ends, reserve stroke in her own hand, to dispose
of that she has, or have such and such liberties, to go and do as her
lists: or if she feel the yoke of subjection heavy to her, and will be
eased of it: or if she dislike the person or qualities of the party, or his
abilities, or breed and parentage, or trade and calling: any of these are
sufficient to hold her spirit off, and to use her freedom, and live single:
Even so here: Till Self and selfe-ends be all borne down by the stream of
grace and the promise, there is no possibility for the soul to yield up her
self, and resign her liberty. That which they speak in Joh. 8.33. We are
Abraham's children, and were never bound unto any, is the voice of every base
heart: which though it ly in the deepest slavery, yet thinks her self free:
because that chain is sweet by custom, and becomes even as dear as life it
self: And to be broken off from it, is more bitter then death. Oh! every one
thinks thus, Romans 7.9.
Now I am alive to my will and lusts: If once my neck be under the collar of
Christ, I must stoop; farewell then all my liberty. But till the soul be
brought to see that in the promise which will equal such carnal liberties,
and recompense them with an hundred fold in a better kind, she will never be
persuaded to deny her self. She sees her self warm in her nest, feels no
want, loves her ease, and therefore will not out of her track.

And hence it is, Psalm. 45. To be brought to an utter strait, and a forlorn
condition, is one ingredient of faith.
that Solomon tells Pharaoh's daughter (in the name of the Church) that if she
will forget her self, her Idols, and heathenish heart, her fathers house and
contents, her private wealth and honor, that she may wholly be his, and
according to his heart, in her prizing him for himself, and for his mere
love, above all other delights: if she will be subject to him, and deny her
own name and will, then she should be a wife for him, and he would delight
in her love, not else: So, that resigning up her self wholly to be at his
dispose, was one maine piece of the marriage. Even so is it here, That soul
which will enter league with God, and cast her self upon him for pardon and
life, must wholly cease to be her own, and come under both the name and
authority of another, or else she equivocates and lies to the holy Ghost,
worse then Ananias did. First, that averse heart in general to the match, must
be taken off; that contrariety and distaste of conversion and Christianity,
must be abandoned* Rebellion against the way of God must be abhorred: then all
quarrels against God, the conditions of a regenerate person, the difficulties,
the crosses annexed to it, must be devoured. All the souls mixtures, both in
the way of believing, and obedience afterward, must be pared away. All her
own duties, performances, labors, zeal, devotion, religion, morality, all
her affections bred in her from her own ends, must be forfeit: She must be
content that Grace honor her self with the only stroke in the work of
conversion: if she bear not all the sway, she will bear none at all. Now if
any of these stick in her stomach, if she be willing to have the fat and
sweet, but she will have none of the sour: she is still within her own
bounds, and cannot freely resign up her self to the promise: for Self and
the Word are directly contrary. No soul will cast her self upon a bare word
of God, but that which has first renounced all that might really give her
content without it. And therefore (to finish) such a soul puts her self out
of her own dispose, and submits her self to be at the dispose of God, to do
with her as he pleases, according to that which in his word he has revealed
himself to be willing to do. She desires that she might be more willing to
have God glorified in his own way, and honored in his mercy, then to enjoy
pardon and heaven in her own way. And although it be not the case of every
weak soul to come thus far, because that which draws the soul first to
seek God, is her own pinch of guilt and curse, and her desire of forgiveness
and peace: yet her entire desire is, to cast her self so far upon the bare
word of God, that if that can fail, she is willing to perish: and as she
grows in light and strength, she is glad to be informed what the scope and
purpose of any truth of God is; and being so, she desires to stoop to it most
humbly and entirely, that (whatsoever become of her own) yet Gods will may be
done in her and by her. And this may serve briefly to show what the first part
of faith imports, that is, Self-denial. I have often spoken of it before. Thus
much here may serve.

2 Part. Resignation. Resigning up of the soul to God, is a second ingredient
of faith.
The second thing in faith is, Resignation of her self to God. This is, when
God is fully and wholly that unto the soul, which before Self was, or any
thing in the world wherein her content stood. Consider (good brethren) I speak
of a weighty thing, and not for discourse sake: Perhaps you may think I go to
deep, and indeed so I do, for a carnal fleet heart; howbeit no truth of God
must be concealed to please our baseness: therefore to cast and resign up
the soul to God, is neither more nor less then to lot upon the Lord in the
promise, to become that unto the Soul, which before Self and the world was in
the uttermost of her profits and pleasures, lusts and vanities, which gave her
that satisfaction which she desired. Oh (good friends) that neither I nor you
might utter and hear that in a few sentences, which perhaps all our life has
scarcely reached unto: For, I tell you plainly, such a speech as this, might
well set us both upon scanning how the case stands with us. We all know what
our own ends, what the world, 1 John 2.16. Matthew. 18.9.
the pleasures of it, the lust of the heart, the lust of the eye, and the pride
of life, have been unto us: Surely, as our eye and right hand. When as God is
to the Soul that which formerly Self and sin were, it is a sign of
resignation to God.
Tell me now: Are any of us so cast upon the word of God and those qualities of
a promise before named, faithfulness, constancy, lovingnesse, freedom, and
the rest, that we can venture all our welfare thereon? That God will so
alsufficiently supply us, that both all our former unlawful liberties and
contents, shall be as mere loss and dung to us, and we shall think our
selves never the worse? Again, that all meet and lawful contents shall be
ministered unto us, and that by a promise? Lastly, that if ought be denied us,
which may seem desirable, we shall therefore not think it meet, because God
gives it not (for else his love could beteame it) and if we must want it, yet
even therein we shall abound; because we have his promise, that it shall be
an hundred for one; Yea, and that we shall esteem the presence of God, his
favor, peace of heart in forgoing a blessing, or patience in bearing a cross,
greater gain (by far) then to have had our wills in kind? Truly (brethren)
to have God that unto us which before other things were, is not less then I
have spoken: and yet so is God to that poor soul which has cast her self
upon him for pardon and life: for he who will not fail in the greatest, will
not fail in the smaller. Mark then, Faith in casting her self upon the
promise, is an hard grace, but yet wise: she will lose nothing in the Hundred,
but she will get in the Shire: and she is warranted so to do by the Lord, who
will have her know, if she will be ruled by him, and trust his word, she shall
be no loser, but an infinite gainer; yea, and know it also, to her great
content, though now and then mixed with some doubtings and weakness.

And by this mean the soul waxes confident upon God in the promise, and by
degrees grows to see this truth as well in other promises, as in the maine: of
which I shall after say somewhat. I say, faith grows by experience to an holy
complacence in God by his promise, to be all one with him, acquainted with his
truth and bounty, to venture herself and all her happiness thereon, and so to
have such an affiance, and trust in God, as not easily to be unsettled by each
delusion, or conceit of Satan, or world, or herself: But still in all her
seeming straits and difficulties to rely upon the promise, and to pick out the
true meaning thereof, even the length and depth of it; and seeing God cannot
lie, therefore to wait for resolution in all doubtful cases, rather then
rashly to question the promise, and to repent her of her choice. This holy
obedientiall affiance and trust upon God by a promise, is that happiness of a
Christian soul, and that true rest of heart which she should pitch herself
upon, as that portion which she counts best, an fallen into a goodly ground. It
is a good illusion which Saloman or Batsheba has, Prove. 31.11. of the good
wife, That the heart of an husband rests in her, he is so linckt in love and
affection to her, so experienced in her fidelity, chastity, helpfulnesse and
gracefulness, that his heart rests upon her, and trusts to her: Be the
business never so weighty, be he never so far distant from her, let never
such conceits and suspicions come in his mind, all are washed off, the trust
which he has in her quits his mind, and he rests upon her without casting
any scruples. May it be so between sinful couples, who may be and are in
many things unfaithful, and shall not the Lord much more be trusted? Yes
doubtless: A true believing soul goes not to work by guess, casts not with
herself, what if God should fail her? What if she should be defeated? But
because the promise has secured her of Gods unchangeable truth, she takes it,
Simil.
and (as with a knife) cuts in two all such cords of withdrawing fears, and
throws herself upon it; as the anchor is cast upon the bottom under water,
when once the Pilot has by his plummet sounded it, and there it sticks, and
holds the ship from tossing too and fro with wind and waves; even so does the
soul which has known the Lord, and taken sure marks of him, knit and fasten
it self upon him, and stands not to descant off and on, this way and that, but
drownes it self once for all in the sea of his Attributes, no more to be
distempered by any of her objections. That time which others spend in asking,
Shall I? Shall I? I could be content, but may I safely do it, and shall I be
welcome? With the like stuff she spends in doing as she is bidden, 1 Samuel 15.
Esaias 26.3.
and hazarding all upon the faithfulness of him, who is the everlasting
strength of Israel, and cannot lie. Oh thou would cast thy self upon the
truth of a man, whom thou have found to keep touch in his promises, and would
blush if such an one should cast thee in teeth that thou did distrust his
promise, having never taken him tardy in any thing. Should a sinful man so
engage thine heart, and so ingratiate himself with thee; and shall not the
Lord much more deserve it of thee? Genesis 8 9.
If ever thou will have thy weary wings at rest, fly to this Arc and settle
there: Buy and sell upon the promise, set down thy staff there, for this is
the way to engage the Lord to thy self; thou honor him above all honoring
by thy faith, and he will for it requite thee, and trust thee for ever, and
bind himself not to leave thee, because he knows thou make full reckoning
of his help; thou have cast off all other props of thine own that he might be
instead of them all unto thee. Such a one shall not need to fear that it shall
be disappointed. So much for this Use.

Admonition. Lets of faith to be seriously shunned.
To take heed of such lets as might hinder this their holy resolution. Somewhat
I said about such lets in the first Doctrine upon this verse: Some of more
special mark in this kind I have reserved to this place, which I will sum
up in few words.

First, rest not in making many complaints touching thy backward and averse
heart from casting thy self upon the word: I do not bid thee cease
complaining, for the Church has none to moan her, save him to whom she
complains. Jeremy Cap. 3. brings in Judah complaining, but withal she returns
to God and faith, Thou art the Lord our God, and Ephraim complains. Jer.
31.33. but withal she is converted, and the Lord calls her his first borne, so
Esaias 63. The Church in Babell sadly mournes for the hiding of Gods face, but
she is restless till 64.1. Esaias 34. Ester 2.5.
the Lord make the mountains melt and flow down that he may help her. So do
thou, and prosper. Mourn like Hezechia, like a Crane or Dove, but join his
faith to it, and say, He has said it, and will do it. Mourn like Ester, so
thou do as Ester, go into the King, and touch the Scepter, saying, I will
cast my self upon the promise, if I persh there, so be it. But else as for
many complaints to men who are like thy self, for fashion, fruitlessely, and
there rest, without cleaving to the answer of thy complaints, and taking
counsel; I say bite them in, and keep them to the Lord and thy self in
secret; for they may puff thee up with pride and false opinion of thy self,
defile thee and harden thee, and hurt others.

Secondly, beware of sloth and dalliance with the Lord, but when the Lord comes
near thee, do not make thy self sure before thou have it, and so neglect the
pursuit and accomplishment of it, follow him close at the heels, and suffer
him not to put thee off, but let him see thou art minded to buy and not to
cheapen: all commodities have their peculiar season to get them in, and so has
faith; discern this season of the Son of man, thou can not make it earlier
or later then God makes it, only mark his day and hour, and make sure of it
then. If the Lord see thee to be a pedling chapman, either he will deny it thee
wholly, or cause thine ease to vex every vein in thy heart ere thou have it.

Thirdly, take heed of filling thine heart and thoughts with earthly things;
the cares for earth will eat in so dangerously, and win upon thee as the sea
tides gull down the banks: They will eat up cares of heaven, as they say
Eagles feathers will consume other feathers being mixed with them. Be sure if
thou lay in for faith, come with an heart empty of other thoughts: if thou
would cast thy self upon a promise, throw not thy self upon the world, and
the contents of it. I speak not of the corrupt world, but of the most lawful
liberties; they are apt to steal away thy spirit easiliest under that color:
mark thy self if ever the promise were more favourlesse to thy taste, then
when the world is sweetest: Be ashamed to plunge thy self into the creature,
when thou pretendest a desire to cast thy self upon the word for pardon and
life.

Fourthly, and above all, let no bitter root defile thine heart, Heb. 12.15.
and spring up to choke thy resolution this way. It will over drop all thy
purposes and mar them. Pride, prejudice, lust, covetousness, privy looseness
which the heart will not be beaten from, any other naughtiness will so appall
and defile the pure gift of faith that it will not come near where such haunt:
Take heed of suffering any lust to get head and overflow knowledge; let not an
hollow heart not thoroughly searched, but presumed to be better then it is, and
returning again after long violent suppression, enter in to destroy all thy
fair hopes; for as sweet as it is in thy mouth, it will prove gall to thee at
last, as Esau's profaneness did, but too late.

Lastly, beware of curiosity and self-willednesse in Gods way: But humbly trade
with him in it, be content with the conditions of his market, both for time and
takings: Be not offended at any affronts which befall thee, but submit to his
will from whom thou look for thy cure. If Naaman had done thus, he had cast
himself upon Jorden without all this ado: But because thou will frame an Idea
to thy self how thou would proceed, and can abide no prolongings, no
crossings of thy course, because thou art not always alike in thy affections,
but sometime under hatches, sometimes in the top sails, thou art impatient,
and come short of thy desires. Submit to him who tries all that is in thine
heart, that at last by thy often defeats, thou may know, Deuteronomy. 8.2. Romans 9.16.
It is not in the willer nor runner, but in him who shows mercy, at whose
courtesy its meet thou stand with all submission, till he have subdued thee to
himself, and made thee (with Naaman) glad to obey and wash in the Jorden of
the Promise. Thus much of these: like to which are many more, but by these
judge of the rest, and cast off all, if thou would cast thy self upon the
promise.

Fifthly, this is Exhortation to all who are under the Condition, Exhortation.
and to cast themselves fully upon the promise, trying what the issue will be.
Do as God bids thee. Paul, go into Arabia the the desert, To obey the command
of faith, and to consent to the promise.
go not to Jerusalem to dispute the case, when God has declared his mind to
be, that thou resign up thy soul to his word. Go not from Gods Nineveh to
thine own Tarsus, to thy cost and sorrow. As those kine of the Philistims went
straight on to Bethshemesh though lowing after their calves, in token they were
more acted by God then by nature, so do thou, not turning either to the right
hand or the left. There is no danger in this; as we say leave is light. Neither
is there any other thing in the promise then seems: There is neither hook nor
crook in Gods pure intents. Be thou to him as he to thee. Come in, cast thy
self upon the word, be eased, be reconciled to God: Faith is then bred when
that is done, which is said; faith is the best Disciple, and most dutiful
hand-m^id that ever was better then those servants of the Centurion, Gal. 1.17.
Jona 1.3. 1 Samuel 6.12. Matthew. 8.
which did as they were bidden, came and went at command Cast the crown of all
thy rebellion at the feet of God. Popish Emperors weary of the world, and of
all the victories, pomp and state of it, have laid down their Crown at an
Idols shrine, and turned votaries. Do thou as a man weary of all thy former
delights, cast them all at Gods feet, and thy self upon his promise. But thou will ask me, How shall I thus throw my self upon it? To cast the soul upon
the promise, wha^ it is.
I answer do these three things: First, take the due estimate of the promise,
and that is done by minding, pondering, familiarizing with it. By minding it, I
mean a marking of it, an heeding of it as a thing of no ordinary excellency:
Count it as thou would the chair of Estate which thou bowest unto, as
representing the Kings person. So does the promise, its the chamber of
presence, in which God discovers himself, the royal Chair which carries
State in it; when thou beholdest it, behold in it the Majesty of God, Esaias
26.10.
which no hypocrite can see in it: Its hidden from his eye: but to a believer,
set by God in the clift of the rock, Exodus 34.6.
thence to see the glory of God, his graciousnesse, and to hear all his good
proclaimed: to such an one the promise is of a most eminent excellency, Deuteronomy.
32. end
full of all the fullness of God. Slight it not therefore, but set thy mark
upon it. Secondly, ponder it, as Mary did; weigh well the contents of it, the
blessed consequences of believing: Take to consideration the worth of the
pearl, Luke. 1.29.
and treasure hid in the field, as that wise Merchant did, Matthew. 12.44. Its as
the applying of Ebed melecs rags under Ieremies armeholes, Jer. 38.11.
that he might be drawn out with ease. Meditation is an heavenly trading of
the soul in her thoughts and affections with Gods matters till the soul
clapse with them. Psalm. 119.
Thirdly, make the promise familiar by this means. Draw thine heart to it, make
it thy familiar friend and counselor to pass all thy matters for thee, and in
all thy doubts, consult with it, and let that give sentence: And having
received it, esteem the words of the mouth of it as Job did, Job 23.12.
above thy appointed food; power all into the bosom of it, as thou would
power out the symptoms of thy disease into the bosom of thy Physician, or a
child all her griefs, losses, and sorrows into the lap of a tender mother.
Thou shall fare better by a promise, then they shall do at their hands. This
is the first direction.

Secondly, be under the authority and evidence of a promise, and be convinced
by it that its thine; that all before said of the strength, wisdom and other
properties of a promise, do belong to thee as really, and are put into it by
God, that thou might have thy part in them. See clearly as in a mirror, that
God intends all to thy self, and as in the Covenant more generally, so in the
Seals more particularly. As Laban seeing how strangely things went, Genesis 24 50.
said, We can say neither more nor less, but Gods finger is here, it must be a
match. This is the work of the Spirit of the promise always assisting it, and
telling the soul under the Condition Doubtless, thou art the party whom God
means to save: Ester 6.6.
As Haman said, whom should the King mean save me? So shall thou say, (but much
more warrantably) If God had not indeed meant me well, he would never have so
convinced me, and set me on ground, that I should have nothing to gainsay. The
Judge on the bench saw not the thief steal, but by the sworn evidences of
witnesses he is so convinced in himself, that he reads sentence without
question; by this means the soul brings out Gods cloak, staff and signet as
his pledges left in her hand to assure her of his good meaning toward her. Genesis
38.25.


Thirdly, claspe unto, and with the promise cleave unto it, to be rid of all
thy annoyances at once. Once convinced of the promise, and ever fastened to it.
And this cleaving to it is that work which immediately causes the consent,
and obedience of the soul unto it, to cast it self upon the promise, open it
thus: The soul in the act of believing, is solicited by Satan and unbeleefe,
to give over, and return to folly: But the promise pressing in* persuades her
to believe and renounce her old distempers: The soul in this demurre consults
with herself thus, If I go backward, I perish irrecoverably: If I go forward,
I see difficulty, yet hope. What then shall I do? Surely I cannot be worse
then I am: I must dye however in not believing; but in believing, I may live:
Therefore I will cast my self upon the promise and live. A man will do thus
naturally, though he have no promise: Thus did those 9. lepers, 2 King. 3. only
upon an hazard, they cast themselves upon the army of the Aramites: Why?
Because they were sure to dye in the City. So the poor soul giving herself
for dead, puts her life in her hand, and says, worse then dead I cannot be;
better I may be by a promise: Nay, if God be true, I shall be; and therefore I
will venture my soul, and jeopard all upon Gods faithfulness, if I perish, I
perish in the arms of a promise, not in Satan's claws, and by my unbeleefe. In
this strife of the soul, the Spirit does lay in such strong weights of
persuasion against the disswasives of corruption, that the soul finally is
overruled, and so consents and obeyes to cast herself upon the sure bottom of
a promise for pardon and life.

By these directions thou may help thy self in this weighty work; but
because the heart is dull upon the spur, Motives to Faith.
let me add a few motives to quicken thee. Let one be this, Remember first,
that this will be the issue of Gods enquiry at his coming to judgment.
Secondly, that by this resigning up the soul to God, the greatest honor is
done to him which by a mortal creature can be. Thirdly, that all such in the
day of the Lord shall be most glorious. Fourthly, that the greatest wrath and
vengeance shall light upon the heads of unbeleevers. Fifthly, that this being
the rarest grace of all others in the world, is therefore worth our chiefest
endeavor. Of these and the like I purpose (God willing) to treat of the next
Lecture. Now for the present (having exceeded our ordinary bounds) we will
desist here. Let us pray.

THE EIGHTEENTH LECTVRE continued upon the 14. VERSE.
VERSE XIV. Then he went down and washed himself seven times in Jorden, and
his flesh came again as the flesh of a little child, and he was clean.


AT the end of the last Exercise (Brethren) I began to finish the first and
maine Branch of Exhortation, raised from this act of Faith, to cast the soul
upon the promise. To the which end, I added to the directions for the duty,
certain motives: time giving leave only to name such as came to mind, I have
referred the brief touching of them in several, to this occasion.

Faith g^ves most glory to God.
gives most glory to God: therefore it is worth the ensuing while we have time.
I think none will deny, but that which ascribes most to God, and least to man,
is the most worthy grace to lay in for. But such is this: It is wholly for God,
concurres with him in this point of his honor above all. All our obedience to
the Moral Law, at once considered, glorifies not God so much as this: no,
although we could perform it exactly, as we cannot. Partly, because this
grace apprehends the perfection of Gods righteousness, which no holiness or
righteousness can reach to. Faith (though weak) yet apprehends the perfection
of God, and thereby conformes us to be like him. Now that's a great honor to
God, to resemble his perfection, and to be perfectly righteous, which only
faith in this life apprehends. Partly also, for that faith only acknowledges
God in all those Attributes of his, whereby he sets forth himself in the
saving of his elect. God aimed at more glory in Redemption, then in Creation:
And Adam did not so much honor God in his integrity, as a believer does in the
act of his faith: For Adam honored Goodness, but not Justice nor Mercy, which
the Lord meant especially to set forth in Christ. Read Read Romans 3.25.26. Oh!
you may easily conceive, how acceptable this work of faith is to God, by a
resemblance: For take an ambitious man, who stands more upon his honor then
gain: Who does most please such a man? He that sends him gifts? No, he seeks
to have all men bound to him, rather then to be obliged to any. That man is for
his tooth, who in great meetings trumpets out his praise, tells of his breed,
learning, bounty, and generousnesse: And if any lessen his praise by comparison
with others, will challenge him into the field, and spend blood in the defense
of it. Oh! how dear is such an one, to a man who stands upon it? Even such a
man is he who dare cast himself upon a promise: for he equals God (in a
sort) in his ends: let God propound to himself in what he will be honored;
and faith instantly concurres and faith, True Lord, it is meet, be famous in
thy justice, satisfying it self upon Christ: be honored in the wisdom of thy
eternal purpose, and thy revealing it in time: receive glory from thy poor
creature, for that gracious mercy of thine, that love, that power, and all that
unsearchable riches of thine past our finding out: Oh! be glorified in all, at
the hands of him who yet cannot reach it. Romans 11. ult. 1 Timothy 1.1.19
To the King immortal, invisible, and only wise God, be all dominion and
praise Faith then enlarging it self to all such qualities as God seeks to be
great in, does exceedingly honor him, and therefore is a grace so much the
more to be sought! All seek the face of the Prince, Prove. 26.29.
because greatness delights in it. David having but a conceit of the contrary
in Mephibosheth, was implacable. Get this grace then, that so thou may set up
the Lord, and make him glorious in thine own heart, 2 Samuel 19.29
and in the hearts of all others, as near as thou can.

Secondly, let this move thee; When Christ shall come to judge, Christ's last
inquiry will be for faith. 1 Cor. 3.13.14 Matthew. 25.
I deny not, but he will also examine and try every man's work by fire, and
purge the good works of his from all dross which cleaves to them. It is
clear by that in Matthew. 25. that he will take account of all the Talents that
he has lent out: But this shall be the maine issue of all, how the maine
Talent of the Gospel has been improved: that is, whether it have been believed
or no? It is plain by Luke 18.9. Think you (says Christ) that when the Son
of Man shall come to judge the world, he shall find faith upon the earth? That
then shall be his inquisition. And no doubt, that shall be then in as great
request, as now it is in little. Then a world (if we had it) for a drop of this
oil; but the market is over. Well, let us then make it the great issue of our
inquiry (if we be wise) while it is called to day: If we lay one issue, Heb.
3.15.
and God lay another, what a woeful loss of the day shall we sustain? Who
shall recompense our loss? God asks for faith, and we bring him in our many
Sermons hearing, or prayers making, our duties doing, or Lord, Lord, have we
not done great things in thy Name? Then shall he answer, Depart from me. Matthew.
7.22.
Will not this be our hell ere we come at it? But Faith will pass for
current in that day. Therefore use all diligence to make that sure now: It will
be in vain then to say: Alas! I was not aware of this issue; if I had, I
would not have been to seek.

Thirdly, God having found out who these are, will set them forth in that day,
to be wondered at before Men and Angels. This is that Paul speaks, 2 Thessalonians.
1.10. when he shall come to be glorified in his Saints, God will be admired in
all and only such as believe.
and to be admired in all them that believe in that day; because our testimony
was believed. What is it to be admired in all that believe? Surely then, God
shall make fully known the infinite riches of his mercy which he has
discovered, in saving his believing ones, when a world of others shall be
rejected. How few behold God admirable in the conversion of any? Men have other
objects of admiration now to occupy their affections; as, who is the eminent
rich man in the Country, who get the Kings favor, or be the greatest for
their preferment: These men do admire. But as for that grace which has chosen
some to be believers, leaving thousands of great note and parts, alas! it is
slighted as a fancy, and controlled as a falsity: Nay, who are so scorned as
such? But in that day, those great rich ones, and gallants, shall be despised;
and then shall the Lord be admired in believers. Here they lie by as
wonderments. But there they shall reflect a glory upon God, who has bestowed
such favor upon them, as to give them faith. Oh! happy then those who have
kissed the Son, Psalm. 2. ult. It seems that believers shall then be
Master-peeces, when as the Lord himself shall be glorious in them for his
love to them. How shall they then be glorious in the sight of the world? Numb.
10.17.
If Moses and Aaron were so glorified in the sight of Israel, by reason of the
government and Priesthood which God put upon them, and that when as Kora and
his fellows had sought to disgrace them, how great shall the honor of
believers be then, when it shall be some addition to Gods own glory, that he
has made them such? Can God be admired in the choice gifts of Bezaleel and
Aholiab, Exodus 36.1.
but they must needs be glorious who enjoy them? Oh! then it will be the
chiefest honor to be a believer, then shall it not repent them of any pains
they have taken, that they have set to their seal that God is true: Then shall
they shine as the stars who have converted others, Dan. 12.3.
and have been converted themselves: Then shall it appear who are Gods
offspring borne of God, 1 Pet. 1.
having his seed in them, Kings and Priests to God, His Jewels, his peculiar
ones, and Favorites. Do ye not see how a Prince is admired, who wears a
Jewel of peerlesse price upon his hat, or in his ring? Shall a Jewel grace a
man, and shall not they be glorious from whom God receives a kind of grace?
Tell me, whether it were better for us to be these persons, or (with the
multitude of wicked ones) to be dazzled with their beauty in that day, and to
gnaw and bite their tongues for very anguish, that they had not the grace to
believe the word in season?

4. Motive. God shall come in vengeance against unbeleevers.
Fourthly, then shall the Lord come in treble vengeance against all that know
not God, nor obeyed his Gospel: who put away the Promise from them in a scorn,
and made a mock at his threats, who said to God, Depart from us. Where is now
that tongue of yours, which said, 2 Pet. 3. Where is the promise of his
coming? Come, let us see this day of the Lord. It shall be a black day to
you, and you shall wish it as far off then, as near before. For then shall
the Lord set the true colors upon every sin, and the most terrible upon
this. No Thief, no Harlot shall look so grisely, so ghastly as an unbeliever.
Hell shall be heat thrice hotter then Nebuchadnezzars furnace for all such:
There the Son of God walked; but here they suffer, Amos 5.18.
who have trod under foot the blood of the Covenant, and counted it an unholy
thing, and unworthy of them. The Gospel is hid to none, Heb. 10.29.
but such as perish. This is that condemnation Joh. 3.19. They are condemned
already, and the wrath of God abides upon them in right, but there it shall
cease, and take full possession. They have despised the remedy, and cast the
potion of their recovery against the walls. They shall not resist the quashing
force of this rock falling upon them, Luke 20.17.
and grinding them to powder. This sin opposes God in all that, in which he
sought honor to himself: and therefore how terrible will he be in revenging
himself? How fearful will it be to see men condemned even by him who yet is
the Judge of Gods Chancery? God has no quarrel with men, like to the quarrel
of his Covenant, Levit. 26.25. When they go contrary to God in this kind, he
will go contrary to them, and avenge them: when he avoucheth them to be his
redeemed ones in the blood of the Covenant, Deuteronomy 26.17.
and himself to be their God all-sufficient, and that freely, being enemies
and traitors; and they shall disavow him, and tell him to his face, that he is
a liar, 1 John 5 10.
meaning nothing less, and his Ministers to bear false witness of him: when
he bids them lay down their weapons and come in, 1 Cor. 15.15.
and he will pardon their rebellions: yet they wilfully persist in bearing
Arms against him, what possible way can there be of reconciliation? When
tender mercies are rejected, what is to looked for, but jealousy burning to
hell? Shall a second blood of God be shed for such as have despised the
former? If they who despise Moses Law, Heb. 2.2.3.
are put to death under two or three witnesses, how shall they escape who
despise so great salvation?

Fifthly, that is to be highly esteemed and ensued, 5. Motive. Faith is a rare
Jewel. 2 Thessalonians. 3.2.
which is so rare a commodity, and to be found in so few hands, a flower that
grows in so few Gardens. But Faith is such an one, 2 Thessalonians. 3.2. Faith is not
of all: nay, the portion of very few. Every one seeks to ingrosse rich wares,
that they may raise the market at their pleasures, for their own gain. But
the Royal Merchant of this Pearl, beyond price, may well go alone: for there
be few who will go to the price of his Pearl. Oh! if the paucity of
Believers, or rarity of Faith, or scantnesse either of such as preach it, or
hearken after it, might persuade, this reason might strongly (as a Lodestone)
draw us to believe. Such as remain not profane, yet rest themselves in a
form of godliness, keep under the line, and subsist in a dangerous degree to
faith-ward, but dare not resign up themselves to the promise. When it should
come to this point, they make sure of some fair retreat or other for
themselves: And when this fruit should come to the birth, there is no strength
to bring forth; and so they fail of the grace of God, and dye in that state.
All that is in request with men, is, how they may get to heaven with most ease,
Esaias 37.3.
and rid their hands of this trouble of self-denial, and selfe-resigning to
God: They will not put themselves out of their own power, nor clearly
discharge themselves of all weights which hang on and press down in this
kind, and therefore justly may that be men's ruin, which they prefer before
mercy, that is, vanity, pleasure, sloth, and ease. Let us then be of those few
that believe, and not of the world of unbeleevers.

6. Motive. No riddance of our distempers till we believe.
Lastly, let this prevail, that until thou beleevest, and drownest thy
distempers in the promise, thou shall never be rid of them: Thy staggerings,
fears and disquietnesse of thoughts, thine hard heart, thine impatience, thy
old corruptions; yea, Satan with seven worse spirits, will return, and
enthrall thee more desperately then ever before. Thou can have no security
from them otherwise, but a truce only, which will end in worse war. All thy
hearings, prayers, hopes, duties will be forfeit and perish. Matthew. 12.
And were not this lamentable? Especially for such as have been so fair for
faith, swet for it (as 2 John 8.) to lose their reward, for adding a little
more soundness of heart, to their former knowledge and affections? Is it not a
sad sight to see one to make shipwreck in the haven? Who would not pity
himself for such folly? Who would lay eggs in the sand to be trodden by
beasts, Job. 39.14.
except a fool bereft of understanding? Satan will not give thee over, but
sift thee thoroughly: If there be no faith in thee, there is no difference
between thee and others. Consider (good friends) what the Scripture speaks,
If ye will not believe, you shall not be established, Esaias 7.9. Nothing but
this Anchor will settle the ship; nothing but Faith will overcome the world,
either within us, or without us. The heart being unpurified, will bewray it
self: only to faith is granted to wear the crown of victory, 1 John 5.5.
for this is that victory, even our faith. Oh! who would be always unsettled, and
lie open to all mischief, who might prevent it? Zach. 12.10. Conclusion of the
exhortation.
But I conclude this Use, with the former Directions and Motives. Pray to God
(for the Spirit of grace and supplication go together) that his spirit may
persuade thy soul to both these, to deny thy self, and to resign up thy
self to the promise? Say thus, Lord, thy works are all perfect, where thou
beginst thou finishest. It is beyond flesh to retain this grace: I have run, I
have labored; but except thou give me the hand to help me over this steep
hill, I shall fall back again to my old distempers, and the end will be worse
then the beginning. 1 Samuel 14.13.
Oh therefore let me go up the hill of faith, as Jonathan did up the hill
against the Philistines; give me a sign as thou gave him, and then all lets
and oppositions shall fall before me: all high things which set up themselves;
yea, the worst, that is, the contrariety of heart to this thy way of believing,
shall be cast down: and then shall I submit nakedly to this obedience of
faith. The Lord grant it to us all for his Names sake. This for the first and
maine Use of Exhortation be spoken.

or a better life, that they cast themselves upon the promises for salvation,
sustaining and full redeeming them from them all. Know this (brethren) that as
much ado as faith costs us for pardon, Plead the promise for sanctification as
well as pardon Matthew. 4.1.
yet we have not done there. It is as great a grace to preserve the soul, as
it was to beget it at first: enemies will not give us over as soon as we are
converted to God, but rather assault us more forcibly, as Christ himself was
by Satan, after his baptism and unction to be Mediator. Now then, what help
have we against all affronts, save to cast our souls upon him for relief and
redress, whom we have already adventured upon for pardon and life? What is
our Charter save that of our Savior, Be of good courage, I have overcome the
world: Joh. 16.33. and 14.1. Esaias 26.3.
Let not your hearts be troubled, you believe in the Father, believe also in
me? Cast your selves upon Jehova, for he is eternal strength. Here on the one
side steps in fear, and says, I shall never overcome such a corruption, and
lust, of earthlinesse, or pride, or self-love, or revenge, or
uncharitableness: or, I shall not grow in grace as others do, but always stand
at a stay: or, I feel no thriving by the means, still after fasting,
Sacraments, the old deadness of heart abides, and I walk (as the horse in the
mill) in one dead frame of heart and life. Well, deny thy self first, and then
resign up thy self unto the promise. Do thou willingly yield thy self to
any base corruption? Or do thou wilfully slight the means, or defile thy
conscience? Then look to thy self, and lin not, till thy pardon and peace be
renewed. But otherwise look not at thy distrust or unworthiness, but humble
thy soul for thine unbelief, and recover by the promise: Say thus, Lord, when
I was weak, and without strength, I cast my self upon thy word for pardon of
sin, and release of curse: how much more may I do it for supply of wants?
Plead the promise now as thou were wont to cleave to it at first.

When Bathsheba was afraid her son Solomon should be defeated of the
Kingdom, 1 King. 1.15.22.26.
she and Nathan plotted together to concur with one Argument, and came to
David, saying: Did not my Lord the King say, that Solomon should reign? How
then is it, that Adonija sits on the throne? What did David? He rouzes up his
dying body, and swears, As the Lord lives, look what I have said, shall be
accordingly done. Thus by pleading they sped: Plead thou the promise which once
God gave thee, and so shall thou also: Lord, Did not thou say, Sin shall
not reign? Thine shall grow? Thou will finish thy work, and they shall hold
out to the end? And now, lo the Devil persuades me it shall be otherwise? But,
O Lord, had I first clave to sense and feeling, I had never believed: Therefore
now teach me to cast my self upon thy Word still, and look off from
appearances. Although I feel no great growth, yet because thou have said I
shall, and I do not wilfully oppose it, therefore I believe I do. In like
manner steps in the malice of Satan's instruments, and they threaten my ruin,
and make me think I shall one day perish by them. But I ask my soul, Do
thou not side and sort with them by an ill conscience, forsaking thine
integrity? Then cast thy self upon the promise, Psalm. 73. end. Call thy self
a fool, a beast, for distrusting God: Roll thy ways upon him, and say, Was
not I always with thee? Did thou not promise to guide me by counsel, till
glory? whom have I in heaven or earth like thee? When Iehoshaphat in 2 Chronicles.
20.5. was beset with three armies, what did he? Cleave to sense, and so
despair? No, he pleads a promise, an old one, made to Solomon at the
dedication of the Temple, Did thou not say, when enemies should besiege us,
and we look up to thy throne, thou would look down? Lo, here is an object
for thee, Mount Seir, and Moab, and others. What did God? Instantly answered,
and scattered them all. Alas (brethren) our faith forgets her plea, and is
weary of her work. God sets enemies about our ears to file off the rust of
faith that she may still honor him against fears, and carnal reason: We say
we have cast anchor upon Gods bottom for pardon, but how shall it appear? If
we say so, who shall gainsay us in a secret thing? But show it then in our
course that secret grace may discover it self in straits and trialls, that we
may know all that is in our own hearts, either how weak they are that we may
strengthen them, or how strong, that we may be thankful.

But when sorrows and fears beset thee on every side, sickness, debt, losses
of husband, wife, good ministry, when bad times, examples of debauchednesse,
malicious foes, treacherous friends; when all these or any would make us think
our faith was but a fancy, and we cast our selves upon a promise in vain: Then
look about thee, here, and never till now is the trial whether thou have cast
thy self upon God or no; upon his wisdom to reach thee a way of escape, upon
his power, his truth, love and constancy, that he can and will free thee: Is
this faith to pretend casting thy self upon God, once for all, and when
trialls come, Joh. 11.27.39.
to warpe, and to say with Martha, Now he stincketh? To fling up and down and
say, How shall I bear this loss? Endure such affront? Get out of this
poverty? Avoid this enemy? Cease all other tricks, and learn one better then
all: As the Cat once being challenged by the Fox in point of wit, when the Dogs
came upon them, the Fox with all his wit, was torn in pieces, the Cat had but
one way but it was worth all, she got up an high tree and secured herself.
Read Ezra 8.22. He would not dishonor God, but fell to the work of fasting
and believing, and so prevailed. Give not thy right in one promise for a world:
Its a fountain better then all dry pits: A wise man will not sell his
possibility of a great inheritance for a trifle: assure thy self, there is a
promise in the word belonging to every duty, and every part of a Christians
course, which who so can believe, shall go through it, whether doing or
suffering, with sweet ease, in respect of him who goes to work of his own
head. He that casts himself upon the word, cuts off many troubles which others
meet with; because his heart being well appaid in Gods love, is not easily
unsettled; and as for such as must pinch, yet there he is upheld, knowing they
come from God in love, are no greater then mercy sees meet, are such as Christ
himself is a party in, and affords to his members, his own courage,
meekness, power, and victory to sustain them in, and in his due time will
give a redemption from to all who wait for it in well doing, and faint not.
Plead therefore the promise, and trust God in all.

The third Branch of Exhortation concerns those who have cast Persevering in
believing procures assurance.
and also for all other support here: To such I say, give not God over here
neither, but still press him for assurance, and fullness of persuasion
touching both. The faithful improvement of the promise in respect of the truth
of the promiser, is often requited by the Lord with such a gracious strength
and full fail of the Spirit of the promise, as makes God and the soul to grow
into close communion, and holy familiarity, and carries the soul above her
doubts, fears and complaints; because the Spirit of God witnesses unto our
spirits, both that we are his, and he ours: Nothing shall separate us from his
love, nor it from us: All things pertaining to life and godliness, shall be
ministered. This is that which Paul speaks of, Ephesians. 1.13. By which Spirit
after you had believed, you were sealed; and by it the Lord makes the soul so
interessed in him, that as he knows who are his, 1 Timothy 3.1. So they who are
his, know themselves so, reflecting this assurance to their own consciences,
so that they walk as enlarged ones, because perfect love expells fear. I will
not say, that their joy does always equal their peace: But their peace equals
their assurance. Hence it is, that commonly such find hard duties easy,
crosses welcome, fears vanished, Lesser light in Faith may go with greater
assurance.
God present in ordinary, so that their falls are few, and their peace is
constant according to that knowledge which they have. Which I add, because I
doubt not but many an upright Christian may in some cases exceed him in some
acts of closeness and obedience, both in doing and suffering, who yet goes
beyond him in assurance; the reason is plain, because assurance follows not
always upon the greatness of light, but the constant living by faith in that
light which a man has; so that for lack of light greater faith may come short
of that measure of obedience which lesser faith may have. To return, let none
be wanting to himself in seeking the greatest degree, but beware of resting
upon this, that his faith is unfeigned, and the faith of the Elect, and so
never seek further. This is the general disease of most Christians at this
day, wherein I am persuaded few attain that degree which formerly in times of
smaller light (but more tenderness, conscience, watchfulness and sincerity,
with diligence) they attained unto: Oh, thou shall one day find the fruit
hereof, Note this.
when that broad door of entrance into the Kingdom shall not be granted thee!
If any ask by what marks the Spirit of sealing is discerned: I answer: First,
by more then ordinary self-denial, humility, Marks of assurance. Luke 5.8.
spiritualnesse: The nearer the soul comes to God, the more it abhorres it
self. Secondly, such an one has much inured herself to weigh the promise; as
that scholar soonest grows to be above his rules, who has got most
exactness in his rules. Thirdly, he is ordinarily free from doubts. Romans 8.
ult. I am persuaded that neither life, nor death, etc. Fourthly, death is
welcome to him, as it was to Simeon, Lord let thy servant depart in peace,
because mine eyes have seen thy salvation. Fifthly, such an one is above
carnal respects or own ends, for he knows his requital is not daunted with
trouble, hard duties, losses for Gods cause, for he understands his hundred
fold. And so I might add more, which the examples of David and Paul in
Scripture will afford. One more I add, If God visit them with any spiritual
desertion (as he may in extraordinary) yet the experience of former mercy, at
the lowest point, keeps them so, that the grace of God shall ever be
sufficient, and therefore they shall be content for the time of their eclipse,
to be under infirmity, seeing hereby God is most glorified, Luke 22.42.
and their grace approved. Thus it was with our head Christ himself, and with
Paul, 2 Cor. 12.9. So much for this third and last Branch, and so for the whole
use of exhortation.

Consolation. Weak believers must not quail and give over.
though sound and faithful ones, who (though in much poverty and infirmity of
spirit) have desired to cast themselves upon the promise, when yet their light
is divine, and their settling and comfort but small. Say thine own heart often
misgives thee, saying, I have long heard, and received the Sacraments, with
other helps, but I cannot put on the Lord Jesus, I cannot in particular fasten
upon each part of his Mediation and Merit, as King, Priest and Prophet: I am
afraid to die: I doubt, if hard times should come, I should be the first
should stagger, and deny Christ: I am troubled often about my evidences: when I
have any, I keep them not long, mine example is dark, my peace small, my self
very silly to conceive, remember, affect goodness, all go before me; and a
thousand such. Well: But yet this thou have, that when all is done, Joh. 19.7.
yet thou art not willing to give over the Lord: there is a secret thing which
upholds thee, thou know not as yet what God is doing for thee; but thou
shall know: Thou say, Whither should I go Lord, Joh. 6.68.
if I forsake thee? Thou have the words of eternal life. This again thou have,
when thou can not swim, yet thou lie upon the bladders of the promise,
waiting for more skill. If thou sink as thou art coming, yet thou have an hand
to put out, and a tongue to say, Lord Jesus catch me. Matthew. 14.30.
Thou can not answer every doubt by a word, but thou plungest thyselfe upon
it, to answer for thee, and can send Devil, World, and Unbelief, to Christ
in thy stead. Be comforted, all is well. When Peter, Acts 12. was bidden to put
on his Cloak and Sandals, and follow the Angel, though he saw not why, or
wherefore, being asleep, yet this he did, he obeyed, and did as he was bidden;
and when he was past all Bars and Gates, he saw the truth of all. So do
thou obey, although yet thou see not why. But in time thou shall. And
therefore do not mutter, seasons of more light, strength and comfort, are in
the Lords dispose, not thine. If thou be neither lazy nor rebellious, it is
God, and not thou, who holds thee at this stay. Be as God will have thee:
Behold the salvation of God, it shall be thy strength to sit still. Perhaps
there is more within then appears as yet. Rather wonder that thou have any
thing, that thou live, or may look up to heaven, then thy strength is no
greater. And this know, the Lord tries thee with little, to see if that will
make thee thankful, that he may give thee more. Still clasp upon the Promise;
remember Salomons speech, Prove. 30.26.
The Cony is a weak Nation; but they make their holes in the rock, and so
become strong, because wise in weakness. The Ivy is a weak plant, but it
has teeth and strings to fasten hard upon a brick wall, and so grows above
the Oak. A weak child has all the parts of a strong man, although not the
strength of any. In a word, apply that to thy self which the Lord speaks Esaias
50.10. He that has no light, but is in darkness, yet fears God, and obeyes
his voice; let him trust in the name of the Lord, and stay himself upon his
God. Better a little light then thy own sparkles. As for the worlds disdain
it is common to thee and the strongest. And so much for the whole Doctrine,
which as it was my chief scope in this Treatise, so I pray God above all (and
yet withal) the rest to bless unto us both.

Having finished Naamans obedience it self, The second general of the verse,
v^z The extent of Naamans obedience.
now we proceed to the rule, or (if you will) to the extent of it: For the
Text precisely adds, That he did obey according to the word of the man of
God. Before we have heard how crossely he carried himself toward this message,
and the Holy Ghost has at large shamed him for it: But now the Lord having got
the victory over his stout and rebellious spirit, lo, how he also rejoices to
describe it, and to present unto us what a strange change is wrought in him.
For why? Now he submits himself to the rule of the word, at which he had so
cavilled, and to the uttermost thereof, he went down and obeyed, according to
all the circumstances of the word of the Prophet. In two things.
Two things there were in the Prophets saying: First, a solemn charge in and
under the authority of God, this charge he yields unto: 1. Extent of the
command.
For he goes down to Jorden, washes himself, and that seven times, omitting
nothing at all of the charge, neither for matter, nor manner. Secondly, there
was a promise, 2. Extent of the promise.
and that was a persuasion to obey from the assured effect that would come
thereof. This promise he consents unto, acknowledges it, and good reason to be
in it, and takes it as no humane, but a mere divine cure, and so concurres (as
I have said) with it, and that to the uttermost intention and meaning of it.
From these two branches arise two points, the first whereof we will now
propound, open and make use of ere we come to the other. The former point then
is this, Gods commands are sad things, not to be shuffled, or dispensed with,
but to be obeyed, according to the true tenor, intent and contents thereof.
Perhaps some may think, The grounding of the former of these.
that I am more curious then I need to be in fastening a point of such weight
upon words (in show) not bearing it well up: For why? They will take this
phrase of the Holy Ghost to be but a complement of speech, Naaman only, and
reaching to none else;) they may allege that it instructs not us of any moral
obedience which is of a perpetual nature: To whom I would make the fuller
answer, because I shall treat somewhat that is not the question now; only this
it is whether the express relation of the Holy Ghost touching the
punctualnesse of his obedience be not ground sufficient of the Doctrine;
especially the Text seeming to mention it with delight, and to record how far
the Lord brought down Naamans heart from the extremity of slighting all, to
such an extent of obeying to the uttermost.

Occasional commands bind as much as moral and perpetual, for the present.
for the present, and for them whom they concern, as any moral and perpetual
ones do: I add, that they are as dangerous and sad in the transgression to
such, as they are made unto, whether the parties be faithful or unfaithful.
For example: It was but a mere positive, and (as far as I can learn) a
temporary charge, Exodus 12.22. to sprinkle the Doore-posts of the Israelites
houses with the blood of the Lamb which was to be the Passover (I confess the
Sacrament was for continuance, but the sprinkling was but for the present)
Howbeit, had the charge been broken, how sad the effect had been, Numb. 20.8.
all know. Moses his striking the Rock, was the obedience only to an
occasional command, in respect of the act done at that time; but the neglect
of the due manner of doing of it (though through infirmity only) cost him the
loss of that type of entering into Gods Rest, that is the promised Land. And
lest any (perhaps) might except against this instance, take others of mere
occasional nature: That of the young Prophet charged to go and denounce
against Bethel, 2 Kings 13.3.4.
and not to eat or drink in the place, was a thing in it self neither good
nor bad: yet God having positively set it down for a rule to curb him, we see
the transgression of it cost him his life, whatsoever color he might pretend
from the old Prophets reasons or person to induce him to it. So might I say of
all other. It was but an occasional thing that the Lord charged Saul, 1 Samuel
13. to stay for Samuel, and not to adventure to pray, and offer sacrifice
himself, before the battle. 1 Samuel 15.2.3.
It was but occasional that he was charged to destroy all Amalek, branch and
rush, man and beast: yet, what his dispensing and paltring with God in both,
cost him, we all know. Briefly, I say of all such incident and occasioned
commands, whether for the temporarinesse of them, or for the indifferency of
the things urged: they are as sad things for the necessity, and penalties, for
doing or for not doing, as the moral. Ceremonies in their nature had nothing
in them to force obedience; Numb. 15.32.
howbeit, he that transgressed one of them, as in gathering of sticks upon the
Sabbath, offering a beast with any blemish in it, staying up the Ark contrary
to the charge, 2 Samuel 6.7.
or the like, we see had fearful punishments annexed, as to be stoned, to be
stricken dead, to be cut off from his people. And why? Because (during Gods
pleasure) they were in as great force, and bound the conscience as much as the
moral, whereof they were but as shells, and whereto they only served as fences
and fortifications. So that still the Doctrine holds firm, That Gods commands
are sad things, Doctrine. Gods Commands are sad things.
not to be dispensed with at our pleasure, or by our distinctions: But
indispensable, unappealable, unavoidable: and therefore to be obeyed according
to the intent, and the extent, length and breadth thereof. For the prosecution
of which point, first, I will prove it by Scripture, secondly, I will reason
it, thirdly, show both what the intent of a command is, Proofs of it.
and what the extent is, and so come to Use. For Proofs, we may remember what
phrases the Lord uses to make good this truth: Deuteronomy 12.8.
He tells us he will not have us to do that which seems good in our own
eyes, but obey his voice. He bids the people to obey the Prophet which he
should give them, (the Lord Jesus the word of the eternal Father) and hear
his voice, for (he says) he will not pardon your transgressions, Deuteronomy. 18.18.
Deuteronomy. 30.15.
if you run after your own devices. Again, he tells us, That the obeying of
his commands is life or death, I set before thee this day life or death; Deuteronomy.
11.26.
a sad point. And the Epistle to the Hebrews tells us, Heb. 2.3.
That the breaker of Moses Law under two or three witnesses escaped not. How
often have we this phrase continued in Deutronomy, Deuteronomy. ubique
they did according to the word of the Lord by the hand of Moses; in every
thing done still, the rule and the extent of obeying are added, Number. 9.
According to the command of the Lord they pitched and removed; they attended
the pillar of fire by night, and of cloud by day: And again, Do all according
to the pattern showed thee in the Mount. Add not to this Law, nor detract
from it, but do all that is written, turning neither to the right hand nor
left; to this purpose is that phrase, Walk narrowly; Ephesians. 5.15.16.
a word taken from them that work by line and rule, as if the workman cut or
saw his timber or boards besides his chalk, or mark, we know he spoils his
work, but if he hew or saw it even and narrowly, carrying a steady eye from
going out or in, he makes good work of it: So the word of commands must be
closely clave unto, without warping or swerving. Thence it is that we are so
often called to a due beholding of the person commanding us: Heb. 4.13.
He (says the Apostle) whom we have to deal withal, beholds all things as
open and naked; noting that in commands we have not to deal with a man like
our selves, whose edicts we can pick holes in, and pick quarrels against, but
a sad and solemn Majesty, who will not be dallied withal; Heb. 12. ult.
For our God is a consuming fire: and so also wear often pinched with the
authority and power of the word, The word of God is piercing, and sharp as a
two edged sword, dividing between the joints and the marrow, Heb. 4.12.
and discerning the thoughts and intents of the heart.

Men of place dare avow any thing which they command to their inferiors, by
the place which they are in: Smite him (says Absalon to his servanrs
concerning Ammon) for lo, have not I commanded you; 2 Samuel 13.28.
how much more shall the Lord bear himself upon his royal Authority, and
sovereign Power in the things which he commands? As we read often in Scripture
that he urges men to obey by this argument, Have not I commanded thee? So we
see again that Moses having uttered the song to the children of Israel,
concludes thus, Deuteronomy. 32.46.
Set your hearts unto all the words which I testify among you this day, which
you shall command your children to observe: and why? Mark, For this is not a
vain thing unto you, because it is you life, and hereby you shall prolong your
days in the land which you go to possess: When he tells them, it is not a
vain thing, he means the greater by the less, that is, It is a sad and
weighty thing, as much as your souls and salvation come to; make not therefore
vain matters of my commands, nor strange things of the great things of my Law.
When Samuel encounters Saul in those two eminent Chapters, the 13. and 15.
verse. 13. and 14. touching his fulfilling the charges which God had enjoined
him; mark, how he opposes still the commands of God to Saul's slightness,
sweeping down his cobwebs with the besome of Gods commands: Has the Lord more
pleasure in oxen then in hearing his voice? Thou have done foolishly, thou have
not obeyed the commands which the Lord thy God commanded thee. So much for
Proofs.

Their first making was solemn.
all that terror and awfulnesse which he cast upon the camp, arraigning six
hundred thousand men, besides women and children, at his tribunal, and not
admitting them to come within the lists set at the foot of the mount, besides
those fearful earthquakes, thunders, lightnings, darkness and smoke which
scared the beholders, and made Moses himself to quake, and rottenness to
enter into the bones of men, showed sufficiently that Gods commands were no
nose of wax to be turned which way we list, nor trifles to be dallied with, but
steadfast, weighty and solemn things, to be observed with sad and serious care
of heart, with great closeness and narrowness: And surely if the Lord Jesus
in his commands, was so full of authority when he was at such distance, and so
far off; how much more authority is he of in those commands of his published
in the Gospel, I mean the command of Faith, and those moral commands of the
Law which himself has distinctly established, and interpreted, (as we see it
was his scope in those Sermons upon the Mount) pressing that he came not to
break, Matthew. 5.17.
but to strengthen them? If a Princes Laws made only by lawfully deputed
Officers were so great, what are they which in person, and with his own mouth
he has uttered? And how great is the disobedience of them that resist?
Heb.2.3.4.
So much for the first.

They borrow their sadness from the nature of the Commander.
and they do but argue and witness what that is. Now we know the will of God
is most sovereign, powerful, indispencible, whether we speak of it as his
nature and being, or as the effect thereof, in that transcendent and secret way
and purpose thereof, whereby he has determined of the ends and states of all
men: Now then are not those expressions of his will in his commands, answerable
thereto? And are they not as closely to be observed, as the other to be deeply
adored? Yes surely, Men will bow to the chair of Estate when the King is out
of it for near resemblance: How much more shall we fall under the authority of
commands, wherein the Lord is so present, as that he can never be separated?
And whereunto he has annexed such sad penalties as no mortal creature can
either avoid, or undergo? So much for the second.

Majesty of God, to tie the conscience and inner man of his creature, with as
strong ties, and to as narrow obedience, as any mortal Prince can tie the
outward man to closeness and punctualnesse of duty. The proportion of the
laws of earthly Princes, does prove it.
But we see Princes count it their chief honor to plant themselves in their
subjects hearts, in the uttermost and deepest awe of soveraigntie. Although
they be never so distant from their subjects, yet they look that the influence
of their Royal pleasure shall go through their whole Kingdom: That none
should be so daring and presumptuous, as once to mute or quetch, if they once
proclaim their will. That must stand for a Law: if any man enquire or dispute
their prerogative, they esteem them Traitors, so sacred and inviolable they
look, that their Persons and Edicts should be, that they will have them
indisputable and unimpeached. See it in Saul: 1 Samuel 14.24.
when it pleased him to enact a Law for the time of battle, that no man should
touch a bit, or taste a drop of meat or drink, till the Philistines were
overthrown; how did that Proclamation of his force the wills of his subjects to
obey when as yet they were strongly provoked to break it? Could an Edict of
such rigor (scarce just) so prevail, and that in secret, and shall not the
Lords most righteous will much more? Is it for the Kings honor to press the
subject, not only for civil homage, but for conscience sake to obey him; and
is it not much more for the glory of our King invisible and immortal? Yes
sure, it makes much for his renown, that all his people do, without all
questioning and difficulty, freely and nakedly close with his commands, for
that sovereignty and authority sake, which himself has conveyed into them:
Else we should make the Lord a weak King.

Fourthly, we must know, that the Lord has mavelous rewards God has great
rewards for obeyers. Psalm. 19.10.11. 1 Samuel 22.7.
and therefore well may he require at our hands, excellent obedience: his pay
is not common, ordinary, slight and general, but close and bountiful. In
obeying his Commands, there is great reward. Saul looked that his servants
should be very close and faithful to him (in a sinful case) because of his
rewards. Can the son of Ishai give you Olives and Vineyards? If a Master
allow a special servant double wages, he looks that his service should be
very close, and his eye in every corner for his Masters advantage. So here:
None give such wages as he, therefore no work should be done like his, no
commands ought to be so punctual as his. If a Master should make his servant
his child, and give him his lands, he gives him no more then he may lose; nay,
then he must forgo. Princes allow some subjects rewards reaching to the half
of their Kingdom. But the Lord makes every servant of his, a free borne
child, and gives him a never fading inheritance of glory; yea, a whole, an
eternal kingdom for the least obedience they perform, even for a Cup of cold
water; yea, for every command they obey. Matthew. 10.42.
And shall not they then be punctual, close and serious in their obeying?

Fifthly, whatsoever is in God, is eminently so: not only in respect
Whatsoever is in God, is eminent. Psalm. 19.
Now Gods will is himself, and his Commands (as I have said) are the engraven
form thereof. Therefore they must be eminently such as they are. Are they
righteous, close, sound, pure? Then must they also be eminently so, exceeding
pure, righteous, sovereign and solemn. Nothing in God is common or vulgar:
therefore nothing of God, or coming from such eminency, Psalm. 19.
can be otherwise. And, if the commands of God (which are as the Seal) are
such, then ought the stamp in the conscience, spirit and practice of men, be
such, which ought to be as the wax to the seal.

Else God his subjects might rule him, not he them.
then might they give him law, not he them. What a poor and titular King were
he, who must stand to the good will of his people, as being more strong and
subsisting in themselves, then himself? What a King would he be, who either
for lack of power, or because he has resigned up his power, cannot match
them who are under his command? How poor was it with David, 2 Samuel 3.39.
when his own son and his subjects; yea, Ioab and Abishai were too strong
for him? A true King must be furnished with power, policy, and influence of
authority sufficient, to curb, overmatch, and subdue his subjects: how much
more then the Lord? Doubtless, were not his laws full of majesty and
authority, they could not match and equal the corruption of their hearts, whom
they ought to govern. For example: The heart of man is very stout, lofty and
rebellious: If then the Word and Law of God were not full of strength, able to
make it quake and tremble; yea, to cast down and break the rocks and hills,
Nahum. 1.3.
and to make Carmell and Lebanon to shake, Dan. 5.6.
how should he control it? Even Belshazzars knees smote together at his
handwriting. The heart of man is base and slavish; Slaves watch their season
and opportunity, when their Masters eyes is off, and his back turned, to play
their parts. If then this law of his were not (like the soul in the body)
wholly in all, and wholly in every part, beholding the creature always, in each
corner, and at every turn, how would hypocrites make bold with him? But now
his whip is before them, and his sword hangs over them perpetually: His
Sergeant and Keeper is never from their heels: their own conscience and his
Spirit (as Elisha's with Gehazi) going out with them, and coming in; whither
shall they go from his presence, but he will over-take them? If they go up
to Heaven, Psalm. 139.8.
or down to Hell, or to the utmost parts of the Earth, his eye follows them,
and they are still naked before him. Therefore there is no playing their rex
more in one place, or one time, then another. Jer. 17.9.
So again, The heart of man is deep and deceitful, who can know it? If then
the Lord were not more searching, narrow and politic, then all the cunning of
hypocrites, and if his commands were not able to hunt them out of all their
nooks and corners (as Samuel did Saul, 1 Samuel 15. 1 King. 14.
and as Abija did Ieroboams wife) how should he keep his state and dignity over
it? Must he not needs be overreached by it? But now the candle of the Lord
searches all the bowels of the belly: Prove. 20.27.
all those secret windings and turnings of a close and false heart, are open to
him, and to his word, commands and terrors (even as Benhadads plots to Elisha.)
And so may I say of all the rest. 2 King. 6.12.
The word of God is fully able to match and control whatsoever is in the
corrupt heart of man, and in that respect is a law meet and fit torule and
control it. And therefore how meek, calm, how open, plain, how loyal,
faithful should that obedience be, which the soul should perform unto his
commands! So much for this.

Seventhly, the Lord has power to repeal Laws, as well as to make God has
power to repeat the saddest law, therefore to make it. Deuteronomy. 22.6.
which at another is none: he can reconcile contraries by his will: he that at
one time forbids to kill the Damme upon the Eggs, at another time commands to
kill the women and their sucklings at their breasts, or in travel, or big with
child, and yet both lawful: He that forbids the spoiling of so much as the
scraps that fall from our Tables, or are left after meals, at another,
commands the remainder of the Passover next morning, 1 Samuel 15.3.
to be burnt with fire: Exodus 12.36.
He that forbids to steal a pin or a point from another, commands to rob men
of their best jewels, gold and silver. So that from his mouth we must receive
Law: his will is Law, either forbidding or enjoining. Therefore it must needs
be, that it is sovereign and not to be controlled by any, or all the
creatures. The Lord commands policy to be used by a Captain in war; yet if
he will have men play the fools, and fight with Lamps and Rammes-hornes,
Judge. 20.29. Josh. 6.8.
it is better then policy: yea, he will have Saul to wait for Samuel, 1 Samuel
13.13.
although his Soldiers go from him, and his enemies are ready to surprise
him. When the Lord commands, it is a sin to suffer an Ox to perish, or a
sheep to miscarry in a ditch, or the like: And again, Luke 14.5. 1 Samuel 15.3.
when he pleases all the fat Oxen and Cattle of a Kingdom must be slain
downerights, and be made dung for the earth: yea, their owners also must be
destroyed. So much for reasons.

Now I come to the second general; viz. to answer those two questions, Answer.
Intension and Extension of Commands what.
and integrity which Gods commands require of his people. By extension I mean
the largeness and elbow-roome, the breadth and reach of them. Both these make
much to set forth their authority: For the former, Gods object at which he
aims in commanding, which he binds by his charges, and arraignes at his
Bar, for breaking them, is the conscience of a man: he sets up his Rules in
the secretest part of man, called in Scripture, the Spirit or inner man, of the
most retired thoughts and affections. To this Closet no law of man can pierce,
save God: he is the Lord of the bodies, but the souls are Gods peculiar: He
requires indeed outward kissing the Son, and bowing the knee; Jer. 31.31.
Romans 14.11.
but he moreover urges the due of the heart: There he will have his laws
written, even in the heart; and thence he will have obedience to flow. So Paul,
Prove. 26. Romans 7.22.25.
I delight in the Law of God in my inner man: And, whom I serve in my spirit.
Heb. 4.6.
The intents of the heart are pierced by this word and Lawgiver: he judges
the uprightness, tenderness, narrowness, closeness of our obedience by the
heart root: If it be planted there, even in the bent and stream thereof: all
is well, not else. Read Matthew. 5.28. You have heard say of old, Thou shall not
commit adultery: But I say, He that lusts after a woman, has committed that
sin in his heart. So that the Lord looks at a pure principle, manner and
scope of the heart, as well as the curbing of the outward man or members.
Princes are mounted upon Thrones of Ivory or Gold: But the Lord only exalts
himself in the spirit and conscience; there he sits as Sovereign, and causes
it to become his own Recorder, witness, and Judge, against the person
himself, so that the greatest self-love in the world cannot bribe the
conscience to side with the sinner against him who is the Lord of conscience,
and can condemn both the one and the other. 1 John 3.20. Matthew. 10.28.
Fear not him who can kill the body only, but him who can cast body and soul
into hell fire, I say unto you, fear him. So then the Sovereignty of the
commands of God, stands much in the intents of God, and that meaning of his to
rule the spirits of his subjects; and in all their obedience, either negative
or affirmative, either in doing or suffering, to cast a secret chain upon the
conscience, to obey cheerfully, equally, uprightly, wisely, constantly: For
instance, in the worship of a Sabbath, the abhorring of oppression, the
suffering for the cause and truth of God; the Lord looks not at the external
act, but the intent of the soul, and the pure carriage of the heart toward
himself, as with what delight it keeps a Sabbath, how cordially it preserves
the spirit chaste and clean, for what ends it suffers the cross, whether for
Gods or it own. Thus much for the former.

Quest. 2. What is meant by the extent of a command.
The latter is, what is meant by the extent of a command? I answer, The full
reach of the command. As for instance. First, the unlimitednesse of the
command. The Lord makes not some Laws for great ones, and some for small ones;
as if the great fly might get through the cobweb, but the little ones must be
taken; but his nets as they are small enough to catch the small fish, so they
are strong enough to hold Whales and the might. They reach to all sorts
without limit, rich and poor, noble and simple, high and low, one and another.
Secondly, their extent stands in their influence to all: The Princes law
reaches to all his Subjects, as well as to his Chamber of London, but yet the
lawgiver reaches no further then his presence, in absence, and behind his
back his Laws are slighted. But this Lawgiver is omnipresent, and assists
his Laws with immediate influence, causing them to convince in secret, as well
as in public, and is able to execute his own Laws to the uttermost, so that
for lack of strength, and reach of arm, no sinner can go unpunished.
Thirdly, this breadth reaches in the affirmative command to the negative, and
in the negative to the affirmative, as directly as if they had both been
expressed: In the narrow Laws of men, the sense and scope of the Law must be
limited to the words of the Statute* which (as the common speech is) have no
meaning in them beyond the terms thereof: But the power of Gods commands
stands in their insinuations, and imply somewhat by necessity which they
express not. Fourthly, their extent stands in the coherence thereof, to wit,
that whatsoever maine good or evil the Lord commands or forbids, by the same
power, he forbids or commands whatsoever concerns that command, the means
tending thereto, the occasions leading, all circumstances attending whatsoever
possibly the soul of man can apprehend, directly or indirectly to make for
that Law, or to thwart or cross that Law. Fifthly, it reaches to the quantity
and measure of the duty, urging not only sin to be shunned in the greatest
degree, but also in the smallest, and so, duty to be done, not only in the main
pieces, but in the pettiest, all proceeding from the same goodness and
justice. Sixthly, it reaches to the measure of the principle of obeying, urging
it to obey, not coldly, deadly, slackly formally, but to put forth the
uttermost affection, strength, wisdom, will, courage, zeal, reach and
largeness, fruitfulness and extension of the inward and outward man to
concur with the meaning of the Commander, which the Holy Ghost calls all
welpleasing, Col. 1.7. Seventhly, it reaches to an universality of time,
place, occasions, not to be limited, straitened and circumscribed at our narrow
will and pleasure; but ties us always, yesterday, to day and ever to one
obedience, Heb. 13.8.
not to vary with the time, with the multitude, by occasion of dangers, fears,
losses, enmity, power of man; not to be cast off in private, in secret; but to
be enlarged according to it self, generally, to all circumstances. This is a
field of matter, but I have already elsewhere walked in it in some sort, as the
reader hereof may perceive by that I have written in my practical Catechism,
part. 3. in the article of the directive rule of our obedience, the Law of God,
where I treat fully of the point. So much for this second.

To these two questions, a third may be added, Matthew. 5.6.7.
not only of Pharisaicall, but of Antinomian abuse and dissoluteness. Paul
also tells us, To. 2. ult. that faith setles the Law stronger upon her bottom
then ever. So that he is as well accursed now as ever, who shall add or
detract, Rev. 22. True it is, that the terror, rigor and the impossiblenesse of
the Law is removed by our Lord Jesus; The Law how far its strengthened or
weakened by the Gospel. 1 Timothy 1.5.6.
but look what is taken off in that kind, is supplied in another; for the
spiritualnesse and purity of obeying is enlarged now, rather then diminished;
only it is true, that even in this enlargement the Lord Jesus has made his
yoke most sweet and easy to them who out of faith, love and a good conscience
seek the end of the commandment, as Paul speaks; of which more shall be
occasioned to speak after, (if God will) in the use of Exhortation. Its enough
here to say, That as the Lord Jesus has removed that burdensomenesse, tyranny
and irksome rigor of Laws, which was intolerable; so he has put another
yoke upon the soul instead thereof, which although love make sweet, yet
justice will not abate, nor cut off: Love made Jacobs labor welcome, but still
the frost was tedious, and the heat wearisome, Genesis 29.20.
and the conditions hard enough to flesh and blood. So much for this, and for
the ground of the point.

Now in the third place, I come to the use of the Doctrine. And first let it be
Instruction and Caveat to all superiors and men in dignity and authority, as
to acknowledge a wide difference between their sovereignty of commands in
respect of Gods, Instruction with Caveat. 1. Branch.
so to look to it (as they will answer it to God) that they usurp not Gods
prerogative over such their inferiors, as by providence are under them. To
execute Gods authority over their subjects and inferiors is lawful for them,
to be Officers and Viceroyes, or Vicegerents under and for him, acknowledging
that all kingdom and power of theirs is under a greater, and earth is still
under heaven, this is meet. But to usurp a power unlimited over the
consciences of men, or to equal their sovereignty with Gods, Gods commands
exceed men's in point of unlimitednesse and Sovereignty.
is unjust. For why? Gods commands admit no inquiry, deliberation, shifts or
excuses; but require a free, resolute, unlimited, unquestioned subjection. So
do not man's. A Master cannot force the conscience of his servant to what he
pleases, as if all the blame should lie upon his neck, if the servant offend
God in pleasing man: No, for although the Master shall pay sweetly for imposing
it, yet, so shall the servant also in venturing to obey a command usurpedly
imposed, and therefore it imports him to enquire of the lawfulness of the
charge which his Master urges, except he will incur the praemunire of God and
his penalties for transgression: Its therefore both their duties to esteem
their commands, and obedience thereto according to the rule of the Word,
knowing that only Gods commands are of themselves, Law; other commands are so,
so far as they borrow their warrant from thence; and therefore ought to be
inquired into, scanned and debated before they be obeyed. I do not intend to
trench upon the positive civil power of Kings and Magistrates: I speak of
that usurpation of Governors, whereby they take upon them to impose Laws upon
inferiors, contrary to the commands of God. Let the Sovereignty and extent of
the Laws of God be a curb and bridle unto all men in place to subordinate
their laws to Gods, and not to trench upon them. Matthew. 5.19.
He that shall break the least of these commands, and teach or force others to
break them, undertaking to stand between them and their harms, to answer God
for the violation of his will shall be least in Gods Kingdom. Inferiors must
inquire into their Masters commands, and not obey implicitly.
I urge this the rather, because I see that some defend the contrary: By name,
that a servant is bound to obey his Master, urging the breach of the Sabbath,
(I mean such a work as infers necessity of breaking it) and sins not
therein, the obeying of his Master shall save him harmless, and the Master
shalll bear all the blame; what a trumpet of defiance is this, to proclaim
licentiousness in breaking Gods Sabbath?

So may I say of the Minister of a Congregation: Let him beware lest he lend
that authority and strength which God has put upon his person, Ministers must
not prostitute their authority, to urge or back commands against God. Matthew.
10. end.
to countenance, back and support any base dishonor of God, any the least
affront given to the Commands of God. But remember, as thou would have thy
people in all things subject to thee under God; so be thou closely subject to
God, who has thee at a more infinite bay and vantage, then thou can have
them. Oh! fear thou him who has thee and thine at such a beck and command,
that he can destroy soul and body in hell: Fear him, I say, whom there is no
appeal from, no cavilling against, no dispensing with, no concealing from, no
avoiding of his wrath. If any would abuse thy place and person, to set up or
bolster any prophanations, liberties, or corruptions, which they cannot so well
bolster as thou may, by the opinion which men have of thy learning, thy
years and gravity, experience or gifts: Beware, and prostitute not Gods
commands to the baseness of men, set not thy conscience to sale to please men.
If thy licentious Patron, (who claims an interest in thee) would borrow a
privilege from thee and thy Ministry, to live in lust, usury, oppression,
base pleasures: If thy people would pull thee from thy zeal, and closeness of
conscience, to justify them in the profaning of Gods day, and the blowing a
trumpet to that which flesh of it self is too propense unto: Look to thy
self, let not fear of losing thine esteem with them, or their love; no, nor
thy credit, thy living, thy peace and liberty of Ministry: Let not favor and
flattery, to be praised and commended, to be a moderate man, draw thee on
either hand to violate thy peace.

Remember those two fearful paternes in Scripture, 1 King. 13.
which I shall mention: the one voluntary, the other compelled, but neither of
them allowed by God. The former is, the example of that old Prophet, who
knowing that the young Prophet (sent by God to denounce against the Altar and
Idolatry of Jeroboam) was charged not to eat or drink there, till he was
returned home: yet would needs abuse his authority and years to divert and
control Gods Command, and attempt the young Prophet to return, to break his
charge, and to eat and drink at his house. No sooner had he persuaded him so
to do, but the Lord sent an item into his heart, to denounce against the young
Prophet, that he should dye for it: What a shame was that unto him? Who but
himself drew him unto that service? Therefore it was just that his own mouth
should pronounce sentence, as against the other, so against himself, for his
insolency and usurping against Gods solemn commands. But another instance I
would also press, who might seem to be pressed and provoked to do the like;
and yet escaped not censure. And this latter example I urge the rather upon
this wretched age of woeful time-servers, with whom the prints of divine
sovereignty in Commands, seems to be wholly worn out and defaced. If there
be any pressure put upon Ministers by their Patrones, People or Superiors,
which trench upon the word, they presently fly off from obeying a command
according to it, and the sovereignty of it, and consult with flesh and blood,
the consequences of such an obedience to God: and if they find, that it is
like to become any prejudice to their state and liberty, they think it a very
rational thing to obey men before God. So woefully is that impression of Gods
sovereign Commands, blotted out in men's Consciences, Equivocating in point of
Commands with conscience for the saving of our own skin, is abominable.
that in very deed, the violating thereof is made but a sport: and the outward
respects which men have to their name, ease, wealth and welfare, washes off all
respects to Gods commands. Tush (say men) would you have us rush our selves
upon the rocks, and upon the snares which are laid for us? Do you think we
are such fools as to betray our selves to trouble and need not? We hope we are
as honest as others, and would be as loath in cold blood, to prevaricate, as
others; but being now snared, we must provide for our selves as well as we can,
we must save our selves for better times, and not betray our own safety: Our
opinion is sound, and our practice shall be honest; howbeit if any command of
men come between to try and compel us, what would you have us to do? We can
dispense so with our people, that they shall not stumble at us; we can so order
it, that we can confute that with one breath which we allow with another. Oh!
thou temporizing hypocrite: is thy conscience kept in a box (like those witches
eyes) to pull out and keep in at thy pleasure? Do thou (I say not reject the
pattern of Gods ancient and modern Confessors and Martyrs, Heb. 11.37. but)
the express charge of commands, that thou should dare to please men to
dishonor God?

Exodus 32.
Take therefore that famous example of Aaron, that it may give thee thy belly
full of thine equivocations and distinctions against a Command. Moses being
gone up into the Mount, the people would needs have a Calfe, and to that end
would needs press Aaron to make it for them, they knew his authority would
carry it through better then their own, and so urge him to be active in it.
What should Aaron have done? Surely abhorred the thought of it, and clave to
the second Command, with many other to that purpose. But here fear or
flattery, or infirmity, steps in, and makes him a Politician, he bethinkes
himself of a witty trick to out-shoot the Devil in his own bow: for,
supposing they would not easily bring their Eare-rings and Jewels to be molten,
he tells them, If they would have a Calfe, it must be made of their costliest
ornaments, bring him them, and they should hear more: whereas he should have
checked himself and said; What if they bring them (as indeed they did) will that
discharge me? No surely: therefore I will put my life into Gods hands, cease to
color against Command, and abhor their motion.

What came of this? Alas! he was taken in his own snare, and so was not able
to go back, but makes them a Calfe. Had he not, think we, infinite many
arguments to shift off his sin? Yes verily, he feared their violence, or was
loath to cross them too far: his conscience was honest in the maine, and
what should he do? What? Should they rend him in pieces? He knew Moses would
curb them afterward, but he was not able. But what of all these? Could these
shield him from Moses his bitter rebuke, and Gods more bitter wrath? Should
thou (mine high Priest) betray mine honor to the lust of rebels? Was there
none but Aaron to make the people naked? Should their father, their nurse,
expose them to wrath and vengeance? Oh we see, what it cost him? Nay even Kings
themselves have been such fearful examples for their audaciousnesse, Judge.
27.8. 2 Chronicles. 24.17.
Gedeon for his Ephod, Ioash for harkening to his Princes and their bribes,
Saul for sacrificing without Samuel. And shall we venture to violate the
Sovereignty of Gods commands? Beware lest if we dare to do it, we pay for it
as they: When those Princes of Samaria heard Iehu's challenge for the children
of Ahab, 2 King. 10.4.
what said they? Behold two Kings could not stand before him, and shall we
venture? No doubtless; we will send in their heads rather. So say I, let not
any fear or favor of man embolden you to try conclusions with God, to remove
his landmarkes, to descant upon his Statutes; for if Prophets, Priests, Kings,
have not been able to stand it out, how much less you! Transgress who dare
or will, but bring you the heads in baskets to Iehu, tender you close obedience
to God. The more ye are pursued for conscience, the more stick to it. Cast not
that away to the hunters: As they say, the Bezor (whose stone we prize)
understands she is hunted for nothing, save her stone, therefore if the hounds
put her hard to it she bites them off, and saves her life. Do not you so, lest
the misery of a lost conscience prove more fearful then all the gain of your
ease and ends, can prove sweet.

And to add another item to inferiors: 2. Branch. Inferiors follow not the
example of superiors in the breaking of Gods commands.
If others will be so base as to betray us, to make us naked, let us wind our
cloak the closer about us; trust God, and save the darling of our peace
entire. If our Ministers will defend usury, petty oaths, jeastings, riots,
abusing of the Sabbath; let us be so much the more resolved against them, and
for the Sabbath to keep it holy, not only as a day of voluntary devotion, at
our pleasure (for so we may grow to sanctify one of ten or twelve as well as
seven) but the eight day, and Lords day [consecrated by himself (doubtless)
by intimation to his Apostles and by their practice to the honor of his rest]
from the work of redemption. Note.
And howsoever so express a text for the change and prorogation of the seventh
to the eight as we might wish, be not found; yet (were not our sinful hearts
prejudiced against the power of godliness) we might rather conclude, that by
this silence God tries our honesty then provokes our treachery. Epecially the
command of the Sabbath.
If the Lord Jesus purposely would defile and abdicate the seventh day Sabbath
of the Jew, by lying in the grave that whole day (and no other else) that he
might early rise upon the next morrow after the light appeared, (whereas else
he might have lien that day too:) To this end, that as the first Sabbath was
devoted to the honor of Gods rest from his creation; so this second might much
more be deputed to the honor of the finished redemption, (a far greater work)
shall we quarrel with him, and call it a will worship? Christ Jesus the Lord of
the Sabbath translated the rest of Creation to the rest of Redemption.
No verily, but rather the more we see Gods Sabbaths, and their morality
opposed, the closer let us cling to them; let us know that although the
meditation of Gods creation and providence be not abandoned by the eight day,
yet there is added a more forcible one for us to chew upon: To wit, the
excellency of the Evangelicall Sabbath, serving to magnify the power of the
resurrection; which, as it gave our Savior a rest from his work of
satisfaction, so it gave us the full accomplishment of the merit thereof: for
what had his death and grave been worth to us, without his victory? And what
less fruit can we reap thereby then the clearenesse of our justification?
Romans 4. ult.
As he showed himself the son of man in dying, so does he show himself the
Son of God by the power of his rising, Romans 1 3. Ephesians. 1.20.21.22.
that he might make himself a full witness of a perfect redemption. And shall
not this eight days rest of his, cause a rest to us? A rest of peace through
pardon, the peace of conscience, and joy in the holy Ghost? Should these things
be so dark unto us, or so useless, that we should question it, whether they
are worth a Sabbath or no? Far be it from us. But rather let the corruption
of men provoke us to keep an holier, closer, and not ceremoniously to observe a
more spiritual Sabbath then ever we ^ave done?

Terror to all that cast off the yoke of Gods commands.
do kick and spurn at it; and rather then they will be subject to it, they
cast it off, and lay it in the dirt. Perhaps, so far as it will go in their
own stream, they will allow it; but let it pinch them and wring them (as a
straight shoe wrings the foot) then they cast off, Psalm. 2.7.
and will no longer endure it. Thus those, Psalm. 2. are said to cast off the
cords of Christ (he means the Jews and Pharisees) when they felt the
spiritualnesse of his kingdom. For the opening of this Use, Four Branches.
first let us see the truth of the point in the grounds that hypocrites go
upon. Secondly, the ways of hypocrites in balking them. Thirdly, the shifts
they have to shift off the dint of pinching Commands. And fourthly, 1. Branch.
Hypocrites their false grounds. 1. In breaking Commands.
apply the terror home unto them. For the first, lest any should think there
are none so vile, know it, that they cannot be other, all things considered.
For first their heart is unclean, and rotten at the core, although they seem
in their own sight, and in the sight of others, to be never so pure. They love
evil, therefore they break commands naturally; but they keep commands, and
do good only, so far as it agrees with their own ends and purposes.

Secondly, because they are held in and detained violently from that which they
aim at: therefore, as a prisoner in his chains, always lies at the catch and
opportunity to seek his escape: so do these, whenever any color or
evasion, any shift or trick is offered, they cleanly and slily wind themselves
out of the authority of God.

Thirdly, because there is a struggling in all such hypocrites to be better
thought of then they deserve, therefore their occupation is perpetually to
bribe their own conscience, and to delude themselves with some shows of duty,
religion, pangs of devotion, passions and affections, vows, and purposes of
good, and to keep up the damme of their own consciences from breaking in upon
them, and yet all this while they have no power to lay hold upon any solid
bottomes of truth, either threats, promises or commands.

Fourthly, its certain, that every hollow heart does seek finally her own
ease, and quiet of carnal liberty, and to be rid of the dint and power of
commands from molesting her, that so by her cunning tricks and distinctions,
she might at last scrue herself into a content of the flesh, and to stop the
mouth of conscience from any more accusation: And although this cannot at the
first be attained while there remains any spark of truth in the soul; yet by
degrees, and by often declinnig the dint of solemn commands, it comes to pass
that a base heart winnes a presumptuous habit to herself, and finding a
corrupt ease therein, resolves to hold it as strongly, as an honest heart would
preserve sound peace and ease of conscience by the promise. And so being
resolved to hold whatsoever false peace she gets, and to lose it upon no
terms of a better condition, she outgrowes all former tenderness of heart
which was wont to attend her, and nouzells herself in that which she feels,
as if it were a sure bottom, easily believing that to be, which she would
have: And this for the first ground of Terror.

Now to apply it: Application of this first ground.
Consider what a fearful state and condition this is; what woeful rotten
grounds these are of peace. Who is there so vile and lewd, (except enchanted by
the Devil, and held in the snares of his own lusts) who durst commit himself
to the sea of a religious course in so broken a Bark. Take but one example
hereof, recorded (I think) for the nonce, to scare all eluders and shifters
with Gods Commands. And that is Balaam: who having his charge given him
solemnly by the Lord, not to go with those messengers of Balac, Number. 22.19.
who came with bribes and presents in their hands, to procure the service of
his Sorcery and witch craft to curse Israel: feeling himself sore pinched with
this command, and yet having no rest in his own covetous heart, to forgo the
wages of iniquity: studies how he might reconcile Gods ends and his own: And,
seeing that could not be compassed, by a direct refusal to go; therefore
first he bids the men stay till the morning; and in the mean while he so
blind-folds his own eyes, as to dream, that if God would give him leave to
go, he might go. But what a deluding thought was that, when as his conscience
told him, God had denied it before? Well, by going to God to blanch over the
matter, viz. That if he would give him leave to go, he would do no otherwise
then he was bidden; the Lord connives at his going: And what does he? He takes
it very gladly, Verse 20.21
and makes use of it; but from whence is it that he does so? Surely from no
other bottom, save this, that by his going, he hoped (one way or other) to
attain those ends, which else he knew he should not; whereas (if he had
meant truly) he would have abhorred such an occasion as laid a block in his
way to fall at. And how did he go forward? Surely with a foole-hardy courage,
and a peevish resolution to get his booty; for when Gods Angel crossed him,
Ibid.
opened his Asses mouth to convince him, so blinded he was, that he despised
it, and smote her; whereas he should have returned home, and abhorred his
blanching with Gods command. And was he sensible of himself in all this his
race? No, but still impudently, tells God (when he saw there was no remedy) he
would go back, if he might not go? What was that, but to upbraid God for
resisting him, having before given him leave? And so he proceeded in his
journey, and sought divinations, that is, cast about with himself how he might
curse the people, and get his ends: And, when the Lord crossed him still, yet
(to show what metal he was made of) rather then he would lose his booty, he
advises Baalac how to procure God to curse them by provoking them to Idolatry
and uncleanness: And this was the whole course of this Hypocrite in crossing
the command of God; having once won ground for himself by his first trick, lo,
he hardens himself so fast in his treachery, that he sees not his own
hypocrisy: And what was his end? Surely, notwithstanding all his tricks, yet
he could neither avoid the censure of God, nor escape vengeance, when it fell
point blanke upon him, Jude 11. Number. 31.8.
for he was devoured by the sword, he and all his nation, both Kings and
people. Oh let not this terror pass from us in vain! Assuredly, whosoever
shall shuffle with Gods commands, and harden his heart by his own subtilty, to
sin without sense; commonly the Lord suffers them to go on blinde-folds,
without any hope of remorse, Fearful judgment of God upon hollow hearts in
dispencing with commands.
till he tear them in pieces like a Lion, and there be no remedy. Dally not
with Gods commands; for, it will cause the conscience to fret secretly like a
moth without sense, and that's the next way for the Lord to tear it in pieces,
and to send it to hell, that there at leisure it may feel that which before it
would take no notice of: And all to teach men to abhor the breaking of
commands under colors of distinctions.

2. Branch. The tricks and ways of hypocrites in breaking of commands.
The second Branch, by which I would make way for this Terror, is, to lay down
the several ways by which hypocrites do cast off Gods commands when they
pinch them: The view whereof will aggravate the terror exceedingly. And these
briefly may be summed up in these heads following. First, hypocrites cast off
pinching commands, by denying and avoiding the truth and realnesse of the
command: 1. By avoiding the realnesse of commands.
And thus many shun the dint of a spiritual command to keep the Sabbath
holy, by denying the whole morality of it, and calling the authority of the
fourth Commandment into question and scruple, that so under that buckler, they
may walk on desperately and senslesly in the breaking of it, whether Ministers
by not preaching, or people by not sanctifying it. Secondly, by a base shifting
off the knowledge of a command, 2. Shifting off the knowledge of them.
that having no knowledge thereof, they might lurk in their disobedience the
more sweetly. Thus Joh. 3.20. They who hate the light, come not at it, that so
they may lurk as unconvinced of their own sin, which (if convinced) they
must needs abandon. So also those Jews, who being urged by our Savior to
answer whether the Ministry of John were from heaven or from men? Mark 11.31.
They consulted together thus, If we say it was from heaven, he will ask, why
then did you not believe it? If from men, the people will stone us, seeing all
held John to be a Prophet. They resolve therefore to answer, we cannot tell;
which though it were false, and a deluding of their conscience, 3. By
diminishing their extent.
yet, they washed their hands of it the more easily. Thirdly, if they needs
acknowledge commands in spite of them, yet they take away and diminish from the
extent of a command, and limit it to a narrower extent then it reaches unto.
Genesis 3.5.
Thus Adam and Eve were content to abridge the strictness of the charge, and
to restrain it as themselves pleased, adding a peradventure to Gods
absoluteness; and so of an whole charge they made but half an one. Thus the
Pharisees by their Sophistry cut off the spiritual part of the moral Law,
Matthew. cap. 5.6.7.
and they limited it to the outward act, by which they established their own
ease in the keeping thereof literally.

4. By opposing of one command to another. Matthew. 15.4.
Fourthly, when they are beaten off here then they shun a command by opposing
one against another, that so they may destroy both. And thus did those
Pharisees by their Corban: They imagined that it could not be denied but there
was good use of offering to holy ends, and it seemed a pious act for a child to
nurse a decayed parent: Now for their private Corban, they discharge the child
from his obedience to father or mother, (as Papists do at this day debar
parents of their children, by snaring them with vows against their consent)
whereas first it should be decided whether of the two commands were most
necessary to be done? That so the one might give place, the other might
prevail. Fifthly, 5. By false plea of presidents and examples.
hypocrites shun the dint of commands by false plea of presidents, and
examples of such as God has dispensed with (in some special cases) and
therefore, say they, why may not we be spared as well as such? A some have
stolen other goods, some have been tolerated in their officious lies, See
Genesis 30.39.41.42.
others have been allowed other liberties, or at least been connived at and
pardoned in them; why not they as well? Whereas some of their examples are facts
of boldness, and presumptuous policy, Exodus 1.19.20.
1 Samuel 20.6. as David's answer to Abimeles, Ex. 12.35.36.
and the apology which he put into Ionathans head, to stop Saul's mouth withal:
Others although God winked at, yet he allowed not. Sixthly, hypocrites elude the
force of Gods commands by the adding of new commands, which God never made, 6.
By adding of new commands of their own.
as supposing that hereby they may well be spared from obeying such as God has
commanded. And this is an old and beaten way of hypocrites, to load themselves
with outward burdens and imposts of their own, that they may seem to be far
from them that break commands: They will not spare their flesh, but impose
more then God could find in his heart to impose; If he call for an hin of oil
or wine, they will offer him whole Baths and Buts thereof, Mica 6.
yea rivers and floods; if God require of them a fast once by the week, they
will fast twice, if he appoint them a sacrifice of their flock, Luke 18.12.
a sheep or bullock, they will outvie him, and offer him the fruit of their
own loins and wombes in sacrifice; by which superogating, they doubt not, but
to be accounted through-obeyers of his own commands; and by this policy our
Papists and formal worshippers, at this day subsist, and justify themselves,
imagining themselves to be worthy obedients to commands, because they devise so
many which God never dreamt of. But you must consider in the mean while, that
the commands which themselves devise may be obeyed by their own strength and
power, and serve to while and keep them occupied that Gods commands may be
dispensed withal: They are no such great friends of voluntary, as they are
sworn foes of necessary commands: As it was said of Ottomans horse, That where
he once set his feet, grass would no more grow after; so where the devotions
of these hypocrites take place, Religion and the power of godliness wanze and
perish. Lastly, hypocrites corrupt the authority of Gods commands, by excepting
and cavilling against the strictness thereof, 7. By cavilling at the
strictness of them.
with carnal probabilities and reasons of their own. Flesh inclines to
liberty, and when once that can be established, each pretense running in the
stream of flesh, makes it seem to be reasonable. There is no command of God
but admits some color and objection of a carnal heart to gainsay it. But of
this in the next Branch.

But to apply this Branch also with Terror, consider, Oh ye hypocrites, who
have so many ways to cross Gods commands, and to nible off here one piece
thereof, there another, till you have quite overthrown all; Application of
this second.
whether (I say) ever any prevailed against God who contended with him about
the sovereignty of his Prerogative? Shall he not most righteously condemn all
such? Esaias 54. ult.
Was there ever any that resisted God and prospered? Shall not this be the
condemnation of the world, John. 3.19.
that light came, but they hid themselves from it, and all, because their
works are evil? Is it not just, that those who wink with their eyes, and
will not see, should be left to themselves, to be stone blind? Act. 28.
That their hearts should be as hard as brawne, so that they should be
senseless of the wrath which hangs over them? Do we think all those woes
denounced against pharisees and hypocrites shall rot in the sky? Such as by
their own traditions have destroyed the Law of God, and neither will enter
themselves, nor suffer them that would to go to Heaven? Who hate with deadly
feud all such as resist their inventions, and would not only draw blood from
them, but even shed their heart blood and bowels to the earth if they could?
Shall not all the blood of them which they have spilt from the blood of Abel to
this day, be required of them? Shall not the Lord turn back upon them all
those obtruded worships of theirs, Matthew. 23. ult.
as fulsome? Shall not all their labors be forfeit? What a terror should this
be to all Popish pharisees, that when they look for deep thank from God for
the high service they have thought to have done, he shall choke them with
their own morsells, and grudge them therewith till they come out at their
nostrills? What is so fearful as to lay heaps upon heaps, and dye of thirst?
To hear God answer them and say, Who requires these things at your hands? Let
them who set you on work pay you your wages? To lose the day at Law, is some
sorrow: But to lose the day in the solemn judgment of God, and to he sent to
those Idols, inventions and devotions, which they set up in Gods room, which
cannot help them, how fearful will it be? When the Lord shall say, Bring me
but the entire obedience of heart to one of my Commands, to my Sabbaths, to my
Sacraments; prove but this one thing, that you have walked humbly and meekly
with God, that you have kept your selves unspotted of the world, served your
time and generation wisely, abstained from fleshly lusts, abhorred form, and
clave to the power of godliness, and I will save you: But alas! not one drop
or dram of such obedience can be brought forth: Tell me how just and righteous
shall ye your selves confess your condemnation to be? Surely you shall be
speechless: Here you confound others with your terrors, and make them so, but
there your selves shall be so confounded, that you shall be struck dumb, and
not be able to gainsay; nay you shall subscribe to your own doom. But I must
remember my self, and here break off, though abruptly, leaving the third
ground of Terror and Application of it, with other Uses to the next Lecture.

THE NINETEENTH LECTVRE continued upon the 14. VERSE.
VERSE XIV. Then he went down and washed himself seven times in Jorden, and
his flesh came again unto him as the flesh of a little child, and he was
clean.


TO proceed (Brethren) where we left last, 3. Branch. The cunning and colors
of hypocrites to shift off Commands.
and to conclude this Use of Terror; let us also (in the third place) observe
by what shifts and cunning these hypocrites elude Gods Commands; even with
Arguments suggested by their carnal reason, which is as a spring never drawn
dry, affoording them still one pretense after another in all parts and points
of duty occasioned unto them. Take but two or three examples in this kind:
First, 1 Samuel 13.8 14. 1. Instance.
those two acts of Saul recorded in the thirteenth and fifteenth Chapters of
the first of Samuel. Then that other of Jeroboam, about the thirteenth of the
first of Kings. For the former, God commands Saul not to meddle with
sacrificing or sanctifying the battle till Samuel came. For the more deep
trial what honesty was in his heart, the Lord detaines Samuel longer then the
days appointed, and what does Saul? Surely he falls to offer sacrifice
himself. When Samuel comes, he asks him what he had done? He tells him,
he had given the adventure to break the charge; but he was moved thereto by
weighty motives. First, Samuel came not within the limited space, and that
seemed to license him to offer sacrifice, and to release the charge. Then
secondly, Samuel was but a subject, a man unskilful in the affairs and
seasons of war: himself was a Martial man, of great wisdom in that kind,
and therefore in so doubtful a case, fitter to determine what was to be done.
Thirdly, the Philistines were now come upon him, and he was unprepared; so
that, had he not bestir'd him, they might in likelihood have suddenly surprised
him. Fourthly, the soldiers that he had, were slipped away from him upon
Samuels delay, and so he was in peril to be deserted, and to lack strength.
Fifthly, he was very religious and devout, in that he would not suffer the
Sacrifice and Prayer to be neglected, notwithstanding the danger. Sixthly, it
seemed to cross some other commands of God, to desist from sacrificing at that
instant, and not to hasten it. For why? The staying upon Samuels coming, had
been to prefer Sacrifice before Mercy to men's lives. Seventhly, it seemed to
cross Providence, when God had offered an opportunity of fight, upon better
conditions, to neglect it, and to venture upon more unequal terms afterward:
These and many more cavils he pretended: But none of them could
(notwithstanding the colourablenesse thereof) prevail against an express
command: and therefore Samuel denounces against him, that in all these
passages of his carnal wisdom, he was but afoole, and should be stripped of
his Kingdom. God knew well enough what straits he was in, and yet knew also,
that he had experience sufficient of Gods power, in all these straits (if he
had not had a base heart of treachery) which could have stood between him and
his fears: so that he should not have needed to have fallen to his shifts.

2. Instance. 1 Samuel 15.3.
The other instance of Saul is in Chap. 15. There the Lord betrusted him the
second time with another close trial of his loyal heart, putting him upon the
destruction of Amalek, commanding him not to spare any, old, young, high or
low, fat or lean, but to kill all. One would have thought that the former
trial had been a watchword sufficient; but a base heart will be base when all
is done: therefore in that business also, he faulters fearfully; killing the
baser and meaner sort of people, the lean and worthless cattle: but keeping
the richer sort of people, and the fat cattle alive. Now, when Samuel comes to
him to take an account, what does he? He magnifies his obedience at the
first; but by and by being convinced of his falsehood, he falls to dawbing
with untempered mortar. Doubtless, the bottom was a covetous heart, turning
after the spoil: but he had colors enough to defend it. For why? Was not the
killing of so many fat cattle (in show) a prejudice to mercy, since that they
might have filled many hungry bellies? Yea, and to piety also, since they might
have made many a sacrifice to God? But alas! to plead mercy or sacrifice
against a charge, is to be wiser then God, that is, a stark fool. And so was
he. The like were his other tricks: That the people reserved them: And, he
feared their violence if he had resisted them: (a very lie; for they feared
him extremely, as appears by the vow which he bound them in, Chap. 14.) But
could all these shifts profit him? No surely: He was convinced to be hollow,
and then threatened the second time with the loss of his Kingdom for the
breach of the command.

1 King. 12.26.
The second instance is Jeroboam: God gave him his charge to keep his statutes,
and promised to make him a sure Kingdom. What does he? As soon as he had
gotten into the saddle, what thoughts does he apprehend? Surely, leaving the
promise of establishing his Kingdom, he casts with himself what would follow
upon the going up of the ten Tribes to Jerusalem to worship: he imagined, that
it would prove an occasion of stealing away their hearts to the government of
Juda: and therefore he gives God over, warps to himself a better way of
safety, sets up two Calves in Dan and Bethel, to keep the people at home. And
what (think we) were his pretenses? Very many. For why? Was there no other
place might serve to worship in, save one? Did not Abraham, Genesis 21.33. Genesis
26.25. Genesis 35.14.
Isaac and Jacob set up their Altars and worship God? Nay, were there not
Altars built in Canaan by the command of God, and by the two Tribes and an
half? And did not Samuel build an Altar by occasion of the Philistines
invasion? And besides, what? Was it not equal, that he, being a King called by
God, (as well as Rehoboam) might ordain a place for his subjects to worship
God as well as he? Did God by name forbid this, 1 Samuel 7.9.
or tie him to the Temple? And moreover, if God had so delighted in the
Temple-worship, would he have cut off the Kingdom from the house of David, and
settled it upon him? Besides all this, what? Could nothing content men but the
Temple? He did not set up his Calves against the Temple, but for the worship
of the true God: If indeed he had done it for idolatry, it were sinful; but
he ordained it for God. And as for those resemblances of Calves, which he
devised, why? Was not the Temple full of Lions and Cherubims, and engraven
forms? And to conclude, although a Prophet came to denounce against his
Altars, yet was he not devoured by a Lion? And his son Abijah, who would not
close with his Idols, died he not an untimely death? And did not he survive
and prosper by this worship of his? Lo, what a world of tricks and shifts he
could allege! But nothing could serve his turn against so strict a charge as
the second Command, wherewith he stood charged, still the wrath of God pursued
him, and cut him off at length, making him a very byword, Jeroboam the son
of Nebat, who made Israel to sin. So that, let hypocrites turn themselves
into never so many colors; and scrue themselves never so subtly into their
distinctions, they do but so much the more incense God against them, and
provoke him to unmaske and discover them to the world, to be such as they are,
till unavoidable destruction at last come upon them.

Endless were it to speak of all. 3. Instance. Act. 5.5.
Ananias and Sapphira (those sacrilegious hypocrites) had first consented to
be of the forwardest in zeal to the Churches service: And, they would sell
all, and lay it at the Apostles feet. After, through temptation of Satan, they
consulted to keep away a part of the price, and yet pretended to give all.
What think we? Had they not colors? Yes doubtless. For why? Did all sell
their estates for the Church? Or, did many give such a portion as they gave,
(who yet perhaps had as great means?) And was it not well that they did as
they did? Or, did God urge more from them then they could well spare? Should
they so succor others as to undo and endanger themselves? Or, could
consequent difficulties at the first so appear, as they did after? Or could
they well change their tale to the Apostles, after it was once given out that
they had sold all? Would not that have discredited their zeal? All these are
fair colors: But for all these, forasmuch as the pinch of the command of God,
(to keep their vow) caused them to play the hypocrites, and to c^st it off;
the Lord (we see) used Peter as an instrument both to de^^st, convince, and
sentence them with such a doom, as made all the Church to tremble at the like
falsehood and lying against the Holy Ghost.

^cation (...). Christ at his second coming will w^sh off all the colors of
hypocrites with his terrors.
To apply this terror also, and so to conclude the Use: Let all such be
affrighted, to consider what the end of flatterers and time-servers shall be!
The 2. Command has in it a sad and solemn intent, and extent, to take up the
whole man for God, in the duties of his worship. Not only urging us to abhor
all false worship, Popish worship, gross Idoll-worship: But to embrace the
most pure and exact manner of worship, which possibly we can: and to reject any
such dregs, as might, in the least sort, defile the spirit of the worshipper.
How dares any man then, in this case, to come in, and stop Gods mouth with
distinctions and pretenses? Think we that God will be mocked? Although now
while they go with the stream of the time, they may seem pardonable, yet
when God shall come in vengeance to take a severe and strict surview of the
actions of Hypocrites, do we think they shall so easily escape? Matthew. 12.
Could the Lord Jesus in the days of his abasement take upon him so severely,
as to make a three stringed whip, and scourge out those buyers and sellers in
the Temple, to overthrow their Tables, and to scatter their money about the
ground, and all for the violation of one Command: and shall he not (much more)
take upon him (think we) when he shall come, not as a meek Lamb, not as
riding upon an Ass colt, but as the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, triumphantly
riding upon the clouds of glory, and decking himself with strength and
revenge, as with a garment? Shall then these breakers of his commands carry it
so smoothly away? Shall they not flee from the presence of this terrible Judge?
Acts 5.5.
Could Peter, a seely man, being armed with the authority of this Judge, with
one word of his mouth, throw down those two hypocrites Ananias and Sapphira,
and lay them dead upon the place: and shall not the Judge himself, coming in
person, much more, with one frown of his irefull face, crush all such daring
enemies of his glory, as have made his solemn Commands, idle scarebugs, and
have turned them into shadows? Now, whiles the consciences of men are
enchanted with hopes of preferment, with ease, with the glistering shows of
pomp and state, the examples of their betters, and the common stream of
carnal worshippers: when they see the power of truth to be trodden down, and
the sincerity of Religion to be discarded; its an easy thing for them to bear
down commands, and not to be troubled at it: but when as the Lord shall open
and enlarge conscience to the uttermost, and bid her speak out, and not be
afraid to bear witness against all breakers of his solemn commands; shall
they then (think we) set up their horns so high as now they do? Dan. 5.7.
Shall not rather their knees knock together, as Belshazzars did, in the midst
of his quaffing in the cups of the Temple?

When the terrible Judge shall not write only upon the wall, but thunder with
his voice against all that have brake his cords, Psalm. 2.5.
and cast his chains from them, shall they be able to endure him? when all
their musters shall be pulled off from their faces, and all things shall be
naked in the sight of him that judges, and conscience shall ask them
questions without admitting any shuffles or equivocations, shall they subsist
and hold up their faces? Then conscience shall put them to it, Heb. 4.13.
and say, do thou think in thy very soul, that the Lords day are days to
be profaned with unlawful games and pastimes, with drinkings and dauncings?
Speak truth now, do thou think in conscience that those who walk closely
with God, maintaining the power of Religion in their lives, are the worst men
living? Or do thou think in thy conscience thou did well in leaving thy
flock and charge at randon, and spending thy time in dependances, hopes of
promotion, ease, pleasure, and such like? Do thou think in thy conscience
that any thing can purge out the defilement of Popish Idolatry and
superstition? Will scraping of the stones of the house fretted with a canker of
incurable leprosy, serve the turn? Can any thing (save only pulling down
the house, and making it a heap of rubbish) make it clean? Speak as in
conscience thou think, should man in his opposing Gods commands be obeyed
before God himself, or God before him? If thou were now to begin again,
durst thou break the least of his commands, and teach others to do so? Durst
thou lend thine authority, presence, countenance, tongue or pen, to defend the
breach of any command of mine? Oh, (I say) when conscience shall set thee thus
upon the rack, and stretch every joint of thy soul upon the wheel of Gods
strict inquisition, will there be any place for tricks and evasions? No, no.
Think sadly then of the sadness of commands, (Oh all ye presumptuous
hypocrites) while there is season for it: Now the Devil sets you upon a
pinnacle, and shows you all the glory of this sensual and carnal world, and
offers you the greatest reward for your breaking of the most chief and sad
commands; its now a merry world (if it would last always) to break commands!
Who rule the roast, or carry matters more boldly, or gaster other more terribly,
then such as cut off commands most desperately! But lo, there will be
bitterness in the end! You shall not always carry it at your pleasure, none to
gainsay you! This Judge of all flesh, one day shall turn your triumphs, and
scorns, and insolences, into a most sad and sorrowful dejectedness, one day
your hearts shall melt as water, and your countenances shall fall down as
Cains did, after God had convinced him of his cruelty and bloodshed! Genesis 4.9.
Heb. 12. ult.
Think of it betimes in Gods fear, its not for the honor of our God, our
consuming fire, to suffer every bold breaker of the commands, to lurk and lie
safe in his den! No: God shall find them out to be dissemblers: The Lord Jesus
shall not then flatter them, but set their sin in order before them;
therefore let the terrors of God pierce you now, let rottenness enter into
your bones, and let the voice of a commanding God, cause the lips to quiver,
and your bellies to tremble! Hab. 3.
fear him that is the great commander of the world, who has chains for
Princes, and can bind Kings in fetters of iron, Psalm. 149.8.
yea can cast soul and body into hell: I say, fear him: 1 Samuel 15.16.
If he were so terrible to Saul in the words of a weak Prophet, Samuel; if now
he be so potent in the voice of a convincing Preacher; What shall he then be
in his own voice and presence, when the mountains shall rend in sunder, and
the frame of things be disolved? So much for the former Branch of this second
Use.

2. Branch. Terror to all profane ones. Psalm. 2. Psalm. 12. Job 21.14.
For the latter sort briefly: if this point justly terrify all hypocrites for
blanching with God: how much more then does it condemn all profane and
professed rebels, who do walk and trade (without remorse) in the open
breaking of Commands? Who say to God, Depart from us: who cast away his cords,
and break his bands in sunder: who say, Our tongues are our own, we will
speak as we will, and what Lord shall control us? Who proclaim their sin as
Sodom: and say, If this be to be proud, I will be prouder: more unclean,
swear ten to one, break all Sabbaths; that evil I do, I will do it: and, I
care for none of these strict and severe urgers of Commands, I will be the
worse for them. Well, go on, you shall have your belly full in hell of your
own will: There you shall swear, and curse, and blaspheme God, and pay for it
all the while: therefore if you will be filthy, Rev. 22.
be filthy still: Add to the number, and fulfill the measure of your
abominations; go forward, you can but go to hell, therefore take your
pleasure: Know, that he who sets up Altar against Altar, and his will against
Gods, a close following of his Justs, his cups, his harlots, his oppression,
pride, envy, against Gods close Commands; shall apply all his closest plagues
and vengeance against such, and whosoever shall rise up against God in
judgment, Esa. 54. Esaias 54. Psalm. 50.
him shall God most righteously condemn. Oh think of it, you that forget God!
Shall not the hypocrites avoid everlasting burnings, who do but adulterate the
purity of close Commands: and you shall escape, who disanull them? You walk as
the forlorn rank in the face of the Canon, and what wonder if you be shot all
to pieces? And, all who will desperately follow your steps, let them know they
go straight forward, neither turning to left hand, nor to right, to the
Bethshemesh of destruction. Its terrible to hear of, and see the present
plagues of such, even here; some open defiers of the Sabbath to be struck mad;
others in their fencing upon that day, to fall down dead; a third in shooting
off his recoyling gun, to be beaten to shivers; the end of proud rebels is
terrible in this world, Iezabels, Saul's, Herod's: But the whole of their misery
here, is not the tenth of that hereafter; the day is to come, Esaias 1.
wherein the Lord will cry, Aha; I will be avenged of mine enemies! I will
laugh at their destruction! I will make my blade fat with their blood: And when
I have done, I will take as little thought for their woe, as they did for my
Commands! Oh tremble at this!

Examination.
that the commands of God must be obeyed, according to them, that is, their
intent and extent; and that they are so sad and close things? Oh then! in the
fear of God try we our selves, whether they be so to us or not. It imports us
exceedingly to do it: for if God be sad and we be slight: if his issue be to
enquire after close obeying; but we only look at the surface and outsides of
duty, taking what we please, and s^umming off the fat and easy part, leaving
the lean and more unwelcome part to whose will: we shall find a wrong
bargain of it. The eyes of God are piercing eyes, and look over the whole
earth, where he may find close, strict and sad obeyers of his voice (as he
says Esaias 50.) and there is his delight. But as for him that with-drawes
himself, and secretly (like that Judas) whips out from his fellows for his
own ends, Heb. 10.38.
his soul shall have no delight in him. Therefore in such bad times as these,
wherein every one will be religious, but few or none close with the power of
commands: how imports it every of us (Brethren) to let loose stuff go, and to
try our selves touching the souls concurrence wi^h God in this Sovereignty of
his Commands? And, because (me thinks* I see you to be desirous to try your
selves about this, but want direction how to do it aright; therefore I will lay
down some such rules of direction as (through mercy) may sweetly search every
such heart as is willing to come to the touchstone, and leave it sound and
sincere: or, if it shall discover it self to be otherwise, then to look to it
self, and to abhor all such lets as it shall find to hinder it from this
closeness and faithfulness in obeying commands.

First, that soul which obeyes closely, Trials of close obedience.
is very active and lively in She is truly willing to know the uttermost of the
truth.
but suspects her self still in her obedience, that it is too loose, too
easy, and too slight to be good. She desires to go down right with Gods
commands: and having found out, Romans 12.2. what that good and acceptable will
of God is, then nakedly she desires to close with it, come what come will of
it: whereas the hypocrite is of a clean contrary strain. For why? having a
guilty conscience of withdrawing a part of the heart from God, it is death for
him to come to the trial. 1 Samuel 15.12.
Saul was as a Bear haled to the stake, when he came to Samuels inquiry, Acts
5.5.
because he knew himself crazy. So Ananias and Sapphira, when they came under
Peter's inquisition; Sold ye it indeed for so much? Fell down dead. Oh! the
hollow heart shrugges and shrinkes at the extent of Commands; cannot endure to
think them larger then it self is willing to do them. If she should hear of
a rule of more closeness then she can admit, she must needs bewray her self,
which she is loath to do. Oh! how desirous a base heart is to get abatements of
commands. There is no man so forward to urge the uttermost allowance of the
weight of gold, that his light pieces might pass for current; as an hypocrite
craves still for allowance to his slight obedience. It kills his heart to hear
of the strictness of a Sabbath, what the rules of a lawful Fast are, to
prepare himself to the Sacrament, to hear the Word, to deny himself, to be
tied to do, or take good in company, to walk unspotted of the world, to
oppress none by fraud, usury, hardness: Alas! his Trade lies in this kind,
take him off that and you kill him. See 1 King. 22. Ahab being urged to call
for a Prophet of God, sent for him: But as the Messenger went for him, in his
return he entreats him that his words might be like the words of the four
hundred Prophets: and that he would not be too strict. But the closer obeyer
is a close inquirer, like Micaja, who would not be pulled to the right or left
hand from God; he is a willing person to be informed about the nakedness and
simplicity of commands, desirous to know the hardest. Thus Job cap. 34. and
verse 32. says, If I fail that which I see not, do thou teach me: Thus
David, Search me O Lord and try me, if there be any way of evil in me: Not,
that they have not much corruption, and come far short; but yet they have no
treacherous heart of withdrawing, but rather an entire affection to be equal
to Commands: And as the heart of an hypocrite does infinitely disobey: So, the
soul of a believer has a boundless unlimited desire to obey a word,
according to a word, in which regard its called a perfect heart, because it
would be so, and mournes that it cannot; as a natural child is troubled that
it cannot do the fathers will to the full, and therefore does what it can to
the uttermost. Try we our selves then in this: Do we wish that the rule were
crooked, that we might crook our own way? Do we tremble and start at the
closeness of Gods sovereign Commands, saying, These are hard things, who then
shall be saved? Its a sign we are hollow; and if we could, we would be
willingly ignorant, 2 Pet. 2.5.6.
that we might live the sweet life of an idiot: But, do we press after
light, information, resolution, and when we have it welcome it and obey it? Do
we desire that we might live under a convincing Word and Ministry? Do we
count it our happiness that the righteous smite us? Are we willing (upon
better information) to undo our errors, to begin again anew, rather then we
would still err? Surely its a sign of an honest heart, closing with Commands?

She is tender to obey.
and soundness of judgment, to discern and to close with commands, to
abhor and to abandon the contrary. I may compare a close heart in these two,
Simil.
to a skillful musician, and to the tender ey-lid. A musician that has exact
skill on the lute or vial, will lay his ear to the strings, and by his quick
discerning will presently find out the least jarre of his distuned instrument.
Another man would judge that there is very good music, but he cannot rest so
content, but still is putting down, or winding up his pin and string till
his ear be pleased. Oh! there be many secret jarres in the spirit of a good
Soul, which others see not, and therefore applaud, and commend; but he cannot
allow himself in them; he counts not himself thereby justified, he discernes
the jarre of his heart (though others like his music never so) and perceives
which way his heart winds, and doubles, flagges and faulters; as in keeping of
a Sabbath, in hearing the Word, in the end and scope of his actions, and is
never well till his heart be in tune: And so it is with him in his affection,
his heart smites him for that jarre: as Iehosaphat having wound in himself
into an Idolatrous company, and hearing his four hundred Prophets flatter him,
could not be quiet, 1 King. 22.7.
but started at it (as a man out of his place) Is there not here (says he)
ever a Prophet of the Lord to consult with? So David having cut off the lap of
Saul's garment, 1 Samuel 24.5.
checked himself, and smote his heart for it. As I said, it is with a good
heart, as with the ey-lid; which being given to cover the curious eye, is so
tender, that if the least mote touch the eye, it cannot endure it, but
twinckles and complains instantly. Try thy self then by this rule: If thou
feel Gods Commands with a furred glove on thy fingers, and as one would feel
the least needle with a cloth about this hand: if thou go to work grossly
with commands, it must be a very great and large one which thou feel, but as
for the lesser, and narrower ones, thou have no sense thereof, (as in truth an
hypocrite cannot reach the spiritualnesse of any Command) thou show thy
self what thou art: But if thou set the Commands of God in the closset of thy
soul, if thou have a tender, sensible feeling of all thy jars and cavills with
the Commands of God, if thou start at the least appearance of evil, as well as
those evils which will waste, and gull down thy conscience, its a mark of an
heart truly closing with Commands.

Thirdly, its a very good sign of a close heart, if having been prevented It
profits in obedience by experience of former disobeying.
the soul have enough and too much of it for ever after. If a tender stomach
have overshot it self with excess in some dish of meat, commonly nature will
do penance all the life after, and loath that dish. Seldom do we read, that
the Saints fell into the same sins, which once they paid for. David returned
no more to his uncleanness, Hezechia to his pride of life; Peter to his
denying of his Master. Try thy self then by this. If thou make a falling
sickness of thy sins, and art always complaining, praying and disgracing of a
sin, but yet fallest into it again as often, thy heart is either unsound, or
unguarded: I grant that Beelzebub will light again often upon the place which
he is beaten from; but I speak of a defilednesse of heart, consenting to that
which it seems much to whine and complain of. For surely a good heart is always
in combat against any sin, but above all against her most known natural
corruptions, her eye is always upon them, they make her as the fish out of her
element, quaking for fear. No hectique disposition upon the body so sapes away
the strength thereof, as the fear of a sin formerly foiling the soul, makes
it fearful of it, yea it nourishes in it self a perpetual antipathy, and
enmity with it. Many may be her staggers, but still she lies in watch and wait
against them, and all the opportunities, occasions and inducements unto them.

Fourthly, an honest heart has a sensible joy in it self, that there is In
cases of question she is glad that the word may decide it.
Be the colors of a base lust never so strong and many, yet the soul is glad
to hear, that neither it self, nor yet her corruption must determine the
case, but that the word must and can bear sway. She says in such a case as
Saul did in casting lots between himself and Jonathan: 1 Samuel 14.41.
The Lord give a perfect lot. This is a sign that although the heart might
possibly be blinded by ignorance in some case, yet sincerity is still alive;
because it can rejoice to hear the cause of God pleaded against her own; and
can find in her heart to abandon the most precious lust, rather then the least
tittle of Gods commands should perish. He who has an ill cause loves not to
hear of an equal bearing by impartial Arbitrators: But he whose cause is
good, or at least who loves peace, is more troubled with the controversy, then
tickled with the gain; and therefore binds himself to stand to award, and is
glad that there is any way to make an end.

Fifthly, the honest heart cares always more for the preservation of the
integrity of Commands, then for her own safety and ends. She Solomon call for
a sword to divide the child, She prefers the safety of the Command before her
own skin.
looked only at her own ends, to be as the other woman was; but in the mean
time she discovered her own unnaturalness, and that the child was none of
her own. But the true mother who knew the cost and price of her child, could
not endure the cutting of it asunder, but cried, Give her rather the child,
then it should be slain. Just so is it here: A base heart, never bred by the
grace of the Spirit, to obey Commands, rejoices when it self, and the word may
have share, and share like; is glad to see the word mangled, and that God
should have one piece of his will and she another. But a close soul obeying
Commands, is of a far other frame; for she has been bred of the immortal
seed of the word, lien in the womb, felt the warmth, and drawn the breasts of
it, and lives and grows by it: Therefore she cannot endure to see it divided,
wrested, abused, and cut in two; rather she is content to abhor herself, her
own ends and respects, and cries, O Lord, let not the child be hurt, rather
let my will be cast in the dirt. This is a sad trial indeed; let us come to
the scanning of it: While Gods and our stream may be suffered to run in one
channel, we easily give way to God: But, if it so fall out, that he will not
suffer our dung to swim with his Apples, but if we will go in his stream, we
must go in it merely, only our lusts must be renounced; nay, perhaps so the
case stands, that even our lawful liberties must be removed, our lives,
healths, gifts, contents, ease, elbowroom, credit and sway, must be shaken off,
to obey a Command; and those who would persuade us (as Peter did Christ) to
pity our selves, Mat. 16.25.
must be rated away and forsaken, wife, child, friend, counselor, people,
Minister, who come in and tell us, if you suffer, and obey God, farewell the
ease of our life, farewell the jollity of our town, our shops, trades,
takings, revenewes, credits, contents: Oh! I say, if in such a case, the life
of the child, (the honor of the world and of conscience) be more precious
then all these, 2 Chr. 34.17.
if then we flagge not with hopeful Ioash, when his Princes came to entice
him; If then we stick to a Command, if then we cleave to a charge, this is a
sign of soundness indeed.

Saul did, affirming that the killing of al, sorted not with piety or charity;
if we leave the consequences of our obedience to God, without pleading against
them by arguments from absurdity, or inconvenience, its a sign of a close
heart: Our nature is, when we see the sad command to lie before us, to dispute
against it thus, What shall become of my people, if I obey this command, what
shall become of the glory of God? But honest obedience takes no more thought
for God, then he takes for himself: if he commands us ought, he calls not at
our hands for more then he allows us; but takes that to his own
consideration, and will have us let him alone with that. We shall not need
take thought for the good which is lost by our obeying: But we must not do
evil that good may come of it. To forecast the disasters which our obedience
may infer, Note well.
is to take upon us the person both of the Subject and of the King: if the King
call for obedience, let the inconvenience upon it lie upon him: we have done
our duty. Try we our selves then about this, if we be negotious and curious
for God, in a thing wherein we are not called, its thanklesse double
diligence: 2 Samuel 6.6.
As we see Vzza in staying the Arc was more provident for God then he
required: and therefore paid dearly for it, though his intent was good. So,
when we judge of obedience, not by success, but by the word. It was God his
will that the Arc should be brought home by Saul, though he slew the men of
Bethshemesh for looking into it. See 1 Chronicles. 12.

Seventhly, he obeyes closely, who only trusts God, and licks himself It
trusts God to make good all she loses.
either for doing his will, or for suffering for it. An hypocrite upbraids God,
as for his doings, Esa. 58.6. so for his sufferings, Matthew. 25.24. He thinks
God to be bound and beholden to him for them: and if he either regard him not
in the one, or reward him not for the other, he thinks himself wronged.
Contrarily, a close obeyer counts his reward to stand in his obedience, that
God will account him worthy, either to do or suffer for him. Acts 4.22.23.
And if he lose either his will and base lusts by the one, or his credit,
health, wealth, or friends by the other, he looks at the promise of an hundred
fold, grounded upon Gods alsufficiency and faithfulness. A notable text we
have 2 Chronicles. 25.9. when the Prophet forbad Amaziah to go fight with his
enemies: his objection was, That he had hired Soldiers of Israel for some
thousands of Talents: how should he do for those? The Prophet tells him, The
Lord could abundantly restore those Talents.

Brethren, we would suffer perhaps for God: but then (as it was with Amaziah)
these Talents are the sorrow of all: hence comes our unwillingnesse to suffer.
But as the Prophet said, so say I, The Lord can make them good: do but trust
him. Affliction is a bitter herb; but it bears a sweet flower, and sweeter
fruit. Give the Lord thy Talents, and thou shall have an hundred fold back
again. These losses which thou fear, thy wife, thy children, thy contents,
give them up to God, trust him with them, and he will refine them all for thee,
that thou shall receive them at his hands purer and cleaner, (not to say
greater and fuller) then ever before. Those vapors which the Sun exhales
from the earth, lose nothing by it, for they are so altered in the air, that
they come down again more fruitful upon the earth, then ever. So, if God
have once tried thee in this furnace, all shall come forth purer then ever. The
daughters of affliction are the fairest of all other. There were no such women
for beauty as Jobs three daughters were after his affliction. He himself was
purer, and so was all he had: Job ult.
and as affliction is a furnace, so is it a banque: Job had twice as much after
he had lost all, as before: No trade so gainful as this of the Cross: a man
that has had the experience of it, gains twice so much, nay an hundred times
more then he had before: I say not temporally, (and yet God is alsufficient)
but spiritually, to all that suffer meekly and patiently. Cast off therefore
the clog of these Talents both from thy heart and thy heels, which do so hang
on, and oppress, and trust God, and he shall make them good.

Let us try our selves in this case: Put case we deny our selves in our
passions and distempers of wife, servants in the family, when we be provoked:
surely we think our selves to lose our own will, and the satisfying of our
lusts, which is as our life: what shall we have for it? Surely the peace of
God, Phil. 4.
passing all understanding shall rule our hearts: we shall be more then
conquerours, and the sweetness of the love of Christ (for whose cause we do
deny our selves) shall be sufficient boot in beam to pacify us: Judge. 9.
we would not forsake our fatness and sweetness for an humor, to exalt our
selves; rather we would deny our selves, to keep that precious pearl
unstained. Can we then rest in this pay? Do we choose rather to pick out the
mystery of this hundred fold, and to improve it by faith, then we will forfeit
our obedience? Do we choose rather to maintain our liberty with God in
communion, in prayer, in a quiet conscience, then we would break a command?
Would we endure the greatest evil of punishment, rather then be guilty of the
least known evil? It is a good sign. So I say also in our sufferings;
perhaps we see our selves slighted and disregarded by men for our service to
God; yea, those who awe us most, do unthankfully (if not trecherously) handle
us; our labor seems to be lost, and we are left to sink in our own
charges. Can we now in this case commit our selves freely to the promise of
God, and say, Though there be neither calfe left in the stall, Hab. 3.
nor bullock in the flock, yet we will still rejoice in God our salvation?
When the wife in the bosom is not to be trusted (as Micah Mica 7.5.
speaks) when a guide, a friend, prove unfaithful, and our enemy is one, of
our own Tribe, familiarity, household? Can we then trust in God, and make him
our strength? Can we find sap and savor in a promise of Gods support, whether
he seem to answer our prayers or not, yea, though in stead of releeving us, he
add sorrow to sorrow, and give our enemies the better of us? Can we make songs
of him in our pilgrimage, and find a realnesse in his promises, when nothing
appears, save that God leaves us, to sink under our burdens? Surely it may
appear then, that our hearts are close in our obedience.

It closes with commands, without colors or cavils.
without colors or cavils against either. The guise of this world of
hypocrites, is contrary: For the former, when the question is, touching the
substance of reading, hearing, prayer, Sacrament, we color over our
unwillingnesse with some by-cavils. Being urged to read good books, they
cavil and say, They are too deep and too learned form our understandings; as
if we would read them if they were plain: whereas the books are plain
enough, but we have no heart. Being urged to hear a good Preacher, we
allege, we conceive not his method. If we be bidden to frequent such a good
Congregation, we say, we cannot endure to be so crowded and thronged. If to
follow such examples, we answer, they are too eminent for us to follow: whereas
indeed, as once one answered, when he was urged to do some good with his great
wealth; The thing you urge is good, but I have no heart to it: so, we want an
heart. So, when we are called to serve God in our time, to fast and pray, we
cavil, That it is dangerous; and therefore we crave pardon: whereas the Lord
calls us to serve him with all our strength and courage, not only in safe and
easy duties, but even in such as hypocrites count dangerous and offensive. Try
we our selves then by this Rule. If we profess to serve and obey God even in
those duties for which the world loves not, with Paul we be not ashamed to make
them the best and fairest flower of our garlands, it is a sign of closeness
and honesty. See Acts 23. I say, if we be willing to bend our selves to our
uttermost wisdom and ability to obey, rather then through fear to give God
the slip, it speaks well for us. That which the world counts evil, I am not
ashamed to say, I worship God by.

Ninthly, if in such Commands of God, as border (and that lawfully) In the
obedience to pleasing Commands, it looks at God, not ease.
yet we rest not in that obedience, but can prove that we are carried upon
better respects. For example, it is Gods Command that we follow our Callings,
That we punish sin when we can, wheresoever it lies. Now mark: We feel our
selves prompt enough (perhaps) to follow our work and business, because it
runs in the stream of our commodity, and therefore we will not be idle: So
again, it falls out, that he whom we pursue for his offenses, is our enemy;
and therefore we are easily drawn to pursue him. Here therefore the trial is,
if we can by evident Arguments prove, that as we are not drawn to leave the
duty for the neighborhood to our own ends: so yet we do the duty from a
superior principle of Conscience. As for example; though we should get nothing
by our preaching, yet we would choose to preach rather then desist. And, as we
pursue our enemy, so would we also our friend, if he sinned in like case. This
is a good mark. For why? hypocrites are very glad when Gods and their ends
concur: As the dung swimming in the same stream with the Apples, said, We
Apples swim. But when we can separate the precious from the vile, and call
dung dung; and Apples Apples, it is well. Saint Augustine said well, God bids
me preach; but I feel my self to please mine own humor in it: God wills me
to shine; and lo, I feel that I shine to my self: Therefore, as I will not
cease shining for this reason, so yet I will endeavor so to shine to others in
holy life, that I may not therewith shine to my self by pride.

Tenthly, close obedience grows: It is as close and punctual in It grows
with ^ge. 2 Chro. 16.12.
It is said of one of the Kings of Juda, that when he was old, he put his
confidence in the Physicians, as if he had not done so in his younger years;
but closed more with the promise. There is a seed of Revolt in our base
spirits, appearing more in our age, then in younger years. It is not noted in
vain of that old Prophet of Bethel, 1 King 13.9.10.
that he sent for the young Propht to eat with him, contrary to the charge of
God. This then is some trial, if in our age we wax not more confident of our
strength, more loose in our zeal, slacker in good example, remiss in our
watch, and bolder to trench upon those Commands of God, which formerly we
durst not transgress. If with our years, knowledge, experience, we grow more
close, careful, wary and punctual with God, rather then otherwise, it is a
sweet sign. Age is proud of it self, and gives large dispensations: And, it
were to be wished, that our lamentable experience of all sorts, did not too
much approve it.

It stops the disobedience of others.
then dares venture to break the least Command it self. It has abundance of
mourning that others disobey God, and that God is not generally obeyed rather
then want of honesty and will to obey it self. In 1 Chronicles. 12. the Text tells
us, that David fetched home the Arc, as in other respects of duty to God; so in
respect also of Saul's neglect, who had not done it all his time. And Iosia is
said to pull down all those Groves, 2 Chro. 34.4.
Images, Idol-worships and Relics of old evils, which all his Predecessors
had let alone: Try we our selves then, by this, Whether our stream do run so
naturally to God, that for the love and honor which we owe him, we content not
our selves with obeying him our selves, except (as far as we can) we fetch in
others to do his will; at least, that we have a large heart, to wish that it
may be done in earth as in heaven, Matthew. 6.10.
mourning for the narrow bounds of obedience, both our own and others, and
making amends for the defects of others, to our uttermost. This is a good sign.

It obeyes when there appears no advantage for our obedience.
so that, come of it what will, we will cleave to obedience for obedience sake.
Thus it is said of Josiah, that he sent to Hulda for counsel what to do, when
he had read the book of the curses of the Law, and stood convinced thereof.
When she sent him word, that God had decreed to bring misery upon the City and
Nation (although he for his part should escape the sight thereof) what did
he? Give over the obedience of the Command? No: when he foresaw he should
not, nor could prevail for the whole land; yet, for mere conscience sake, he
humbled himself more before God, then ever any before him had done. If then in
desolate times, we can find in our hearts to humble our souls to God,
whether the success answer the expectation or not, and give our service to
God, to requite it as he shall please, it is a good sign that love to him
prevails against self-love in our obeying.

Three branches.
as also watching all occasions and opportunities in special to obey, with
reviving her self, and renewing her Covenant, zeal and spirit daily, to obey
better.

It is bettered by experience.
For the former of these Branches: First, it is experimental; that is, whereas
the obedience of an hypocrite is a dead thing, theirs is lively. An hypocrite
follows means and duties apace; but is never the better for them, because he
wants the life of grace to draw acceptance and blessing from God. He lays
heaps upon heaps, yet dies of thirst. As Job speaks of the Estridge, that she
lays her eggs, and hides them in the sand; because God has denied her
wisdom to brood them: and so the feet of beasts crush them in pieces: So,
Job. 39.14.
the Lord has denied wisdom to the hypocrite, he suffers him to toil
himself, and take pains to worship God, and do duties; but he is as willing
to forfeit them again: comfort and savor he wants, he is as new to begin
again after them, as before; only from hand to mouth, he pleases himself in
his obeying. But the close heart so obeyes, that he feels peace thereby,
enjoyes his obedience, feels the sweet fruit of it to encourage him, the
experience of it to ripen him, to strenghthen him, to better his resolutions
and purposes in obeying for afterward, Acts 11.34.
that he may with closer consent of heart obey for time to come. And withal,
being accepted in Christ, and having all his obedience dipped in his blood, he
is cheerful, lively, and joyful in his attempts, growing by the experience
both of his failings, to make him humbler and wiser; and of his virtues to make
his obedience more settled, rooted, and fruitful, claiming (in an holy manner)
his privilege from God. It is occasional.
So Compare Jer. 42.4. with cap. 44.16.
But let him be up again and healthy, he apprehends no occasions, his silver
then is dross. As Ecclesiastes says, The heart of the wise man is on his
right hand, but the fools on the left. Each hypocrite in his pangs and hot
blood is very fervent in obeying. 2 King. 9.34.
So Iehu marched fervently against Iehoram, while the heat of self-love
lasted, but the motion soon quailed. For when the heat was over, the next we
hear of him is, that he departed not from all the sins of Jeroboam. He
rooted out Iezabels idols, but set up Ieroboams. Sure it is, the obedience of
hypocrites is dead ware: there is no active principle in it to quicken it, by
each occasion offered to express it self: or by each defect and decay to
recover it self. That it is, it is by starts and pangs, It is lively from a
principle.
whereas the obedience of a

True and close obedience lies close to God as well in particular duties It
obeyes as well in special duties of our calling, as in general of Religion.
You shall have many Magistrates, who as private Christians, walk religiously;
but in the acts of their Magistracy, bite in their zeal: so Ministers,
Parents, Governors of Families. A Christian is never searched to the quick,
till the trial lie in his particular place. It is not enough not to be a
rotten and hollow Magistrate, except thou also be a faithful one. A rotten
one will discover himself by his treachery, and siding with those sins and
sinners he should punish, under one pretext or other, declining the zealous
pursuit of them: But one that is not faithful, will withdraw himself for
fear, as loath to be noted, afraid of his betters, willing to sleep in a whole
skin. Try our selves by this: If we obey closely, we will not strive to
quench, but to quicken up our selves, to pick out the best services we can for
God in our places. As a good Justice will strain his authority, and improve
the Statute to the uttermost against Sabbath Breakers, drunkards, and glad that
he can thus express his heart: Another will bite it in and conceal himself.
So Parents, so Officers, so rich ones, do that which others cannot, not, else,
alas! what singular thing do you?

It is well principled.
she has a sound principle, and is not like to hypocrites. I may compare
these to Children set to School, some only to read, write, and cast account,
so far only as will serve them to keep their Shop-booke, or make their
reckonings straight: Others to be Grammarians, and so University Scholars, to
learn the Arts and Tongues, that afterward their learning may principle and
furnish them for all studies. So is it with these: The formal Professor, if he
can pray, and tip his tongue with general religion, is at a point, and looks
no further; he has enough for the attaining of his own ends, and is never
troubled about his course. But the sound hearted Christian, who strives to
bring his whole heart and life under the Rule, has never done with himself;
but works his general principles into an infinite breadth of particulars: How
shall I delight in the Sabbath? How shall I hold in my heart from giddiness
and loosnesse? How shall I watch to God in my thoughts, affections and
conscience? How shall I get strength against this secret lust, and that defect
in duty, praying, hearing? How shall I use the world, as if not? or deny my
self? God sees these errors, although man does not. Oh! the principle of
grace exceeds the shifting skill of an hypocrite, as much as heaven does earth.

These are some (among many others) which may serve to try our hearts
(brethren) about this weighty business. Set we upon this work therefore, and
cease not till by all or by some of these trials, thou can (although but
weakly, yet soundly) judge thy self to be one that endeavors closely to obey.
And as thou shall by these marks discover thy self to be, so either be
comforted, or admonished. To the which ends the two uses following shall
pertain. Thus much for the use of Examination.

Comfort.
themselves in their condition. I have pressed the use (in part) before, to
wit, in one of the Reasons. To apply my self more particularly, this I add,
That thou who closest with Gods Commands, may be doubly encouraged. In 2
respects. The first.
First in respect of thy special serving of thy time: Thou bear witness to
God, and to his truths, when thou see the power of godliness borne down in
this base world: know it that as the Lord will be slight with the slight; so,
he will be close with the close: 1 Samuel 3.
It is his promise, That who honor him, he will honor, those that esteem
preciously of Commands, and walk narrowly with him in their obedience, he will
esteem preciously of them, they shall be of his Cabinet counsel, they shall be
privy to his secrets, he will make known to them his ways: Joh. 7.17.
So that when he is aloof to others, they shall have familiar access, yea if
he give an account to any, of his administrations, they shall be sure to
understand it. Abraham was for no other cause, called the friend of God: If ye
do my will, you shall be my friends, more then my servants; for friends know
secrets. Genesis 18.17.18.
Read that Ezekiel 9. Where the Lord causes them that obeyed him but in one of his
charges (to mourn for the iniquity of the age) to be marked with a pen and
ink, that he might know them for his jewels, for his beloved ones. And again
he tells that Church in Rev. 3.19. because she had kept the word of his
patience, that is, clave to his truths in the times of danger: Therefore he
would save her from the temptation which should come upon the whole earth:
Close obeyers of God in loose times, shall have close comfort in trouble.
They that stand out for God, and will not oppose his glory to public sale
and reproach, he will shroud them in the day of trouble, when others shall go
from chamber to chamber with terror to cover their heads from wrath. A strange
promise, which we can hardly see how God should perform; but yet God will do
it for such as preserve themselves unspotted in conscience, and clean from the
infection of others. In the mean time he will be found of them in their
prayers; close walkers with God, shall have close audience, close peace, close
comfort, inward refreshings, as Esaias cap. 50. speaks, read the 10. verse. Who
is he that fears the Lord, and obeys his voice? Let him stay himself upon
his God: And therefore fearing God, fear nothing else: Although thou be
scorned and pursued for this thy closeness, as a vile person, yet, let not
this dismay thee, for thou suffer for God, and (as Saint Peter says) if for
a good cause, and cleaving to a word, 1 Pet. 3.14.
thou art feign to suffer, take no thought in that behalf; let them who suffer
for their misdeeds look about them, but as for thy part, the Spirit of glory
rests upon thee, and although thy face shine not as an Angels (like Stephens)
yet thou shall as much convince thine enemies, Act. 6. ult.
as he did; the same Spirit of courage and patience which upheld him, shall
sustain thee, till thou be redeemed fully from all adversity. Heb. 10.37.
Bear a while, and he that comes will come and not tarry: in the mean time,
side not with them who break Commands, and would have thee follow their
examples: But rather if this be to be vile, be thou yet more vile, and the more
thou avilest thy self for God, the more honorable he shall esteem thee.

The like I may say of thy obeying commands in the general practice of
Christianity: take comfort in this also. Can thou say, The second Branch.
Romans 7.22.
that thou delightest in the law of God in thy spirit and inner man? I tell
thee, thy estate is better then to be a Prince, without it. The Lord has done
great things for thee (if it be thus) and (as Paul speaks) even made thee for
the very nonce. 2 Cor. 5.
Consider the days past! Has it always been thus with thee? Could thou
always desire to be unclothed, and clothed upon? Could thou always desire to
dye daily, through the rejoicing in our Lord Jesus? Was thy soul always under
the authority of the commands both of Law and Gospel, with sweetness and
delight? Was it not rather bitterness and gall? Who then has made his yoke
easy? Surely he who deserves unspeakable thanks at thy hands for it! And
therefore be also truly joyful in thy portion! The time was when such a
liberty of going in and out with the Lord, would have made thee leap: and
shall thou now carry it about thee, Delight in obeying the sad commands of God,
affords solid comfort.
without savor or sensiblenesse? Perhaps thou will say, I have my load another
way, a deal of base corruption hanging upon me, to cool my courage! Oh! but
the Lord has only tried thee thereby, whether thou will forsake his yoke or
no, for thine own ease: he does but put a back-bias upon thee, that he might
weigh thy motion to himself; thou art not hereby hurt one whit, but much
bettered, kept in awe, and humbleness before God: whereas else thou would be
puffed up! But, is this, or ought this to be any cause of thy discontent? ought
it not rather to increase thy comfort, when thou see the Lord has provided
against the vanishing of it, to make it durable? Oh! bestow but a few hours in
a week, to think what a privilege it is for dust and ashes, nay a dunghill
of rebellion, a depth of treachery, to be so changed, as to come under the line
of God, and to be under his authority, with a willing heart, to make the love
of Christ thy banner, and to be subject to God thine heaven! Oh! to have thy
will captived to his, and to desire to know, fear, love, close with, nothing
save his will, what is it but the suburbs of heaven? to feel a vein of
sweetness to overrule thy soul, and to cure that light, giddy and frothy
emptiness of it, to sadden and settle it under this power and kingdom of the
Command! To cast out the law of the members, the law of a proud, a stout
self-loving and self-seeking heart; to be above these, above corruption, so
that as they stincke in thy nostrills, so should thou in theirs: Oh do not
count this a common privilege, rather nourish it, hug it in thy bosom,
beware lest any steal away thy Crown! And rather then thou should live to
see that day, wherein the commands of Faith and Love should wax stale, and
unsavory, choose to be taken out of this world, that thine eyes may never see
the evil of a revolting heart, Heb. 3.12.
to depart away from the living God.

Admonition. Lets of close walking with God must be abhorred.
then let us be admonished to amend it betimes, and to search and cast out all
such lets as do hinder and forestall in us this closing with God. As it fares
with hypocrites (of whom I have spoke) that they have an habitual contrariety:
so it often falls out with the people of God, that they meet with many actual
rubbes which oppose this subjection of spirit. Not only that old Adam, which
is ever present, (and when they would do good) still suggests evil, and when
they would shake off evil, still hinders good, as Romans 7.14. But also, they
meet with one or other actual affront, in whatsoever command the Lord tenders
unto them, which dogs and disquiets them from the entry upon the work, What
they are.
to the upshot thereof. There be as many commodities, and spare for a hard
time: (and yet perhaps we be rich, have not a child or kinsman to bestow it
on) and so under this cloak, breaks in abundance of worldliness, not only to
keep us from unspottednesse, but even to drown us in the world. So let the
Lord but

Sometimes also by ill custom in lesser evils, not espying how the Sampson in
his mill) not considering what wash way they make of Gods Commands. Oh! these
and all other scurfe of this kind, as Antinomian liberty under the Gospel,
erroneous thinking our obedience to be closer then it is, because in some
duties (which please us) we are close: whereas in others we are loose: as,
when God requires us whether alone, to be always well seasoned, and least alone:
or if with others, to curb our vanity and vagaries, and either to do good or
take it: I say, These (for it were infinite to say all) the Lord will have us
cut off by the same sword of his Spirit, even by his Commands: always watching a
base heart, always armed against Devil and world, her threats or her baits:
and when they have gain^^nd God all they can, yet to conclude for God, and to
determine and resolve all our resistances and demurres, by his bare truth:
saying, All these have their colors: but against them all is one truth, one
eternal, righteous, unchangeable word of God, which must carry them all, and
my soul down the stream.

Be warned then (brethren) by this caveat: Do as the Saints have done before
us: Romans 4.18.19.
Abraham had a world of exceptions to snare him: he foresaw that the killing of
Isaac employed not only a contradiction to the promise, but also infinite many
absurdities, as to break a moral law, to make himself a man execrable, an
abhorred person: therefore forbidding his thoughts to plod any longer, he
drownes all in the command: God (says he) who gave him, requires him: why
should I then deny him? Absurd, contrary, impossible charges to flesh, imply,
that God will aid the soul of the obeyer, with the more singular grace, and
crown it with greater rewards: and therefore he resolves to go downeright
with the command. Genesis 39.8.
Joseph had his thoughts (no doubt) stirring, when he was tempted by his lewd
mistress; perhaps, if I do it, honor, gain, preferment, may ensue? But to
be sure, on the other side it will be most woeful for me to fall into the pit
of an whore, Prove. 6.26.
to be snared for ever with a cursed conscience: oh (says he) shall I do
this, and sin against God? Here (beloved) lies the maine trial of a
Christian, if, when all is said that can be, against the charge either of
believing or obeying, the soul shall devour all her objections, as Peter
(when after his idle fishing all the night, he was bidden to cast his net on
the right side of the ship) Lord, Luke 5.7.
at thy command I will cast in. So do thou and prosper. And so much also may
serve for this use of Admonition.

Reproof.
and Exhortation. For the former thus: Are Gods charges so close, so
spiritual, so binding? Surely then the course of this world is very
blameworthy, for that loves nothing save liberty and dispensations. It was
wont to be said in the times of those heretics, All the world is become
Arrian: but now we may say, It is all turned libertine Antinomists and
Libertines, (who under the color of ascribing to the excellency and extent of
faith and imputation, (which they never well understood) maintain a
licentiousness of practice) have filled the world, at this day. The course of
such among us as have written or preached some abatements to our former Tenets
and Articles of Doctrine, allaying and corrupting our principles of
justification, free grace, and other the like, has brought forth this bastard
fruit, and Papists dare publicly write books in the reconciling of our
Doctrine in this Church of England with their own Tenets. And as some
Separatists from the writings of some of our Worthies, have falsely extracted a
necessity of our departing from the Church of England: so would these impudent
Cassanders force us to come in and join our selves with their Popish
Synagogue? What true and Christian spirit should not mourn to see our old pure
wine thus to be mixed with water, and our old coin so embased with copper? For
practice, much more apparent it is, how men make dispensations for liberty, in
all the chief points of Christianity? What one act or duty savouring of
sincerity or the power of Christ, is not caught at, curtolled, diminished, and
dispensed with? Dispensations against the power of truths, is a great sin of
our times.
When were the lascivious wits of men more busied, or their profane hearts
more bold, in fleecing away the extents of the truths of God, as they are in
Jesus? And why? Surely, because whenever power of truth decays, there the
tenets of truth must also be limited, restrained, and circumscribed. Yea, and
men would seem to be mad with reason, Sundry instances named.
and to maintain, That those former times wherein Doctrines and Practices of
men were more close and strict, were times of less light and judgment: but
now (say they) we are grown to be more skillful and able to discern, and
therefore may take more liberty. Who ever heard that ignorance bred closeness,
or that light bred liberty? True it is, that as truth, so the power of truth
lies low in the earth, and is hidden deep, and requires a long time to dig it
out. But to affirm that the truth was more strict in the beginning of time,
then after; and that it is the honor of time to broach liberty and loosnesse,
how unreasonable it is? No, rather we have by our base deserting of truth, or
detaining the same in unrighteousness, brought upon our selves a revolt from
both truth and the power thereof in great measure, and made our ends worse then
our beginnings; except the Lord mercifully do set our Sun ten degrees back,
and reduce us again to our first temper. Let us not think those days which
God honored with so much blood of our Martyrs, (and that in the infancy of our
Church) were further off the power and savor of godliness, then we are.
Rather it might become us even now (in our Laodicean self-sufficiency) to learn
of them, and not to pretend our own liberty and breadth, as an argument of
greater perfection.

The truth of it is, look we into all estates and conditions of life,
Amplification of this reproof.
great, small, or middle; into all actions, behaviors of men, moral,
spiritual: into all their ways, either of worship and ordinances, or of life
and conversation, and we shall find not one of these to have escaped the
taint of carnal liberty and dispensations. Our forefathers zeal could outbid
all fears, persecutions and dangers, for the maintenance of commands. But we
(degenerate creatures) are all for abatements, and how we may reconcile Gods
and our own ends together. If men could refine the Bible, and make an Index
Expurgatorius, for the dashing out of the most close, powerful Truths, as too
hot and heavy for the times of loosnesse, wherein we live, how welcome would
they be? As Papists have done with the second Command, and with other writings
of men, which favor not their proceedings: so do we now go about by our
practice, to traduce those grounds of Religion formerly received, and call them
into question. Who is he, that seeing our Sabbath prophanations, our pride in
apparel, our garish fashions, disguised cuts of hair and attires, both in
men and women, the height at which the most live, how the Peasant affects the
habit of a Yeoman; he, of a Gentleman; he, of a Knight; he, of a Lord, and
so forth, would not say, The whole world runs riot, and is mad of liberty?
Who can endure a Minister, who (like Micaja) will speak nothing for fear, or
flattery, but the naked truth? How are Gods commands in short time, like to be
turned into men's carnal dispensations? 2 Kings. 22.16.
So that, their look and habit will scarce be discerned.

Marks of dispensers. Some branches of reproof. 1. Number. 1 King. 22. 1 King.
18.22.
And this may appear by these particulars: First, compare but the number of
closers with Gods Commands, with the multitude of dispensers, and we shall see
in Scripture, how many false Prophets Ahab had to one Micaja, how many Baals
Priests Iezabel had to one Elija, how many thousands of staggering Israelites
to one Joshua: Eleven Tribes, Exodus 32. fell to set up the golden Calfe, to one
Tribe of Levi, which detested it. And the like proportion was in our Savior
and his eleven Apostles, and a few others, to the swarm of Pharisees and
dispensing hypocrites. 2. Cunning.
Secondly, what cunning do such as are loose in obeying Gods commands, use, to
hook in them that are better minded, to sort and side with them; and how happy
do they think themselves, if they can make to themselves one Proselyte? How
eager was Ahabs messenger to seduce poor Micaja? 1 King. 22.
And how safe are they when they can pervert such? When Boner could draw in
some of the weaker sort to the persecuted Christians, to side and league with
him against their brethren, what a May Game was it? Therefore Solomon wishes us
to put our knife to our throat, Prove. 23.2.
and not to venture upon the dainties: for they have a hook underneath. And
how eager are such people as do themselves break the Lords day rest, against
them who dance not after their pipe? How greedily do they snatch any occasion
which they can find, from the errors of the better sort, for the establishing
of their own? Yea, and that from those, whom (otherwise) they hate and
abhor? Mr. Beza and Mr. Calvin are men whom many do not allow in all things;
yet how do they magnify their opinion about the unmoralnesse of the Sabbath?
And thus do they delight to dis-joynt the good, that in their divisions they
may reign. If they can pick out any who have learnedly written about games
and pastimes, Cards or Dice, how do they applaud such, and scorn the learning
of such who are otherwise minded? As the Fox, whose tail was cut off, was glad
to have all other beasts to cut off theirs. 3. Counsel carnal.
Thirdly, their counsel is suitable. Oh! say they, ye shall do well to
moderate your zeal and severity, to be more calm and temperate: It were not
your wisdom to go so fast on, but ye may know how to come back with
safety. It is good policy for every man to secure his own Retreat. When young
and hot blood is spent, you will be wiser; and when you have seen more into
the world, you will be cooler, and repent of your strictness.

4. Questions.
Fourthly, how earnest are they in all their questions, to find out the least
degree which an obeyer of commands can possibly reach unto? May not such a
measure of believing, humility, and self-denial, serve the turn? Must I of
necessity either lend my money without usurious contracts, or keep it still?
How should a Commonwealth want such as take use? Must I needs pray so, and so
usually in family? Needs be subject to my husband for conscience, being a man
meanliter parted? Me thinks men are too scrupulous in these cases. Can ye^ not
limit us a little for the keeping of the whole Lords day? May not the public
duties serve? And may we not be dispensed with for private serving of God
apart, if we worship him in family? Is it so material of what fashions our
apparel be, so our minds be modest? Or, what companies we come into, so we
be our selves religious, chaste, and sober? Is it of such necessity to prepare
our selves so strictly for the Sacrament? Or to examine others of their
fitness? Is it not enough that the Minister does it? Is it required of us, to
abide in our places, to do good, to govern others by our example, and not to
run up to the City, there to spare, and rake together for our backs, pride of
life, and procuring of great matches for our children? 1 Cor. 7.20.
Must a man abide in the vocation wherein God has set him, without picking
quarrels with it, weariness of it, and changing it at our pleasure for
advantage? May we not sometimes strain a joint to please wife, husband,
friend, great ones? And so by a little yielding, keep off the dint of that
which would else light sor^ upon us? Me thinks these things might admit more
limitations then so. The world was never so mischievously set (to use Aarons
words, Exodus 32.22.) for their wills and liberties, as now: And to this market
every man makes haste, and the question still is, What is the lowest price?

Fifthly, what are the wits of most men spent about, 5. Wits.
save the devising of tricks and distinctions to weaken and loosen the chains
of Commands? What arguments does their carnal brain suggest, partly from
probabilities to flesh, partly from the prejudice of men against the persons of
the strict, and partly from the multitude of the looser sort, or such
absurdities as seem (in sense) to flow from the closeness of commands? Some
alleging, it wearies them to hear a Sermon above an hour long: Others, that
they can hear more in an hour, then they can practice in a week: Others,
that it confounds memory: Others, that now men have knowledge enough. And as in
this, so is it in all other respects, and one or other cavil arises against
every Command.

Sixthly, 6. Malice.
how opposite are men in the pursuit of such as seem not to like of such
Coleworts as themselves feed upon? Judge. 17.
We read how clamorous that Idolater Mica was, when the Danites had stolen
away his Idols? How mad Laban was with Jacob for his Gods? Genesis 31.30.
And so are men in these days, against any Ministers, who convince them of
their bredths and loose liberties? Men choose rather to lose their blood then
their ease, and form in Religion. Surely, the people are grown so deep in
love with this trash of slight serving God, that they could scratch out his
eyes who should pluck them off from their Idols: And as she spoke (in another
kind) that the custom of women was upon her; so the stream and course of the
world does so inchant them, that it is death to them to stir an inch.

Men will (to conclude) run and ride till they tire themselves, 7. Partiality.
to confer with such as they think of their own judgment, such as will
smooth and sow pillowes under their elbowes. But if they might converse with
others at the next door, who are of another judgment, they shun them
purposely: And so (to conclude) we all look to buy by the largest Bushel
from God; but when we come to sell, we get the most scanty one that we can
come by.

8. Baseness.
Look among Papists, and tell me, what cost, what extremities will they not
endure, rather then their Catholic cause should go down? But among us, where
is there one of a thousand that cares for the cause of God, the sinceri^y of
truth, or such as profess or suffer for it? Oh! most unthankful people. Has
God taken all this pains to make his will familiar unto us, to reveal
himself to us in his narrowest truths, to make his yoke sweet, and his burden
light, and go we about to cast it off more desperately now, then when our
light was small? Do we thus requite the Lord, like an unthankful Nation? We,
who should have been the closest and narrowest toward God, and walked most
uprightly and closely, Deuteronomy. 32.13.
do we kick up the heel, and pluck back the shoulder? Do we revolt and
play the fugitives, with Demas, 2 Timothy 4.10.
from the Banner and Colors of our Lord and Master? Oh! that this day our
sins might come to our remembrance. The Lord shame us for it, Brethren;
especially such of us as have buried our care and closeness, under a clod of
carnal wisdom, earthly affections, fear of men, love of our selves, custom
of the time, examples of our betters. The Lord (I say) gaster us off these
Idols, and teach us to leave off our correspondencies with hypocrites, and to
be transformed in the spirits of our minds, that we may approve what is that
good, acceptable, and precious will of his, not only in judgment, but in
power and life of obedience. And so much for this Use. Now I hasten to the last.

Exhortation. Branches of ^t, three. 1. Mourn for them who have forsaken their
closeness^ of obedience.
That we mourn unfeignedly for the desperateness of others in this kind: Oh!
If we be as ready to forgo our Jewel and C^owne of close walking, as this
world is willing to rob us thereof, we are not like long to hold it! Oh then!
if the world be so resolute to hold her own, how should we learn to hold our
own by their example? What a shame is it that the children of this world,
should in their generation be wiser then the children of light? Should we then
dare to prostitute our consciences to such? If we might have all the glory of
this world for our worshipping this Idol, should we not abhor it? Is it now a
season to fly, to stagger, to betray Gods Commands? No, rather let us cleave
the closer by their warping: and as a chaste Matrone beholding a debauched
strumpet, closes more with sobernes then ever; so let us do with the obedience
of Commands: when we come before God in our most special devotions and
pra^ers, let us not (with those hypocrites) feel a pleasure of our own
tickling us: Esaias 58.
let not us seem to disavow the declining, looseness and hollownesse of
others: and in the mean time, keep false weights and measures within our
selves; let not us have a traitors heart to keep our breadths in Gods narrow,
but come to the oath and covenant, to come under the authority of God, loathing
all our slightness, ease, baseness, bondage, bringing him so much the more
close obedience, by how much we seem to detest the contrary: And having so
done, learn we (with David) to prise the purity of Truths never the worse,
because others embase them: when he had (in the former part of the Psalm)
mourned for the manners of others, he adds, Psalm. 12.6.
Gods word is as silver purged by fire from the dross: So should we be so
far from quailing of judgment, or weakening in affection toward the commands
of God, because others vilify them, that rather that should provoke us to
adore, and admire the purity of them: And not only so, but to cry out with
him, Help Lord for the godly men decay, and hypocrites increase: Verse 1.
Arise therefore, quite thy cause, deliver thy people, set them at liberty that
stick to thy Name, and bring forth their light out of darkness, Psalm. 37.6.
as the morning, and their righteousness as the noone day. Send forth O Lord,
rain down grace and goodness, and let it bear down this stream of carnal
liberty, as the sea bears down a brook: Bring thy Commands again into
honor, and make all such as teach dispensations against them as odious as
Monks and Friars: This is the first.

Another branch is, 2. Branch. Much more for our own looseness in that kind.
That all Gods people do mourn and humble themselves for their own playing
fast and loose with Gods Commands. What godly heart is there in the world that
could not beteam God whole days and nights in this lamentation! Who should so
poorly know his own spirit in this kind (if he attend it at all) but this
work should be precious? Either to rid his soul of her base slightness, or to
fasten upon it, the cords and chains of God with more closeness and delight:
Say thus to the Lord, Oh I feel no power, no girding of loins, A form of such
a mournful complaint.
no awe, nor fear to lie upon my soul by thy commands; I sit loose to prayer,
to watching, to hearing, to meditation: I feel this day slipped from me, without
redeeming it to the best use, in all my solitariness, company, liberties,
duties, I have been as one in a dead sleep; no virtue has gone out of me this
day, either of living by faith in the promises, or of compassion to the
distressed, of love to the Saints, mourning for the afflictions of Joseph, I
have met with objects of the world, of impatience, of uncharitableness, and
yet no chains of thine have been upon my spirit, but I have walked as one at
his own terms: Surely the cords of Gods Law have not bound my lusts as a
sacrifice to his altar, nor the loadstone of his love has not sweetly drawn
my soul to obey him with delight, but I have been mine own man in all these!
My will has not been subject, and (as it were) bound up in thine. Matthew. 8.
I have not been my self under thy authority, as that Centurion was! I look
that my will should be done by all that are under me, yea I look that they
should walk in all wel-pleasing toward a sinful wretch, yea, obey me
punctually, closely, universally, yea, my very thoughts, that he might be a
servant according to mine own heart, and whether I give a reason or no of my
charges, I think it equal, that my inferior do nothing at all swerve from
my commands.

Oh! what shall become of me for my loose heart, thoughts, affections,
conscience? What shall I answer for my dead, hard, lazy, empty, senseless,
sensual heart, in point of a tender, cheerful and upright walking with thee!
I see Saul's subjects being charged to fast, 1 Samuel 14.30.
trembled to see his own son to touch a little honey, so far were they from
tasting it) and shall the awe of a man in a trifle (saving the vow) so
absolutely surprise their wills, and yet the eternal and righteous will of God
not be able to prevail over me! O Lord, I deceive all that know me, when I do
the material part of a command, the life of the duty is absent; when I do the
moral part, the spiritual is far off; and although I see and know it thus, I
am so chained under the law of my corruptions, that the integrity, the scope,
the fruitfulness, the large-heartednesse of my obedience, is not to be seen:
Oh! I offer sacrifices halt and blind, wanting heart, liver and reigns: I am
so fraut with my self, Romans 7.23.
and the command of evil, that good is seldom present. A lust has a
principle in me, causing me to love it, to serve it, to use all means to
fulfill it, to shun studiously whatsoever might cross it: But I feel not
that spirit of grace, which should cause me to obey, from a principle of
sweetness: still there is somewhat which me thinks I choose rather to do, and to
be swaied by, then the law of love to God for his love to my soul! Oh! herein
the Lord my God be merciful to me, that whereas I have found as much mercy as
any, yet I have bowed to this lust, and that, and worship my own fancies, and
am as like to do still, if the awe of God lie not more closely upon my soul!
Oh! that this fire might always so burn upon mine altar, as might consume my
dross, and put some life and courage into into me, to get out of this Circle
in which the Devil has conjured me, to walk deadly and basely toward the
Commands of God!

Nay (which is worse) O Lord, I am grown to this point, even to lie as a beast
in a slow, groaning under her burden: so lie I, in a fullen discontent of heart
at the Lord himself, that he enlarges me no better, when as yet I nourish my
self, all the while, in my ease, and carnal distaste of his straight
Commands! Oh! me thinks my cursed heart (because it cannot have her will of
him) could even tell him to his face, That he is an hard Master, and gathers
where he strawed not! Alas! I consider not, that he has me at the vantage,
because I have lost the grace of my creation; nay abused a better grace of
Mercy; and therefore may justly be punished for the least Rebellion. And not only
thus, but from this stubborn heart of mine, it comes, that I set my sails
abroad, and commit my self to wind, and weather: am not smitten when I break
all cords in two, as Samson I am loose in Sabbaths, in the curbing of my
passions, my vain thoughts have their through-fare, and lodge in me, and yet
I am not troubled, I swallow every gobbet, and let it go: Once I could strain
at a gnat, but now I devour Camels, and hear no more of them: Oh! Lord, I
pick quarrels with those laws, which have formerly been equal to me!

And (more then these; Lord) I am grown to this sad point, that the sense of a
bit and bridle, is (by custom of loosenes) quite slipped out of my mouth; I
begin to frame God, to be such an one, as my base heart could be content he
were: even a God like to my self, who will neither do good, Psalm. 50.
nor evil: whose threats are as the clappes of thunder, without any stroke
following: I hope to go on in a Round and way of easy Religion, and doing of
one duty after another successively, without strayning of a joint: But as for
any sadness of Commands to weigh down my spirit to solid fear, (being thus
accustomed to a slight and vain course) I feel it not; God help me!

In all these respects, what shall a poor soul (O Lord) do, Conclusion of
this branch.
with it self? What (O my deer God) shall bring me back again, after all
these desperate revolts, unto thee? I wonder that I should not be wholly left,
to utter woe and open offenses! I know nothing in my self, why Satan should
not have me at such a bay, as to cause me to depart from God, grossly, and
generally, as well as in these secret rebellions! For, I wax weary of thy yoke,
and am content that others should abide the heat of thy work, and my self be
released! O Lord, I am so far from pleasing my self in this state, that,
rather then I would be under the misery of my slightness, I could wish thou
woldst cast some other unpleasing chains upon me; some stinging cross, some
corrasive to eat out my dead flesh: And, (as untoward as I am to suffer) if I
deceive not my self, I could wish the sweet fruit or such a course, with some
pinch to my flesh, rather then thus giddily to provoke thy Majesty by the
transgression of thy Commands!

But thirdly and above all, this is exhortation to all Gods people, Jacob went
to Luz God cast a fear upon the nations, that they durst not stir a joint
against him. Oh! Genes. 35.5.
such a fear should thou beseech God, to cast upon thy soul in secret,
Fear of God besetting the heart a great mean to keep close to God.
wheresoever thou becommest, that it may hem in and compel thee to obey! As
its said of the clowd which filled the Temple, and caused the people to fear
the presence of God, who was in the midst thereof: so, should this cloud always
lie upon thy soul, to smite an awe into thy soul of offending. Theris is a
base spirit in us: it is not love alone, which can long hold us within bonds:
Heb. 12. end.
Therefore we had need (as it is Heb. 12. end) to hold fast such grace, as may
cause us to walk in reverence and holy fear. Deuteronomy. 32.46.
Moses (summing up the contents of that Swans song of his, in two words) tells
the people: Set your hearts to all the words of this book, which I testify to
you this day, that is the law of the covenant: its a sad law: sadly therefore
set your hearts to it. He, whom we have to do with, is one, Heb. 4.13.
to whom all things are open and manifest: his word is quick and as a two
edged spirit, dividing between the soul and spirit, the joints and marrow,
the thoughts and intents of the heart. Dally not therefore with him: Its
fearful to fall into his hands: He will not spare us: but will punish our
sins. And, Heb. 10.31.
if we call him father, who judges without respect of persons: 1. Pet. 1.17.
pass we the whole time of our dwelling here in fear; For, our God is a
consuming fire. This in general.

In special, The command of the Gospel to believe in Christ is most solemnly
to be ^beyed.
make conscience of the most solemn command of the Gospel, to believe in the
Lord Jesus, close with this command. It is the most sovereign and
indispensable of all other: Obey this, and obey all: for in this stands the
obedience to all the rest. The Lord has engaged all his glory and honor upon
this one: That the most vile, miserable sinner living, who is willing to come
in with his load pinching him to hell, shall find ease: Whether it seem so,
or no, this is the truth, he has purposed to magnify all his Attributes in
showing mercy to such an one: He will have it known, that he can do that
which flesh cannot, even love the most hateful enemy in the world, that is
weary of his enmity. This he has set down with himself from eternity; in time
has declared it to his Church, by giving his justice a full discharge in the
blood of his Son. He is the upshot of promises, and therefore looks that he
be believed; yea, for a recompense hereof, that he has made all Yea and Amen
in him, 2 Cor. 1.20. Joh. 3.33.
he desires but to be believed, counting them that do so, to seal that he is
true: and calling the rest liars. Consult not now with flesh and reason; Say
not, that this word is far from thee, Romans 10.8.
it is near thee, it is offered and pined to thy sleeve, Esaias 1. Luke 5.7.
that thou might believe it; consent and obey this, and the worst is past. As
Peter said to Christ, At thy command I will cast in, though I have cast all
night, and caught nothing: So say thou, I have long traded with mine own
inventions, devotions and duties, but now at thy command, I will try what thy
promise is worth, and cast my self wholly upon it for pardon, grace and life.
If I perish, I perish. Venture so and prosper. Secondly, proceed to other
commands: The same Lord of commands, bids us love one another; for love
fulfilleth the Law, Joh. 14. Jam. 3. 1 Timothy 1. All other commands issue from
faith.
the end thereof being love out of a pure and good conscience, and love
unfeigned. Fear this command also. The person of man (who is thy immediate
object of love) may, perhaps, seem contemptible to thee; for what can he do
unto thee, whether thou love or love not? But he that made thee and him too,
and has planted you both in the body of his Church, under Christ the head; he
it is, who bids thee love thy neighbor; love him by reproof, and murder him
not; love him by counsel, example, admonition, compassion: lowre not upon him,
curb self-love, passion, indignation, wrath, envy, revenge, slighting of him,
disdaining him: Think with thy self, it is not for naught that all the
commands are said to be done in this one, of Love: Think not that all shall
be well if thou can but believe in Christ; Matthew. 25.
know, that the Lord Jesus himself, who will call for faith at his coming,
Luke 18.8. will call for love also. The want of love, and the due carriage of
thy heart toward others, is a spiritual solemn command of the Gospel as well
as faith, and one day will appear to be so: when God shall call thee to the
Bar, and convince thee, how little fruit of love has ever proceeded from
thee. Therefore close with this charge also; look not upon man, but upon that
God who has bound thee to him by this chain of love, and who will hold
himself wronged in the violation of it: lay a more solemn charge upon thy
spirit in this kind, then ever, and feel thy soul to lie under the authority
of this command, as well as the former.

And what more should I say? From these two well-springs proceed all the
streams of Commands, concerning, God, Man, and thy self. Hence issues a
Command of a close keeping the Sabbath, ordering thy conversation aright; Ephesians.
5.15. Jam. 1. ult.
hence comes that charge of walking circumspectly, as wise: keeping thy self
unspotted of the world. Hence it is, that thou art forbidden to have thy course
in covetousness, to have any fellowship with the unfruitful works of
darkness. Hence also it is, that thou art bidden, Redeem the season; Heb.
13.5. Ephesians. 5.11.16. Mat. 16.26. 1 Pet. 3.9.
Walk wisely toward them who are without: To take up thy cross daily, to deny
thy self, to live by faith to sanctify God in thine heart, and make him thy
fear. And the like I might say of the rest (for it were endless to speak of
all.) Conceive of them all as coming from one rule of righteousness: And know
it, he that requires one, urges all: Perhaps thou would think it equal to
obey the Magistrate, obey thy Parents, keep the Sabbath: but know it, the same
God commands thee to preach in season and our, to execute the righteous
judgments of God, to be subject to thy husband, to teach thy children the
fear of God: These are special ones, and less welcome; but if thou obey not
them, thou do but play fast and loose with God in the generals: For all
sound obedience to God is equal and uniforme. I know what flesh will say, It Is
tedious to be so tied and tasked, to be held to it from day to day, never out:
say not, I could be content to fast and pray one day, to redeem liberty for
many: I could walk close for a Sabbath, so I might be mine own man all the
week. But know, that the law of love takes no thought for continuance; it is
no violent compulsion, as a slave to ply his work; but as natural as for the
fire to burn, or the sparks to fly upward. Let the Law be once written in
thy heart, Jer. 31.31.
and it will teach thee holy wisdom, love and delight to accommodate and apt
thy self to each one in special equally and constantly. Simile.
The Law and Art of music in the mind, acts the fingers ends to such a
nimblenesse and presentnesse of service, as is admirable. And if the writing of
letters and characters upon Fringes and Frontlets, were so powerful, as to
prompt a man to the obedience of each occasion: what then is the law of grace
written in each faculty of the mind and will, in the reins and the spirit of
the Soul? But here I cease for this time. Let us pray, etc.

The end of the ninteenth Lecture.
THE TWENTIETH LECTVRE continued upon the 14. VERSE.
VERSE XIV. Then he went down and washed himself seven times in Jorden, and
his flesh came again unto him as the flesh of a little child, and he was
clean.


WE ended last time with some exhortation: But (brethren) because me thinks
I hear some say; Were it a thing within my power to compass, there is nothing
which I more wish, then to delight in the law of God in my inner man:

Means d^^ecting to obey. 1. Faith.
The first and one main is, get the Lord Jesus to be thy lawgiver. Moses is a
commander of rigorous, impossible duties, serving rather to convince the soul
of that power of created righteousness, which we have lost; then to enable us to
obey. But the Lord Jesus, is a more mild and merciful lawgiver: who as he has
united God with flesh, in his own person: so therein he has broken down that
wall, which stood up, as a Tower impregnable, Coloss. 1.20. Ephesians. 3.15.16.
between God and us: he has made all level and easy, and fastened the
hand-writings of Morals and Ceremonials, unto his Cross, that it might never
appear against us. Nay more, he has fulfilled all righteousness both of
doing and suffering, that we in him might be clothed with it as a Robe from
top to toe, and might fulfill the Law by faith. Practic. Catech. part. 3. Art.
5.
I have at large opened this point elsewhere in the doctrine of it: Let us here
urge the necessity of faith upon our selves, and close with the promise, to
make it our own. The truth is, there is no command of God, but Christ has
made it possible and sweet, and by a promise he conveyes it to the soul,
saying; Take my yoke upon you, for is easy; Mat. 11.29.
and my burden, for it is light. Of our selves we have another Law in our
members, leading us captives thereto: a law of lust, pride, ambition, sloth,
profaneness, hypocrisy, and self-love. These naturally we take thought to
fulfill, as Paul says, Romans 13. ult. But the Lord Jesus has destroyed this
power in us of sin and death, Romans 8.2. Romans 13. ult.
eased us of the impossiblenesse of obeying through the weakness of our flesh.
He has quit us of being debtors to our flesh, to fulfill it, and redeemed us
to himself. Nothing remains now, save that we put on the Lord Jesus by
faith, that we renounce our old base bondage and slavery, that we be willing
to be freemen, and that we close with the promise of sweet obedience, by our
believing it. For this was his scope in easing us of one burden, to put upon us
another; yet easy and sweet. Let this then be the first Rule: If thou would
fulfill the Law, believe. Faith has united all the elect to Christ his Flesh
and Godhead, who fulfilled all righteousness, Romans 10.4.
and was made under the Law, that he might be the end of the Law to
righteousness for all that believe. Fasten then upon this, That the Lord Jesus
never brake one Law, performed all; never preached Sermon less then he was
bound to, never did one miracle less then he ought, failed in nothing,
ground, substance, manner, measure, end of obeying; but did all in perfection:
And none of this he did for himself (sure I am, not properly and purposely)
but for us, we were his scope: for our sakes he did all. And why? Surely, that
we might partake it, not only in freedom from guilt and wrath; but also in
acceptance with God, as his beloved, and his righteous servants, prepared for
every good work. As the Lord offered us Christ to the former end; so does he
for this latter: he is as faithful in the one, as the other: Therefore, 1 Thessalonians. 5.24. Romans 12.2. Coloss. 1.10. Philip. 4.
sunder we not those things which God has joined together: but put we on
Christ in both, to redeem us from guilt, and to make us Priests and Kings, to
offer up sacrifices of all well pleasing and obedience, with holy delight and
cheerfulness. He is faithful that has promised, who also will do it. He who
has him, for his own, who has done and suffered all: he, whose Christ is by
imputation of righteousness, and by not imputation of sin, sins not,
fulfilleth the Law, and is that which he is unto whom he is united by faith.
This for the first.

Secondly, if thou would obey commands closely, 2. Meditation of the object.
then muse seriously of the sadness and solemness thereof, and incorporate
thy soul into it. First, muse of the spiritualnesse of them. If Gods Candle
search the bowels of the belly, and pierce the soul; be convinced in thy
meditations, that the baseness of thy hollow, vain, worldly wandering heart
upon the Sabbath, vexes the Spirit of God, as much as working or playing: and
so in other duties. Secondly, of the universality of them: Muse therefore of
this; It is not my wealth or poverty, my greatness or meannesse, my learning
or ignorance, which can dispense with me; with God there is no respect of
persons: No time, no place, no circumstances can prescribe against God; he is
one and the same object of fear in all places, duties, times, occasions.
Thirdly, muse of the indispensablenesse of Gods Commands. Courts may dispense
with men's offenses: Gods penalties cannot be bought off nor commuted. Gods
commands are unappealable, coming from the highest Court of heaven: Lower
Courts cannot be appealed unto from the higher. Fourthly, they are his
Commands, who is infinite in wisdom, righteousness and vengeance, sees,
knows and tries all obedience, is present every where, and strong enough to
punish the breaches of any one; no man can avoid his eye, or escape his
censure; He backs all Commands with threats, and pursues threats with revenges.
F^fthly, they are absolute: no colors, no distinctions will be admitted; they
are subject to no man's interpretation, but to their own: They are both Text
and Comment to themselves. Other men's charges and statutes are yet subject to
construction, and interpretation, so often as any ambiguous questions fall out
about them, and by that means are often perverted quite and clean from their
sincere intentions: But no Devil, heretic, or profane person, could ever
remove Gods limits, or overthrow his meanings: As they were, so they still
abide. 1 Pet. 1. ult.
The word of God abides for ever. Such thoughts as these being settled by
meditation upon the soul, may be as powerful to persuade closeness in
obeying, as the thoughts of bad men upon the wrongs offered them, provoke them
to revenge. If the Lord go with the one, as Satan goes with the other, they
must needs prosper. Righteous (O Lord) are all thy judgemens, therefore thy
servant fears thee.

The third examples. Psalm. 16.2. Psalm. 119.4.
Thirdly, its excellent for us to turn our eyes off from all slighters and
paltrers with God, abhorring their declinings, Psalm. 101. But to bend the eye
of the soul toward them that are singular in grace, and close obeying. So
David tells us, That he set such before his eyes, till he was ravished with
them: Doubtless (says he) they go not astray from any commands: As if he
should say, oh that I were such an one! With the base and formal, a man should
soon learn that trade: But the watchful, the wakefull, the close, the
conscionable, will soon teach us their practice; so that it will be a shame
unto us to be otherwise, and it will fix the nail of commands deep into our
hearts as with an hammer. Eccles. ult.


The fourth prayer. Psalm. 119.27.
The fourth is Prayer, which is the constant help which Gods people have always
used to ease themselves by at this pinch. David prays God to teach him his Law
graciously: mark, graciously, that is, in the sweetness, ease, delight, and
reward of it, not in the toil and difficulty thereof. Psalm. 119.
So again, Oh that mine heart were directed to keep thy commands! They that
feel the true weight of them, will groan under their own weakness, and pray
for strength! Hence that holy prayer of Saint Augustine, Give strength to do
what thou biddest, and bid what thou will! Turn all Gods promises and
covenants into prayers; for there is no one command urged upon the soul, but
it has a promise annexed. Oh Lord, thou have said thou will incline me to keep
thy Law, Thou have promised to write it and engrave it in my fleshly tables, to
cause me to walk in all thy Statutes! Oh do it Lord! Open mine eyes, that I
may see the wonders of thy Laws, their perfection and excellency, and then
take the stone out of my heart, and make it tender, they may pierce into it,
with fear and awe: Help Lord, my fruit is come to the birth, and there is no
strength to bring forth.

Fifthly, get humbleness of spirit, and that will equal Gods righteousness.
Murmr not, fret not at the closeness of them, for that satisfies not God:
But be as a worm before him, The fifth rule, Humility.
and tremble at his voice, as we see the poor worms come shaking and
trembling out of the earth when they feel the feet of any treading the earth.
Esaias has this speech in one place, You have made me to serve by your
rebellions. A proud heart makes God serve base flesh. An humble heart which
knows it self, serves God, and is glad that it may be accepted. In Psalm.
2.12. we see how base men take upon them: But whence is it? Oh, pride makes
them cast away all the cords of God from them! Pride makes them to say, Our
tongues are our own, what Lord shall control us? A swelling proud heart will
not endure any pinch of Law more then it self likes. But the humble will take
Law at Gods hands gladly, and concur with him: Have thou (O Lord) bidden me
deny my self? Abstain from fleshly lusts? Possess my soul with patience? my
vessel in holiness and honor? Its just Lord, thy will is a rule, I desire
not to see beyond it: Proud servants love a fair Livery, and great wages,
better then close commands: But the humble will take any work upon them, and
say, its their object. Beware then of a sullen, queazy, coy and proud heart.

Sixthly, mark closely the threats of God against each rebellion: The sixth
rule. Observe Gods Judgments.
and the verifying thereof in experience, both in Scripture and daily. This
will cut the comb of presumption! For who have offended God and prospered? Its
a maxim: lot upon it, whether thou see it so or not, be sure it will be so: As
that old Prophet told his sons, 1 Kings 13.
Bury me in the grave of the man of God; for all which he has said against
this place, shall surely come to pass. To get a weighty heart under threats
(giving them a being in the soul, through faith) is the only way for Commands
to take effect: For God has fortified the one with the other; if the fence be
broken down, the corn lies open to the stroyance of all beasts. Observe
closely, how God plagues drunkards, swearers, adulterers, Sunday breakers, and
the like; and add the patterns of the Scripture (often pressed by Peter and
Jude) that we may not think their damnation sleeps: else we will be
Atheists, 2 Pet. 3. Epist. Jude. Psalm. 50.
and frame God like our selves. But this will awe us: Such and such ventured so
and so, but they paid sweetly for it; if we be content to share with them, we
may side with them, but not else. For Gods wrath will not rot in the sky.
Eccles. 7.
Deferring of judgment sets the heart of a sinner, yea hardens it to
rebellion; but believing it works fear and prevention, as in Noah, Heb. 11.
Heb. 11.


Seventhly, deny thy self. The seventh rule. Self-denial.
Self and God will run in a stream a while, as filthy dung, and pure apples
in a river, till the one be scattered from the other. So our own ends and Gods
make a poor shift to go together a while till trouble and losses, reproach and
pursuit divide them, but then they sever. Sure it is, That man who has no
other obedience for God, save that which will go in his own stream, of ease,
safety, content, quiet and welfare, will abandon God, when he is tried:
Therefore he that means to walk closely with God, let him shake off such
weights as these. The like I may say of such, Heb. 12.
as dare adventure to suffer in Gods cause, upon hope to lick themselves whole
by carnal supplies. No, no: All such build upon the sands of their own false
hopes, the Lord will scatter them. I deny not, but that God is all-sufficient
to all his, and has promised not to fail them; yea, to give them an hundred
fold requital. But this is to them that walk uprightly, Mal. 3.
Genesis 17.1. not to hirelings who obtrude their service, and know no requitals
but carnal: Such, it is just with God to leave to their own shifts; 1. Pet. 3.
even to cry a confederacy, to fear the fears of the wicked, and to put forth
their hand unto evil, because of their afflictions: They will buy out the air
of a prison, but their own air shall choke them; only they who can trust God
in his promise, and are content to take his pay in good worth, what ever it
be, such God will not forsake: And such only are meet persons to obey,
because they are armed.

8. Rewards.
Lastly, digest truly the reward of close obeying, not only in heaven, when it
shall be known to men and Angels, who they are (though unknown to the world:)
But even here alas! Gods peoples right hand knows not what their left hand
does: They acknowledge little to come from them, Matthew. 25.
they keep all to themselves. When did we see thee naked and clothed thee?
Hungry, and fed thee? Sick, and in prison, and visited thee? Why are you such
strangers to your own duties? Then shall others be strangers to your joy:
only your selves shall enjoy the privilege of your own close walking: For be
ye sure, God will not conceal it; close love shall never want close peace,
unknown welfare, and comfort of heart, prosperity in grace, growth and
experience. You that walk in the regeneration of obedience with Christ, shall
not only sit upon Thrones hereafter in stead of your dust and ashes here: But
in the mean while you shall fare as Christ fared; he who made it his meat and
drink to do his Fathers will, had meat to eat which no man knew of: Joh. 4.
Nourish thou a mourning heart for sin, thine own and others, a close heart
to obey, and no man shall be able to judge what thy joys are: Prove. 10.29.
Thy work is also thy wages, and yet the Lord shall besides support thee
otherwise; so that neither spiritual nor earthly requitals shall be wanting,
till at last that life of thine which was hid with Christ in God, Col. 3.3.
shall break out before all, Men and Angels. Then shall close obedience be
swallowed up into exceeding glory; and the garments of joy shall be added to
thy secret consolations, in the day wherein Christ himself shall appear in
glory. And so much also may serve for this Use, and for this Doctrine: Whereto
I wish from my heart, a blessing from God upon the Reader.

The next Branch of Naamans obeying, was, his closing with the promise.
The second branch arising from hence, is, that Naaman washed seven times,
according to the word of Elisha, in respect of the promise added to his
washing; and that was, That he should recover his flesh again, and be clean.
This point (I told you) is as material as the other, one cannot well go
without the other; they are as twins, which live and dye together. The point I
collect from it, is this: Gods promises must be believed according to the scope
of promises: that is, according to the intent and extent thereof. I say again
(and mark well) promises must be believed according to that which is in them,
and that which they import; neither must they be shortened or straightened,
stretched or enlarged, neither made less nor more then is in them. Doctrine.
Promises must be believed according to their extent.
More then they are no man shall need to make them: for all the store and
fullness of God is in them. Less then they are, none may dare to make them.
That which the holy Ghost speaks in the conclusion of Revel. 22. He that
shall add any thing, or d^minish from the words of this book, the Lord shall
add to him all the plagues in this book, and diminish his name from the book
of life: That I may say of the promises; Let none make them greater then they
are, Opening of the ground of the po^
nor yet lesser; but let every one take, understand, and apply them to
himself, as they lie in the word, not in the letter only, but in the
spiritual meaning and purpose thereof. Touching the ground of this point out
of the Text, it needs not many words to be spent about it. It is evident that
the obedience of Naaman in going to wash, proceeded from no heat of sudden
alteration of mind, no pang or humor, no blind hope, or had-I-wist, as who
say, It Is but trying, I will go, hit I or miss I, it is but my journey. No,
but as he was strongly held back before, by a deep self-conceit; so now he is
drawn forward by as deep an inspiration of God, and a persuasion that the
promise annexed to his washing, was as certain and undeceiveable, as the
charge was divine and absolute: and therefore in obeying God commanding, he
consents to God promising also, in as full and absolute a degree, and in all
points and respects as the promise lay: that is to say, not that he should
perhaps be cured, perhaps not; but that the cure should be whole and entire,
no manner of Leprosy should hereafter cleave to him any more, but as now he
was nasty and scurvie all over, so then he should be healed by the healing of
God, (better then if Elisha had laid his hand upon it) that is, as perfectly as
if he never had been Leper, and his flesh should return to him as the flesh
of a little child, so clean should he become, and return home, and not repent
him that he had believed the promise in the fullness thereof. So much for the
ground of the Text.

Now (as I noted in the former point) here some may step in and object, Naaman?
Alas! his washing was but an outward act, and that occasional and personal,
only reaching to himself, and determining with him: Our case is otherwise,
and it must be a bottom of eternal truth, which must ground a doctrine of
this nature, because it concerns the perpetual practice of a poor soul in
respect of pardon and sanctification.

To whom I answer in one word, That the question is not here, Naaman is, or is
not: but what the nature of every promise requires, whether it be occasional
and temporal, or spiritual and general. The point is this, Every promise,
be it what it will be, whether for once and away, or for ado, being from God,
requires an equal obedience and extent of faith to embrace it, and cast the
soul upon it, as well as the moralest and generallest promise in the Word can
do. The reason is plain, because in the one, as well as the other, is
enclosed that power and truth of God, which binds the soul to an equal and
uniforme obedience. I speak now (and mark well) of such promises as require
our faith for the performance; for some promises are absolute in themselves,
and rest upon the naked word, whether we believe them or not, because they be
universal: Genesis 8.21.
As that the rainebow shall be a sure sign of no more deluges: That seasons of
the year, Summer and Winter, sowing time and harvest, shall continue: That the
Gospel shall be preached to all Nations: M^tth 24.13.
That there shall be a restoring of the Kingdom to Israel, and Christ shall in
this world be known to be Lord and King of his Church. These promises though
they deserve credit, yet shall be performed howsoever, being pitched and
appointed by God in their seasons. But for personal promises not so: That
particular promise made to Abraham touching a son (if yet it were particular)
or any other concerning a present mercy or deliverance, Genesis 18.10. Esaias 7.4.
as that which was made to Ahaz of victory against the Syrians, or to the
Shunamite, or to Manoa and his wife concerning a son, Judge. 13.
I say these required as firm an assent of faith, as any of the general.
Hence it is, that usually Christ effected no particular miracle, but he
required faith to believe it to the full: If thou beleevest nothing is
impossible: Did not I say to thee, If thou can believe (Martha) thou
should see the power of God? John 11.40.
So that Naaman here in the promise of healing, was tied to a punctual
closing, and casting himself upon the promise, as well as we are in the more
spiritual and general. And in this respect, this Text is a sure ground of
Doctrine to us, because, if, even promises only for present use, and of less
importance, required such faith, much more do those require it which are of
perpetual nature, and far greater consequence. And so much shall serve to
answer the doubt.

Now I proceed to Proofs, and so to the clearing of the truth by reason, and
answer of some questions, and so to Use: For the Proofs, first take that
place, Ephesians. 4 21. If ye have learned and known the Truth as it is in Jesus.
Mark how the holy Ghost prevents the carnal mistake of Promises: They must
not be taken up as our wit serves, or to make up our own ends; but as they lie
in the way and scope of God* and as the truth is in Jesus. This is a mystery to
a lazy, carnal, base heart, which construes promises (as men that interpret
Statutes) to their own ease and ends: No, Jesus his truths will not submit to
us, but we must come to them, and believe as the truth is in Jesus. What that
is, shall appear after. Another Text may be that in Romans 12. the last: But,
Put ye on the Lord Jesus, etc. He compares the Promise, and Christ to apparel
(as well he may both for warmth and ornament) and faith to the putting on of
our apparel. Now we know apparel be it never so fit, yet if it be put on
wrong, it will neither warm nor become the body: If that which should cloth
the legs or feet, should be applied to the head, if that which should be put
on the hippes or thighs, be put upon the shoulders, what an useless and
preposterous clothing will it prove? Even so, if the promises of God be
misapplied, and mis-put on, they will do us no pleasure, our work will prove
but unprofitable, 1 Pet. 4.11.
and ridiculous. That which the Apostle speaks of the due preaching of the
promises, and the whole word, may be applied to our hearing and believing them:
viz. That we preach the words of God, as the words, and so we must believe
them, even as they lie, and as they are, without our mixtures, qualifyings,
distinctions, stretchings or straitnings: We must take the promises as God
offers them: God made a promise to Paul, Act. 27. That he would give him all
the souls that were with him in the Ship. Paul believed God, but how? Surely,
that all in the Ship should abide therein; so that when some would have gone
out, Paul boldy tells them, That except they abode in the Ship, they could not
be safe. Why? Because the promise must be believed as it imported, and not as
it was construed by them: Paul understood the contents of it, and therefore
told them, the promise was no promise, except it were taken according to it, to
the purpose and meaning of God in it. God bids Noah build an Arc, promising
safety by it: How does Noah go to work? Genesis 6.14.
Does he build an Arc at his own pleasure? Does he make it of what form
and scantling he lists? Does he pitch it within and not without? No, he
construes the promise of safety in the Arc according to it, the meaning of the
promise was, I will save thee by mine Arc, but I will have it such an one as I
appoint, else I will not save thee by it. Just so does the Lord to us: He will
save us by his Promise, by his Word, Baptism: But he will have both believed
according to that which himself has put in them, and not according to any
carnal, Popish or self-sense of our own. There was a promise of protection to
Israel by the pillar of cloud, and by the pillar of fire by day and by night:
But how? Number. 10.34.
According to the meaning of it, viz. That they must watch closely both the
standing still or the removing of them both: They durst not go on, when they
stood still, nor pitch when they removed: And so the promise of conduct, being
aright taken, became most useful to them: It was the promise of God to hear
his peoples prayers in the old Testament; but they who prayed were to pray
according to it, that is, looking toward the Temple, though they were never so
far off, as Jonah in the whales belly, Daniel in Captivity. See also David Ps.
27.2. I have called upon thee, looking toward thine Oracle, meaning the Holy
of Holies, the best part of it, because there stood the Arc of Gods presence,
and the Mercy-seat upon it. To conclude, the sum of all is, Gods promises
must be believed according to all that God offers the soul in them, neither
more nor less.

But now, ere we proceed to Use, a question here offers it self: Accordance of
a promise stands in two things.
in the due qualification of persons to the promises. Secondly, in the due
accordance of promises to persons. For the first, as all may not meddle with
each promise, so some may meddle with none at all. Promises and they, warpe,
accord not. For why? They are unqualified for them, and that may be in two
regards: The each more gross, the other more narrow. Touching the former, know
this, Not one profane companion, who can boast and say, I have got a promise,
may apply a promise, for a promise must also get thee. There is no peace to the
wicked, and therefore no promise: We apply no salves, no bands to a bleeding
wound: For why? The blood would bear it off, 1. In accordance of persons to
promises.
and mar it as fast as its laid on. Thou have no sense or need of any
promise, for that belongs only to such as want. The Law and the reward of
doers belongs to thee; no promise, at least not of the Gospel. In this case,
believing is like to marrying. Not each party is a meet one for every wife or
husband, but those who are apt each for other. Who laughs not at a Scullion, or
Cook, All sorts may not believe promises.
or housekeeper, that burns in love with the Lady or mistress of the house?
Or at a Student, or Preacher, whom none but a great woman of nobility or honor
will serve? Or at some young youth who marries a woman of threescore? Alas!
they are mismatcht, all see and say, money and wealth, or preposterous love for
their own ends, not for the due ends of marriage love, made such matches. No,
apt and meet ones may marry, they only are beyond exception. So is it here:
Not every one who is without a promise, may presently marry it, not each base
fellow steaming and sweating out of the Alehouse or Stews: Such little look at
a promise as a promise for the honor of grace, but at their own ends, to gull
themselves with false hopes. David says well, Psalm. 119. Thy promise, O Lord,
wherein thou have caused thy servant to trust. But God causes not every one to
believe a promise, but forbids them as presumptuous; yea though they dare say
that though there were but three saved, they should be one: and again, what a
fool art thou, that can not believe? I would believe I trow, or else its
pity but thou should perish! Oh thou fool, even of thine own mouth!



2. In the accord of promises to them in sundry parculars.
The second accordance of a promise, stands in the qualifying of it to the
person who may and does believe it: or if you will in the several
beneficialnes of a promise to the soul: and this more directly touches the
point in hand. Concerning which to speak fully, is no easy thing, howbeit some
particulars I will point at for your better conceiving of it: And first, you
must know, that this accord of a promise presupposes the due order in which a
promise belongs to the soul. This I would express in two branches. 1.
Promises must be understood as issuing from truth in general.
First, the promise, being a parcel of the whole truth of God, requires that
the soul do believe the whole truth, before it can believe special parts of
it: Faith being a resolution of the soul into the mere verity of him that
speaks in the Word, a part whereof is a promise: Why? Because it savours more
of Self, then Faith, that I believe those things in the word which immediately
concern my own welfare, except first I be concluded in this, That God who is
the first truth, and deserves to be credited for himself only, is the author of
the whole word through. Hence Heb. 11.2. the Apostle doubts not to affirm,
That by faith we believe that the worlds were framed by the word of God, and
that things now seen, were made of things not appearing. This is but a remote
thing to the maine object of faith which justifies: But yet its enclosed in it,
as the pearl in the mother of pearl; he that lively believes one, may believe
the other more easily, as deducted thence. The act of justifying is an act of
that lively faith which does more then justify. Note.
So also true faith so believes a promise, that it also believes dogmaticall
truths, practical truths, threats, charges, admonitions, instructions; as well
as comforts and promises, because it looks at him who deserves the universal
saving reliance upon Gods truth for himself, as well as for our own ends. This
for the first branch.

Secondly, 2. In respect of Gods order, viz. first promises of reconciliation,
then of sanctification.
promises must be believed in that order of immediate saving of the soul, in
which the God of order has propounded them to the soul: then we believe a
promise according to a promise, when we first believe that promise which
concerns pardon, reconciliation and life, and then proceed to believe such as
concern government and sanctification: First, those that are our being, then
our welbeing: As in a fat of wares, first we must unfold and take out the
upper, then the nether. The prime and first promise must be first believed,
then the rest: I speak now of the priority of order, not of nature, to us
ward, not the word ward, for so, every good thing is given at once to the
soul, Christ I mean, and all he has: But for us, See 1 Cor. 1.30.
till we have believed the first of saving us, we cannot believe any other
which follows upon it, viz. of mortifying a lust, quickening to holiness. The
like may be said of the order of spiritual and temporal promises, till the
former be digested, the latter cannot be. The reason, because the first gives
virtue, title and claim, yea influence into the other. This for the first.

Secondly, he who believes a promise according to a promise, 2. A promise must
be believed according to the intent of the promiser.
believes it according to the intention of the promiser: Each promise swims to
the soul in the blood of Christ, and therefore has a strong bottom, and
undeceiveable. Promises are no loose interlocutory words falling from the mouth
of God, when he minds other matters: Nor yet as men's promises, who first
garishly make them, and after intend them: but first God means them really,
and then fulfills them. To believe aright, is to believe as the promise is,
strongly and surely bottomed and grounded; they deserve fully the souls rest
and affiance, not staggering and doubtfulnesse: We must not use promises as we
would use little pegges or tagges, which though we dare hang our hat on, yet we
dare not sway our own strength upon, for they cannot bear it. But as we use
some strong brazen or iron crook, upon which we durst weigh our whole body;
such is the promise, Es. 26.3. fix thy self upon it, for the Lord Jehovah is
everlasting strength: Do not as those two Disciples at Emmaus, who said, we
thought and looked that he would have risen again by this time, but now we
know not what to make of it; and yet Christ was even then risen, and talking
with them; when we warpe and lie aloof upon a peradventure, this is not
according to a promise, but when we lie close to it, as a foundation which will
bear us up strongly.

Thirdly, they believe a promise according to it, who believe it in the due
limitation of it; and that in two regards: First, of the variety of estates to
whom they belong. 3. When a promise is believed according to the due
lim^tations. In two respects. 1. Of the variety of estates to whom they belong.
All believers are not equally capable of all Promises. Promises go according
to the need of Christians: Promises concerning crosses, belong properly to the
afflicted: Promises concerning grown ones, concern the strong: Promises to
the weak, belong to novices. Promises touching them that stand, are of one
kind: and promises concerning them who are revolted, and backslidden, are of
another. Each promise holds a natural and geniall propriety to such as they
concern. No true believer ought to be a stranger to any of the promises: But
he ought especially to apply himself to such as are appointed for him. This
is to put on Christ's apparel rightly. When men mismatch the promises, looking
rather at such remote promises as less belong to them, passing by the proper
and peculiar ones, they feel not the true use and benefit of them. What has
he to do with promises of growth, who is revolted? he has more need of
recovering. What has he to do with promises of knowledge, who is puffed up
with that he knows? He has need rather of such as concern the humbling of
his soul. What should he trouble himself with promises of support in
greatest difficulties, temptations, persecutions, who rather had need to be
better resolved of pardon it self? 2. In respect of the variety of promises
themselves.
Secondly, in regard of the variety of the promises themselves: for there must
be a limiting of temporal promises in respect of spiritual. He that will
enlarge temporal promises to himself in point of enjoying them, according
either to the price which they cost, or the right purchased thereby, shall
disguise himself exceedingly: For although they are fully purchased for all
believers in point of right; yet not so in point of dispensation: herein
wisdom orders bounty, according to the object upon whom God sometime
enlarges, 1 Cor. 3.22.
sometime restraines. All are ours, if we be Christ's. Howbeit not always, for
equal measure or time. This is our baseness, that we are carried to promises
as the beast to her food; not by faith, but appetite. Note.
Faith puts the knife to the throat, and restraines the soul to the ensuing of
such promises, not as her self, but as the Lord thinks best. And she teaches
the soul, that it is better for her that God sometimes should exchange promises
for her, rather then give her such as she would choose and prefer, through
lack of discretion. For they are an hundred times better for us, which requite
us an hundred fold in one kind for such as we forgo in another, rather then
such as we covet. If God will try some graces in thee, as self-denial, and
patience under sufferings, covet not thou the exercise of others, as of
Sobriety, Cheerfulness and Thankfulness for Blessings.

4. When a promise is believed according to the extent thereof.
Fourthly, they believe a promise according to a promise, who believe it,
according to the fullness and extent thereof. And this branch does most closely
concern the doctrine in hand. As many enlarge promises beyond that which they
import: so many more do curtoll them, and serve them as Hanun did David's
servants, cutting off their clothes by the middle: They are straightened in Gods
enlargements, like Jonah who grudged that God should be so gracious to Ninevee.
Jona 4.
As it is with Beggars, who qualify the measure of their Alms according to
their own baseness, not the bounty of him who bestows. A Beggar will be
content with clean straw in a Barn to lodge in: But a friend will look to be
lodged in a good room, and best* Feather-bed. Why? Because he measures his
welcome according to his friend his beteaming heart. It seems a great thing
for a poor sinful wretch to obtain forgiveness; but as for other promises,
he thinks them a far off: Or, if he get a few promises by the end, he
thinks God must needs shorten him of others. But the Lord will have faith
comprehend the length, depth and breadth of promises; yea, the fullness of him
that fills all in all. Unbelief is like Iehoram, Ephesians. 3. 2 King. 13.18.
who being bidden to shoot the Arrows, and smite the ground, limited God to
thrice, whereas God meant seven times. Men having given us bread, send us for
meat to another door, and for drink to a third: But the Lord will train all
his to know his door, and none else, and to expect all from himself. Men
loath ordinary Beggars, and give at certain times, but not ordinarily. But
Christ Jesus is yesterday, to day, Heb. 13.8.
and for ever the same, upbraiding no man. All promises of God are equally Yea
and Amen in Christ, one as another. 2 Cor. 1. end.
Some one maine benefit there may be in marriage; but there are abundance of
second ones consequent thereupon, all entailed to it: So is it here. So that
he who shortens and limits promises, does not according to them, but contrary
to their extent. Separate not the things which God has put together: but
rather make a golden chain of one and other. If God will give me the best,
viz. heaven it self, he will not deny us the temporal. For the promises
reach as far as the merit. Christ died to redeem body and soul from all
distresses, though (as I noted) all sorts of promises are not accomplished to
all believers at all times, yet their right to them all is equal.

Fifthly, he believes a promise according to a promise, 5. When it is believed
according to the peculi^rity and special ufe of it.
who believes a promise in the peculiarity and special use thereof. For
although each promise has the fullness of God in it, because it cost the blood
of the Lord Jesus; and no piece of his Testament, no one Legacy of his could
be made effectual to the Church, save by his death; yet he does not thrust all
the virtue of his death into one or two, or a few promises, but for the more
clear satisfaction of the soul, he distinguishes his good things into as many
several and peculiar promises, as the necessities of his people do require.
To the end, that every one that needs any good thing, may know where to find
it. Simile.
And as Apothecaries, who sell many wholesome Drugges, do not shuffle all
together, but for the more ease and certainty, disperse them into so many
several boxes and celles, where they may be sure to find them, when they need
them, without mistake or error: So has the Lord done, he has not generally
and confusedly put all graces and benefits into one promise; but has
dispensed them in sundry promises. Not a good thing, but it has her peculiar
promise, to which the Lord will have all his people to resort. And by this
means he trains his people to be well versed in his Scriptures, and to pick
out promises as they lie; yea, promises which seem to be made to some
special persons, yet he will have them (as the Be) to carry them home to
their Hives. As that promise which was made to Christ himself, Esaias 49.8. he
will have us apply it, 2 Cor. 6.2.3. That which was made to Joshua, Chap. 1.4.
he will teach us to improve it, Heb. 13.5. And except there be special cause
of the contrary, I mean that promises are proper to some, and incompetible to
others: The Lord will have us search each corner of his Word, to fetch out
those promises which lie there as gold in veins, for the comfort of his people.
Promises made to the head, to the body, to any member, belong to the members,
to any part, to the whole body, except a limitation be made.
All promises made to the head, belong to the whole body: all that concern the
Church, concern also the members; and such as concern one member, does also
reach to another, circumstances being wisely observed. So that look what a
poor soul would have from God, whether grace to hear and receive aright, to
pray or worship God spiritually, to endure patiently, and take up her cross,
or to mortify any lust, to get a soft heart, to be settled and stablished in
faith, to be kept from this present evil world, or whatsoever else, one place
or other of Scripture will help thee to a promise for the nonce: by which (if
thou have a gift to go to the right Box) thou shall much more clearly and
fully rest thy self upon God for a supply, then if only thou should consult
with general promises, which (though they contain the particular,) yet are
less evident, and express not peculiar good things with such accommodation as
the particular do. Our base spirits are content to generalize with God, so we
have any promise, it serves our turn. And why? Because we use promises for
fashion, and make our selves think we do that we do not; whereas believers
of promises search out their own Legacies in special (as if one should search
a Will of a deceased friend) and as the Angels pry into the Mercy-seat, 1 Pet.
1.
and look a far off to see what God has promised. As common folk think they
have stopped Gods mouth sufficiently if they worship him any way, by singing a
Psalm, or reading a Prayer, half asleep and half awake: so deal they with
promises. If they can catch any by the end, it is enough for them: As for
culling out, marking or singling those promises from the rest, which might
specially stay, comfort, and speak to their own hearts from God, they have no
skill; and accordingly is their gain, general promises, general comfort. But
I say, peculiar application of mine own promises, is according to a promise.
Each promise will not suit to every necessity; Special wisdom and pains is
required to get them, distinguish, understand and apply them as the plasters
which serve for special sores.

6. When it is believed according to the scope and bent of them.
Sixthly and lastly, he that believes a promise according to it, believes it
according to the scope and bent of it. This is that which I said in the
proofs: All promises as they are Yea and Amen in Jesus; so they must be
believed as they are in Jesus. Most men scumme off the fat and sweet of
promises for their own ends, leaving the lean and sour for whosoever will. But
mark Paul's words there, Ephesians. 4.21. That ye put off the old Man, and put on
the New. This is the pad in straw, which few men see in a promise. They think
promises sound nothing save good news, and that they catch at greedily: But
the scope of a promise is another thing, as it cost blood to purchase; So it
must cost us our lusts and base evils to forgo. And there must be an harmony
betwixt the purchase and the fruit. Christ proclaims no man ease and liberty
to live as he list; he catches the soul by an holy craft of Promises, that
he may win and subdue it wholly to himself, who redeemed it: That every
knee may bow, and call Jesus the Lord, not boast only of his salvation; but
submit mind, wit, senses, will, affections, passions, purposes, lusts; yea,
the stream and bent of the whole man unto him. And in truth, he who does not
deceive himself in Jesus, will not only boast of him as Papists do, Sweet
Jesus, sweet Savior, sweet Christ: but will say, Joh. 21. Matthew. 11.29.
my Lord and my God, my King and my Prince. A promise under the sweet name of
it, carries a sad instinct with it, into the spirit of a believer, 2 Cor. 5.16.
bringing in the truth, as it is in Jesus, new Lord and new laws. All old
things are passed away, and are become new. This alarm no base hypocrite can
endure: And therefore smoke does not more scare Be^s, then promises do them.
For why? They know there is such an intimation in all promises, as they are in
Jesus, that whomsoever Jesus eases of his yoke, him he puts another yoke upon*
even of obedience and self-denial, which to flesh is irksome, except he who
puts it on, do also in the putting on make it sweet and easy, as he will do
to all believers. And these few may serve for a taste to the rest, for the due
conceiving of this, What it is to believe a promise according to it.

Now briefly two or three reasons of the Doctrine: one may be this;

Secondly, except the promises be taken according to that no more Matthew. 25.
reaping where he sowed not? What can be fouler reproach to God, then both
these? whereas by esteeming a promise duly, God is vindicated, and saved from
dishonor, in both respects, as neither being larger nor straiter then his Word.

Thirdly, what a snare would it prove to the soul her self, to be pith and
marrow of the promises lies not in the words and outside, but in the sense and
meaning of them, which who so mistakes and misconstrues, must either deceive
himself in looking for more, or defraud himself in looking for less, then
the promises contain in them? What a continual vexation is it then to err
about the extent of those things, wherein to err, is above all other errors
most dangerous and remediless? Many more reasons might be added, but the
substance thereof will occur otherwise.

Of Terror.
Truths of God must not be taken by tradition and prejudice, but from the whole
body of truth believed as Gods.
what a common error is this? Who believes or deducts promises from the rock
of truth, as marble pillars dug out of the whole quarry? Men take the whole
truth of God (for the most part) from the tradition of men, from the
interpretation of others, which is no other, save upon trust, as their Parents,
Masters or teachers have instil'd it into them, and I grant its meet to be so
at first, for so those Samaritans, John 4. at first harped upon the truths
preached by Christ by the information of the woman: But they did not rest there,
till by her they were drawn to hear him speak himself, and then they told
her plainly that they resolved their faith not into her report, but Christ
himself. It is with many of us, as with Papists, who use the Church to be the
principle of their faith, whereas she should only be a guide, an informer and
directresse. Its not to be doubted, but the Church is the preserving and
sustaining pillar of truth in point of guiding the soul to the truth; for had
not the Church nursed us, taught and trained us up, where had we been? But this
must not be enough to stablish us, except we mean to disguise our selves, and
bewray our sandy foundation, when tempests and troubles shall try what is in
us: no, we must put a difference betwixt our drawing to the truth, and our
believing the truth, and never rest till the bright morning star of the Word,
the Lord Jesus has risen in our hearts, who will cast such a through light
into them as shall shine from East to West, Matthew. 24.
and enlighten us in all truth, yea lead us into all truth by his Spirit,
Churches judgment must guide us, principle us in the truths of Scripture.
that Spirit I mean which assists his word in the hearts of all humble and
teachable ones. This will cause us not to take here a shred and there another,
such a command, or such a promise as pleases us, not knowing what to make of
the rest, but to set open our whole hearts unto the whole truth, the whole body
thereof, that it may enter into us, possess and dwell in us plentifully, in
every part; it will present to our eyes that God of truth speaking in his word,
and piercing thereby into the very marrow and bones, dividing the thoughts, and
carrying the soul into the stream of that excellency of his, whereby we may
be convinced of his truth, it will show us the truth of the written word, in
the eternal word of the Father, full of Grace and Truth, the way, the truth
and the life; in whom who so believes to salvation, does also believe all and
every truth which ever came out of his mouth, and we shall no more doubt of
that then of Christ himself, in whom all truth is established and gathered, as
the whole verge of a garment into one knot; so that as no man bids us to prove
that its day light when the Sun shines; so we shall need no proof or
demonstration of any particular part of the word, having embraced Christ that
eternal word of God into our bosoms, because he brings all his truths with
him, and having himself fulfilled that one great promise of his incarnation
and redemption, has also in that made good all the other promises, and made
them Yea and Amen, to the praise of his glory.

Oh therefore, The Spirit of Christ must be our first planter of truth in the
soul.
how woeful is the condition of such as forsake this way of faith, and go to
dig pits which will hold no water, boasting that nothing shall ever pull them
away from the truth, no fears, persecutions, change of times, and I know not
what! away with thy vain brags! If thou have not first planted thy self upon
Jesus, the body of truth, thy particular knowledge of truths will vanish of it
self; for he who gathers not with Christ, scatters; but how much more when thy
slight building shall be shaken with crosses and enemies? Therefore gaster your
selves from such frothy bottomes as will deceive you, get truth first planted
in your souls with the love of it for some real and maine good which it has
done you, Terror to all Popish and blind maintainers of truth upon error and
opinion.
and when Christ shall have brought his truth with the saving comfort of it
into you, it will hold your hearts close to it, never to go from it, it shall
keep your hearts and minds in the knowledge of God, it shall discover to you
that rich hoord of promises which are hid in Christ, out of whom they are but
as the sound of many waters, and vanish as fast as they come: This will teach
us a rule of conceiving truth aright: This will scatter all mists of error,
darkness, mistakes from the mind, and purify the heart by the obeying of
the truth, as Saint Peter speaks, 1 Pet. 1.22. 2 Pet. 1.19.
yea it will be a light shining in a dark place, and guiding the feet into the
way of peace: Abhor then a patched confused knowledge of truth, destitute of
the truth in Jesus, as thou would abhor and loath utter blindness, and
arrant ignorance it self in the highest degree: For indeed (setting aside the
show of it) its but cosen germane to it; who abhors not a misbeleeving Turk
or Jew as a very infidel? Who loathes not an Heretic, Papist, Pelagian or a
Schismaticke, as we do misbeleevers? Yea (in some respect) worse; because they
are so leavened, that it is easier to draw a Pagan (not prejudicate) to the
faith, then such: Its true, that the other have more of truth in them then the
other: But they do so corrupt, confound and misapply truths, they maintain
not truth, in the accord and the harmony of truth; therefore they hold truth
rather to overthrow truth, then to establish it, and in effect are greater
enemies to the promises, and to the truth in Jesus, then they can seem friends
to some kinds of truth, whatsoever their abettors, and patrons would or can
speak in their defense. So much for this first.

Secondly, and more particularly, its terror to all audacious and impudent Of
Terror. Hypocrites who rush upon promises ere they be fitted for them, reproved.
who boast themselves of faith in the promise, having yet no right to a
promise. Promises if aright believed, must be believed according to their
order, not contrary thereto, and against the edge thereof: Ah poor creatures,
and raw believers! Did you ever come under the condition of faith? Were you
ever in a strait, and at a deadly loss for want of a promise? Were you not
always believers from the first till now? Yes surely; you never came under the
Law to drive you to a promise, and to make it sweet to your taste, drink to
one a thirst: Therefore you dream of promises like brainsick folk. Simil.
Once a fantastic fellow standing upon a Tower, would needs have men to
believe that each ship coming up the channel, was his own; whereas it was
neither so, nor so. Even so do these: But know it, you have neither part nor
fellowship in this business of promises. We have a rule in Physic, that
humors must not be raw, but met and digested, ere they can be purged; else
physic scatters them rather into the parts of the body, then expells them.
But if they be once settled, physic will purge them: So say I to these, your
lusts are violent and fierce, not brought to an head, but by the conviction of
conscience, and the spirit of bondage; if they were, then perhaps the promise
being applied in season might purge them out; but else the promise is rank
bane unto you, and would rather disperse your lusts, make you more jolly, mad,
resolute in sinning, without fear or remorse, then rid your souls of them.
Promises breed either the best blood in men's souls, or worst; if kindly
appiled, according as the truth is in Jesus; when the sad Schoolmasters of
Rebels has once sent them to Christ, they breed the best, settle the soul,
produce faith, and cleanse the conscience: But when they are caught at by bold
and presumptuous ones, who (although there be but three saved, yet) look to be
of them, they breed the worst blood of all, even the blood of impudent secure
presumption. Therefore away from promises all such! hands off! be afraid to
mix with them, Gold will not unite with dross, nor promises with you; rather
go to the terrors of God, which may (like darts) smite through the dead loins
of your souls to tame you, and prepare you for purging: Go to John Baptist
first, to cast down every high hill, to fill every valley, and fit you for the
King of heavens free passage upon your hearts, and then shall you perhaps see
what a promise means; till then you sleep under the hatches dangerously, till
you be thrown into the storm of wrath, which yet will not cease then neither.
Oh ye proud Pharisees, Papists, Pelagians, what have you to do with promises?
As he said to them, so say I to you, Matthew. 3.7.
what do you here? Who taught you to escape vengeance to come? You are the
vipers who fret in sunder this womb of promises: Can you indeed do as you
say, that is, fulfill, and more then fulfill the Law, can ye merit and
supererogate? Surely then promises, and you accord not; your righteousness
has destroyed the righteousness of God: As for promises and Christ himself,
you make him but a stalking horse to a proud heart, and as a stirrup to get up
into your own sadle! when you have tired your selves in your own ways, and
wearied your selves in your error, compassing your selves with your own
sparkles, this is the portion which God gives you, Esaias 50. ult. even to sink
in your own sweat, and to lie down in sorrow. Behold all you that venture upon
a promise, in this pickle, wonder and vanish, for you shall not believe the
promise, though a man of a thousand should declare it unto you: Act. 13.38.39.
That Doctrine that belongs to you is a doctrine of despair in your selves,
for your stout hearts, and standing out with God. This Word must first cast
down all high thoughts, and make you calm, 2 Cor. 12.4.
ere ever the doctrine of a promise can find entrance into you. What have you
to do with peace and promises? Turn behind Iehu the furious marcher, 2 King.
9.22.
armed with the revenge of God to humble your souls. So much for this.

And thirdly (lest I should forget it) let this be terror to that generation Of
terror. Popish abusers of promises terrified.
but devour them all whole, without scruple. Who can read those usurpations of
the Romish Whore, and impudent claiming of promises, even the choycest of all
which the Word contains for the comfort of the true Spouse of Christ, in all
her turmoyles under her malicious enemies? Dare they who are the tyrants, lay
claim to the promises which only belong to the innocent Saints? The
persecutors themselves to the promises of the persecuted members? An harlot to
the promises of the chaste Matrone? When that woeful Gregory the Pope, called
Hill debrand, or Brand de Hell, trod upon the neck of good Henry the fourth
Emperor, he used these words; Psalm. 90.11.
Thou shall trample upon the Serpent and Cockatrice, and tread upon the Lion
and Dragon: Can any modest ear hear such abuse of promises? I speak not
only for the malitiousnesse of calling a Lamb, a Lion, and Dragon: but the
profane arrogating of such a promise to himself, who indeed was one egg of
this Aspe and Serpent, whom Christ shall crush and destroy. But who wonders at
this in him? Who takes upon him to make Scripture and mar it at his pleasure?
So he takes that promise to himself, Psalm. 2.8. I will give thee the Nations
for thine Heritage, and the Gentiles for thy Possession. And thus he defends
his unlimited jurisdiction. And again, The wicked shall hoord up treasure, but
the righteous shall possess it. Job. 27.16. This serves his turn for his
raking in of Treasure. So again, I will give thee the Keys of the Kingdom,
Matthew. 18. This for the pardoning of sin. He might as well take one promise
from the Devil, as abuse so many of Gods; Behold, all the Kingdoms of the
world, they are all mine, and I will give them thee, if thou will worship me.
Sure I am, of all other promises this most fitly belongs to him, upon the
condition. But as for all other, Oh woeful profane mouth, to challenge promises
contrary to their scope. Paul I know, and Jesus I know; but who art thou?
Terrors are for thee, not promises.

Secondly this point serves for use of sharp reproof, and that of Reproof.
yet refuse to cast themselves upon it. I spoke of these before: but this Psalm.
97.11.
but they will not see it; but go on with their burden, as if they would offer
their ears to be boared for slaves. As those mentioned last, are in one
extreme, and snatch at that which is denied them (for stolen waters are
sweetest: so these cannot make use of that which belongs unto them, when yet it
is pind on their sleeves: To whom I say as Esaias did to Ahaz, when he refused to
ask a sign: Is it not enough for you to grieve men (Gods Prophets) but you
will grieve my God also? What? Are you too well offered, Esaias 7.13.
and cannot see when you are well used, nor discern your friends from your
foes? Do you think it is enough to nod your head (as Asses do) at a promise,
believing it only as a tale told, but withdraw the affiance of your souls
from it? Is it enough for you to moan and complain, to desire and mourn? Are
these faith? Is it better for you to shrugge in the cold weather, and to wish a
fire, yet in the mean time to starve for lack of that which is offered you?
To go naked, and let the garment lie by unoccupied? Oh! check your selves
bitterly for this irregularity, whatsoever the cause be, whether unworthiness,
or sloth, or sullenness, it is not according to a promise, that I am sure of.
Oh! get your souls out of this emptiness into the life and marrow of a truth:
Learn the truth as it is in Jesus, that you put him on, being naked. Not to
marry the promise, being fair for it, is contrary to a promise. But to
believe, and to cast your selves upon the Word, to rid your selves of
staggering, accords most kindly with it. So much for this.

Of Reproof. Ephesians. 3.16. Psalm. 78.19.
Secondly, this reproves all limiters and restrainers of promises: for that is
not according to a promise. The truth in Jesus is the largeness of it: Its
length, depth, breadth, and height, all dimensions are in it. Thus those
Israelites straightened the holy One of Israel: Can he prepare a Table in the
Wilderness? This is our cursed spirit: when a promise seems true in the
general, yet in the particular not so: as Martha confesses the power of Christ
to be able to do all things; Joh. 11.39.
but when it came to the point of raising her brother, then she said, Lord, he
has been buried four days, he stinkes. What a base carnal limitation of
Almightinesse is this? Limiters and restrainers of promises, reproved.
See what a contrariety is in our hearts to a promise, according to the extent
of it. As the Cable seems to a Needles eye, so does all the points of an
extended promise seem to our hide-bound hearts. Gods enlargements work by
contraries, and make us the more straightened; as in the point of the same, or the
kinds of promises, and so the rest. Now I think God has heard my prayer: but
how long he will, that I (says one) know not: it seems too much to press hard
upon him so long, so often, for so many favors. True, if he were a man, Jer.
2.13. Esaias 26.3. Heb, 13.8.
or a dry pit; but he is a God, a fountain of living waters: Men will be
weary of doing good; but it is Gods nature to do it, as the streams to flow.
Who thinks it a wrong to a fountain to draw from it daily? Does it not come
always more fresh and sweet? It is the honor of a Prince to look at himself in
giving, not at others. The ofter thou come to a promise, Sundry instances of
it.
the welcomer. It is according to the truth, as it in Jesus. Oh (says one) I
have trusted God for pardon, but as for purging my corruptions, of pride, ease,
vanity, the world: or if so, yet for purging or weakening this or that beloved
lust, 1 Kings 20.28.
cannot believe it. Why? Is God the God of the valleys only, not of the Hills
also? So (says another) I can trust God for heaven, but not for outward
things: for my self, but not for my children; while I live, but not when I
must dye, loath I am to hear of that: or, for the present, so far as I find
my needs; but what may hereafter betide me in my name, health, state, safety,
liberty God knows! Does God know, and dare not you believe? Is this according
to a promise, and the extent thereof? Truly, Popery cares for no faith.
we have all a Pope in our belly: that's unbeleefe: we go far onward in
Religion: But we have hearts which shrink in the wetting, and hold not out in
breath and pace with promises; grudge and cannot beteame our selves the wealth
and fullness of God, lest we should be complete in him, and too wealthy by
him. Jonah grudged promises to others, but we are envious to our own souls. I
remember what once a devout ^otary prayed: Lord (says he) grant me my petition
this once, I come not often to trouble thee, and on condition thou will grant
me this, I will never trouble thee more: Oh base wretch! Is thine eye evil
because Gods is good.

Thirdly, this reproves all such as stretch out promises beyond their Enlargers
of promises beyond their due bounds, to be reproved.
They could beteame the temporal promises of God to themselves and the Church,
for deliverance and redemption from all enemies, for peace, protection and
welfare, were unlimited: But those which touch their souls, especially to kill
their lusts, they care not how narrow they frame them, even as the bed and
covering of which Esaias speaks, that is so narrow, that it will not wry them
warm. They believe not promises as they are, but fancy them: They choose rather
that the bush would not burn at all, then that it might not consume in
burning; where God straitens they enlarge: Shall thou teach Jesus how to frame
his truths? Surely this kind of receiving of truths, is not according to Jesus,
and the honor of Jesus, but according to Self, and carnal self-love. Thou
may as well take upon thee to alter the whole frame of Scripture, as of
promises, for God has bounded them, and their landmarks cannot be removed.
Apply thy self unto them as they are, for they will not accommodate themselves
to thy humor, thy seasons or contents.

Fourthly, this is reproof to all, who believe not promises according Not to
believe a promise according to the intention of it, is sinful.
They make them weaker and insufficienter then they are. This does intollerably
trench upon the honor of Jesus; this (of all the rest) is far from embracing
the truth as it is in Jesus. What is it which Jesus has not done or suffered
to stablish and ground truths? And yet how basely do we handle him in this?
We look rather at our little sins in our believing, then his great promises. Oh
(says one) if my sins had not been so deep died, so odious and long lien in,
I should hope well. Rather thou should say, if mine heart were not so
hardened, that I am past all feeling and faith, I should do well. If thy sins
have not driven thee to be desperate in rebellion and contempt, they are not
surely too great for mercy to pardon: Look upon Manasse and Paul, 1 Timothy 1.13.
Though I were a persecutor, a blasphemer, and injurious; Chron. 33.12.
yet mercy and truth abounded in Christ Jesus: He says not, sin abounded
beyond mercy. Oh (says another) But I have sinned since my first enlightening,
sinned against the remedy, adding drunkenness to thirst. What? Do thou so
still, and nourish a rotten peace, and a secure heart still against the
promise? No, but thou doubtest that thy abusing the means, and hardening of
heart, will not be pardoned: But know that the Lord Jesus his sufferings are of
a deeper nature to merit, then thy sins to destroy: He was made all sin; 2
Cor. 5.21.
satisfied for all sin, he was a nature of sinners, not a sinful person
only; and therefore can pardon even them that murdered him: and not in vain
is that example set down in Acts 2.30. to prevent that fear. They who come to
Christ must come to him not as the greatest sinners only, but as to the
greatest Savior, able perfectly to save all who come unto him. The strongest
eye must be cast upon his strength, Heb. 7.25. Esaias 27.5.
not upon thy deservings. The mystery of mercy is to save to the uttermost,
that so the soul may break, and God may be honored to the uttermost. Well, but
yet he pardons none, save such as have faith, and how shall I know that he will
give it me? I answer, the promise that offers pardon, works faith to believe
it, and therefore its said that it creates the fruit of the lips; Esaias 57.16.
Matthew. 11.29.
which is peace: it offers ease to him that is laden: if it offer the effect,
it must needs work the cause. But (says a poor soul) this might be, if mine
affections would rise to it with some earnestness, but I am dead, and under
infirmity. Nay, even then also can the Lord create this hand of faith in thee,
2 Cor. 12.9.
by the seed of the word: how did Paul lie under sad buffetings, yet this grace
was sufficient for him. In a word, what ever the sense of thy weakness be, yet
its Gods strength which thou must take hold on to make peace, and that
comprehends thy weakness, when thou can not comprehend that strength. So
much for this.

Fifthly, this reproves such as run to promises, without wisdom, Unapt
appliers of promises, or other parts of the word, reproved.
and the particular necessities under which they live. When they should run
to the promise for comfort, they rather please themselves in running to the
threats of the word for deeper humbling, that pleases them better, because they
think it may better be felt; but this course suits not with the truth as it is
in Jesus, which requires that each malady apply it self to her proper remedy.
This causes the wound to rankle, not to heal. When men are called to do some
special service and duty, they forsake that, and rush themselves upon
suffering, promising to themselves that God will sustain them, and so provoke
needless sorrow, like Jonah to themselves, and all by their rashness. Others
being called to suffer, Jona 1.6.
shun that and promise to themselves strength in doing: But this is to
misapply promises, for they always attend upon commands, and while we be in Gods
way, not our own: God pays no man wages for doing his own work. Others
promise themselves great blessings upon attempting difficult works above their
strength, unto which they have no calling, leaving their Ministry ere God
knock them off, or thrusting themselves into trades in which they want skill,
leaving their own, and the like. But the wiser way for them, were to apply
themselves unto promises, which concern those special callings, conditions
and ways, unto which God calls them.

Preposterous appliers of promises, reproved.
contrary to their nature and use or scope; who separate them from their end,
which is to mortify, purify, and better the soul, as well as to comfort and
pacify it. Also all such as mistake, discover, darken, stretch, dis-joint the
promises, who take not such a due measure of the promises as they ought,
putting them on as they may best fit them, and so never come to the kindly use
and fruit thereof as the Lord offers them. Of which I say no more, this shall
serve for this whole Use of reproof.

Thirdly, this point serves for Exhortation, Exhortation.
to incite and draw all who 2. Questions. 1. How a promise believed.
what should the soul do that she might believe a promise, according to the
reach of it. Secondly how should she practice and set this grace on work? For
the former of these, three things would be done. First, 1. A promise must be
sounded.
the soul must fathom and comprehend a promise truly, Ephesians. 3.15.16. That you
may comprehend with all Saints, what is the length etc. That which the woman
John 4. tells our Savior, I may say of this, The Well is deep, and there is
nothing to draw with. There is depth in a promise; but few are men of
understanding to fetch it out. There may be enough in it, for ought most men
look after: their shallowness discourages them from attempting it. Virtue is
gone out of the Lord Jesus into it; both for life and godliness, this and a
better life, in crosses and blessings, for all turns, so that each idle cavil
of a base heart ought not to elude it: Has God set it open for his whole
Church to be filled with the fullness thereof, and shall it not be sufficient
for a poor members supply? Accustom thy self to deal with a promise, as the
mariner does with the sea, whose depth he is ever and anon sounding lest his
ship should run a ground, and be swallowed up. Thy misunderstanding may
eclipse the beauty of it, thy ignorance and blindness may frustrate thy
benefit, but still the promise shall stand nevertheless full of water of life.
Enlarge thy cord and plummet, that thy slight heart deprive thee not of both
the view and of the use of it.

Secondly, having found out the bottom and depth of a promise, 2. Draw out of
this welspring of salvation.
bestow pains, and draw waters plentifully out of this well of salvation,
bestow good labor and travel. In fetching up water out of deep wells, you
shall see how many hands at once are at work at the wheel, or pully, to get up
the bucket. This is the work of faith, always to be tugging at the well with
cable and arms, to get out this water of life. Esaias 12.8.
Say thus, here it is put Lord by thy self, and to be had, I will therefore by
thy strength handle a promise according to the uttermost of that which is in
it, I will draw, and that with joy, for there it is and thus it is to be had.
Its sad working hereat with the most; but it should be a merry work; we should
sing at it, and deceive our toil by the sense of our necessities, and the
variety of those ordinances, meditation, prayer, and the like, must be our
hands, and unweariednesse must be our instrument. Take we heed lest through
sloth and a base heart, we content our selves with scrappes and puddle water,
who might fill our selves with good things, and with rivers of water springing
up in us to eternal life.

3. Give not over the promise, though long held off.
Thirdly, give not over a promise, although the error of this wicked world, and
Satan, together with the Lords delays, should weary us, especially under our
afflictions. If our Lord Jesus his discouragements could have killed the
courage of that poor woman of Canaan, she had never obtained a cure. Oh! our
Savior did what he could to try, whether she would be beaten from the
promise, viz. That Jesus, the son of David, came to save both the bodies and
souls of all truly distressed ones, Jews and Gentiles. But she had so far
extended the promise, Matthew. 15.
which Christ seemed to restrain only to the Jews, calling the rest Dogs,
that it was strange she was not out of conceit, as one mistaken: But, as if
she had been in his bosom, so does she hold fast the promise; Though he say
nothing, yet he will do somewhat, I will still keep my right, he means not
Israel according to the flesh, but the promise, and such an one am I. She knew
promises looked not at the worthiness of man, but at the mercy and
faithfulness of God. Surely, I shall be answered by and by: for I have the
scope and end of the promise on my side. Faith had taken full measure of the
promise by her own want: and therefore our Savior sends her away with the
admiration at her faith. Oh! let us thus duly apply our souls to the seal of
the promise, and it shall leave behind it the stamp of all that virtue and
fullness which God has put into it. A base heart not concurring with God in
this largeness of his promises, is as hard wax put under a fair seal, Simile.
which takes no impression at all from it, though clapped on never so hard. But
as the softened wax takes all the counterfeit of the seal, and expresses them
to the uttermost: Even so an heart rightly prepared, receives the print of the
seal, letter for letter, face for face, yea, grace for grace. Faith is both
hand and hammer to drive the nail of the promise, Eccles. 12.
given by one Pastor, the Lord Jesus up to the head. This for the former
question. Now I come to the latter, Quest. 2. How shall we practice this duty?
how this duty may be practiced.

And for answer to that, this I say, We must know, that the life of faith in
all believers, rests upon such promises as concern their condition, be it what
it will be; knowing that there are special ones given us by God (as Peter
speaks, Chap. 1. and verse 3. of his second Epistle) for our supply in all
needs. The soul then does not foolishly misapply these, but gathers them up,
stores them like a wise Steward, both old and new, that she may bring them
forth in due season; as a man would every morning put on the apparel of that
day for his use and comfort And this is her putting on the Lord Jesus, Romans 13.
ult.
who first has taken measure of her needs, and then offers himself in his
promises and ordinances, Word, Sacrament, Prayer, and fasting, and the like, to
fit her, as her clothes do her body. Some of these I have already touched in
one of the Uses before, Ans. diversely.
upon the Doctrine of Naamans obedience. A few more I will add now, not
pressing the use of them, but barely presenting them to your view. Sometime thy
base heart feels old guilt and accusation of conscience to return, after
mercy tasted, and hope of victory enjoyed. But why is this? Surely, that hereby
the work of Self-denial might be perfected in thee, 1. In the return of
guilt, strength of sin, custom, presence of it.
and sin might be known to be out of measure sinful, that it might be more
abhorred, and stronger faith in pardon and purging thereof improved. Clasp upon
the Word for it, I am he who will heal all thy rebellions for my name sake,
both new and old: It is according to a promise, that the Lord should leave none
of thy corruptions unsubdued. Who is a God like unto our God (who forgiveth
iniquity, transgression and sin, Mica ult.
(mark how many words he uses to include all sin whatsoever, both of nature
and course; yea, sins after the light of the Gospel embraced:) And I create
the fruit of the lips, peace, and I will heal him. I have seen his
rebellions, and smote him, hid me and was angry, and he went on in the
frowardness of his own heart. Esaias 57.
But I will heal him, and restore comfort unto him. Again, perhaps thy soul
meets with some eclipse of Gods presence, and forsakes me, so that I live in
darkness, and walk up and down with a dead heart, without feeling. Well, 2.
In the deadness and hardness of heart.
if it be by reason of some apparent sin against conscience, return with a
broken heart by a promise to God, Jer. 3.1. A man having divorced an
Adultresse, will not return to her: But if thou will return to me, I will not
reject thee. Return, O ye backsliding people, and I will have mercy upon you,
and heal all your iniquities. But if the Lord be departed otherwise, know it
is not to forsake forever. For a moment I was angry, Esaias 54. But with
everlasting compassion I will embrace thee. And in the Psalm 55. The Lord will
not leave his people for ever.

Sometime the soul is afraid she shall fall into some scandal, 3. Fear of
falling into some scandal, and not persevering.
and never persevere: but he who has delivered, will deliver from every evil
way and work: He will preserve the souls of his Saints: he will write his law in
their heart, they shall not depart from his fear: I am persuaded nothing shall
separate, etc. He is faithful who has promised. Sometime sickness, poverty,
debt disquiets, and how then? In six troubles he will keep thee, and in the
seventh, that it shall not oppress. He put his hand under my head, and will
make my bed in sickness: when I was weak, the Lord help me. Again, the
soul complains, 4. Sickness, debt, enemies, unfaithful friends, and the
like.
But I have enemies. Well, but if thy ways please the Lord, he can make them
thy friends: If not, though an Army of them compass me about, yet will I not
be afraid. But perhaps friends fail, and turn unfaithful? Well, yet Mica 7.
When I dare trust no friend nor wife, I dare trust the Lord. When my father and
mother forsook me, but the Lord took me up. Can a mother forsake the child of
her womb? Yet will not the Lord. He will sustain and redeem thee: In all
their afflictions he was afflicted, Esaias 63.9. Oh! but they prosper, and I
decay: They bear all the stroke, and my cause is sentenced. Stay a while, and
their green Bay tree shall wither. True it is, it is long first. Psalm. 73.
Psalm. 37.6.
But fret not thy self, roll thy way on Jehova, and be doing good, and he
will effect it. He will bring forth thy righteousness as the morning: He
will plead thy cause, Mica 7. When there is casting down, thou shall see a
lifting up, and he shall save the humble person. Job. 22.29.
But thou will say, My prayers be not heard. Not presently: but it is, that
thou might pray oftener, and earnestlier, that so God may deliver thee from
that thou fear, and his grace may be sufficient for thee. Thou will still
object, 5. When prayer is not heard.
My troubles are as no bodies, secret and stinging, unknown to any. But not
unto the Lord, whose eyes are in every corner of the earth, and knows the heart
and reins; yea the most hidden sorrows, that he may be strong with the weak
and contrite ones: Oh! but I am dark for lack of faith. Yet let him that is in
darkness, and sees no light, trust upon God, Esaias 50. But I want means. The
Lord is my support, Psalm. 23.3.
leads me to the pastures and streams; and when I am lost, yet sustaines me:
So that although the Olive and Vine should fail, though there should be no
Calfe in the stall, nor Sheep in the flock, Habak. 3.
yet will I make the Lord my salvation. But my temptations and assaults by
Satan are fierce, to Atheism, to deny providence, the Scriptures, and such
like molestings. It they be tedious they shall be short, and faith shall
quench the most fiery darts.

6. Temptations and fierce assaults of Satan. Matthew. 5.12. 1 Pet. 4.
But he stirs up his instruments to vex and pursue. Well, they may cast thee
into prison ten days, but hold out, and I will give thee a Crown of life.
Gods hook is in their nostrills. Blessed art thou when thou art persecuted for
the name of Christ: The Spirit of glory shall rest upon thee. Fear not man,
whose breath is in his nostrills, Esaias 40.7. But I fear evil times will
pluck me from my steadfastness. No: Thousands and ten thousands shall fall
on both sides, but thou shall go free in the midst. Matthew. 24.
If possible the Elect should be deceived: But its not possible: I have prayed
for thee that thy faith fail not. The just shall have a shining light upon
their paths. Luke 22.31
Oh! but perhaps I am in perplexing straits what course to take. Well, but a
voice shall be behind thee, and say, This is the way walk in it! Oh but my
sorrows are the miseries of the Church! Esaias 30.
The gates of hell shall not prevail against her. Be of good courage, I have
overcome the world. The ship that Christ is in, Matthew. 18. John 13. ult. Mica
7.8.
cannot be drowned; He will rebuke the waves, and cause a calm. Rejoice not
over me, O mine enemy, for when I am down, I shall rise: Christ has naild my
enemies to his cross, led captivity captive. Esaias 26.1. Salvation has the
Lord set for walls and bulwarks. Esaias 13.5. God will defend Jerusalem. Light is
sown for the Righteous: Bear the yoke, because thou have sinned, and the Lord
shall break the decree, Mica last, and tread them as mire in the streets. In
the mean time, Jer. 46. I will correct them in measure: and Esaias 28. Did I
correct him, as I corrected them who afflicted him? No, but in measure. But how
shall I do when the King of fears comes? The sting of death is sin, which
being taken out, thou shall triumph, 2 Cor. 15.
O death where is thy sting? But I have poor children to provide for! Well,
Exodus 20. The Lord shows mercy to thousands of them that love him: And, the
children of the righteous inherit the earth, Psalm. 25. But when I am dead, what
shall become of me? Take no thought, Esaias 57. They shall rest in their graves,
perfumed and softened by the grave of Christ, and be purged by it from
corruption. Their names shall be sweet on earth, as the precious ointment: And
their souls shall reign with God in full perfection of happiness, above
sin, sorrow and all enemies, till it shall join with the beloved body again
at the day of Christ, to enjoy in heaven perfect consummation. These and such
like promises, let every poor soul cull out for herself, out of the treasury
of the Scriptures, and enlarge them to her own use, that it may go well with
her, and that the promises may be believed according to their extent; for this
is the misery of the soul, that God has fullness for her in his promises, but
she will not see it, acknowledge it, embrace it, accommodate it, but let them
lie rusting there, without regard, as men use to suffer their Armor to do,
because they have no use of it. Thus much shall serve for a direction in this
kind, and for this Use, as also for the whole Doctrine, and former part of
this verse, containing Naamans obedience.

Now I come to the latter part of the verse, The last general. His success.
Three things in it.
which contains the immediate success of his washing: And that is first the
expression: That his flesh came again etc. Secondly, the cure it self: He was
clean: And thirdly, now we hear no more of his former distempers, all are
vanished and washed away with his leprous skin, in Jorden. These points I note
here: As for the remoter consequences following upon this cure, afterward I
shall come to them in the next verse. The cure then of Naaman, is that which in
these latter words is to be considered; and first, of the holy Ghost his
expression: 1. The expression.
His flesh came again as the flesh of a little child (for of this I will say
somewhat) ere I come to the main point. Many words had been used to express
Naaman his obedience, how punctual it was; and now as many are used to
express the cure, how entire and perfect it was: as if God would not come
short of him, but be as punctual in full curing of him, as he had been in
close obeying God. Who doubts of the perfect cure of such a Leper, as was made
of a scurvie, loathsome, nasty skin, like the skin of a little child, that is,
as whole as he was borne? So that it notes a perfect restitution of Naaman to
his former integrity of soundness. Gods remedies are perfect ones: But men's
are lame and crazie.
Men's remedies are always lame ones, if they heal one way, they hurt another.
We use to say of Physical courses, purgings, bleedings, as they help in point
of present cure, and remove present death and danger, so yet they leave a touch
upon the body afterward, and leave either some other aile behind, or else take
away strength, abate the spirits, or other like: and all to show us that man's
medicines are like himself, and that is, crazie, doubtful and dangerous: so
that, not long after, the same or worse maladies and diseases follow; but to
be sure, death. Hence arose that proverb, Many Remedies are worse then the
diseases themselves. And all commodities in this life carry inconveniences
after them. Perhaps they are one way beneficial, and two ways prejudicial.
But Gods cures are like himself, perfect, entire, and absolute. No more
leprosy is heard of, to grow upon Naamans skin, after God had done with him:
he came no more into the hands of other Physicians, through relapse into the
old distemper. Eccles. 7.14.
No man can find out any thing after God. But he can find out sundry
failings after men when they have done their best. I will not insist upon it;
only it may briefly teach us these two Items:

First, to turn our doting eyes from the perfection of any creature here, by
reason of those crackes and flawes which are in the best of them. We must turn
our doting eye from the perfection of the creature.
What petty Deities and Idols are Physicians esteemed among carnal people, for
their skill in curing diseases, especially if their gift be any more then
ordinary? Say it be but in any one kind, or disease, as a Consumption, Fever,
Dropsy, or the like, especially, if (when others have given over the cure as
desperate) they take it in hand, and effect it? What money, what honor is
thought enough to requite a man? Nay, as Patients teach them, so, how do
Physicians learn to dote upon themselves? And how will they boast themselves
like petty Kings of their supposed skill? Oh! if this medicine (says one) will
not heal him, nothing in the world will do him good. And another, I healed
him (says he) when no other could turn his hand to it. And, I will pawn all
I have upon my skill, that I heal him. Could God himself speak any more? Let
me not be thought to speak disdainfully against the persons of any learned or
religious Physicians, much less their profession, both which I honor, and am
bound to do while I live, for the good received from them, through Providence.
And I know many there are in this kind, eminently religious, and well
deserving: But only (by so just occasion) one Item I would give to Physicians,
Physicians must know themselves only instruments of Providence, for such as God
will heal.
and another to Patients. To the former, this, That as they are conversant most
what about searching out natural causes, symptoms and cures of diseases: So,
no profession is more subject to Atheism and profaneness, then such, except
the Lord subdue and captivate their spirits and skill, under his Providence,
making them servants to attend it for the good of such as to whom God has
appointed life by means, and no otherwise. For why? Who knows not but many
recover of diseases (in the judgment of Physicians) incurable? And how many
there are in whom nothing save safety appears, who yet in the midst of the
Physicians security, dye instantly? All to show, that the passages of life and
death are not in man's hand, but in the Lords; who oft-times delights to
blindfold the wise and prudent in their own sense, and to do good by those
who are of meaner parts? Not but that the parts of learned Physicians are to
be esteemed (who cannot be too well parted, since they deal in so precious a
subject, as the life of the most excellent creature, man) but that with parts,
they join a God, adore him, and set him up in their souls as supreme and
chief, treading themselves under feet, in point of that Royal prerogative of
saving life.

Alas! how does the Lord humble our confidence daily, when he crosses our
conjectures, and betrays our folly both in our hopes of recovery, when there
is none, and in our despaires, when there is no cause? What mortal man, whose
breath is in his nostrils, would not here submit and lay down his weapons at
the feet of the Lord of life and death, confessing himself a fool, and that
both in his own case and others, the Lord may and does often conceal from him
the real cause and truth of Diseases? 2 Kings 4.27.
The holy Prophet Elisha, led by a Divine and miraculous Spirit, humbly
professed it to Gehazi, in the woman's case who came for her dead child. The
Lord (says he) has hidden it from me? And shall not we say so, who are poor
silly ones to him, even as a base ignorant empiricke is to us and much more? So
for people, how insolent are they in this kind? People very fond in magnifying
the outward cause, and neglecting God.
Robbing God of his honor, and setting up base man in his throne. Oh (says
one) such a Physician let me have, or let such a sickeman have, and upon my
life he will heal him! Let the upper millstone run upon the nether, and I
warrant your corn between will be grown? What? Is there no more in it then
so? Is there no God? Oh (cry you mercy says one) I forgot that, now I speak
as a man! Nay, rather like an Atheist: and so let a Physician whom they like,
visit them, his coming is to them as good a medicine, as the physic he
brings! If Physicians would abhor, and tremble at such Patients, and Patients
such Physicians (mules scratching each others itch) they would learn more
humility, and divinity. Honor the Physician, and spare not, so thou give him
no more then is due to an instrument. Let him and thou sanctify both physic
and receipts by prayer and faith, and behold it as a servant, not as a God, to
put confidence in, and then all is well.

Some report of that good King of Swedes, that he thought his life was but
short, because men did so deifie him, (but that was not all) much more, I
think, should we with Elihu tremble to give titles of God to men, lest our
Maker should destroy us: for Esaias 42. Job. 31. Jam. 5.
He will not give his glory to another. In a word to use Saint James his style,
you ought to take God with you, saying, If God will bless it, it shall heal:
Alas its but a patcht remedy when it is at best; howbeit its in Gods hands to
bless or cross it. Enough of this: The like counsel take we from hence,
touching all other earthly creatures, or contentments therein. Our life it
self, our strength, our wealth, wit, experience, friends, parts, bravery in
fare, dwelling, retinue, and any other blessing, either for necessity or
comfort: What one is there of all these, but has in it one way, as great a
misery, as another way an happiness? So that (setting aside the sobriety of
heart, making it, as it is, pure to the pure:) what good is in it, which in
some other respect is not requited as much with an evil? As that great man,
who threw his Diadem (or Kingly wreath) on the ground, saying; If a Subject
knew what was wrapped up in it, he would not stoop to take it up, to have it.
What carking care goes with riches? A poor Cobbler very merry in his songs,
while poor, having a bag of money cast into his puy, ceased to sing. At
last, he that threw it him in, came and asked him, why he was so sad all on the
sudden? He suspecting who it was threw him back his bag, and bid him take it:
for he could never be merry with it. Do I infer hereby, that Gods blessings
are to be despised? No: But that God has left a crack in the best of them,
in all of them; to teach poor man to Idolize none of them, but to set his
heart upon better things. Race is not always to the swift, nor wealth to the
wise, nor battle to the strong, Eccles. 9.11.
says Eccles. How many men's wealth, by their sin, is given them, as the bane
of them that have it? What profaneness, pride, boasting, scorn, mischief,
do they by it? How many poor men's bodies know the diseases of full diet? I
might be endless, but I cease. In Gods fear, look upon the worms that breed
in our Manna; behold the defect, the sting, the penalty, the vanity of the
creature; loath excess in it, getting, having, forgoing: Set thine heart
solidly upon perfection: those dainties that have no surfeit: that portion which
has no sorrow with it: Grace and favor of God, which has no lack: that
excellent cure of faith and the new creature, which is Gods cure, which
restores the leprous soul to such a smoothness as it was first created with,
nay much better: Every gift of God is perfect, Jam. 1.16.
says James 1.6. like himself. Be in love with Gods remedies, a quiet,
humble, patient heart under thy afflictions, which are not only not worse then
the diseases, but better then prosperity it self; such as restore the soul to
such a cure, as is not subject to any future decay or relapse. So much for this.

Another thing here I observe, How mavelous and sovereign an God overrules
the silly creature to be the instrument of working great effects.
The flesh of Naaman (says the Text) being washed in Jorden, becomes as the
flesh of a little child. Not surely by any inherent quality therein by nature,
but by the concurrence, or rather overruling power of Almighty God, using them
to be isntrumental in this kind, for the settling Naamans faith thereby, as by
a sign, q. d. As surely as thou in obedience of faith, shall wash, so surely
shall thou be cleansed. Means of an unproportioned strength to effect a
supernatural effect, may yet be relied upon as Gods, when any direct word is
given us to warrant them. Learn then first (by the law of contraries) that all
means used by man, without a warranting word, are justly to be suspected, as
not proceeding from God, but from another principle justly permitted by God, to
work for the deluding of unbeleevers, who will not embrace the truth revealed,
All Unproportioned means used by men, without the Word, for effecting of great
works, are evil, and to be abhorred.
but detain it in unrighteousness. And, let the colors of men be never so
holy, in pretense of Religion, yet God is not with them: As well those
Exorcists of the Jews, taking upon them the dispossessing of Devils, without
ground, Acts 19.13. As the Maid or Pythonisse, that gather Masters great gain
by her divinations, Acts 16.16. was from Satan. Good Witches and bad differ in
color, but not in Divellishnesse. Papists their exorcismes and Spelles, or
charms, working by words of Saint John's Gospel, or any devout prayers, Popish
Miracles and cures what to be thought of.
or other sentencss of Scripture, because they have in them no such natural
operation to produce such effects, as to heal Agues, or other like diseases,
nor yet are determined by any express word of God to any such use or end; are
as bad as the Medicines or Charms applied by good Witches for the cure of man
or beast. For why? Natural things they are not: Divinely supernatural they
are not: Diabolical therefore they must needs be. Charms and spells of good
Witches to be condemned.
We must have a word for it to enable bare dead sentences of Scripture so and
so, by such, at such a time, in such a manner, to such diseased men, or cattle
applied, to effect such a cure on Gods name, else though the words be good, yet
the Charm is never the better, but much worse. Better were it, and less
sinful for such to use profane, graceless words, then holy, to so cursed an
end: And although the material end be good, to cure a malady, yet the means
are Divellish limitations of unlikely agents, must be warranted, else their
device is from man by Satan.

Indeed men look so much at the apparent supposed good of things, to restore
things lost, or the like, that it tickles and withdrawes them from the
suspicion of the forked hook which lies covered under the bait. Oh! (say
they) I warrant you, the Devil is a murderer from the beginni^g, and does no
man good, but hurt: But there is a white Devil like an Angel of light, as
well as a black one, with horns and hoo^s, and the former of the two is the
more sly and dangerous. The Devil spoke good truths when he confessed Christ,
and the Apostles that he might overthrow him by his lying witness, and
conveighes double poison hereby, which else he could not. For what else does he
by such wiles and tricks, save draw the spirits of curious and distrustful men
to woeful Idolatry? To put confidence in him under a Witch, to expect success
from a cursed Principle, to ascribe that glory which belongs to God alone, to
base means, which all are reduced to the Devil their first mover. Satan knows
he gains more this way, then he loses by the truth he speaks, or the good
which follows. He denies himself at no time, save for wicked ends. Beware
therefore: Dare not to confound those excellent ways of God in his power,
providence and mercy to his creature, with the Satanicall and Sorcerers courses
of profane beasts. As for those miraculous operations of God in his Church
throughout all ages of the Old Testament, in the poole Siloam, and the gift of
ejecting Satan by some certain persons, there was enough to prove that they
were from God, John 5.4. Matthew. 12.27.
for the confirmation of Truth, the strengthening of Faith, and the drawing of
Proselites. But as for all the other, the Lord justly suffers Satan to deceive
such as deceive themselves first, and reject the truth, as we see in Saul, Esaias
8.19. Should the living go to the dead, 1 Samuel 28.6.7. Jam. 3.15.
and to them that whisper out o^ the earth, (Geomanticks:) No, but to the Law,
and to the Testimony, if that favor not, there is no wisdom in them, save
that which Saint James calls from beneath, and divelish. A most woeful thing,
that in a land where the Gospel has been preached this eighty years, such
abominations should swarm, and that with impunity, yea in some cases (which I
name not) with Apology. God amend it! So much for this Branch.

Secondly, Goodness of God in using weak and poor things, to effect great,
is much to be admired.
hence acknowledge the infinite goodness of God in devising such aid and
succor to poor creatures both their bodies and souls for the expressing of
his tender mercies to us in this infirmity of our flesh. That by a word
speaking he should create the fruit of the lips, even peace, Esaias 57. by the
Ministry of a sinful man, (further off from power to convert a soul, then
Jorden to heal a leper) and beget it to a lively hope and immortality and
glory. That thereby the word preached should carry with it the working of faith
and regeneration. As the Lord Jesus his own blessed words effected miracles in
the speaking, causing the dead to arise, the lepers to be cleansed, Mark ult.
the deaf to hear: So the words of his Ministers by the same virtue from him,
should do greater things then these, even by instruments most weak, how
admirable is it? To the end that our faith might not stand in man, but in God!
2 Cor 4.7.
That the deadly soul leprosy (worse then Naamans bodily) of infidelity,
pride, hypocrisy, self, should be washed all away by the water of Baptism
through the word of the Covenant, to which its annexed in all believers, and
these shall become sealing ordinances to ratify the truth of regeneration to
the soul, and to confer the nourishing power of the Spirit unto life eternal,
how admirable is it? It is the omnipotent power of God which causes it, which
separates the silly creature of water, bread and wine for the present, from
common use, Sacraments how divinely appropriated to seal up to the soul
strong assurance of salvation.
takes off the base outside of it, casts an honorable mantle over it,
appropriates it, to holy, solemn and divine, use and service, unites the Lord
Jesus himself with his whole merit and efficacy to it, and all to effect this
end, to convey the Lord Jesus into the soul of the Believer; assuring it by
virtue of this sealing ordinance, that as verily as the body by virtue of
appetite eats and drinks the creatures, so truly does the soul take and eat
the body and blood of Christ to the souls nourishment by Gods command and
promise. This is a mystery: and it should teach us, that if God have assumed
such poor creatures sacramentally into the partakership of himself, therefore
to take heed lest we vilify the outward ordinance (as pretending all the power
to be from Christ) but to acknowledge each part thereof to be from him, and
one as true (though not as effectual) a part as the other. Ye parents make not
Baptism a common thing, make not so solemn a thing to wait upon your leisure
and complements, when all your trinkets are ready, then carry your child to
the Sacrament. No, let your bables attend it, not it them. Despise it not for
the outside, there is a blessing in it, and under the baseness of elements
lies hidden a world of worth and honor. Therefore not to be used as common
things.
And you (my brethren the people) run not out from it so soon as the word is
preached, as if you discerned no Christ in and under it annexed to it for your
own special use and good. I tell thee those silly creatures are essential
parts of the Sacrament, as well as the grace and ordinances of God, to be
reverenced (though I say not with our own invented, yet) with that esteem with
which God has honored them, viz. to be channells and conveiors of that grace
of the Lord Jesus for life and support; else would he not have graced
Sacraments with the like honor to Faith, Except a man be borne of water and the
Spirit, John 3.3.4. Mark ult.
and, He that believes and is baptized, shall be saved. God can work without
them when they cannot be had, but when they may, he will have them share in
point of honor with the graces sealed, from which they cannot be severed, nor
may be rent. So much for this second Use.

And lastly, although I do not here equal Jordens waters to a Sacrament,
Jordens waters a resemblance of baptism.
nor dare I call it a type of Baptism, yet is there a clear and lively
resemblance thereof in it. I speak not this to teach any to use their wits
boldly, to allegorize every thing as some have done. In this, its safest for us
to captive our wisdom to God, to be no wiser then himsel^e; but where he
pleases to express allusions there to follow with sobriety. As in the
allegory, Gal. 3. end. of Sina and Jerusalem, to typifie the nature of bondage,
and of freedom. So, that of Noah's flood, which Peter, Epist. 1. Cap. 3.21.
tells us is semblable to Baptism: Else its best for us to forbear types, only
we may make resemblances: As here, this healing of Naaman by Jorden, and
expressing of it by the flesh of a child, teaches us thus much: That the Lord
who occasionally used this water to such an end, as to cure an incurable
leprosy of an aliant and stranger from the Commonwealth of Israel, does
assure us that much more by Baptism, (as by an appointed and settled sealing
way) he is able to heal the fretting leprosy of sin and curse in all his
believing ones, and seal the soul of such a one through the faith of the word
to a true ingrafting into Christ, Affectation to allegorize the Scriptures a
dangerous course.
and the new Birth. Constantine the great and good Emperor being a leper, and
told that nothing else could heal him, save bathing of his body in the blood
of infants ripped out of their mothers womb, abhorred the speech of it, as
counting the remedy worse then the disease: That which he did mercifully in
forbearing, do thou religiously in embracing. The blood and water flowing out
of the pierced sides of the Lord Jesus, and washing thy soul by faith
sacramentally, is only able to heal thy leprosy, and to make so perfect a cure
as shall never need to be repeated. Naaman and thou need nevere be washed the
second time, if once thoroughly cured; and in truth, it was this blood which
made Naamans cure so perfect. Apply thy soul to it therefore, to make a
perfect cure in it, better then all thine own patcht and half cures. Look
not at the outward water alone, look at the power and virtue of him whose
blood only can heal both the water from her cursed barrenness, to make it
fruitful and seasonable seed of life; and thy soul by water, from guilt,
power, and eternal curse due unto it. Christ in the water, is the power of it,
one drop of his sides issuing out water and blood, is the efficacy of the
Sacraments: Mix all with faith to cleanse thy soul, to purge thy leprosy, its
shed to thine hand, and powered out by himself most willingly for thee: If thou
refuse it thou art guilty of shedding it, but, not by believing and applying
it. Numb. 19.4.
No legal cleansings of the leper by Aaron can equal it; he sprinkled the
blood and ashes of a Cow, Christ sprinkles with his own; he often, Christ once
for ever; he imperfectly, so that the leprosy might return, Christ fully,
never to return. H^^. 8.15.
If then the blood of an heifer could purge by ceremony a polluted body, how
much more shall this blood of the eternal Covenant cleanse thy conscience from
dead works, to serve the living God? But beware thou do not go and wash in
Jorden with lesser faith then Naaman did; do as much for thy soul, as he for
his body, else thou separatest the things which God has united, and destroyest
the power of the Sacrament and the purpose of God for thy regeneration; yea,
the very creature of water shall rise up in judgment against thee in the day
of judgment, for that it closed with Christ inseparably in his Ordinance; but
thou most profanely did warpe from him by thy unbeleefe. So much also for
this third Branch, and for the second Doctrine, and so for this Lecture. Let us
pray, etc.

THE ONE AND TWENTIETH Lecture continued upon the 14. VERSE.
VERSE XIV. Then Naaman went down and washed himself seven times in Ioraen,
and behold his flesh came again, as the flesh of a little child, and he was
clean.

Then he returned, and stood before the man of God, etc.


The second head. The cure of Naaman.
WE noted (Brethren) two lesser Observations in the end of the last Lecture,
out of this last part of the verse, viz. The success of Naamans obedience:
Now, leaving them, and the expression of the cure: we come to the cure it
self. And (says the Text) he was clean. No intermission of time passed
between his washing and cleansing, both went inseparably together. The ^^ine
poin^ flowing hence, which we have reserved to this Exercise, is: That G^ds
promises are always as good in the performing as in the making, if not better:
for so falls it out with Naaman here. The Prophet promised him cure of his
Leprosy by washing himself: And lo, now he is as good as his word, he washes,
and is clean in body. This is as much as was promised. But moreover (as
appears by the sequel) he proves a clean soul also, and this was an
overplus to the promise. It is a light thing for the Lord to heal his body,
except he heal himself: And in this respect I may well say, as I said
before, That Gods cures are perfect indeed; all perfect gifts are from above;
and all that are from thence, are perfect to purpose. Ere I come to handle the
point, this I would premise (Brethren) how fitly this point follows the other,
to make the heart and life of a poor believer comfortable. The former point
told us, that promises must be interpreted aright, and not mistaken, not
restrained, but believed according to the utmost extent of the promiser. But
then comes in a doubt, Though I enlarge them in their full reach, yet God may
restrain them to the shortest size. True, if thou stretch them upon thy
carnal tentors. But take them according to the word (as indeed thou shall not
need to make them better then God has made them) and then this point will tell
thee to thy comfort, that God will perform whatsoever has gone out of his
mouth to the uttermost, nay perhaps cast in such an overplus as was neither
promised, nor looked for. The Text is president enough for it, if there were no
more. So that even in the entry upon the point, we may set a star in the
margent, (and for our better encouragement both to believe, and in believing to
wait patiently) may say, these two points carry very sweet news from heaven
to a poor empty and hungry soul, both that he will have it believe to the
uttermost, and when she has so done, God has in store for her as much
performance, yea, and much more then she has faith. But let us come to the
point. The order I will observe in the point shall be this: First, I will prove
it by Scripture. Secondly, by reason. Thirdly, I will clear a maine doubt
about the Doctrine. And so lastly come to the Uses: and first of the first.

Concerning which, this I may say, That the whole Book of God, Doctrine. Gods
performances always as good, if not better then his promises.
is nothing else, but a very Theater and open Stage, wherein the Lord acts his
part of performing of promises. And not so alone: But so curious the Spirit of
enditing the word is in every Chapter and Verse, lest the reader should spy any
flaw or crack in the performance of promises; that it steps out of his tracke
oft-times to reconcile and equal each performance to her own promise. And
this both in the maine promise of Christ's exhibition, and in all secondary
promises, whether general and concerning the soul of the whole Church and
each member of that body; or personal and temporary promises, concerning this
and that person: And the greater distance there seemed between making and
keeping of promises, the more curious regard has the Holy Ghost to express
Gods keeping touch, when his time was come. For example, Proofs and Instances.
God had promised to Abraham that his seed should be set free after it was a
stranger in an heathen land for four hundred and thirty years, and so it fell
out, Genesis 15.13. Exodus 12.42.
when the time came that God delivered them, what says the Text? That self
same day of that term expired, the Lord brought forth Israel with her armies:
So in the Gospel, mark how curious the Holy Ghost is in expressing of the
faithfulness of God in each passage of Christ, his nativity, his parentage, his
dwelling, his person, life, betraying, passion, death, burial? See throughout
the Gospel. Mat. 1.2. etc.
Forty several times one or other of the Evangelists refer the passages that
fell out, to the promises themselves: That it might be fulfilled which was
said, And thou Bethlem are not the least of the Cities of Juda: That it might
be fulfilled, Rachel lamented for her children, and would not be comforted,
etc. That it might be fulfilled, Out of Egypt have I called my Son: He that
ate with me in the dish, he betrayed me: And he was counted among
transgressors: Mark 15.28.
And upon my vestures did they cast lots: Matthew. 27.35.
And he shall make his grave with the rich: And he shall be as one of no
beauty, like a withered branch: with a great many more. Not so much as his
riding to Jerusalem is omitted, Behold thy King comes, lowly and meek,
riding upon an Ass, the fool of an Ass. Why is all this? To let us to
understand, that he who would be so punctual in all petty passages belonging
to the great promise of the Messia, Matthew. 21.4.
would be as faithful in performing all other promises consequent upon his
merit and satisfaction. And the like speeches are used to this purpose in the
personal promises made to the Patriarchs, as to Abraham concerning Isaac, to
Rebecca, concerning the elder serving the younger, to Jacob, that God would be
with him in his journey, and bring him back, and deliver him from Esau: To the
Church in the wilderness concerning the possession of Canaan, Joshua tells
them, Josh. 21.45.
after the conquest, nothing failed of any one particular promise, which God
had made concerning the giving of the land of Canaan to the seed of Jacob.
Infinite many more instances might be alleged, as the fulfilling of the
seventy years captivity, and the return of the Church back again to their
City and Mountain, as Esaias 57.13. All being pledges put into one bosom,
touching the maine fidelity of God, in making good the promised Seed and
Messiah so often made and renewed to Adam, Abraham, David, Ahaz, and his people,
which though it were kept in the bowels of time for four thousand years, yet
at last, Gal. 4.4. When the fullness of time was come, was accomplished. And
hence all other promises took their original, 2 Cor. 1.20.
and derived their issue. So says the Apostle, All the promises of God are in
him Yea and Amen, to the praise of his glory; that is, Luke 1.45.
firm and inrepealable. Thus says Elizebth to Mary, A performance shall be
from the Lord of whatsoever has been said unto his handmaid: Faithful is he
who has promised, who will also fulfill it. The Lord is faithful, Heb. 6.10.
and will not conceal the labor of your love. 1 Timothy 5.15.
This is a faithful saying, and by all means to be believed etc. endless it
were to reckon up all; and as for the addition of the point, that sometimes he
fulfills them for the better, we see what Paul says, Phil. 4.19.
Our God is able to do for us more then we can ask or think. When Solomon
chose to ask a wise and understanding heart to go in and out, 2 Kings 3.11.
lo (says the Lord) I have given thee it, and moreover I have given thee such
wealth, honor and wisdom, as never any had before, nor shall have after thee.
Matthew. 6.32.
And so says Christ, Seek the Kingdom of Heaven and the righteousness of it,
and other things shall be cast in. So that it was not Naamans case only, but
by consent of Scripture, we see that his particular case, is made the case of
each believer, more or less, so far as is meet. This for proofs.

Because he is Jehovah.
For as he is an absolute and infinite being in himself, giving to all other
depending creatures their beings: So by virtue hereof, he vouchsafes a being to
all his promises, which are the most excellent parcells of all his Scriptures.
He gives the like substance and being to all his commands, and threats, to all
other sorts of truths, but especially to these, being his chief truths: Genesis
17.1. Exodus 6.3.
And as he said to Moses, I was not known to them before the flood, nor to
Abraham by any other name save El-shaddi, alsufficient, but not by the name of
Jehovah; this name is a more real name, and gives a reality to my promises,
and causes me to perform them: So now may we say, I was not known by the name
of the Father of Christ Jesus in former times, as I am now; for in him I make
good all my word, he has sealed up all my truths, my love in him is attended
with all my other attributes, wisdom, justice and faithfulness, all my
strength and power assists that, so that whatsoever I have promised, I will
perform, for I can do it, I will do it, and I am true in promising,
therefore I must fulfill it. God then is Jehovah, the being of all his
promises, our God in Christ.

Second Reason. God is faithful in performances, in respect of his For his
own honor.
He knows that except he should keep touch with his Church, and maintain the
glory of his keeping promise with her, he should destroy the credit of his
Ministers: the faith of his elect, and in a word, the hope of drawing any out
of the common course of the world, to the Kingdom of grace. So that his
unfaithfulness threatening utter ruin to the whole art and way of Religion,
either in faith or obedience, and shaking the very pillars of the Churches
confidence; it must needs stand the Lord in hand to see his promises fulfilled.

Thirdly, forasmuch as whatsoever is in God, is eminently in him, and Because
whatsoever is in God, is eminently in him.
) therefore his truth in fulfilling promises, must also be singular and
eminent. It must become that excellency of his truth, not only to content
himself with such a performing as the poor creature can expect, and concur
withal; but such an one as is above whatsoever the soul can ask or imagine:
that is, rather to be over, then under his promises, better rather then worse,
this makes much for the adoring of his faithfulness, and the believing of his
promises.

Fourthly, the Lord does thus for the continual strengthening of his For the
strengthening of his servants. 2 Timothy 1.12.
and that by daily experience growing in the soul hereby, it might come to
this pitch to say, I know in whose lap or bosom I have put my pledge, I know
in whom I have believed: I go not upon had I wist, but upon undeceivable
grounds. Thus, as the wicked through unbeleefe withdraw themselves more and
more to perdition; so the faithful follow faith to the preserving of the
soul; Heb. 10.38.
they grow more and more rooted therein by such trial of faith, they grow from
faith to faith, Romans 1.17. Ephesians. 3.16.17. Matthew. 11.29.
rooted and established, and not easily puffed off by every wind of error,
fear, temptation; they grow from believing one to believe more, from general
promises, to special, from spiritual, to temporal, from promises in peace,
to promises in and under crosses, dark ones, deep ones, long ones; so that no
estate, service, occasion, trial, waxes strange to them, but familiar, and at
last the yoke of God waxes easy, and his burden light.

Fifthly, because the Lords performances (or purposes at least to Because his
promises come from purpose of doing good.
They promise apace, but their spirit being backward in love, and entire
wel-wishing to the good of others, come short of their own promises. Now the
Lord in his intention or purpose to do good to his Church and People, does
thereby draw his heart to make promises, that so, the good things which he
wishes them, may be presented to them before hand; and they may know that in
mere faithfulness, he binds himself to them, not to strengthen himself, but
their weakness rather in believing. Now because the Lord out of an Idea and
foresight of his own free grace, purposing to do good to his, does break
into promises; thence it is that promises are easy to perform with him. Men
are rashly drawn either by their own sudden pangs or by others motion to
make promises, not knowing their own spirits, and scantlings of affection, and
so in cool blood they undo that which in hot they made. But because Gods
purposes strong and firm, caused him to promise, therefore the same Spirit
moves him also to perform. Again, though men mean well in promising, yet
inability oftentimes causes them to break against their wills; whereas in God,
purpose of love, and power of hand to perform, are always equal, so that
nothing can come between bark and tree, nothing can set his promises and
performances together by the ears. Let the reader look back into the point of
Faith, where I have mentioned abundance of excellent Attributes in God, every
of which are objects of Faith, and means to strengthen it, and especially his
faithfulness.

Because he looks not at us, but his own bounty.
because he promises not according to what the narrow neck or vessel of the
soul is capable of, but what his bountiful heart can beteame it: Promises
would prove but barren and bare matters, if so be our bucket could reach their
bottom. But since the Lord promises according to the extent of his own
bounty, therefore he performs so also, whether the soul conceive so or not.
What heart can conceive the unspeakable good things prepared by God for such as
love him? Eye has not seen, ear has not heard, nor has it entered into man's
heart to contain them: 1 Cor. 2.9.
yet all these are enclosed in the promise, and though the soul at first
obtaining of pardon, see not what God includes in it to be in time
accomplished, but is glad of a present supply of her need; yet the Lord who
gives his Christ (the knot of promises) all at once, is content to keep touch
with the soul, and in due time to reach her out, all sorts of them according
as her need calls for, in duties, in wants, in temptation, in conflict with her
lusts, 1 Cor. 1.30.
or in affliction: Then he makes Christ, Righteousness, to be Christ, Wisdom,
Sanctification and Redemption: The less the soul looked for it, the welcommer
it is when it comes. Its not so with base men. If the party promised unto,
conceive not the extent of the promiser, the promiser thinks he has quit
himself well in concurring with the expectation of the other, although he
shorten his own intents. But this base falsehood of restraint is far off from
God, and therefore he performs that which often is unexpected, as well as what
is. And so much shall serve for Reasons. Now to the Limitations:

Limitations of the point.
And they are sundry. These three following may give a taste of the rest, which
because they avail much for the due qualifying of the Doctrine, therefore I
will mention them, and the proper uses flowing from them, and so proceed to the
other uses belonging to the Doctrine. The first limitation is, That God though
he always perform his promise, yet not always in that very kind which the soul
perhaps seeks and claims. The soul looks at one kind, the Lord looks at
another: It is enough with him, God performs promises always: yet not in that
very kind, which the soul expects. And why?
that he always keeps touch in one kind or other, though he do not fulfill it
as the soul would. And good reason, since the scope of fulfilling a promise,
being the special good of the soul that believes it; and the Lord himself
being fitter to judge of that, then the soul it self can. Therefore it is
meet that we leave it to him in what kind he will hear and perform. We, in
the mean time cannot be losers, because the Lord does not neglect to hear us
in our kind, for lack of love; but through ^bundance of wisdom. If we can
believe, that the kind which he answers us, be (questionless) best for the
present condition in which the soul stands; then may she be as well
satisfied in Gods way, as her own. For example: There is a promise, Psalm.
50.15.
that if we call upon God in the day of affliction, he will hear us, and we
shall praise him. Upon this the soul under any yoke of body, or mind, sues to
God upon his promise, to ease that yoke, that she may praise him. But the Lord,
being wiser then she, holds on the yoke still: howbeit he does it, not as
forgetful of his promise; but because he sees there be other graces to be set
on work in the poor soul, as breaking of heart, patience, further faith,
self-denial, which would not work kindly if the yoke were off. If he meant
only to exercise thankfulness in the soul, he would deliver it: but he
judges the other to be more useful for the present, and therefore chooses a
performance in his own kind, which shall be an hundred fold more gain to
the soul then the other. 2 Cor. 12.3 4.
Paul being sorely buffeted, not for sin, but to prevent it, prays instantly
to God to remove it. The Lord seeing that performance not to be proper for the
end of his buffeting, continues it; yet he breaks not promise: for he
ministers grace sufficient to uphold him under it. Verse 9.
By this means he attaines his end, to humble Paul, and moreover teaches him
to desire to live under desertion and infirmity, sometimes, that so he might
get that experience of Gods strange upholding of him in the want of feeling,
which before he had found under feeling. By this mean (though irksome to the
flesh to want the use of graces and gifts) the Lord trains him to a sober use
of his revelations; and to renounce himself so far under buffetings, as to
choose rather to be as the Lord would have him, then as himself chose to be.

The use of this qualification is this: The use of this limitation.
Both to cool our spirit of self-love, which is ready to appoint God his way
of performance: as also to teach us wisdom to apply our selves to the best
good of a performance, rather then to the performance it self, Gods people
look more at the good of a performance, then the b^re performance of a promise.
to ascribe this honor to God, that he better knows how to make good a promise
to us, then we can choose. And therefore not by and by to cry out against God
for not performing it, because our turns are not served: But rather by our
defeat, to search into the cause, and to see whether God and we look the same
way or no: If we do not, we may be long enough ere we be satisfied, or honor
God in his faithfulness. If we will tie God to perform one promise, and the
Lord means to perform another, we shall be far to seek. Say we therefore
thus: Lord teach me to look out what the promise is which thou aimest to make
good. Faithful, I am resolved, thou art: but that stands not in serving my
turn, but in serving thy self upon me. Since thou do all things well, I
do but wait to see thy way, for it is best, and shall curb my spirit, and give
me best content; because it tends to make me more experienced, more humble,
and at last thankful to thee for that good which thy self meantst me, which
is infinitely better then that which I fancied. So much for the first.

Limitation the second. In general promises to the Church, the time of
performance must be left to God, and why.
The second limitation may be this: In promises concerning the welfare of the
Church in general, except the Lord tie himself punctually to a time of
redress or deliverance: we must conceive of Gods performances indefinitely
without prefixing a time or period of our own: For in such, it is enough for
the quitting of Gods faithfulness, that he performs really, although he leave
the time when, to his own wisdom. We look that Gods love in hearing us for
such performances, should trench upon his wise providence; but that ought not
to be: In such cases it behooves us to distinguish upon promises. In such as
touch the soul and life of a believer, usually (except some special thing
hinder) the souls believing and the promises performance go together: as, for
the strength against a lust, for quickening up of any grace or gift, for
sanctifying of any ordinance. But not so in the public promises. The reason
is, because the Lord may have a predominant way of his own to bar present
performance. He does neglect the special good of them who pray for a more
universal good of his own; either because the sins of his enemies, by whom
he uses to scourge his Church, See Genesis 15.16.
are not come to the highest pitch, and so it will not be most for his glory,
to punish or suppress them yet: or because the provocations of his Church, and
the sins thereof, are not yet purged thoroughly, nor brought to the lowest
point: These respects may hinder special relief of some present miseries,
restraints and persecutions of his people. There is (we say) in the motion of
every planet, a straight motion coming from the Planet herself, and a backward
motion of the first mover: So is it here, the motion of a promise is
retrograded and retarded by the wisdom of the first mover. The grand promise
of the Lord Jesus his incarnation, was indefinite, and in the bosom of God,
when to fulfill it: one thousand, two or three thousand might have brought it
forth as well as four; yet providence reserved it to the end of the fourth
thousand: Gal. 4.4.
And when that fullness was come, nothing could stop the fulfilling of that,
which yet before that time, no prayers, no expectation of the Church could
hasten: Then, and not till then, Instances of the point.
he that would come, came, and tarried not. So also, we that live in this age,
conceive our selves to be pitched under the fourth vial, under which we are
warranted to wait for the revealing of Gods wrath, and the ruin of the Beast.
But for us hereupon to limit God to own time and period, seven, or ten, or
fifteen years: (whatsoever we may suppose by probabilities) and to determine
God to our own season, is most bold and presumptuous: For God has as well a
way of his revenge and scourging of particular Churches, for their infidelity
and unfruitfulnesse, as he has of fulfilling his maine promise. Sure we are,
his Word will prove true within the Term of this Vial: But to bound the space
and duration of it, we may not. That the Jew shall be called, and the Gospel
generally preached ere the end come, and that the Lord Jesus shall even in this
world express himself to be the Lord and King of his Church, and set up his
Throne visibly upon their real ruins, who (not waning brains) can or dare
deny it? And yet who (if he have brains) dare punctually determine it within
so or so many years.

The use of this qualification is most precious and weighty, viz. The use of
this second limit. We must not tax Gods administrations.
That in our prayers and services of the time, be they ordinary or
extraordinary, we lash not out through our ungrounded zeal and passions, to
press the Lord to our time, in redressing the miseries of his Church, in
punishing his enemies, reforming abuses, or restoring comforts to her mourners.
Slacken no whit of thy zeal, but let it still be carried within bounds, and
go eaven pace with Gods time, and be limited by that condition. And moreover,
let it curb our querulous and discontented spirits, which (being full of grief
for the upbraiding and insulting Peninna's, 1 Samuel 1.
over the perplexed Hanna's and faithful ones of Christ) may easily fall with
Jeremy, Chap. 12.1. and David, Psalm. 73.5. to distemper our selves, to charge
God foolishly, and to call him to our own bar, as if he ordered not matters
so wisely as we would have him. Alas! Those are ever most confident, who usurp
most. 2 Samuel 15.4. Eccles 7.10.15.16.
Absalom thought his policy and wisdom above his fathers in ruling of
subjects; but it cost him sorrow and ruin. Let us not cavil against our own
days as the worst, nor our own lot, as the unhappiest. Let us know its folly,
wrap up all our own discontents in the field of Providence and Wisdom. For
why should we be desolate, or hasten our own ruin rashly before the time? Let
it be enough for us that we bear witness to Jesus and to his truth, and
serve our time: But let us not break out of our compass, in which God has
set us. Nor let us think long, or tax God for seeming to stop his ear from our
prayers, nor give over our waiting, and wax froward with him; but remember our
Rule, Acts 1.7.
That in public promises still the time must be left to him who is the
Sovereign orderer of all times and seasons. It is enough for us, that in the
worst and most degenerate times of all, God has not left his Church as an
Orphan, or desolate, each member has her own particular faith and patience to
set on work: To keep the soul from rusting, from either tedious impatience or
desperate carelessness: Matthew. 25.
Ocupy these till God come, and these will so allay thy spirit, and exercise
thy meekness, patience and humility, that Gods time shall not seem over long,
faith shall not make over much haste. Hab. 3.


I do not counsel thee to give over faith in performances. But to apply faith
to such promises in the mean while, as may sustain the soul with patient
hope till Gods time is accomplished. See Psalm. 135.14.
The rod of the wicked shall not always ly upon the lot of the righteous, lest
they should put forth their hand to evil. The Lord will not always be angry,
Psalm. 125.3.
lest flesh should fail. Rather then such extremities should come, God will
put an end and say, The day of my redeemed ones is come. Esaias 63.3.
But if the Lord sustain the whilst, and the burning bush consume not, is it
not as good as if it burnt not? Enlarge thy short and hasty spirit by this,
that each day of Gods delay shortens the trouble. And remember, that a thousand
years with the Lord is as one day, 2 Pet. 3.8.
and God is a pure act incomprehensible, not ruled by time. I do not by these
passages, choke the zeal, importunity, clamors and expostulations of the
Church? No, that were another extremity, and as much as to quash the Spirit of
adoption, and to abridge the privileges of the Saints, in their holy boldness
in prayer. For why? Read the moanes of the Church in Psalm. 40. and Esaias 63. and
64. the variety of her holy complaints, arguments wherewith she labors to
draw God on her side, against his sworn foes: to persuade him to be no longer
dark, but to cause the mountains to flow down before his presence. And so
Psalm 12. she cries out for help, because all went to wrack. All this is
lawful, and to pray against implacable, incorrigible enemies: Plead thus,
Lord, although to thee a thousand years are as one day, yet it is not so with
us: five, seven years are somewhat to us; Lord, we are feeble and faint,
Psalm. 110. ult. Therefore tarry not long, Lord. But in all these, remember to
ascribe to God the glory of faithful performance in his own time, and say
thus: Thou have afflicted us on every side, Psalm. 119.
yet have we not forsaken thy Covenant the whilst: we have not exasperated our
spirits against thy delays, but turned the edge of our complaints against our
selves, who by our treacherous unfruitfulnesse have deserved these scourges:
our worst enemy is within us. That sin of ours has vexed thee more then our
crosses and thy delays vex us. Purge them, remove the bar, and we doubt not
but thy performances shall break out as the light, when once our
righteousness shall appear, and our filthiness shall be cleansed, nothing
shall let thy promises from being fulfilled. This for the second.

Limitation the third. God keeps promise with them only that live by faith.
The third and last limitation is this, That the Lord keeps his promises
faithfully; but yet upon condition, to such as not only are his own servants
(for what have dogs to do with the childrens bread?) but such of his own as
abide so, and fear him, live by faith, and keep his Covenant. The sum of the
point is, that which David Psalm. 25.10. expresses thus: All the ways of the
Lord are mercy and truth. But to whom? Surely to such only as keep his
Covenant. Israel was the Lords peculiar above all the earth: but it was not
enough for them to hold their name only, but to keep close to the Lord: If
Israel would have walked in my ways, then it should go well with them, and
with their children for ever. 1 Chro. 17.13.
It was the Lords speech to David of Solomon, He shall be my son, and I will
call him Iedidijah, the Lord loved him. And if he transgress against me, I
will chastise him with the Rods of men, but my loving kindness will I never
take from him. Mark (Brethren) there is a promise which the Lord will perform
to all that are in covenant with him, that is, he will not finally forsake
them. But yet in the mean time if they venture so much hereupon, that they
break their league, play the harlots, and forsake their husband, he will make
them feel to their costs, 2 Chro. 16.3.4.
that he can also break with them and forsake them; and so will he go on with
them till he have wearied them, and by some adversity or other, within or
without, sent them home with sorrow and shame to their first husband. Men must
not look to be loose with God, and yet bind him to be close to them.
Excellent is that of Oded the Prophet to Asa, speaking of the revolted ten
Tribes, Of a long time was Israel without God, or a Law, or a Priest. And why?
Surely, because they had forsaken his Temple, and Worship, his Arc and Mercy
seat: and therefore the Lord plagued them with all adversity. And so will he
do to you: if ye cleave to him, he will cleave to you, but if you warp from
him, so will he from you. Consider (I pray you brethren) and God give us
understanding. The Lord will keep promise with his; but then they must not play
their parts with him. For why? Shall the Father spit in his Daughters face,
Number. 12.14.
and shall she not be separate from him seven days? It was the Lords speech to
Moses touching Miriam, as you know. And so I say to us, Levit. 26.21.
If we walk contrary toward the Lord, he will walk contrary to us; trust to
it. And that not only in case of foul revolts, if we should play the
Adulterers, Oppressors, Blasphemers, etc. Such sins we dare not meddle with
(happily) for the loud cry, and inward wasting of conscience. Heb. 10.37.
But yet (perhaps) we dare withdraw our selves from God by unbelief, fall out
of love with his promises: we dare forgo our joy and delight which we have
had in his presence, Jer. 2.13.
and run to pits which will hold no water, as if the fountain were
unpleasant: We dare suffer that precious seed of Life to dye (if it may dye)
in us, and walk deadly, coldly, basely in our course: We dare allay and
forsake our first love to God, and zeal to his truth: we dare run to the
course of this declining, formal, saplesse and powerless world, and shake off
all spiritual closeness and communion with God, and yet we think to do
well. But know it, this is the great quarrel of all: Levit. 26.25.
I mean the quarrel of Gods covenant, God will avenge it sadly: his soul
shall have no pleasure in such.

Lay it to your hearts (brethren) and know the performance of promises, is the
immediate way whereby the Spirit of Grace conveyes the presence of God to his
servants. We have no voice to hear, nor sights to see, save the voice and
light of the promises: If we can cleave to them, we hold the Lord, and he is
present in our souls, as he was to Paul in that sad darkness, Acts 27.23. But
if we shake off the life of faith, where is our title to the performing of
promises? or where is our right to the presence of God? I remember what the
Lord tells those Israelites in the Wilderness, I will send my Angel before
you, Exodus 23.20.
and he shall carry you forth in your journey: But take heed you grieve him
not; for he will not spare you, but withdraw his presence from you. So say I:
We would claim Gods presence, and God must be our God, and perform all
promises, as fast as we gape after them: But in the mean season, we leave the
condition at large. Some of us have formerly been zealous, yea suffered for
God, and lost our credit, our goods, our liberties for him: Here was life and
power; but now we hold but a carcass of the old temper, a mere name that we
live, we are grown Politicians, civilians, close professors, wise in our way,
rest in the fagge end of formality and common worship. And what think we? May
we be as bold upon performance of promises as formerly? May we challenge the
presence of God in his Word as formerly? No, no, others of us dare be forward
with God, as Iona was, nourish our spirits in anger, Jona 1. and 4.
let the Sun go down upon it, rage and rail like mad men in our moods? And
if we be told of it, we will defend it, and we will be so: for we say, our
wrong was real, and flesh and blood cannot bear it. What? Will you fly from
God, and look that he should follow you up and down, Judge. 19.3.
as the foolish Levite did his whorish Concubine? Others of us dare abuse the
Sabbath, or else have no delight in it, speaking our own words. Others cannot
be rated off from the creature, but run after our profits, wills, vanities,
pleasures, fashions; and cocker our children therein without check. Others
will take the uttermost of our liberties, and go upon the brinke. Others
regard not our families, set not up the worship of God there, or pray for
fashion. Others are grown just to the frame of the times, and give God so
much, and no more then the common sort do, and yet pass well. And so I might
be endless. But know it (Brethren) Gods promises are like himself, and are
faithfully performed on his part, howbeit if this be our frame, we shall find
a change, and he will take in his Sunshine, we shall not find his presence
as in former times to us? Job 6. and throughout.
Did the Lord withdraw himself from holy Job, while he walked in uprightness,
and eclipse his presence and promises from him, write bitter things against
him, compass him about with terrors, hide his face, and all justly, even to
humble him more deeply, and prevent that which else prosperity might have bred
in him? Wonder not then (brethren) if the Lord withdraw himself from us, and
turn away his performing of promises, into breach of covenant, when he meets
with such scurfe as this in our hearts and lives. And let the use of the point
in Gods name be this (which I pray us all to oberve) that henceforth we cease
to wonder if we find the Lord otherwise toward us, then formerly, so long as
the quarrel of his Covenant depends. I grant that there were never any days
such as ours in point of complaint of Gods absence, darkness, and not
performing of promises. But withal consider when were there such woeful days
of Revolts and Apostasies from God, and the power of his truth, as now? Each
face is pale, and each hand is upon the pained side: But it is rather because
men may not have their will of God, and keep him close in performance of
promises, when yet their lives swarm with all abominations? Should I not be
avenged of such time-servers and hypocrites as these, (says the Lord in the
Prophet) do you wonder if he have hidden himself, Esaias 1.
and does count you as you are, refusing to perform promises? No, no: wonder
not, wonder rather if he should: look not for it till you repent. If he darken
himself in the chief promise of pardon, of peace and comfort in conscience:
or in point of his Spirit of presence, and the graces of it, as humbleness,
and patience, love and mercy: if he shorten you in the beauty of your
conversation, that your lives are not so sweet, Spiritual penalties attend
spiritual sins.
your light not so clear as in time past: if he absent himself from you in
his Ordinances, restraining the influence of them, suffering them to be dark
and fruitless? if he leave you in your companies to be unprofitable, in your
liberties to be carnal, in your (solitariness to be dead hearted, if he
harden your hearts, and cause you to err from his ways; so that all your
prayers, fastings, sacraments, covenants, should come forth at your nostrils,
as irksome as those Quales did: I say wonder not, its but righteous.

Make this use of it, Use. Breakers of covenant with God, shall find God
break with them.
to abhor boldness with God in challenging promises to be performed when you
break the condition. Rather enter into your souls, and search out the cause
of the Lords absence, saying, it was not wont to be thus, that thou should
break promise thus, Lord, and leave me to shift for my self; its I who have
broken covenant with thee! O break my heart for it! let it not be all one with
me, whether I feel thy presence, or want it! Its the death of my soul to be
without thee! I walk desolately, mine heart melts in my bosom as wax, I am
consumed for thine anger as with a moth, and I have no rest in all my flesh for
thee! Oh Lord, let it exercise me thoroughly, and use any means, rather then
my disease should rankle, and grow incurable in me! 1 Samuel 20.1, 2, 3.
When David saw that Saul's countenance was changed to him, in what a pickle was
he? How did he bemoane it to Jonathan? And yet his favor had been dear of
the price: and shall not thou mourn for the loss of presence and performance
of promises from God? Oh take heed! go not on, add not drunkenness to
thirst, grow not from one or two falls, to a falling sickness: What is the
life of most men, but a sinning and repenting, repenting and sinning again?
Yea though the Lord be angry and smite them, what do they, save go on still in
the frowardness of their heart, as Esaias 57.16. Oh take heed! Commune with God
and thine heart, consider the sad steps of thy revolt, undo thy work, get the
Lord Jesus to be thy Mediator, better then Jonathan, for he was like to have
been slain for his labor, but Christ shall be accepted, and the Lord shall
restore thee again, and thou shall be as in time past unto him; return by a
promise, and by renewing thy faith, as by thy unbeleefe thou did revolt; the
Lord is willing that thou do so, and he will heal all thy backslidings, and
marry thee after thy harlots tricks and divorce, Jer. 2. and 3. read the
places. Soder not up thy errors by duties, weigh not good against bad, but by a
promise: And so doing, thy flesh shall return like the flesh of a child, and
thou shall be clean, and then thy title to the performance of promises shall
be restored: And as the daughter of the Priest, having buried her husband,
Levit. 22.13.
might return and eat bread in her fathers house as when she was a virgin; so
shall thou return to thy former demensum at the Lords board, and thy charter
of promises shall be restored, and the performance of them. If thou belong to
God, thus it shall be with thee; some cross or other God will send thee home
by, he will cause thy wounds to stink, and thy reins to burn within thee,
but he will set home his truth in thee: yea (rather then fail) he will set
the Devil upon thee, though he pull him off again, in mercy, rather then he
will lose thee. But if thou be a revolting hypocrite, and a server of the time,
thou may go where thou shall, God will not own thee. Thus much for this
third Use.

Now it is time that we hasten to other Uses of the Doctrine. A fourth Use
therefore is instruction with caveat: If God perform all his promises, let us
learn so to carry our selves as becomes them that believe Instruction and
Caveat. God must be left to himself to perform promises, without mixing of
our wits and wills therewith. Ruth 3.18.
but stand still, look on, and behold the faithfulness of God; let us give
fair way to his providence in this kind, and leave the business to himself,
as only concerning himself. As Naomi said to Ruth, Rest and be still, for the
man will not be quiet in himself till he bring the matter about, leave it to
him: so let us do. God needs not our negotiousnesse, or double diligence to
bring his matters to pass, he can do them best himself: And yet so it is,
that as in all other lawful actions we must come in, and chop our gourds in
the pottage to defile it, so especially in the performing of promises. Our
mixtures must be added, our humors and extremities, or else all is marred. The
Disciples must needs crave fire from heaven to destroy the Samaritans, Luke
9.54.
Matthew. 16.21.
or else their affection to their Master cannot subsist. So Peter cannot love
his Master, except he dissuade him from death. Just so is it in this business
with most men. From the chief promise of salvation to the least and lowest, we
must have a finger in the work, and promises must pass through our dispatch.
To give God the honor of fulfilling, as well as promising, is too difficult
for us. And thence it is, that we so hardly obtain the promises, they stick
between our fingers, our hastnings our fears, our dallying, our presumption
causes so much sorrow betwixt the making and performing of promises. If God
were nakedly believed without our own self-love, the work would soon be at
an end. Genesis 27.6.
God promised Rebecca that the elder of the twins should serve the younger.
She could not rest content with that, but she must devise how, as if God needed
her sin, shifting and lying to bring it to pass, and in doing so, she being
taxed by Jacob, tells him, Indeed God foretold it to Abraham, and alleged the
sins of Amorites were not full; yet why might not this come in as an
external motive to God his execution? Genesis 15.16.
Thy curse be upon me my son. But she could not so easily latch the blow.
For, what might be the cause why Isaac fetched over the blessing the second
time, save only to reprove the indirect course that Rebecca had taken? Its
true, that the spiritual birthright took effect from the present: But the
temporal was delayed six or seven hundred years; till David brought Edom
under bondage, I submit my judgment to wiser men, and I doubt not, but other
causes may be alleged; but why might not the promise have taken effect sooner,
if she had suffered the Lord to take his course? We see Esau and his posterity
were Dukes and Princes, when poor Jacob was feign to be a servant, a pilgrim,
and his children to be slaves four hundred and thirty years ere they went
into Canaan. Who doubts but that God guided all? Yet I see not, but we may
suspect God to have had an hand of punishment for this prevention of his
performances. As the midwives subtilty spoke of the Israelitish women to
Pharaoh, Exodus 2.19.
That they were lively, and needed not them: So I may say, Gods promises are
lively, and need no midwifery of ours, they are not so weak that our wisdom
need bring them to the birth. Yet (brethren) we cannot be kept from venturing.
God has promised to be alsufficient, yet, as if he could not be so without us,
we must step forth, and bestirre us with using some indirect mean or other to
purchase a performance: God has promised to bless us in all we put forth our
hand to; but if we marry a child, or purchase a commodity, we must use such a
deal of our own indirect wit and policy and fetches, that by that time we
have done, he that looks upon the issue may half doubt whether the
performance be Gods or our own; at least if it be Gods, yet it is sooted and
crocked with such a deal of our own, that it has almost lost his beauty. And
hence it is, that as it was with Jacob, so it is with us (though in a far
diverse kind) our striving with God, makes us halt ever after, and commonly we
carry some odd mark or other about us, for our interblending Gods
performances with our inventions. Let us learn then to let God alone, that we
may enjoy such a performance of his promise, as best suits with his own will
and way; let us count it our strength to sit still, Esaias 30. so shall we not
be in love with our own nets, nor intervert the entire praise due to God, to
our own wits, but take Gods work home to our selves, and yield him the fruit
of our praise as himself requires, Psalm. 50. ult. So much for this Use.

I come to a fifth Use, and that is terror and bitter reproof of all Terror.
Gods Faithfulness to us in keeping promise, must teach us to be faithful in
our promises to others. Matthew. 7.2.
and therefore faithful also in thy promises, as he is. Nay more, with what
measure thou metest to him, the same thou should look to be measured with
from him again. How then can thou plead from him performance of promises to
thee, when as thy self breakest promises to him, and to men? But of the former
of these, I will speak at the end of the Use: touching faithfulness to men,
where shall we find a faithful man, as Solomon speaks? Surely those that are
faithful should be so much the more esteemed, as rare jewels, Prove 20.6.
but the times now neither use it, nor love it. What promises will not men make
to pay sums of money borrowed of their friends by such a day? But when it
comes, there is no such matter, their turn is served, and as for yours, they
have you at vantage, you must shift as you can. As good hold a wet Eele by the
tail, as you by a promise: Words are wind as with men, and bonds are as
rotten wood and stubble, you must not urge them now a days except you will be
laughed at. Breach of words and bands goes by a custom, and this makes that
great service of lending, so abhorred by men, because conscience in repaying is
so sunk and decayed.

Here perhaps some might ask, whether bands put into the Courts of men for
appearance, or other ends between man and man, Quest. How far bands bind in
conscience.
bind in point of conscience to performance? I answer, except civil bands did
so bind, we do unjustly tax men for breaking bands and promises, for
although a forfeit be annexed to the breach, Answer. There is a difference
between bonds in mere civil c^ses, and criminal.
yet that's used for form of Law, not for discharge of the borrower or party
bound. For the lender wants his money or bargain for the present, and is
damnified by disappointment; forfeits sometimes are hazardable, but to be sure,
they require a longer time of traverse then can be endured: yet in some cases I
say that civil bonds, because their forfeit is a double mulct and loss to the
forfeiter, may be conceived to satisfy the Law, when the honesty of the party
cannot be questioned. But it is not in criminal cases as in civil; for in
criminal, the deserter of his bond takes himself to be eased by the deserting
of it, and not damnified by it; now the party questioned must not be his own
carver to ease

Secondly, to desert criminal bonds concurres not with the intents of them
that bind who trust to our fidelity, and would not else have taken bonds, and
therefore ease us the whilst, but rather open their mouth against us for
equivocators, Jesuits and hypocrites, which we ought not to occasion, because
it has rank appearance of evil. Thirdly, as the case may stand, the
conscience of the bound party at the binding was convinced of no other, save of
an honesty, and obligatory promise to present himself according to bond: now
to overrule an act past by a latter information, or second thoughts, is unjust,
and cannot but snare his conscience: Therefore it is unlawful. Fourthly, its
scandalous and prejudicial to the cause of Religion, which all those who are
religious carry in their foreheads as well as in their bosoms, and therefore
must be very tender and cautelous of; I say how Gods cause suffers through us,
and lest by our sides the body of Religion be wounded: yea (as the case may
stand) although we had some strong reason for our action, yet because the
wound is broader then our plaster, we should be wary. Fifthy, the deserting of
bonds in such cases, imputes very shrewdly to the cause we are engaged in, and
inferres a deserting of it, which is a sad business for him who thinks his
cause honest: and if it be alleged, that he does it to avoid a sadder pinch, I
answer, no pinch of penalty is comparable to pinch of conscience. Sixthly, by
this mean, we desert not only our bond and cause, but even that whereby we
profess to be underpropped, viz. the use of our faith in suffering, and in our
well-doing to commend our selves to God as a faithful keeper? What place is
there left for God to protect us, to quit our persons, to plead our cause, to
honor his truth against opposition, when we our selves cut off and prevent his
providence our selves by our discretion? I have said enough, and perhaps some
may think too much: but I have considerately done it, not in any unkindness
(God knows) but first, Apology for the Authors intent herein.
because it has ever been my judgment. 2. In some respects I feel my self
called to profess it. 3. I hope by this means to stop the like course in
some. 4. I see it may bring a double pressure upon others, guiltless of the
same projects. 5. It grieves me to see that a new custom, the spawne of men's
politic brains, should prevail against the better practice of such as have
feared God in times past to my uttermost memory. 6. Those that do thus, raise
bad opinion by other consequences hereupon, which I silence, else I could have
been silent.

But to return: God is a great performer of promises, and is known by that
name, as the King of England is known by the name of Defender of the Faith,
its his royal Title. Thousands of years are but as one day to his memory, he
forgets not one promise all that while: The Saints have always yielded him this
Prerogative, A God that keeps covenant: Luke 1.70.71. Zachary tells us, that
he raised up a strong horn of salvation, according to the oath made to our
father Abraham, that he would give us: To perform the promise made to our
forefathers, and to keep his holy covenant: Oh! if he be so faithful, shall
his servants we are a contrary badge of falsehood? Is it not a mark of a
citizen of heaven, Psalm. 15.6. that he keeps promises, although to his
detriment? Shall heathens condemn us in this? Of whom one obtaining leave of
the enemy to go home to Rome upon promise to return, went, and returned, and
was rolled to death in a barrel driven with nails. Judge 11.30.36.39.
Iephtha is said to have kept his vow in simplicity (if he did keep it) for
lack of knowledge, and for did his good daughter, my father go not back: But
we in subtilty, and for lack of conscience break promises as fast as we make
them. No man can tell what to make of our days of payment, our promises to aid
the distressed, to make good dowries promised in marriage, to perform trusts
reposed in us, for orphans in point of education of them, repaying of stocks,
payment of debts, legacies; but swear and forswear our selves in the
administering of goods, as if we had sold, and paid creditors to the uttermost:
Alas the measure of your foot is as good as your bond, one trick or other
will salve all! how many woeful and graceless banquerupts are there, who under
the name of profession, have undone many poor widows, poor orphans, poor
kindred, yea strangers, who have admired them for the repute of their sincerity
and zeal to the Gospel? Oh (say they) I durst put my life in his hand, much
more my will, my estate, my wife, and children! the more woeful traitor thou
who have undone them all, and made them beggars, and withal caused the lewd to
cry out and condemn all Religion and Purity! Endless it were to mention the
common defaults of men in their buyings, and tradings, and whole conversation!
woe be to all such as dare thus spit in the face of God and honesty! and yet
walk with as impudent and bold faces, and hardened hearts, as if none could say,
black is their eye! But then, to conclude, what shall be said to such as mock
God himself, and dally with those solemn vows and covenants they have made
with him? Breakers of covenants with God are in a bad condition.
Some upon their deathbeds solemnly vowing repentance to God, restitution of
stolen goods to them whom they defrauded, all to stop conscience, but upon
recovery have paid God with double impiety, and men with oppression; Jonah,
Hezechia, David's breach of covenants shall not help you; you have sinned with
Peter (as that wretch said) so, you have covenanted with these, but you have
not repented of your breach thereof with these. Learn first to purpose, and
then to promise: so does the Lord, and not in your heat of fear, and being
upon the rack, to lavish our promises of an ell long, one inch whereof you
will not keep after. But you fare accordingly: I wish you no worse scourge to
whip you then your own, for neither will God, nor Gods Ministers trust you,
they may visit you on your deathbeds, and bear witness against you what you
have said, but they will not trust you. Men also abhor you, so that as they
who are hanged, are execrable, and between heaven and earth; so heaven has
vomited you down, and earth cast you up, as woeful persons: Be scared in Gods
fear, and repent of this treachery.

Diverse instances. 1 Such as have no promise, and yet charge God for breaking
promise, offend.
Secondly, this is terror to other sorts of persons, who complain of God for
frustrating them of performances, when as yet they never had any promises made
them. What? Shall God bear the blame for your sakes? Did ever any complain of
Gods unfaithfulness, who had to do with a promise? Why then are you the first
that reproach God for nothing? You are like him that called God an hard Master,
for reaping where he never sowed, and gathering where he never strawed. But
does God do so? No he performs no promises save to such as are in Christ.
Wonder not if God afflict you everyway, with an unquiet heart, with horrors and
fears, astonishment and anguish, that he may drive you into covenant. As for
your quarrelling with him, God may say as Iehu said to the messenger, 2 Kings 9.
What have thou to do with peace? Turn behind me. And yet what is more common
then the mutterings of such hypocrites? See Esaias 58. and Mal. 3. But God is not
so superfluous a fulfiller of promises, that he should enlarge himself to them
that are none of his. It Is enough that he fails not in necessary performances.
2. So do such as deceive themselves. And that 1. By Gods forbearance.
Moreover, this is terror to a contrary sort of hypocrites and profane ones,
who (on the other side) boast of such performances as are not. As you see there
be diverse sorts of Market-folks: most complain of their hard penyworths; but
some are such fools, as to belly their own markets, and boast of such
penyworths as they never got. And this befalls in sundry respects: First in
respect of Gods forbearance of them, and showing much patience and
long-suffering toward them, that having been such sinners as they say they
have, yet God should not set them on the stage of reproach, and make them a
byword in the world. This they interpret a great performance unto them; the
rather because they see not only many bad ones, but even many good ones
afflicted in this life for their sins. But oh fool! because sentence is
deferred against thee, do thou crack of patience? Romans 2 3.
Has this long suffering of God led thee to repentance? No, thine heart is
still set in thee to do evil, and to heap up wrath; but it pleases a
presumptuous hypocrite to shroud himself under a covert which is none of his,
and to go on securely in sin, under pretext of being in high favor with God.
But oh woeful creature! this Lion couchant will one day turn rampant, and be
in good earnest, though now he seems to dally. All men's sins are not alike,
some go before, 1 Timothy 5.24.
some follow, but all meet in judgment, except they repent. I ask thee, has
God been so patient toward thee, by virtue of a promise? Does he not so, Romans
9. to vessels prepared to destruction, as in the old world, and Sodoms case?
Does he not so to a sinner of an hundred years old, nay to Cain of nine
hundred, who yet at length must be destroyed? Eccles. 8.12.
Did he not so to those Atheists, 2 Pet. 3.6.7. whose conceit yet could not
out-sleep their damnation? Shall God perform a promise to such as are in
league with hell? But why are others, less sinners, so set in the forefront,
and escape? Surely, perhaps, to break their heart, and convert them to God;
whereas thou go on in a close and hardened heart, to color and excuse the
like sins: or if not, yet to be far from repenting of them. It had been better
for thee God had served thee so too, then to harden thee by long-suffering. And
perhaps thou have bought of these sins with thy wealth and greatness; but
God is not mocked.

Another sort of these are, such as boast because they are kept from open sins
and outrages, have no deep temp^a^ions, 2. Abstinence from open sins.
no great horrors or distempers of consciences, but go on in a fair and
civil way (as one said of that Emperor) rather free from foul vices, then
qualified with any true virtues: They are well thought of, and are no base
drunkards, or the like. Such and such (say they) run into excess of riot and
discredit, for their spend-thrifty, unclean, and ruffianlike courses: but I am
void of such evils. Is it not (say they) a sign of favor? Does not God
promise to his, to keep them free from such offenses? Oh mistaken wretch! God
upholds his in their integrity indeed, in token of love, Psalm. 41.12. But
integrity is equality from great and small. But alas! sin as sin never affected
thy soul as yet, thou have no sense of thy nature, of the enmity of God, of a
secret, false, profane, hollow, unsavory heart. Thy sent is in thee still, as
in Moab: God has not rolled thee upon thy dregs, Jer. 48.29
therefore they settle. And is this mercy (think thou) to soder thee up in a
base course? Thou art held in by abstinence, but that is a negative principle,
no positive grace. Restraint by education, favor of nature, general light,
awe of punishment, is not the favor of a promise; these never cost the blood
of Christ to purchase, at least they are not the purchase in kind.

A third sort are, such as boast of promises in point of external blessings:
3. By outward blessings. Job. 21.10
God has so furnished them with health, strong bodies, success in trades, good
crops, marriage and children, as much corn as can stand on ground, no Cow but
gendreth, and casts not Calfe, that they conclude themselves happy, as few
rubbes and changes as any, Psalm. 17.14. They go down in peace and leave all
to their babes. But are you not also of them, who because they have no changes,
fear no God? Such may be as rank Atheists as live. God makes no promises to
such as go down into the pit. Not the still, but the safe death argues a
promise. True it is, Psalm. 37.37. The end of the righteous is always peace; but
it is the peace of good conscience, not of stupor and ease. Note.
Performances are always good things, but good things are not always
performances. Mercies of the left hand are no tender mercies: Eccles. 9.1 Deuteronomy.
33.16.
Love is no more discerned by these, then hatred. Have thou got the love and
good will of him that dwelt in the Bush? Surely, except the sea of mercy has
come between thy wealth and thy soul, to purge away all thy dross of carnal
savor, the blessings of the Sun and Moon, and earth, cannot pleasure thee.
Alas no! Jer. 2.13.
All is from a dry pit, as the corn on the thatch, which fills not the hand of
the Mower. One performance from a promise is worth ten such blessings as these.

Lastly, all such as boast of their hearings, prayers, doings and sufferings,
4. By their Religion.
good affections to religion, distastes of old sins. These (they say) argue a
change, and that is a sign of a covenant. But, Oh poor soul! these may be
some changes in respect of what in times past has been. But these are not that
change which comes from Gods promise: except some other marks as well as
these, may be alleged. Iehu doted upon himself, to see such zeal against
Iehoram. But none of the sins of Ahabs house were purged out of him. Go, 2
Kings 10.16.
find out some surer marks then the forbearance of some old anger, pride,
wantonness, while the pang lasts, or else this flame will break out again,
and burn up all. To conclude, I say, let all such be afraid of their rotten
and false proppes. What became of those Sycophants, who would needs be King
Edward, or such other Princes? Were they not hanged up? What noble man can
endure a base fellow, who pleads kindred to him, because of name, or likeness
of countenance? When yet they are mungrels, and bastards, having no drop of
Noble blood within them? Beware therefore, and meddle not with Gods
performances, they are Childrens bread, and belong to no Dogs while they are
so. Thus much for this.

A second Instruct. with caveat. Luke 9.23 Faith in promises and performances,
is a most precious Jewel, and why?
It is clothed with all the wealth, wardrobes, treasures and provisions of
God: All the performances of God are hers. As our Savior said, If thou can
believe, all things are possible. No sooner does faith close with a promise
upon earth, but the Lord in heaven closes with that soul by ratifying to it
what it believes. Faith (as he says) is, when that which is said is done.
The Lord meaning to do a poor soul good, causes it to meet his purpose by
believing it, that so he may honor it with a performance. Faith is like the
Cherubims, which were always peeping into the Mercy seat: so does faith always
trade in heaven, spying out what good thing God is preparing for the soul,
that she may believe it, and carry it always with her. If faith concurred not as
well with performances as with promises, who would care for it? Pro. 27.19
But she makes all real and present to the soul, as well as promised. As face
answers to face in water, so does a promise to a performance in a needing
soul, Note. Joh. 11.40 Compare Jona 2. v. 4. and 8. with v. 10.
and that by the mediation of F^i h. As our Savior said to Martha, Said I not
to thee, If thou believe, thou shall ^ee the glorious power of God? Mark
Naaman here: No sooner does he resign up himself to the promise by washing,
but instantly there comes in new marrow into his bones, and smoothness upon
his flesh: here is no intermission or delay of performance, look what was
said, is now done with ease. Naamans work was to believe: But having so done,
all the thought is taken, God looks to the cure, without his care. Could any
thing come between him and home, between promise and performance? Not
possibly: for who should hinder God, Esaias 43.13. Faith is the presence of God
in the soul, Heb. 11.1.
by making an evidence of things not seen, and a bottom in things absent,
grace for grace, Ioh. 1.17. may be grace of performing for grace of believing.
Let this use lead on another then in the fear of God, and teach us to try our
faith by this excellent property, of performing promises. True faith is
perforforming faith. And how.
Think not thy self to have true faith, except thou have performing faith.
Men rest in a naked empty faith: bearing themselves in hand that they have true
faith, and they look at the faithfulness of God in promising; but ask them
of performances, and then they know not what to say to the matter. Alas poor
soul! Faith is no pang, or passage of a man's spirit, woulding this or that:
nor a looking at a promise of truth, as a thing doubtful to me ward: but it is
a bottoming grace, concurring most holily and humbly with the Lord, in his
real and faithful performings also. That heart which supplieth performances
with conceits of things, that are not with some carnal contents or other,
without the presence of the thing believed, more or less, is a dead faith, and
knows not the kindly nature of faith.

Prevention of an offense.
My scope in thus saying, is not to add sorrow to sorrow, and to pinch such
poor souls as have sufficient grief already for lack of feeling: But to
convince all false hypocrites as rest in a faith of their own, not in the
faith of God, who as Esaias 55.2. says, lay out their silver for no bread, but
in the mean time nourish in themselves a dismal faith, which fails of the
grace of performance. I dare not say that all performances are alike sensible;
all hearings of our prayers are not alike manifest to our feeling, all fruit of
receiving Sacraments, fasting, and the like are not of one cize, measure, carry
not the same evidence, peace, comfort: But hence it follows not, Faith when
she s at lowest, is yet a performing ^^ith.
that any true faith is or can be dead faith in point of performing. Naamans
cure here was a more sensible one, then some spir^tuall cures of faith are,
because it was bodily: But yet, even when faith seems poorest, her
performances are real, and she never truly resignes up herself to a promise,
but if she come short in feeling, she has a supply from the real
faithfulness of God, who has told her, That such a corruption decays, such
a grace increases, such a good thing is cast upon her, because God has said
it, and this does really stay and quiet her spirit in him. As an ancient
Christian being asked whether he grew all this while in grace, answered, that
he could not much boast of that he felt, howbeit he believed that he did, for
God had said it, According to thy faith, so be it unto thee.

And contrariwise, hence learn the woeful misery and beggary of unbeleef: As
Solomon speaks of the field of the sluggard, Prove 24.30.
that the briars and brambles thereof argues his sloth; so I may say of
unbeleefe, that its the root of all the rags and baseness which men walk
with. The difficulty of getting over this steep hill of performances comes
only from hence. 1 Samuel 14.13.
Jonathan sought on the lower ground against the Philistines by faith, as if he
had had the vantage of the ground. Many men have fair hopes and opportunities
to get favors from God, but its not the price in the hand, but the heart of
faith to beteame it to the promise, and to lay it out: Unbeleefe binds the
arms of God from performing of promises.
Unbeleefe binds the arms of mercy and grace in God behind him. If God be so
faithful a performer, what has stopped the fountain all this while? Why is it
so little a seen upon thy soul? How might this barren heath of thine heart ere
now become a flood, as Esaias says 43.20. if thy sin had not dried it up?
Well, as the sin of an unbeleever shall not restrain the bounty of God from
him that believes, so neither shall the faith of a believer supply the lack
of it in one that wants it. Think not (poor soul) that the Sacrament shall
be ever the less savoury and effectual to thee, because of them who come in
to it with a saplesse and graceless heart: Do not thou think ere the
meanlier of thy faith because hypocrites lowre upon thee, and discern not thy
privilege. Prove. 14.10.
But look the more narrowly into thy privilege and solace thine heart in it;
for neither shall any stranger enter into thy joy, nor yet shall thou fare the
worse for their beggary. So much for this.

Seventhly, this point affords Admonition to all who would rejoice in
effectual Admonition. To avoid lets of performances. 1. Let. Mistaking
performances.
That they strive hard against every let in the way which might hold their
faith in a barren and fruitless defect and unprofitablenes. There is nothing
so excellent but it has some canker to fret out the pith of it, to blast the
beauty of it. One bar is the mistaking of performances: we frame to our
selves such an Idea of Gods favors, such a great measure of graces, such a
pitch of faith, of mortification and holiness, that hereby our eyes are
blindfolded from beholding such performances as the Lord bestows. But
consider: Is God tied to thy scantlings? We see how they, Mica 2.6. come in and
complain against God in this kind. But mark the answer of God: Oh thou house
of Jacob, is my Spirit straightened? Are not my words good to them that walk
uprightly? So say I, is God false, because thou overpitchest thy thoughts
beyond Gods wisdom? Thou aimest at another man's portion, as they who gathered
manna were too greedy: But be content with thine own: If thou have enough to
keep thee in working case, jealous of thy self and thy corruptions, its
enough, although thou have not all at once. Thou would have three or four
men's portions, so much as perhaps the Lord sees would overthrow thee: Alas,
what can thou bear in this multitude of corruption! If thou had thy fill,
it would cost thee much buffeting to keep thee from pride! Know, that the very
mere work of exercising thy faith is a reward of it self. Secondly, trust not
to thy dead privilege of being a Believer, 2. Carnality and deadness of heart.
and so commit all to wind and weather: maintain not a dull, drowsy, lasie
heart of unbeleefe, but hold quarter daily with the Lord in concurring with his
promises, see how his performances follow thy believing, and look not that
they should drop into thy bosom, or be let down in an engine all on the
sudden upon thee thou know not how: quicken up thy faith daily, else
performances will prove but dead ware, and according to thine unbeleefe, 3.
Murmuring.
so shall it be unto thee. Thirdly, murmr not when promises answer not thine
expectation: If crossed in our marriages, in our children, in the success of
our labors, if debts pursue us, if crosses follow us, if we be not presently
answered in our fasting and prayers, but still our hearts be obstinate and
hardened, then we fall to mutter against God, as if he were unfaithful, but
never enter into our selves to see how we warpe from the promise, and go to
work with our own tools. Ex. 14.2. 4. Some gross sin.
Fourthly, lay no stumbling block of our own iniquity in our own way, to
stop the performing of promises: Every loose, common and hollow professor, let
him decline never so much from God in his course, yet will boast as much of
promises as others, and will not be beaten off: Judge. 19.20.21. ca.
As those Israelites in fighting with the Benjamites, would needs go forward
in the revenge of their sin, and looked that God should assist them, but never
saw the sin which still lay underneath; their Idols I mean, which cost them
the loss of forty thousand soldiers ere they got the victory. Men think if
they should be stripped of Gods promises they were forlorn folk; but in the mean
time they walk not close with God, keep not touch with him in their covenants,
dare play most unfaithful parts with men in their practice, and thus run
into arrearedges, never dreaming that thereby they forfeit their right to
performances, but hold up their heads with boldness, and think that as good
blood runs still in their veins, as in the best believers.

5. Limiting of God.
Fifthly, limit not God in his performances, we care not how little we have for
our money, so we may have our humor pleased in some carnal content, we can
forgo spiritual; so we may have our turn served in some one promise, we have
enough, and can give God over for a good while after, and think much to hold on
with Gods bounty, because our strait hearts are pincht with the exercise of
faith, and therefore its just with God to punish our baseness, and unbeteaming
spirits. 6. Error of the wicked.
Sixthly, beware of the error of the wicked, who go to work by sense, and
esteem Gods performances according to the outward means and possibilities
which they have to compass their ends: God is but a formal notion (upon
point) with them. If thou look upon the world, thou losest the sight of God,
and wilt turn Atheist. Seventhly, beware of oversight and inobservance of
promises: God performs daily and hourly one or other to thee or thine, to
body or soul, in blessings or in corrections, yea more then he is bound to:
But thou gapest after some greater, or some other things, 7. Unobservance.
and so overseest and passest by such as are before thee, and thereby stoppest
the course of thanks and of blessings, because thou see not how many ways
Gods performances lie. Be quick fighted in observing mercies, and say with the
Church, Lam. 3.23.
The compassions of the Lord are renewed every morning, great is thy
faithfulness. An observing heart encourages the Lord to perform more, and he
cannot abide an heart that pockets all, and puts them into a bottomless purse.
Hag. 1.8. 8. Curiosity and censure with others.
Eighthly, shun curiosity and propensenesse to challenge the Lord, when his
public government and administrations please us not: To these many more might
be added, as sloth and ease, worldliness, formality in worship, little
meditation, and such like: They procure a dead life, a barren heart, an
uncomfortable course: Remember, it must be an heart qualified for the nonce,
which must walk with God in his promises and performances. It must be a
clear, humble, watchful, innocent and selfe-denying spirit, not tainted with
il custom, and such shall have no cause to complain of God, nor be sent empty
away. So much for this Use.

Eighthly, this point is Exhortation to all believers, and that in sundry
particulars. Exhortation.
that they take measure of Gods promises to the full, that since God is so
faithful To take measure of promises.
and improve it. Lose no performance for lack of a promise. God can enlarge
Christ to every dimension of fullness, height and depth: So do thou. Those
John 6.27. could beteame to follow Christ for loaves, but they saw no further.
Say we thus, Lord if thou hear me in this prayer, thou shall hear of me
often, I will ply thee with importunity, for there is no measure, no end nor
bottom of thy goodness; I will come to morrow, next day, continually: For
thou art yesterday, to day, and for ever the same. Tell thy soul, Heb. 13.8
heaven were not heaven if thou could reach all in it, yet do thine
endeavor, and pray with Paul, Ephesians. 3.16. that thou may see more in Christ
then thou can ask or think. Mat. 6. (...).
As in the Lords Prayer thou art bidden to ask bread enough for the day, and
that which exceeds, for so the word signifies. As much more Lord as thy bounty
can afford. Oh (brethren) who would not know this Charter and Lease, except he
cared not whether God performed or no? Lord I believe in that promise which
reaches to all my life, to my corruptions, temptations, straits, fears, to
this and to a better life! Secondly, having so done, learn to lot upon him for
each performance, Lot upon God for performance. Ezra 8.21.
especially when it goes hard Ezra having obtained leave of the King for his
journey, and being now at a pinch for a sufficient convoy in so perilous a
journey, concluded, he would not go to the King for it, lest he should upbraid
him, but he would go to the promise for it, by fasting and prayer, and having
so done, was well appaid in himself, lotting upon God, that in such an
extremity he would not fail him. So do thou.

Thirdly, to this end strengthen thy self by the plentiful experience of
performances Strengthen thy self by thy experience.
at such a time I was heard for my wife, for my child, answered in point of
marriage, estate, gifts, credit: such a strong corruption was subdued, such a
grace enlarged, so that I see it were not in vain to wait upon thy promises,
if I had faith sufficient to equal and concur with them. Let me forget none
of thy faithfulness in my receivings of the Sacraments, in my Sabbaths (whenas
I could get mine heart to delight in them) in my very crosses, Lament. 3.23.
when I could be humble, and be content to be as thou would have me. And
shall not this experience strengthen me for time to come? Contrary misery of
unbelief which ^a^not b^team herself that largeness which is in God.
Is there any shadow of change with thee, if I could be the same? Thy base
unbelief is to thy soul, as the laying of a penny to thine eye, close, whereby
thou art baffled so, that thou can see nothing, though thou stoodst upon the
top of the hill. This causes thee to say within thy self, This day I am to
go to Gods Table and Feast; and surely I doubt I shall even come home as I go
thither. I cannot see how God should remove this brazen bolt of my old pride,
unbelief, earthlinesse, unkindnesse, unmercifulness, etc. Do thou not?
Why? Has he never done thee as great good as this comes to? Yes: But thy
unbelief makes thee to seek. Thou must learn to comprehend the Lord better,
Simil.
by faith and experience. I should play the fool to bid a little child of
three years old, to bring me a great Church Bible, I know he cannot grasp it
in his arms; or reach me a thing from the top of an high shelfe, it is above
his reach. So is the length and breadth of Gods promises beyond thine for lack
of comprehension. Oh poor soul! who knows what riches is in a promise? But what
is it to thee that there is such a Mine of gold, when thou walk over it, and
art aware of no such matter? God was here, and thou were not aware. If all
promises in him are Yea and Amen; yea, and he glories in it, that thou
should believe it, and enjoy the benefit thereof: why should thou wear a
chain and fetters about thee, when thou might be free? or make thy self
equal to hypocrites and slaves, when the Lord allows thee to be a free man
of his company? What is this, save (as Job speaks) wilfully to stint Gods
hand, to the end that thy self might be miserable? Surely such a one shall
not have the happy lot to drink of those floods of honey and butter, Job 20.17
which are reserved for the portion of such as can lot and trust to the
fullness of a promise.

Amplification of it.
When thou have been earnest with God, this day, for pardon of thy failings, for
mercy for thy wife and family, do thou feel a check within thy spirit,
from plying God further? Do thou think it enough? Shall thou not need him as
much to morrow? Are there not infinite many passages in thy life, and in each
day, for thee, to know thine old friend, and to make use of him. If God be but
as man, drawn dry with gifts, what do thou pretending to trust to him? Jer.
2.13.
If he be a fountain, why should thou suspect him, or think him sufficient
to pardon such sin, and no more, to purge such corruption and no more, to
deliver from such a danger, and no more? What a straitning of unlimitednesse
and All-sufficiencie is this? If thy self should sow thy Corn upon a
well-tilld soil, would thou limit providence to so many bushels the Acre? If
thou should have Isaac his increase, Genesis 26.12.
an hundred fold, would thou grudge it thy self? No, herein thou can
enlarge Providence beyond ordinary, beyond reason, and there is no end with
thine appetite. But tell me, I pray thee, upon what soil has the Lord sown
his promises? Upon thine, or Christ's? If upon Christ's, 2 Cor. 1.20.
as he says, all promises are Yea and Amen in him, what seed comes amiss to
his foil? Has not his blood made the soil of Promises rich? Can any crop be
reapt off this soil, but plentiful? No, except thou suffer it to shale and to
fall to the ground for lack of reaping. 2 King. 13.19.
Look thou to thy faith, that it hold on with the Lord, and do not smite the
earth thrice, when God intends thee six or seven deliverances. This gives life
and heart to thine enemies within, to the sworn adversaries of Gods truth and
thy comfort, without, that thou can not get breath enough to get up the hill
of promises? Christ makes the soil of promises rich. Ruth. 3.16
For if thou could, thou should bring down thine armfull of performances.
Every one that looks on thee should count thee an happy man, and wonder at
thee as Naomi wondered at Ruths lapfull of corn. Not thy gleanings, but the
Lords powrings out must make thee rich: First, learn to gleane, and at last
God will give thee full measures, heaped up, shaken and running over. Every man
applauds the rich Merchant for his happy Ventures, and admires him for his
richness in silks, velvets, and other commodities of far countries: But thou
shall be an happy man for richer wares. Oh (shall men say) how rich is such an
one become in performances? How is he furnished with all Gods cost? What graces
has he not got? What lusts has he not subdued? How has God held him up by
the chin in all his troubles, to make him cheerful, meek, and patient in
them? How do his enemies sink and fall down, and worship at his feet? How
have his afflictions set a new hue upon him, and made him a far more humble,
diligent and zealous Preacher and professor of the Gospel? Brethren, we are
cast upon ill times, and live in a hard world, 2 Timothy 3.1. yet we are not so
quite stripped of examples in this kind, but we might pick out some such if we
could observe them. Oh brethren! All things are ours, 1 Cor. 3.
if we in Christ: All the crop of his rich soil is thine, if thou have the
capacity of faith to bestow the same in. Paul, Cephas, Apollo, all gifts of the
Ministry, all Ordinances of Word and Sacraments, all the graces of the Saints,
their whole communion is thine, to do, to suffer, to persevere. The heads of
the enemies of Gods Church are all thine, and shall be cast thee over the wall,
if thou will believe. Gen 47. end, and 48.11.
The promises in Christ are a rich Lordship (a nemo scit) of wealth and
welfare: and thou shall say with Jacob, I have enough Lord, I never looked to
see thy face; and lo, now I see thy children brought upon my knees! Happiness
it self could make me no happier then thy performances have done. So much for
this.

Lastly, this should serve for encouragement, thanks and consolation to all
Consolat. Gods people should be encouraged.
the public fulfillings of promises to the whole land and Church, should
deserve it at thy hands, and much more those which thine own soul knows
best, thou standst bound unto him for. Even this present mercy (Brethren) which
now we enjoy in the season of the year. How many have fretted the soul of God
all this Summer, 1631.
by their woeful unthankfulness, because that we have had sad wets, (and not
without cause for our drunkards sakes;) therefore many of us say, We shall
lose our Harvest to year. What? Can thou not trust God in that promise of
seedtime and harvest, which is absolute, and depends not upon thy faith? Well,
Genesis 8.22
now at the last God has heard us when he had us at the vantage: and this
might occasion the recording of many former deliverances. What has been the
cause of Gods detecting so many traitors to our Prince and State, and giving us
their necks, save the faith of Gods people which has noted his mercies?
Thankful and comforted by the faithful performing of promises.
Why should he else just in the nick of our enemies insulting pride in 88. and
since in this hellish treason of the Powder, step in and stop that fatal hand?
Since, how many droughts, famines, rumors of wars, pestilence, bad seasons,
has the Lord turned away from us? Should we confine our thanks to one day in
the year? And put case that still many Popish enemies lie at our root to kill
it, and to endanger our liberties, say that many sorrows are still upon us; is
it not because we have made wash-way of all sorts of performances, and made
them common things? How has God magnified his arm in those public fasts of
ours lately solemnized, besides our private extraordinary prayers by our
selves? When met we but the Lord gave us in some answer more or less? And how
have we requited him for it? Were it not just with him to give us quite over,
as them Judge. 10.13. for our Idols, our covetousness I mean, formality and
hypocrisy? Might he not, as Ps. 80.4. be angry with our prayers? Might he not
laugh at our misery, and leave us to cruel enemies, and foreign invasions,
who have been so weary of his own yoke? Also humbled for their provokings of
God to the contrary.
Oh! let us humble our souls to the very dust, that we have requited him so
basely, and deserved that he should change his performances into revenges and
penalties! you poor hear, who ere now said, you could not choose but starve
this deer year, how fare you now, the danger is overpast? God has performed as
much corn as can stand on the ground to rid you of fears: will you now forget
him as formerly? Remember your covenants! Oh that our powder were not danke,
and our hearts unfit to take fire, and to burn out with praises! nay has not
God betrusted many of us here with more then ever we looked for! such wives,
such children, such patience in our revolts, such addition of life, when we
looked to have been cut off by violent fevers, consumptions, yet restored to
live 7. 10. 20. years after, with unlooked for liberty in our Ministry and
Profession! may we not say with David, 1 Chr. 29.14.
It was little to thee to build me a sure house, but thou would also take in
my posterity to covenant for two or three generations! If a Gentleman should
give his poor friend a ring of 20 s. and put it into a pearl of 20 li. that
friend would thank him though he saw nothing but the gold only, but when he
sees the jewel too, does he not stand and wonder? Should thou do less to
the Lord for those unexpected favors given thee as an overplus to his Christ?
What should thou do, but take up the cup of salvation, and praise him! thy
worst day is better then the best of such, Psalm. 116.10.
as I say not, want these blessings, but such as have them cast in upon them as
common casualties, not as performances. I had rather be the scullion in a great
house, with poor blessings from a fountain, from faith in a promise, then the
Noble man himself, without the favor of the giver: had not Obadiah a better
portion then his Master? let thine estate be never so mean, 1 Kings 18.3.
yet if the Lord have granted thee this intercourse, and intelligence with
heaven, thou have great cause of thankfulness. And to conclude, Psalm. 122 ult.
let us all say as David did at the foot of his song, Our trust stands in the
name of the Lord. For time to come, shall I ever cavil against thee, O Lord,
who have been so faithful? Shall I call thee to my tribunal, if at any time
thou should try me with some darkness of promises? am I not bound for ever to
wait both in mine own behalf, and the behalf of the whole Church to trust thee,
as a God that keepst touch? nay, who have oftimes performed promises, whenas I
have but poorly concurred with them by faith; put case thou should do as
Jacob did to Joseph's brethren, lay thine hands a cross, the right upon
Ephraim, Genesis 48.18.
and the left upon Manasse; say thou should in particular cross my own
contents, delay my prayers, and estrange thy self for a while from me in
wonted performances; is it not enough for the clearing of thy faithfulness,
that thou have so long bin faithful? Is not my experience sufficient to bind
me to thy faithfulness for ever? So much shall serve also for this last Use, and
so for the whole Doctrine, and for this time.

THE TWO AND TWENTIETH LECTVRE, Continued upon this VERSE.
VERSE XIV. Then Naaman went down and washed himself seven times in Jordan,
and behold, his flesh came again as the flesh of a little child, and he was
clean.


THe last day (Beloved) as you may remember, I made an end of the former
Doctrine, issuing out of the success of Naamans washing: To wit, that Gods
performances are always as good as his promises, if not better. Now the last
point of the whole verse, and so, of the third general part of this text
remains to be handled. And that is grounded upon this, That now after Naamans
faith and fruition of the promised cure, we hear no more of his old
distempers, his cavils, his rage and turning from the Prophet. All is now quite
changed with him, as for sorrow and former trouble all is blown away, as if it
had never been. The point is of singular consequence, and it is this, The soul
that can cast her self nakedly upon the bare promise of God, may be sure
thereby to lose all her distempers, which (under her unbelief) assaulted her:
and to drown them in the promise. And this point I will first ground upon
Scripture and reason: Secondly, answer a question or doubt: Then come to some
use. For the ground of the text, it is clear: For we see that according to the
promise of Elisha, so it came to pass. After his washing himself, we hear of
no more distempers: all are gone: we hear of the return of his flesh as a
child's: we hear not of the remainder of his passions. For other texts: Take
that place, Esa. 26.2. Salvation will God appoint for walls and bulwarks: Esaias
26.1, 2, 3.
What is that? The Church under the Gospel should fasten upon the promise for
salvation: and this should fence out all her troubles and former enemies, as a
Wall or a Bulwark, keeps out any affronts, and verse. 3. Thou will keep him
in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on thee, because he trusts in thee. As
the needle of the Dial set just on the North point, settles and shakes not:
and as the Anchor holds in the Ship from floating up and down: so the promise
fastened upon, stablisheth the soul from her former wanzings, and
unsetlednesse. And the reason is more fully set down in verse. 4. Trust ye in
the Lord for ever, for the Lord JEHOVAH is everlasting strength: that is, he is
real in all his promises, and gives a being to them, as being strong enough to
do it. Hence it is, Esa. 55.4. That the Lord Jesus in the offer or promise, is
called a Witness: Behold, I have given him for a Witness to the people: And
in Revel. 1. That faithful and true Witness: Why? because he is Yea, and
Amen, all the promises of God in him, become so. Now, as a Witness in the
Court, who is sworn, and without exception, decides the Controversy between
two at odds: so the promise believed, quits the soul, and puts an end to
strife. So in the Hebrews, the promise believed, is compared to a City of
refuge, which rescued the poor manslayer, whose heart was full of fear, and
distress, because of the pursuer; but there he was free: even so, the oath and
promise of God, received into the soul, determines all doubts between the
Lord and her. It is said of Hanna, that ere Eli had resolved her from God, of a
son, she was full of trouble in spirit: But, when once he had satisfied
her, lo, then she was cheerful, and looked no more heavily: even so is it
with the promise fastening upon the soul, it causes the waves and storms of an
unquiet heart to turn to a calm. Hezekiah was mightily troubled upon the
message of death; but no sooner came Esaias back again, with the news of his
recovery, and the sign of the Suns going back, but Hezekiah's moan was turned
to a song. So is it here. For is there not more in a promise of Christ, and
preached to the soul in his name, then in all the promises of special
deliverances, which were more darkly derived from him? Yes verily. Hence it is,
that the Prophets never describe the power of Christ in his word, but they
run very much upon the description also of this effect, of chasing away of
all spiritual distempers. Upon all the glory, shall be a defense: and there
shall be no more weeping, nor mourning upon his mountain. In stead of the
Bramble, Esaias 55. ult.
shall be the Myrtle, and in stead of the Thorn, shall come the Fur: What Is
that? all shall be new, the face of things shall be changed, Tears shall be
wiped from all eyes: with many such phrases, as come not to mind: each chapter
is full of them. So Job 22.29. When men are cast down, then thou shall say,
There is a lifting up, and he shall save the humble man. Lo, consternation and
terrors cease by believing. So Psalm. 32.6. For this cause shall every good man
pray, in a time of finding: The floods of great waters shall not come near
him. And examples are as evident as other Scriptures. How was Cornelius by
Peter, the Eunuch by Philip, the Jailer by Paul and Silas, freed from their
doubts and demurres, and set at liberty?

Reasons are many and weighty. First, this appears by proportion: O death,
where is thy sting? O hell, where is thy victory? The sting of death is sin,
and the strength of sin is the law (incensing sin;) But thanks be to God,
etc. Now, if redemption deliver us from enemies, (so that they shall not hurt
us) from all crosses, straits, tribulations, (so that they shall not separate
us from the love of God) shall not then Justification free us from inward
horrors, fears, guilt, doubt of conscience, rebellion of sin, cavils,
prejudice, and distempers? Shall not reconciliation rid us of our enemy, and
that shame and confusion which sin brought upon us? Yea much more, for both
come from faith.

Secondly, the contrariety of estates proves it, before and after Esaias 57. ult.
because as the winter air is never temperate, by reason of those moist and
cold vapors which annoy the air with winds, tempests, frost, and snow, and the
like: so the coast of their spirits can never be clear, because of the guilt
of their consciences: they may now and then please themselves with a little
truce, but still war returns, the dint of their fears is not broken: So on
the contrary, There is no war to the soul that believes. As the air
perfectly cleansed in the summer, is settled, and affords a continual calm, so
does the conscience of a believer. Now and then may be over-castings of clouds,
but the dint of guilt and wrath is gone.

Thirdly, else we should ascribe more to particular promises Reuben, the first
borne of God, and the son of his strength. But we see what particular
promises have done to them who have been under sad distempers by affliction:
Of Hanna, and Hezekiah, I have spoken before. Add another: The Lord promised
the Israelites, that upon the sprinkling of their door-posts with the blood of
the Passover, Exodus 12.
the Angel of the Lord shall pass over their houses and smite none of them:
Did they find any distempers possess them, when there was outcry throughout
all Egyt in every family? No surely, they slept sweetly in their beds. Did they
doubt of the victory against Ai, when as they had received a promise of
victory? or were they afraid as at first, when thirty of them were slain? No.
When the promise was made of the fall of the walls of Jericho by the sounding of
Rams horns, and compassing the City seven times, did the people stagger at it?
were they not resolved? And shall not the maine promise of God remove
distempers within, as well as afflictions without? yes, and much more.

Micaiah so scare Ahab? Because he never spoke well to him. So why does the
grace of faith so scatter these distempers? Because she speaks all against
them, overthrowes and resists them. Contraries have mutually the same respect
in their consequencies. The distemper of an unbeleeving spirit, always bears
down the word, till the word (as the stronger man armed with the power of
Christ) do foil her, and strip her of all. The weapons of our warfare are not
carnal, but spiritual, able to cast down strong holds of corruption: Sins
weapons are carnal, Gods are spiritual: Therefore there is no proportion in
the contrariety: God will divide the spoils, that is, cease the distempers.
The reason appears from that speech of Jonah, Jonah 2.8.
They that embrace lying vanities, forsake their own mercy: But I will look
toward thy holy Temple, and promise, and thereby abandon them. Each destroy the
other.

Esaias 50.11. But the word does it really, and surely, no more to be infringed.
No more hungring or thirsting, if once satisfied with this bread and water of
life. The text imports it, Naamans servants here tell Naaman, That which all
thine own discontents and humors could never minister unto thee, that the
obeying of the message will really afford thee. See Act. 13.38. That from which
you could not be justified from by the law of Moses, by this Man, every
believer is justified: All at once set free from outward enemies, and inward
distempers.

Bellarmine himself confessing, that in respect of the uncertainty of our good
works, or else the peril of vainglory issuing from thence, it is most safe
for us to rely upon the sole and mere mercy of God: the bare word of truth and
promise. How much more then shall Gods people say, If it had not been for thy
word, I had perished in my affliction? This is to a poor soul, as the chair
of Saint Peter is to a deluded votary, the determining voice. All eternal,
immutable things comprehend and devour the fading and changeable, but cannot
be comprehended by them, nor resisted by their opposition.

Lastly, the maine and chief reason of all is, because the word Many branches
but furnished with all the power and authority of God: so that, who so clings
and cleaves to it, is out of his own keep, and under the Lords. There is (as
our Savior speaks) spirit and life, 105.
in all which he speaks. This may appear to us in these four specials.

First, in the wisdom thereof: This way of God crosses all 1 Cor. 1.
As Paul calls the Gospel in this respect, the wisdom of God: casting down all
those devices of man's wit, will, works, or ways, by which flesh would set up a
peace and ease of all distempers to her self. There is no doubt, but the
errantest hypocrite living would gladly (if he could) by his smoothing with his
own false heart, come to a kind of settling, that he might no more be troubled:
But it is as the sowing of a new piece to an old garment, and the rent becomes
the worse. Even as a short narrow Map of a Shire makes every petty cottingers
lands to vanish, and causes him to account himself a stark beggar, lord of a
Molehill, not worth the owning: So does this way of God force him, who thought
himself no mean man in his Religion and hopes, to seem a stark fool in his
own eyes. For why? has the Lord revealed the way to life, by the real death
and resurrection of his only Son, glory being made shame, and holiness
sin, and eternity death, to satisfy justice: and shall I play the
Mountebank, and think to satisfy by mine own tricks and devices? Oh fool,
oh beast!

Secondly, in the righteousness of God: As the Sun is able Paul speaks,
Whom God set forth to be a propitiation through faith in his blood, to declare
his righteousness. Romans 3.25.
What righteousness? Surely the equalness of pardoning them who are of the
faith of Jesus, because he has received a full ransom: else (says he) if he
should not justify such an one, he should not be just. So full a content has
Christ given his Father for sin, that if the Father should not acknowledge it
sufficient, he should do Christ wrong, and if he should not impute it to a
poor soul that believes, he should do the poor soul wrong, nay, having
freely yielded his Son and received the price, for that very end, he should
do himself infinite wrong, by unfaithfulness. But there is no such fear.
The Judge of the world will not do unrighteously: he will not condemn the
righteous and the unbeleever alike. For he has accepted his Sons death, as a
full discharge. If we should receive a sum of money for the use of an Orphan,
and when the Orphan comes of age, should detain it, should he be righteous?
Mercy then is of free gift: and faith is a free gift: But justification of a
poor soul for Christ's merit, is an act of righteousness. So 2 Cor. 5.20.21.
Be reconciled to God. Why? Because he has made him sin, who knew none, that
we might be Gods righteousness.

Tim. 1.15. Psalm. 25.10. 1 Pet. 1.25. with sundry others. So that the souls
doubts and distempers may easily be cast upon such promises (for so the Apostle
calls them, 1 Cor. 7.1.) as are built upon such foundations.

Esaias 27.4, 5. Anger is not in me: why? Lay hold upon my strength, and make
peace. The satisfaction of Christ, is the strength of mercy, as truly as the
law is the strength of sin. The arm of mercy is so strong, through this,
that the strong arm of justice cannot pull it away from forgiving a poor
sinner: but mercy will still be above, and will not be beaten down, but
prevail against justice, yea triumph against judgment. By this strength then
which overcomes justice, shall not the distempers of the soul much more be
vanquished and overcome?

Heb. 6. That by two things (the word and oath of God) wherein it was
impossible for God to lie, we might have full assurance: and so twice more in
that Epistle he speaks. The meaning whereof is, As surely as I from all
eternity did intend it, in the foundation of mine election, that is, my Son:
as verily as I accepted it at his hands, when he offered it up by his eternal
spirit, as verily as I offer it to my Church under the word of truth, which
cannot lie, and have pawned my Ministers credit upon it, that, except I speak
truly, they are errant dissemblers; as verily as now my dear Son at my
right hand in glory, pleads for poor souls, that they may partake it; so
truly and really, without hook or crook do I intend to show them mercy. Why
should not every one then that needs it, fasten upon it, and drown all his
distempers in it, decide all doubts, and rest well satisfied?

Conclusion of reasons.
To these I might add many mo: As, that the promise believed, gives the soul a
full requital for all which she forgoes: As Peter said, We have forsaken all,
and followed thee Lord, what shall we have? Our Savior answers him, An hundred
fold here, and after, eternal life. So, perhaps thou have forsaken thy old
crasie props for Gods word, what shall thou have? Even perfect peace, that
which they could never have bred thee. Again, I might say, That faith enlarges
the hidebound and shrunk heart, and makes it concur with the Lord, and equal
his bowels. I mean, to be enlarged in her bowels toward him again: whereas
before it was not so, but she limited the holy one of Israel, and restrained
his compassions. Besides, this word of the promise sets up a light in the
heart, above all that light which was there before. We know when it is dark, we
are glad of a candle: But when the Sun shines bright, a candle is a poor
needless thing, and is drowned by a superior light: So here, a blind, dark,
deluded heart is glad of any dim candle of its own, to make it think it
sees: but when the word comes, that dim light vanishes. These and many more I
might add: but these are sufficient. I hasten to the question and objection,
and the answers of them.

Here then first it may be asked, The Answer to a Question.
But may a poor soul truly laden with her own sin, and under a condition
of a promise, be subject to so many distempers? I answer, yea surely: as in the
womb, the woman that is conceived with child, yet ere the fruit be perfected,
feels abundance of inward griefs, and pains, strugglings and wrestlings, ere
the fruit be come to the full ripeness: But when it is once come to that, the
former distempers cease: Even so is it here: Till faith have formed the soul
to a true quietness and settling, there cannot choose but be many fears and
turne-againes, although the seed be cast into the womb really. But what are
these? I answer, In three kinds.
Such as these (I may refer them to these three heads for order sake.) First,
erroneous conceits let all go, I will take as I find, but I will altar none of
my course. This for the first sort.





Now I say for conclusion, the word of Promise satisfies the soul in all
respects, both lesser and greater, so that now the poor creature is like
Peter, Act. 12. out of his walking sleep, when the Angel was gone, and came to
see that clearly, which before was as a shadow: So the believing soul by this
light of the promise, and by this sword of the spirit discovers and cuts off
her annoyances, here one, there another, as a strong man might cut off thieves
assaulting him, one by one, at a narrow wicket: And, we might exemplify all
these by Scripture, brethren, if time would permit, take one text for all,
Those in Hosea, when once God humbled them, and enlightened them, they could cry
out, Ashur shall not save us: we will not ride upon horses: now we see, that
with thee the fatherless shall find mercy, we will break off all our false
hopes, and cast away our covers of shame, and those props of our own, whereby
we hoped to releeve our selves without thee, now we will abandon, and renounce
them all. A maine place for the proof hereof. And so much for the answer of
the question.

Now also a doubt here arises, which in a word I will resolve, and then come
to the use; The question is, If the Word cease all distempers, how comes it to
pass that the Saints are so molested with them after their believing? for, how
many doubts and fears, objections, temptations, and lusts, befall the best? I
answer, this will be resolved by like Scriptures: He that believes in me, he
that eats of my flesh, and drinks of my blood, John 6.
shall hunger nor thirst no more: How is it then, that our hunger abides all
our life? I answer. He shall hunger no more, deadly, distrustfully, mortally:
but hopingly, beleevingly, and savingly. So here. These distempers may now and
then arise: but not as formerly: then they were general, reaching to our
estate: now only particular, about our actions, our comfort, as arising from
ignorance, error, or special distrust. Again, then they came from our own
principle of heart and mind corrupted: but now they proceed from concupiscence
and the remainder of old Adam in us, which cannot do other: Satan also
incensing it, and causing it to present it self so much the more rankly, by
how much he fears his own dispossession; But now, faith our new principle
causes an holy Requiem in the soul: so that it may say truly, as he spoke
basely, Soul, take thine ease: Thou have goods laid up for many years. So I
say some bounsings and clatterings the Devil may cause at our doors: but the
peace of God which has calmed all distempers before we believed, shall also
allay and scatter all our mists of darkness afterward, as they arise, and
maintain perfect peace. For why? This is the first fruits of that peace which
we have in our conscience, toward God, through justification: even as the ears
of corn which the Jews brought to God, was a pledge unto them, that they
should have the possession of the whole crop. Lastly, I answer, that by this
doctrine I mean not that a Christian does cut off all distempers so, that
whether he believe or believe not, sleep or wake, he is sure for ever after.
No, in no wise. But, that so long as he holds close to the word, there is power
in the word to effect that continually, which it effected at the first: Christ
and his promise, is Yea and Amen: yesterday, to day, and the same for ever: but
how? provided that the soul lie still as close to the promise to day as
yesterday: that it see as much need of it to dispell unbelief, fears,
unquietness this day, as heretofore; and wax not loose and presumptuous,
which is the way to expose the soul to temptations, or else to nuzzle it up in
a rotten quietness for the t^me which will break out again after. But as we
say to a Tradesman, or others, Keep your shop well, and that will keep you:
neglect it, and that will give over you: so here, Tend the promise, and you
shall find sufficient in it, to uphold you in peace, and to keep off those
flies of Beelzebub, which were wont to annoy you: But if you cease your work,
wonder not if your distempers return: for (although there were no enemies
without to molest) there is enough from within a base heart, to create pudder
and unsettlednesse to the soul. And so much for the Answer also to this
Question. Now I come to some use: and indeed, the use is very weighty and
manifold.

Conflict.
answer thus, So we would and should, if we could be rid of our accusing
thoughts, fearful distempers which do molest us. As if a man waking at
midnight, should say, If mine eyes were not shut, it would not be so dark.
Whereas the cause is in the night, not in the eye: for if it were day, the eye
would see well enough. They make the effect the cause, and the cause the
effect. If thou could believe, thy distempers would vanish: therefore remove
that first: Take out the beam, and thine eye will soon be lightsome: The want
of faith causes such a multitude of distempers to annoy thee, and the gift of
faith would cleanse the coast. Begin then at the right end of the staff, and
let not error beguile thee.

Instruct.
A disease which every man cries out of, but few know how to heal, and fewer
apply the remedy. Some tell us, Melancholy will have her course when all is
done: the best cure is, to be patient, till the fuel be spent. Others tell
us, we must be merry and cheerful: as if a man should bid a man whose
legs are cut off, to go of his errand. Others make short work of it, and
think nothing but riddance of their lives will rid them of it. I do not now
speak of the mere bodily humor, I leave that to the Physicians Art: I mean
such accidental Melancholy as befalls men from the sad reflecting of their
condition upon their own thoughts, till they have brought themselves into a
maze of confusion. Whither this sorrow be carnal, or godly, either indirectly
caused by such diseasednesse of body, weakness of constitution, losses,
reproach, as begins to work the heart to a conceit of Gods displeasure: or
such depth of Melancholy as arises from a long and unprofitable struggling
with our spiritual diseases, without finding any issue. The best cure of both
these, is by faith in the promises. That only (like that sword of Alexander)
can cut the Gordian knot in pieces at once, without picking it out. Men spend
themselves infinitely about the thought of these sad dysasters, and what may
come of them, how miserable a plight and pickle they have brought themselves
into: As if a man fallen into a deep Well, should cry out and tell folk a
long tale how he fell in: but still lie there, and desire no man to hale him
out. But the best remedy is, to cure one contrary by another. Guilt and fear,
an unquiet conscience, is that which causes thy Melancholy: All is not as thou
would have it, thou feel not thy self as thou would be: Why? what
would thou be? merry, cheerful, a free man, rid of thy chains: Well: go
to that which only can ease the soul of all her distempers: that is, get the
promise of Christ, grounded upon the strength of the satisfaction: bestow thy
plodding thoughts upon a new subject: say thus to thy self, Did God indeed of
his own accord cut off his own quarrel, when he might have destroyed me in a
moment? Has he appointed his own justice a ransom, that he might have
strength to resist and disanull it? Does he offer his bare breast and heart of
love to be seen by every poor soul that is in straits for want of it, and
knows not whither to turn it self? Does he bid such a soul drown all her
guilt and fears, in this free and full good pleasure of his, to be reconciled
with her? May she believe, that the requiring of this price of his own Son,
will rid the soul of her debt, and discharge her of it? Set thine heart then
deeply upon this meditation: pray God to turn it off from the ill custom of
thy distempered thoughts, and noisome fears that possess thee: And if thou
can but obtain this grace to divert them thus, I say unto thee, That through
Gods goodness, a quarter of that needless and distressed plodding of thy
misery might drown thy distempers in the bottom of the Sea, and turn thy
Melancholy into freedom and joy. For why? so says my doctrine, Trusting to
the Word, will rid the soul of all her distempers.

Thirdly, this point strongly confuteth that Popish tenet, That Confut.
between hope and fear, and that is the best way (they say) to hold us well
occupied, to keep us in a wholesome awe and fear of our corruptions, and to
exercise us in the practice of repentance. But as for this faith to rid us of
our distempers, that they call a fancy, and that a dangerous one, as provoking
a man to looseness and presumption. But, (O ye hypocrites) dare you thus
dishonor that blessed truth of God (built upon such strong foundations) as to
detract from it the maine prerogative of stablishing the conscience? Shall the
Promise have no more power in it, than the vain and carnal presumption of an
unsound heart? Shall both alike leave the soul in staggering? Far be it from
us to yield so profane an absurdity. As for your revelations, which you say
have been given to some special Saints of God, to assure them of heaven:
although we grant, that Peter and Paul had greater measure of assurance, and
more than ordinary freedom from these distempers, yet we affirm that the
evidence which they had, came from no other revelation, than that which the
Word breeds by the the concurrence of the Spirit, which is no other than
faith: and as for that greater measure of full assurance of the Spirit, it was
wrought in them by the promise and faith receiving the same: for the Spirit,
although it be above the Word (simply considered) yet it is not without the
Word. Neither is that Spirit so peculiar a thing as is only given to special
men: but even to some of all sorts of believers, even so many as it pleases God
to stablish after they have long clave to the truth and faithfulness of the
promiser. So Paul speaks Ephesians. 1. Ephesians. 1.
By whom (the Spirit) you were sealed after ye had believed. But to leave
these deaf Adders, who will not be charmed: what should it need to trouble us
to hear them speak against the power and authority of the Word, who (if the
Word should prevail) must forfeit their Kingdom of Traditions and unwritten
verities, wherewith they embondage the precious souls of them whom Christ has
redeemed? This Word of God (which they so bitterly declaime against) being that
eternal truth which shall survive all their inventions: and that breath of the
mouth of God which shall one day consume, whatsoever has set up it self
against the comfort of a poor soul, and the glory of the riches of Grace.
Mean time we abandon this their conceit, as the most horrible cutthroat of
the Conscience, and the greatest tyranny in the world: to wit, That a doubting
and distempered creature, woefully tired with her estate, must be compelled to
return to her old misery, with an increase of her bondage worse than Egyptian.

Terror.
to all hypocrites, who presumptuously will bear themselves upon the Word,
boasting that they have got a promise from God, and they are called to believe,
they may believe, and they must believe: They have had troubles as many as the
most men have had, but God bids them drown them in the freedom of his gracious
promise, and therefore so they will. And although there were but three saved,
they claim to be of that number; no man shall beat them off. But as Samuel
said to Saul, when he pretended he had obeyed the command of God, Whence then
is the bleating of these sheep, and lowing of these oxen? So say I to these, if
you have believed the Word of God indeed, whence are those privy nips of your
conscience, which do so continually assault you? Whence are those terrors of
heart, with which many of you are met with, when you would feign be at peace?
When you are in the midst of your ease and jollity, your liberties, your
sports and pleasures, whence come those cold qualmes over your base spirits,
barring you out from peace and fastening terrors upon you, stronger then you
can resist? Dare you pretend your selves believers, when you feel still your
old distempers to toss and turmoile you, and to hold you down with strong
hand in secret? Joh. 8.30.
If they whom the Son has freed, are free indeed, whence is your slavery?
No, no, you do but set a good face on it; you make fair weather outwardly, but
hatch inwardly such a viper, as will fret your bowels, and destroy you: it is
one thing to smother and choke your fears, and bear down your distempers;
another to drown them in the sea of the promise: you have other delights to
fill your hearts withal: the Lord would have set on the work of the law more
thoroughly, and made you more to stink in your own nostrils, and to prize the
Word of God, and the promise of ease, if ever you had been truly laden; But
sithence you would have both your lusts, and the promise too, holding a wolf
by the ears, which you are loath to forgo, and yet cannot well keep, know,
that you deceive your selves in boasting that you hold close to the promise:
for they that do so, may lose their distempers therein, which you keep still.
It is true, That the Lord would have all his (as Esaias says) count it their
strength to sit still: But how? not in a chair of ease, pretending a freedom
which you never had, and favoring your selves in any forbidden vanities of
your own envy, lust, pride, revenge, and the like. But the strength of a
poor soul, is to sit still in respect of her cavillings, and fightings
against the truth of the promise. Perhaps you will say, you do so, and feel no
such matter in your selves, but are quiet and secure. But I answer, your peace
is not sound, there is a crack in it, as appears by this, That you walk not
as Gods freemen do: you are as close to God in your love, in your tenderness,
in your humble carriage, as you would pretend to be in your believing. No man
can palpably discern the Devils chains upon the Lords freemen. Wherefore to
conclude, I say to you, as he to that messenger, What have thou to do with
peace? turn thee behind me. Oh, these are the days wherein the most vile and
presumptuous hypocrites catch at a promise, and bear down their consciences!
But be not thou (O Christian friend) like to them, for their and disease wound
is but healed deceitfully, and shall break out again most deadly, when they
shall not be able to resist it, except it please the Lord to send them, upon
better conditions, to claim the promise. So much shall serve for this Use.

Fifthly, this bitter reproof of all such, who (in the judgment a dishonor
is this to the promise of God? still to hold a secret correspondence with
Satan, and to nourish our old picking of knots, and answering of fears by our
own blanching wit and devises, yea spending hours and days wearisomely in
setting our own wit and invention on work to beat off our objections; and
thinking they have done themselves good service in the mean while. Whence
comes this? surely by your weakness, and relapsing from your former hold of
the promise: This self-wit and will, is so natural, that we are prone and
propense to revolt and roll back unto it, as fast as the Lord seems to settle
us by his Word: it is an inbred evil, always fighting against the law of faith:
as it is easy for a woman to go to a pond or pulke standing near to her door
(though the water be not so good) rather then to go to a fountain of living
water further off: Ease and ill custom are enchanting enemies: But remember,
that only that blood of sprinkling has in it a sure bottom of staying
fears, so that the soul may be quiet from the destroying Angel, and the
outcries of Egypt: Could they (who never had the experience of such a thing
before) yet so confidently venture their lives upon the Word: and shall such as
have (in likelihood) approved this promise of God by experience, and ventured
themselves upon it, and felt it a sovereign remedy against their distempers,
return to tread the maze of their old confused thoughts the second time? As if
the Word had suddenly lost her strength and virtue to sustain them as
formerly? Shall forgetfulness, melancholy, temptation, corruption, ill
custom, be able to pull them from an assured hold of rest, to assured vexation
and distemper? I speak it (brethren) upon knowledge: It has been thus, and
is thus with many, through a wearisomenesse of this spiritual trade of
believing; that men grow into a very falling sickness in this kind, that is,
such a custom of woeful doubtfulnesse, and distempers, that they seem to
delight in it. Alas poor soul! do thou think that to be presumption in
thee which the Lord himself calls confidence? or because, perhaps, thou
feel the dregs of a bold heart, still abiding in thee, have thou no other
way to avoid a shallow, save by running into a gulf? If the Lord be willing
thou should hold thy peace upon the naked terms of his offer and promise,
seems it too good for thee? or if it be, must thou needs undervalue his grace
by thy baseness, as if it were too great for him to bestow, because it is too
good for thee to enjoy? Know it, from the ground of this doctrine, the Lord
delights as little in this practice of thine, as thou seem to delight much
in it. And although I deny not, but in respect of thy weakness, there may be
some place for pity, yet there is more cause of sharp reproof: For why? Did
thou never believe the Word? deceive thy self no longer, and put away thy
distrust from thee. But have thou believed? (for so thou did pretend) then
trust the Lord still, and say with him, Why do thou thus fret (O my soul) in
my breast and recoyle against that which has formerly satisfied thee? Turn
rather thy vexation into prayer, and say, Remove these unpleasing chains
(Lord) at last, and set me at liberty: show me this wisdom from above, not
only barely to cling to it, but also to improve it so, as to feel the power
of it, to shut out my base distempers out of doors, and there to hold them out
roughly, by the advantage which I have gotten by thy Word. Let not the blind
and the lame come any more at the City of David, it is no place for them. As
thy Word prevails, so let doubts and distempers cease, and hold this sea of my
troubled heart in that calmness which thine own voice once caused when thou
rebukedst the waves thereof. So much for this.

Sixthly, this is Admonition to all that would find the Promise, Admonit.
that they beware of all such lets as keep them from closing with the Promise.
Commonly according to our faith, so is it with us. Therefore let us take heed
of whatsoever might cause us to warpe from the Promise. For as it is in the
graffing of a sien into the stock, if any thing fall into the cleft of the
stock, which holds off the sien from cleaving close to the stock, thereby it
comes to pass, that the sap of the stock comes not at the sien to nourish it:
and so in stead of growing one with the stock, it is separated therefrom, and
withers away: so is it here. Whatsoever it be that keeps off the soul from
clasping to the Promise, let us studiously cast it out, lest the soul return
to her old distempers, and communicate not of the sap and virtue of it, to
sustain her in hope and comfort. Who would lose his labor in so weighty a
case as the returning back of such an enemy? Who would not be at any cost to be
rid of it? We have a common speech, That a man must make a silver bridge for an
enemy to escape away, on condition we may be troubled with him no more: So if
God will chase away our distempers, and help us to beat them down from flying
(like bees) about our ears, let us be at some cost to furnish our selves with
sound faith in the Promise. And whatsoever it be that might keep the heart
away, and cause it to lie loose to the promise, let us be aware of it, and
abhor it. Here some may ask, What are the usual lets of this grace of
faith, from coming into the soul? Answ. I will mention some few of them, Lets
of believing.
before I conclude the use. The first is Mindlesnesse, and Heedlesnesse of the
Moses and Joshua, when as at their word the Sea and Jordan went backward, and
became a wall on both sides of them, that they might go over dry-shod. If the
mouth of a Promise be so honorable, what is the word of the Eternal God? If
the feet of them be beautiful that utter it, what then is the message? If
Heathens would so beautify these Idols which they worshipped, the better to
draw their affections, how should we set up the Promise, as worthy our
believing? Truly I may compare it to many things. It is like Moses his speech
to the Israelites, Stand still and behold the salvation of God, for those
Egyptians which you see this day to pursue you, you shall never see more. Oh!
if the Promise were so beheld by us, as the arm of Gods power able to drown
all our distempers, as in a sea, that we might never see them more: What a
blessed sight were it? Behold it then (as they did) and take good mark of it,
as a thing not to be slighted over. So it is said of our Savior; that his word
rebuked the sea, and her waves, so that there was a great calm. And the people
were amazed at it, saying, Who is this, that even the sea, and the tempests
obey him? So should we be astonished to think of the power of a promise,
saying, what special thing is it, that turns such distempers of spirit into
such a calm? Its like to the hands of Ananias: which being laid upon Paul,
caused the scales to fall off his eyes: So should the promise cause thy scales
of errors, thy fears, thy qualmes and distempers to vanish. Behold it as a
rare medicine which has caused all the fears of the people of God to cease,
Act.
and to turn to sweet ease: David's, Hezekia's, Jonah's, Paul's, theirs of
Samaria at Philips preaching. Its like to Peter's preaching to that same City,
at the believing whereof the inchanmtents and delusions (wherewith before the
whole city was gulled) became as smoke in the air. Its like a certain
Court-Lady, called Jane Make-peace, of whom in the ancient English Chronicle
its recorded, that she was of so sweet and amiable a nature, that whatsoever
quarrel fell out in the Kings Court among the Nobles, or in the Family, she
presently took it up, and made all quiet. This is truly the Lady Make-peace
between God and the soul, dispelling all doubts of conscience, and making it
quiet again. Do we take her to be so, and set by her, and is she so beloved,
and blessed a thing in our souls as that Lady was among all the Courtiers.
Surely then her worth would procure honor and esteem from us: and we should
not pass by the promise so slightly as we do. Our giggish heads have not the
gift to observe a Promise: we are as Naaman, so full of his crotchets, so
looking another way, that his servants are here feign to tell him of it, and
say, Father, think better of the Prophets words, do not slight them over so.
Verily, till this be effected, that the Truths of God bear eminent note in our
eye, there is small hope of doing us good. We hear twenty Sermons of
Promises, ere our eye be turned the right way. They are as beams, and we make
them but as moles. Get we books of promises, and turn our eye off, the whiles
from other objects, that these may be dwelt upon.

water by the chinkes of a vessel. It becomes as meat to an ill habited
stomach, which regorges it as fast as it receives it, and stays not till it be
altered. Many pageants we will look at for the pleasantness of them, which
yet we instantly pass over. But the Promise does us no good, nor can ease us
of our distempers, till it abide in us. Our Savior often presses this, If my
Word abide in you, you shall be my Disciples. Let the Word dwell ( Col. 3.) As
the misers chest and coffers is fraught with gold and pearls, so should the
soul of a good man with the promises, it should be his Treasure. Pondering of
the Promises, Matt. 12.
is as the retaining of the seed, which causes the womb to conceive.
Meditation and weighing of the promise, is as the clean beasts chewing of the
end, till it be almost made milk. We are weary of the promise, as they of
Manna; our soul loathes this dry Manna. But as the Lord shames them for that,
by showing how many ways Manna might be dressed, baked, fried, parched, it was
good any way: so may I shame us: the promise may be taken up as a cup by many
handles, and that fitly: whether we think of it, as the fruit of Gods decree
to save, or of the Lord Jesus his death (in which it is ratified:) or in the
Fathers acceptance: or in the Ministers fidelity: or in the Lords prevention
of us, the wisdom, and other properties even now named: or our own
desolation without it: or the Saints general clasping about it: or the
universal ignorance, unacquaintance of the world with so spiritual a subject:
surely, every way we might heal this disease of our little musing of it. But
above all, if the freedom from all our old distempers, did present it self to
our minds: How do men plod upon Purchases, Pleasures, Honors, because thereby
they imagine that they shall become new men, and that they shall live no longer
as they have done, basely, poorly, mopishly? So should the new happy life of
faith (no more to lead a sad, dismal life) affect us. Nineveh could turn her
thoughts from plodding fears, and look up saying, Jonah 3.
Who knows if he will turn from his fierce wrath, and we perish not? They
mused of the happy ease which a secret hope would effect. And are we so far
from fastening these cords of direct promises, about our armeholes? It is a
harsh work to the flesh, but sweet to the spirit: and although the gains be
slow, yet if they be kept together they will make a heavy purse; when as the
neglect of this work will leave the soul beggarly, and to her shifts. Therefore
wait upon those doors, and at those posts of Assemblies, upon which the
Proclamations of Heaven are fixed, and think thy self safe when those nails
given by the Master of them, are driven fast to stick in thy soul, that they
may not easily be unsettled. So much for the second.

The third is estranging of our hearts from the promise, and of Timothy, This
is a faithful saying, and worthy all entertainment: the word there is taken
from Inne-keepers who stand at their doors or gates of receipt, 1 Timothy 1.15.
with both arms to welcome and lodge travelers. Such a traveller the Promise
is: going up and down seeking where it may be entertained. Just it is with God
to hold us to hard meat (brethren) and to straiten us in this point, and I pray
God it be not the lot of this place to be bereft of this traveller, for these
forty years has he gone up and down among us, seeking who are good hoasts,
and finding few: And because the Lord has pind his promises upon our sleeves a
great while, we wax shie of them, and think we may have too much of them.
But woe unto us if those paths which have been trodden bare by the feet of
the Messengers of God, become overgrowne, and lie unoccupied, as she speaks
Judge. 5. for want of travel: I tell you, good guests finding bad hoasts are
grieved, and soon seek them places of better resort and welcome. So many as
have received him among us, have lost nothing, save our distempers and
corruptions, which we were clogged with, for this guest brings glad tidings,
and expels all sorrows and old inmates which distempered the soul. Let us
therefore beware of this unhospitalnesse, and grow glad entertainers of this
guest, the best which ever came within our doors. Grow we as familiar and
entire with the promises, as the world is strange and aloof from them. Else
our usual distempers will be sure to haunt us, whole mornings, days, and
nights, while they have tired us; But if the Promises be present, and our door
stand ever open for them to enter, and loath to leave them, our old crochets
will have small joy to salute us, their room will be better then their
company. The soul is carried along with delusions of self, and molested
either by false fears, or false hopes, as we read of Sisera's mother and her
Ladies, Judge. 5. Judge 5.
She was always staggering between two rocks of fear and hope, loath was she
to think the worst, and yet afraid of the worst: she was willing to think
that her husband would come and bring home his garments of diverse colors,
captives, and spoil. But then she thought his charet wheels staid too long:
thus was she willing to bear her self in hand with the best, both she and her
false Ladies, till the worst affronted her. Oh (brethren) what a woeful life is
this, for such as may live a better! Who would be a stranger to this Post from
Heaven, coming with swift wings and healing in them; always bringing found
intelligence from thence, Mal. 3.
and supporting the soul with assurance that it is well between God and the
soul? Who would not do as David did, I have made thy Word my Counselor, to
pass my matters? Do Clients keep themselves aloof from their Counselors? Do
Patients make strange to the Physician? or do friends alienate themselves from
friends? Oh! Hos. 8.
we count the Promise a strange thing, which in truth by this time should have
bin as sweet unto us as the honey, and the honey comb: as sweet and sweeter
then ever our delusions were! And we must think this will cost us good inuring
and acquaintance. Our old guests have the birthright, and long have taken up
the room: it will cost time to dislodge them again: Therefore (to end this)
let us (if we would shun the surfeit of our old distempers) grow inward with
the promise, Esaias 28. Esaias 38.
and as Job says, let us acquaint our selves with God; Till he come and say,
This is your refreshing, to give over your own torrents and violent streams,
and to embrace the waters of Siloe, which run softly: let us make the promise
our Companion, let it be both of our Court and counsel, let us empty all our
mind into the bosom thereof, and hide nothing from it, let us discover all our
doubts and distempers unto it: for it has (as Salom. is said to have) the
wisdom and treasures of God, to supply us: Mark it, a Minister of the
promises is as a scarecrow to the people, they care not how little they
acquaint with him: And as scarce one of forty knows a Minister or a Prophet in
the name of one: so few know or receive a promise in the name of a promise:
much less do they make toward it, John 12.20, 21.
and use all means to scrue themselves into it, as those Greeks, John 12.21.
who to get into Christ's company, sought first to Philip, and he to Andrew, and
then both brought them to Jesus. Such Mediation would help us to this
Counselor. So much for this third.

To hasten, another let is unconvincednesse of heart by the promise. A fearful
sin: when men will not admit the Word to prevail so far with them, as to
debate the matter seriously with themselves, till it have left a convincing
evidence behind it that their estate is warrantable: But suffer themselves to
dance in a net, and to lie in an ambiguous and doubtful suspense, and
uncertainty, when by taking pains and laying themselves in the balance of the
Sanctuary, they might find themselves either not to have to do with the
promise, and so amend their defects: or else to be those to whom the promise
pertaines, and so rest satisfied, and set their hearts at rest, as convinced
that it is theirs. Oh! it is a disease so natural unto us, that it is hardly
rooted out, viz. to please our selves with the conceit that all is well, and
our distempers shall cease: but not to try our selves till we be convinced.
Give me leave to tell you (brethren) this dallying with a promise, and not
going through-stitch, will breed you sorrow in the end. Not long since, the
report of a strange accident came to mine ears, of a certain Gentleman who
was in love with a Virgin of good rank, to whom he had long made love, and
thinking all cock-sure, because she made very fair correspondence toward him,
he began to please himself in his fond humor, and gave himself such
content in his hopes (without any sad enquiry of her final consent to marry
him, which might easily have been had, if he had followed it) that he
furceased, as one that might have her at his command. The Gentlewoman
perceiving that he did not carry himself thoroughly in the business, nor as
one that resolved to come to an issue, set her heart upon another lover, of
more ardent affection and resolution. This m^ssage being brought to the
Gentleman, as he was playing upon his Lute, so smote him, that he dashing his
Lute, and breaking it into fitters, forthwith went out of his right wits. The
promise is like to this Virgin: she serves to be married really, and not always
to be dallied with. She loves that the soul should make toward her with
affection; but when the season is come, that the bargain should be made up,
and that the soul be convinced of her good will to marry it, she cannot endure
any dalliance or paltring. If then the season be neglected, and the soul grow
to take things for granted, without any serious trial and conclusion, she
turns another way, and enclines to marry one who will bestow more hearty love
upon her. Beware (good brethren) of this dalliance: they who desire to be eased
of the distempers of the single estate, and to live in a settled course, must
wisely take the opportunity and season which God offers, and embrace it: lest
after, their sorrows return double and treble, and when they would feign
proceed, it be denied them. We see single persons withstanding good offers, lie
by unregarded, till they repent them. Men love a staggering course: whereas,
when they feel their necessities to pinch them, and to send them to God for
ease; and not so only, but the Lord reveals the promise with a great deal of
sweetness and delight to them, so that their hearts grow very far in love
with it, prize it, and think no pains or cost too great for it: then ought
they to discern the season of the Son of man, and to apply themselves
seriously and sadly to take the opportunity. Then should they come to a point
with the Lord, and with all humbleness and wisdom, say thus, O Lord thou have
said, that a laden wretch shall find ease in thee, a fatherless creature left
and forsaken of all proppes, shall find m^rcy with thee: If I deny that thou
have made me such an one, I should lie, for I lie under a burden intolerable,
and the hearsay of thine ease has drawn me after it, with an unfeigned,
restless, and hungry heart: therefore what more can be said, but it is of
thee, that I am the party? What have I to say to the contrary? Thy truth is
without hook or crook: none more needing; none such a sinner as I; none so
faithful as thou, none such a God as thou, to pardon and subdue sin: Thou
have therefore done this (O Lord) as I conceive, because thy meaning is to save
me, and bind mine heart for ever to thee: I can neither say more nor less, but
it is from the Lord, and if he will do it, what is freer then his gift, or
stronger then his will? I am content that my will be borne down by it, and be
as one bound, both hands and feet, unable to resist. Thus the soul which
desires to come to an issue with God, discourses from point to point with it
self, till it grow convinced: Even as Judah seeing the cloak, signet, and
staff brought forth, acknowledged how the case stood, and yielded. And Haman
hearing that such and such an intent the King had to honor a favorite, by and
by laying things together grew to think, Whom would the King sooner honor
then my self? That which he weakly, and from the mutable favor of a man
(whose breath is in his nostrils) concluded erroneously; that do thou gather
infallibly from the mouth of a God, whose love is unchangeable, and so let thy
soul be at quiet, as Rebecca's was, when it was agreed upon, that she should
marry Isaac, there was no dallying admitted, but instantly, and undelayingly
she goes to him, and becomes his wife. Oh brethren! we are making the match off
and on, all our life long, still asking, shall I, and shall I? Oh I could
beteame it! and never come to an end: and thereby, come infinitely short of
that comfort of our union and fellowship with God, which else might be enjoyed.
To end therefore, let us no more consult with our own base, dallying, lasie
spirits, but beg that spirit which only can convince the soul of
righteousness, and never lin, till our gadding and vain hearts be balanced
and persuaded to settle once for ado upon the promise, John 16.9.
a truly convinced that it is ours. So much for this fourth.

The fifth is a cowardly heart, that dares not venture, nor cast Naamans case.
Do but a little consider of it. The case with him, stood just as ours does.
Naaman here has an incurable disease: which none can heal, in all the world,
save one man: He comes to him, craves a cure: receives answer, Go wash: The
message pleases him not: he frets and stampes, that it is no easier, no more
liking to his humor: hereupon (more looking at his humor then this disease)
he is ready to fling away in a rage. His servants come about him, and tell him,
Master, if thy disease might be otherwise cured, it skilled not greatly to
turn homeward: but the matter is considerable, here we are, on the one side
pinched with a leprosy incurable, on the other, offered a remedy that likes us
not: in this case either we must reject it, and so we are sure to keep our
disease, or we must accept the remedy; What shall we here do? Thou say the
remedy is unlike, uncertain be it so, but the leaving it is assured and
desperate misery. Whether of the two shall we take? Shall we prefer certain
sorrow to uncertain good? What folly were that? Perhaps we may go to Jordan,
and come back as we came: grant it: it is but a peradventure: for perhaps we
may speed: If we speed by going, we are made: if we speed not, we are not
undone, we shall come back no worse then we went. Therefore there is three to
one, for our going: let us deny our tech, our conceit, and distemper, let us
but venture it, and cast the worst: but home (in any case) let us not go,
without trying the remedy. Hereupon he adventures, and finds it as the Prophet
foretells. Just so is it with a poor soul. Fear on the one side, lest God his
word should deceive it, does dismay it from attempting the promise: on the
other side, hope to speed does encourage us: What shall we do? Surely, let the
possibility of speeding, the desperate impossibility of speeding any other way,
and, that our venturing cannot make us in worse case then we were, (it may make
us in much better) prevail with us: If we must be miserable, let us fall into
the hands of God; if we must perish, better that his hand cast us away, then
our own distrust: if he can be unfaithful, well may we be miserable (for our
own guilt, and not his unfaithfulness has made us so:) Therefore, how ever
it be, let us venture our selves rather upon a possible hope, then lie still in
assured misery. This is the very state of it: and by this we may see what the
woeful condition of an unbeleever is: He does as Naaman would have done, (if
God had given him his will) he chooses to lie under his load, as the Ass in
her slow, without striving to get out: nay, prefers a sullen humor of
discontent, before the adventuring upon Gods way: that is to say, assured
misery, before possible remedy. In other cases, 2 Kings 7.
no man will be so foolish. Take an instance. In the great famine of Samaria,
there sat two Lepers at the gate, of all others most sure to starve: It comes
into their minds, that their case was desperate: and that any terms were to
be chosen before dying in cool blood: Let us (say they) go offer our selves
to the Camp of our enemies: if they save our lives, we shall live; if not, we
are but dead men: we were better be slain outright then die here. Hereupon
they ventured, and lighted well. Consider we well of this: Shall flesh and
blood in a case of life and death, venture upon a possibility, rather then lie
still in assured misery; venture without any promise: nay venture upon an
enemy? And shall we be so base, and cowardly in the case of our immortal
souls, as to choose rather to perish where we lie, then to venture our selves
upon a merciful promise, upon no enemy, but a Father, who assures us that we
shall not only not be worse then we were, but happy and forgiven? Who should
be so foole-hardy, but one that was never put to thoroughly, in the sense of his
unavoidable misery? If the party pursued by the avenger of blood, should
(having advantage of ground of the pursuer) wilfully have lien down in the
midway, saying, I shall never get thither, I were as good lie still for
naught, as go for naught, would not any man have thought him a senseless
block, not affected with his danger? Therefore (to end this) seeing there is
that in the promise, which can remedy us, let us make toward it: and if our
base spirits misgive us in the entrance, as not knowing the success, yet let
our inward disease thrust us forward, and tell us, This is no time of
quarrelling with God, and keeping of our misery still, but rather of seeking
out: worse we cannot be, better we may be: let us therefore prefer hope
before ruin, and say, If I must needs perish, I will perish by venturing, not
by cowardice. So much for the fifth.

And to conclude, by these means, let us resign up our selves to the
authority and power of the promise, which has as infinite a supply of help
from a fountain of grace to answer our doubts and cavils as we have of
objections to discourage our selves: And, the rather because it is eternal, to
survive all our tedious and endless cavils: Let us claspe and cleave to this
promise, as having grounds enough (from the manifold excellencies therein
contained) to match our fears: let us consent to the offer of it, and obey the
command of it: let us set to our seal, that it is true, not only in it self,
but also to us, for our remedy: let us be carried into the stream of it, as
being able to turn our stream a quite contrary way: let us lot upon it, set
up our rest in it, buy and sell upon it, as the thing we make full reckoning
and account to be happy by: yea, let us plead it, when our necessities, carnal
hearts, doubts and fears do put us to it, as those who will not easily forgo
their right in it: and so hold it, as that which the Lord our God has bestowed
upon us, Judge.
and therefore (as Iphta once said) we will possess it, and not be beaten off
from it, whatsoever any enemy can say to weaken it. Thus much for this Use of
Admonotion may serve.

The next is Use of Exhortation Exhortation.
to all such as either do desire In 2 Branches.
or such as have felt this benefit by the promise already to free them from
their distempers. The former to refuse no pains to get faith: the latter both
to bless God for that liberty, yea to trust him for the true peace of
Conscience issuing from faith: and also to rely upon the promise for a riddance
from all future distempers which may arise from revolts, temptations, or
crosses, throughout their course.

Let me speak a word of both. For the first, let every poor London (Boner)
shall heal me of my blindness, and thee of thy lamenesse, in a short space:
Could a poor blind creature encourage himself against the fire, for the hope
of freedom from his blindness, and count a bloody wretch a good Physician in
that respect? What should thou do then, for the hope of riddance from those
distempers, which have hindered thine inward peace, and have held thee down all
thy days till now? Oh! how good a Physician should he be, and how blessed a
medicine should that be, that should rid thee from them?

Secondly, how should thy loins bless the Lord for this mercy? Elisha to
Naaman for his cure? how beautiful should the feet of them be that bring glad
tidings of peace? But especially what experience should this work, in time to
come, in all such, as the Son has thus freed? What Giant should thou
fear, having overcome the Lion and the Bear? What after births and pains
should affright thee, having escaped the chief pains of travel and birth it
self? It is sweet to think how strong the Saints of God have been, by this
experience, and with what triumph they speak of this deliverance. As Paul in 2
Cor. 1. Who has delivered from so great a death, who does deliver, and I am
persuaded will deliver! And yet who had such after reckonings as he had? So
often in spiritual desertions, in soule-buffetings, in perils by land, sea,
enemies: he was much in labor, in travel, often stoned, imprisoned,
persecuted: yet (says he) out of all these the Lord delivered me; yea, and
still will, to his glory, till my work be finished: Thus the Church speaks
Psalm. 123. That if God had not been of her side, the waves had swallowed her
up: and yet God had broken the snare, and her soul was escaped. And what then?
Our help (says she) stands in the name of the Lord. The poor lame and blind
man in the Gospel, being bid to come to Christ, was heartned on by the
standers by: Be of good cheer (say they) the Master calls thee: So say I, Be
of good cheer, If when thou were yet weak, and unable to help thy self, yet
the Lord bare thee through, eased thee of all thy distempers, when thou said,
It shall never go well: Oh! what special lets by infidelity, fear, and
tentation, what special risings up and bubblings up of corruption can he not
suppress in thee? Now he has given thee strength and experience by his
promise, why should thou distrust him? One says, What can seem great to
him, to whom the greatness of the whole world is known? So, what can seem
tedious to him to overcome, who has got the victory over his horrors of
conscience, and pangs of a froward sullen heart through unbelief? Let us
nourish this experience lively and effectually in our selves against straits,
either by inward desertings, or outward enemies? Our Lord Jesus felt both upon
the cross, that we might trust him for freedom from both: That Cross to
which he nailed all Devils and men, enemies to his grace, shall also overcome
all their second assaults and affronts: and the gates of hell shall not
prevail against us, if we cast not away our confidence. Yea, this our freedom
shall be our earnest-peny of that peace which the Lord shall settle upon our
consciences for time to come: a pledge of that eternal rest, which one day
(when he shall clear the coast from all tempests and blasts of this world)
with full serenity and calmnesse the Lord shall translate us unto hereafter. If
this Angel stand by us, although we were in as deep distress as Paul, when no
Sun, Moon, or Stars appeared for fourteen days: we shall leap up (as he
did among a rout of Ruffians and Soldiers) saying, I trust God, that not one
hair of our head shall fall to the ground. Oh! how well-pleasing to God is it,
that we give not over our hold, and cast not away our Shield and Sword, when we
have greatest need of it? And so much may serve for this Use.

Lastly, this may serve for instruction, to teach us the just proceeding of God
against all Hypocrites, who reject his Word, in this respect, loving their
distempers so well, that they care not Instruct.
longs for peace, and riddance of such slavish companions: but, they who
withdraw from God, and will not believe, it is just with God, to leave them and
their distempers together till they cannot be separated. Ezekiel speaking of
the people of his time, compares them to a seething pot, whose meat, liquor,
and scum sod all together, till they, with the pot it self were burnt all
together. So it is just with God, that they, who would not have the precious
separated from the vile, should have their own faith still; and be left to
their staggerings, unquietnesses, false case, deceits and delusions, and never
be purged from their defilements. Peter excellently speaks to this purpose,
Epist. 1. Cap. 2.6.7. of such as will not accept the Lord Jesus to be their
cornerstone of safety: Surely they find him a stone of stumbling and offense.
So I say to these, Since you cared not to trust in Christ, to rid you of your
corruptions, dead hearts, vanities, lusts, earthlinesse, your unbelief, false
hopes, fears, your own affections and ways: it is just with God to leave you
still to astonishment and anguish of heart: to sink and perish, to fall and be
destroyed, Esa. 28. by this Rock of offense. Christ is either a Rock to save,
or to crush in pieces. And I have noted that many Pharisees and Hypocrites,
refusing Christ, have turned cavillers against the way of God, complainers,
murmurers against it, as base, tedious, and difficult, if not scorners and
enemies. So much for this Doctrine and Lecture.

THE THREE AND TWENTIETH AND LAST LECTVRE, Upon the fifteenth VERSE, and so
forward.
VERSE XV. to the XIX. And he returned to the man of God, he and all his
company, and came, and stood before him: and said, Behold, now I know that
there is no God in all the earth, save in Israel: Now therefore I pray thee
take a blessing of thy servant.

But he said, As the Lord lives, before whom I stand, I will receive none: And
he u^ged him to take it: but he refused.

And Naaman said, Shall there not then be given two Mules load of earth to thy
servant, etc.

In this thing, the Lord pardon thy servant, etc.

To whom Elisha said, Go in peace.


Entrance upon this 4 general.
ALthough Brethren, at my first entry upon this text, I propounded no more
Verses of this Chapter to treat upon, save what I finished the last Lecture:
yet, this one day of our Lecture (being the last that you and I are like to
teach and hear each other) and the last of our year, requiring that I should
say somewhat unto you: Also my studies having reached fully to another Sermon:
and besides this fourth part of the Chapter, craving some connection with the
three other handled already: I have set apart this day to this end, One point
may give light to all the particulars following, being 7.
if God permit: To wit, to handle some one such point out of the whole Harmony
of these five Verses following, as may give you some general light into the
whole context: for time will not permit us to go through all. These five verses
then, as I told you in their Title, contain the remoter consequences of
Naamans obedience. To give you a brief view and taste of them, these they are.

First, there is the true spirit of the cure to be evidently discerned in this
new Convert: feeling the truth of the Word

Secondly, feeling himself unable to reach the Lord himself,

Thirdly, he enters solemn league with the Lord, to be a

Fourthly, he takes hold and possession of the Church of God, Aram ward yet his
heart was to Jerusalem ward, and to the true and only place where the Lord had
visible residence and presence at this time. And this although he testified by
a weak, and poor expression, of taking with him the earth of the holy Land:
Yet the inward soundness of heart, exceeded his weak signification.

Fifthly, he discovers his unfeigned conversion, by a most tender viz. his
presence at the worship of Rimmon: this darts into his converted soul, even as
a dash of the toothache, or the sting of an hornet.

Sixthly, he is exceedingly pierced with fear and care, how he

Seventhly he is very glad to ask direction, while it was now general. I can
but go over the first.

The point then is this, Where God works a true cure upon any soul, Doctr.
Every true cure has the spirit of the cure attending it.
there he also works the spirit of the cure. By a cure I mean conversion of a
soul from Idols, (not Rimmon, but) lusts and vanities, to the living God. By
the spirit of a cure, I mean that instinct and disposition, that due temper
and quality which such a cure deserves at the hands of the cured. And I say
not, the spirit of him who is cured, but the spirit of the cure, that is, such
a spirit as the mercy of him, that heales the soul, instills into it, viz, to
be for God, who has been for it. Only this: As Gods cure has been
gracious, so is the spirit of the cure zealous: and as his work has been
entire, whole and unfeigned to the good of the soul, that it might no more
return to folly, so is the spirit of the cure sincere, entire, and constant.
God hates patchery, and half cures: and the spirit of the cure hates half
thanks, half love, half affections. In a word, the spirit of a sound cure of
a soul, is a tender spirit: the very first fruits of the heart enlightened with
faith, forgiven, renewed, and warmed in the womb of mercy: the most natural,
peculiar, acceptable, and well pleasing fruit of the soul to God. What the
spirit of a cure is.
It stands in a tender love (truly called the first love) a tender joy in God,
tender compassions toward him, tender jealousy of that which might provoke
^im, tender care to please him, tenderness of spirit both to him in affections
of desire and delight, and also for him, in zeal and revenge, defense, and
taking up arms for him. And it rests not in him: but descends to a tender love
to his Truth, Worship, Services, Sacraments, Sabbaths, Servants, and all which
has any relation to God, even for his sake. This in short is that I mean by
this spirit of a cure. I pitch upon this point the more willingly, because it
has an easy comprehension of all those seven consequences of the cure above
named. And although each of them be distinct, yet because this is my last
Lecture, I am glad that one doctrine has so good a lot as to give you (though
but in general, and far off) a view of the whole. For in this spirit of the
cure, all those fruits of Naamans return from Jordan, may be coucht together,
as a garment into one knot.

Explication of the Doctrine.
Mark then, for explication sake, thus much. It is with the soul in point of
spiritual cure, as with the body, in case of a bodily. Who being healed by
some odd rare Physician of a mortal disease, and such an one as all the
Physicians in the country could not turn their hands unto, yea such as all
others gave over, as desperate, and past their skill: by some odd Physician,
(I say) one of a thousand, who himself could not have heald it neither, except
he had by divine hand been peculiarly made and trained up for the very nonce
to be skillful in such a disease: and such a one as will by no means take
money or fees, but scorns it, only stands upon doing good, preventing sad
wreck of the diseased, that he might get himself a name of a merciful and
skillful Physician: Tell me now, what man or woman is there living, who, having
such a cure of such a Physician, would or could, or has the heart to turn
away from him, like a block insensible and ^naffected with such a favor?
There is no such man breathing, I think: But this is common: if any get such a
rare cure, all is too little to make recompense, though he should sell himself
to his shirt: he has no power to do other, he thinks the same evil would
take him then. If he see that no reward will fasten upon the Physician, but he
will needs bestow it freely, the more his purse is discharged, the closer his
heart is knit, his affections are up in arms, his tongue is loosed: Oh! what
love is this? what moved his heart thus to me? what a man of men is he? what
admiration have I him in? O how I love him? what is there which I would not do
for him? run, ride, spend for him? suffer for him, expose my self to any
hazard, maintain his quarrel by any weapon? O how he commends him, in all
companies, and blazeth his name far and wide, till he have raised up as great
fame abroad, as reputation at home. Ask him why he does so, he will answer,
That I am, I am under God, by him: I was a dead man, worse I could not be, he
has restored me to health, and I am better (I think) then ever I was: and
therefore I must always count him my preserver.

I remember in the Roman story I have read of a certain spectacle upon the
Circk or Theater of Rome, where (among other sports) condemned persons were to
fight for their lives with wild beasts; it fell out so, that a man before time
passing through the wilderness met with a lion. And looking for no other then
death, fell down for fear. An illustration of the point.
But the poor Lion approached to him with much moan, and held out his foot
to the man, which foot of his, by reason of a thorn, or some such like thing
sticking deep therein, had so rankled and swelled, that it was like to hazard
the lions life: The man with all his Art and skill fell to his Surgery, and so
wrought that he pulled out the thorn out of the Lions foot, by the roots.
The poor beast feeling her aile and danger gone, fawnes upon the poor man,
and makes all the love, that a dumb creature could possibly, to him: leads him
out of the forest, and there leaves him, and sets him at liberty. It was the
lot of this lion after, to be taken, and to be sent to Rome for a present, and
it was the worse lot of the man to commit a great Robbery: and being condemned
to the Theater, to fight, what lion must be brought forth to fight with this
man but this lion? The man all amort, and despairing of life, this preserved
lion knows his Surgeon, and comes to him, fawnes upon him again, and by no
means could be pulled from the man's side and embraces, but to bring the man to
mind of the cause, he puts forth his foot healed of the thorn. The people
defeated of their expectation, turned their sporting humor into admiration,
asking the caytiffe, the reason of so mavelous an accident. The man
publicly opens the history, as it were wrought: whereupon cruelty being
turned into astonishment and pity, they decreed a statue to be set up in the
Market place (for eternal memory of the fact) of a Lion embracing a man; over
the Lions head, with this title, Behold a Lion, the savior of a man: over the
man's head. Behold a man the Physician of a Lion. I have been too long, but the
works of God are not to be neglected; I would but show you the spirit of a
cure, even in a dumb creature: what then is it in a reasonable? But what
comparison is there between either and the spirit of cure in the spiritual
soul and conscience converted? Oh! no tongue can utter it, only we may admire
it.

Proofs of the Doctrine. 1 In examples
Examples in our Saviors story we have many of the spirit of bodily cures. How
many did our Savior cure, of whom it is said, he was feign to charm them from
telling it abroad? yet they could not, but so much the more blazed it, to make
him famous. Others were no sooner healed, but arose and ministered unto him:
others could not so part with him, but followed him. But one of all others will
best serve our turn, and that is the blind man, Joh. 9. Ioh. 9.
who though he had but poor seed sown in him of any faith, as appears
after: yet from this spirit of the cure of his blindness did strange things:
magnifyed Christ, called him a Prophet, wondered that those who had their eyes
should not know him! when the enemies of Christ, like hornets, came about his
ears to deface the miracle and the doer of it, yet strong was the spirit of
this cure in the man, that he could not endure their malice: though he knew
their spite and rage, and the danger of it, as well as his parents, yet he
would not spare them an inch: What says he? 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. verses.
Will ye be his Disciples? That were fitter for you, then to smother such a
miracle. From the beginning of the world to this day was it never heard of,
that any opened the eyes of the blind. Oh! how it affected him! Surely it might
have become one of his strongest Apostles thus to have defended him. But the
spirit of a cure, and the love of such is stronger then death; at least then
Excommunication. And when the Lord Jesus met him, he added the spirit of a
better cure, and of conversion. These hints I have given you for familiar
explication of the nature of that I speak of. But to leave these, let me come
to the Doctrine it self, to ground it out of the Word, to give you a few
Reasons, and so come we to Use.

2. Grounds of the Scripture. Ier. 2.2, 3, 4.
For the first of these, read Jerem. 2.2. I remember thee, and the kindness of
thy youth, and of thine espousals, when thou wentest after me in the
wilderness, etc. He speaks of that first marriage love which passed between
himself and his people: who took it kindly that God had brought them out of
Egypt, bondage, and the red Sea, and made a song of his mercies, and were found
of him (so many at least as knew him aright:) Noting that this first love is as
precious to God, as early fruits of the spring, apples, pears, plums, pease,
or the like are to the taste of man, as being the most pure and dainty of all.
Zach. 12.10.
And that which Zachary in Chapter 12.10. calls the spirit of grace, compassions,
and mourning, is suitable hereto: by which the grace of God uttered it self in
those who were converted: as we see it fulfilled in the Church, Act. 2. who
being convinced of their killing the Lord of Life, were pricked in heart, and
filled with mourning and tenderness, it is called there a pouring out, because
of that impotencie, and unsatisfiednesse which was in it, that it could not tell
how to express it self enough to God or man: and the holy Ghost uses words of
the plural number, noting how frequent their prayers were at first conversion,
and how bitter those complaints and mournings were for their sins. So we
know John, Revel. 2. Revel. 2.3.
touches the same po^nt when he checkes the Church of Ephesus for the loss of
her first love: we know how tender and ardent that love is, which couples do
bear each to other when they are first espoused together: it may be a pattern
all the life after. Sometimes its styled by the name of joy, as it is said,
Matthew. 13.44. Matt. 13.44.
That when the Merchant had found that Pearl, for joy thereof, counting
himself happy therein, he went and sold all that he had, and bought that
Pearl. And those in Acts 8. Act. 8.8.39.
rejoiced greatly having been converted by Philip: as those who have found an
hoo^d of treasure, who would not part with it again for a world: so the Eunuch
went away rejoicing. Sometime by the esteem of the messenger, To. 10. Romans
10.15.
How beautiful are the feet of them that bring glad tidings of peace? As
Eliezer, Genesis 24.30.
who brought Isaacs tokens and bracelets, and news of an husband, was very
welcome for his message sake. Sometime it is described by the close fellowship
and cleaving of the Saints of God together, as Act. 2. Act. 2.44, 45.
where those that believed, could not part with each other, but sold their
possessions, and gave the price for the maintenance of their poor brethren.
Sometime it is noted by the dearnesse of the heart to the Ministers of God: as
Galat. 4.15. Galat. 4.15.
For I bear you witness tha you would have pulled out your very eyes and
given to me. And much more by that prodigal spirit of suffering for God: Heb.
10.37.
as Heb. 10. Call to remembrance the days of old, wherein you suffered
willingly the spoil of your goods, were made a gazing-stocke both by
reproaches and afflictions: and chap. 11. were persecuted and tormented,
refusing to be delivered. Many phrases are used in the Prophets to describe the
strangeness of this change, as chap. 55. end. The Thistle shall become a
Myrtle tree, Esaias 55. ult.
and the Bramble shall become a Fig Tree, that is, things before useless
should now put on a new hew, and become profitable for all uses: yea to
describe the acceptablenesse thereof to God, it is said, That the wilderness
shall be as a flood, Esaias 35.2, 3.
and the desert as the garden of God, Esaias 41.10.
and as the face of the earth after the winter is gone, and the spring is come.
In the Canticles there is much to this purpose, The winter is past, the spring
is come, Cant. 2.11, 12.
the voice of the bird is heard, the trees bud, and the blossoms put forth:
what do all these phrases of well pleasingnesse intimate, saving that savor
which the soul brought home to God affords to him, and the favor which she
finds in his eyes? But what shall I need multiply over-many proofs? It is
harder to conceal them, then to name them. Others will offer themselves in the
process of the Doctrine.

For the manifesting of his work in the soul.
their course formerly having been so contrary, base, and odious to God and
man, noisome to themselves, barren, and unprofitable, themselves so insensible,
so dead hearted, blockish, and savourlesse of good: what can be a more sensible
mark of mercy to them, then that the Lord has wrought such a change, such
affections, desire, hunger, love, tenderness, closeness to communion,
forgetting their dunghill, their pleasures, lusts, vanities, companies? What
could be a sweeter mark to a rude savage Jailer of conversion, Act. 16.29.
then to spring in to the Apostles, wash their wounds, make them great cheer,
and send them away from their chains? What could more comfort the heart of
poor Lydia, Ibid.
then for a coy Dame, now to hang upon the Apostles, and to say, If you have
found me faithful, abide in my house? So that the Lord, in part does it for
the better contenting the hearts of such, who if some such apparent change were
not wrought, would be ready to vanish in their fears, and acknowledge no work
at all to be wrought.

For their heartning against their difficulties. See Luke 5.34, 35, 37.
while they are together in the Bride-chamber, all is festival, after-sorrowes
must not be mentioned, for those will come alone, and too soon: now it is
honey-moone, now all must sound of joy and gladness, and to talk of debts,
children, charge of housekeeping, and crosses, it is out of season: so is it
here. The Lord foreseeing the many brunts, damps, eclipses, and sorrows, which
his people must meet with, gives them this wine of his flagons, and these
Apples and dainties to make merry with, that they might forget care, and
endeare their hearts at first so deeply in himself, that when troubles must
come, the remembrance of the love of their youth, may encourage them to bear
the more willingly: and when they are grown stronger to bear, then he
conceales their first delights, and allots them harder conditions, suffers
their feasting to be turned to fasting, their mirth into mournings, their songs
into sorrow, suffers them to be crockt among the pots, hurried in the world,
dampt with hard conditions, and files of their first edge, that their inward
metal, and substance may grow better. Thus he fits them for both conditions.

To make them objects of observation in the world.
like Saul in the stuff, but be objects of mark and observation in the eyes
of others. Sometimes God pulls out Wisdom out of her corners, and clothes her
with all orient and beautiful colors, that she might raise up admirable love
of her self in such as behold her. And when it is thus, each man covets to
have a share in her. These admirable operations, which God works in his
converted ones, are so convincing and precious, that even they who do not
desire them for themselves, will yet covet them for their beauty and
comeliness which they see in others. Whose heart was not pierced in the
Gaolers house to see such strange affections bred in him, all of a sudden? when
the Lord comes into a family, and discovers his work in some one or two, in
tender sorrow, in savory desires after the promise, unwearied questions,
Prayers, confessions, and the like, who does not wish himself in their case?
except it be some errant block who discovers his brutishness, all are ravished
to see such early beginnings. The Lord knows the fittest way to work upon
men. Sooner will a young novice by his active spirit of the cure, stir up
others, then some solid and grave Disciples, because the spirit of the one is
more stirring, active, and drawing than the other.

Fourthly, there is in the cure of the soul, converted to God, From that
irresistible power of Grace in the soul.
especially in the first turning home of it, that there is no choking,
quenching, or damping of it. It resembles her original. Seed, leaven,
mustard seed, are things of an active and increasing nature. Leaven in a little
while, will sour all the lump. Hence are those expressions of the Saints, Thy
Word was in me as coals of fire in my bosom? Can a man carry them there, and
not be burnt? I would have kept in thy words, (says David) but such was the
nature of them that they would not be concealed: I had no rest nor peace, till
I had uttered them to Congregations. Peter could not hold Christ in his bosom,
till he had uttered himself to Nathaniel. That woman of Samaria had fire in
her bosom when she went to tell her kindred and citizens the news of Christ's
discourse. The love of God works in the breasts of his Saints, as it first
wrought in his own: he having conceived it once, could not cease, till it had
discovered it self to poor sunken Adam: and he would rather choose to make
his only Son a Mass shame, then he would not express it. Even such is the
same love, having once wrought in them: it is as the new wine in the caske,
which must have vent or else it will break. It is like Joseph's affection to
Benjamin, all must be had out from him, Genesis 45.14.
and he must utter himself to him, and fall upon his neck with a kiss and
tears. The newer any thing is, the more forcible. So is it with love. The
Apostle has a sweet word to express it, The love of Christ constraines us, 2
Cor. 5. The word signifies, 2 Cor. 5.14.
gathers us up together: as a beast hemmed in a Pinfold, has an appetite after
liberty: so the spirit of love finds it self straightened till it break out. And
1 Cor. 13. love is bountiful, and working, 1 Cor. 5.
full of affection, hops all things, endures all things, and the like.

The fifth, God is the God of order, and loves sutablenesse of God is the God
of order.
it is comely for young ones to be so: their lusts were so before grace, and
therefore grace must be so also. I restrain not this heat to mere youth, for
if God do convert elder ones, (as Naaman) there is a spiritual youth or first
age, even in them also: grace at the first is most operative, be the years
what they may be: but especially when grace falls upon tender years, (as for
the most part that is the season, ere the soul be sapped in lewd customs)
then it quickens those hot spirits which it meets with to singular expressions.

For the due convincement of such as after may wax lukewarm and loose.
and inward check for time to come, if at any time his people shall revolt
from this grace of first conversion. The Lord knows our mold and fashion just,
Psalm. 103. We seem at our first setting forth to the journey, so trim and so
prepared, that no troubles nor difficulties shall daunt our resolution: But by
that time we have traveled a while, what with the ill way, what with ill
weather, bad success, and what with our own weary and crazie spirits within,
we wax unto ward and stagger whether we should go forward or no. The Lord
knows how many ways this first spirit of the cure, flagges and wanzes in us:
sometimes the abundance of iniquity causes the love of many to wax cold: this
degenerate formal world is ready to quench our spirit: the presidents of many
zealous and painful professors, who are turned drunkards, unclean,
worldlings, Epicures, and sinful wretches, 2 Pet. 3. ult.
do shake us. The error of the wicked pulls us from our steadfastness: fear of
some men, flattery of others, but especially a cursed heart, on the one side
giddie, presuming, venturous; on the otherside slavish, fearful and
distrustful, distempers us: so that although we keep from gross evils, yet we
are far from that frame of zeal, closeness, and watching, which we have found
only peace from. Now when it falls out thus, and that crosses, debts, ill
marriage care of children and other disguisements, come upon the neck of the
other: then is the Lord feign to step in, and take us to task; to upbraid us,
and cast us in teeth with our first spirit of cure, our early first love, sweet
affections, covenants, humble fear, watchful care, diligent pains, zealous
spirit. Luke 23.31.
What? was this done in the green tree, and shall it not be done in the dry?
What? shall first beginnings shame thee? Did thou begin in the spirit, (if
yet thou did so?) and will thou now end in the flesh? Oh! is there not enough
in that never dying spirit of an immortal hope of salvation, to carry thee on
in thy poor course, with equalness of affection? Say the edge be a little
blunted, what, is metal gone too, is the steel worn out of the back? That
first spirit of sound joy in God, should by this day have bred in thy belly a
welspring of water, flowing to eternal life. Oh! for shame strengthen the
weary hands, Heb. 12.13.
and feeble knees, and correct the crooked, that it turn not out of the way.
Thus the Lord charms a declining spirit, by an experiment of her own, and
brings her back with sorrow and shame, to her former temper. So much for
Reasons.

for God? This then teaches us a difference of cures, and that all are not
alike: for there are many (to be sure) far from this temper and frame of
spirit. Instruction with an item.
Not every cure has such a stroke in the soul of a man, thus to change,
qualify and act his spirit, to and for the Lord. And all to teach us to try
our spirits, and to be afraid to rest in any base and counterfeit cures, which
afford none of this life and operation. Who does not now a days, boast
himself to have gotten this through cure? Counterfeit cures very common in the
world, true cures rare.
If once baptized, and profess the Gospel, it is treason in these days to
put a difference between men. Alas, ye poor wretches! the spirit within you
shall put the difference, though others hold their peace. The base, degenerate,
carnal spirit of men, now a days boasting of a cure and conversion, but still
the same for their temper and frame of spirit, or else in a base outside of
zealous performances, and shows of good, without any cordial, geniall spirit
of self-denial, tenderness, and love to holiness bewrayes sufficiently
whence their cures came. Tell me I pray, was there such a spirit of a cure in
him, whom Christ cured at the Poole after 38. years disease, Joh. 5. as was in
that blind man, Ioh. 5.7. Ioh. 9.7, 8, 9.
Joh. 9. When the former of these was in healed, what news were there? he went
to the Pharisees, and there jangled, but Christ heard no more of him: so that
after meeting him in the Temple, he told him, Thou art now healed, but sin no
more lest a worse thing come unto thee: A sad item, so soon after! Alas, what
wonder! it was a cure of the left hand: a bodily cure of lame feet, not of a
lame spirit, and thereafter came of it: no spirit of tenderness, thanks,
acknowledgement, or engagement followed. And what came of those cures in the
wilderness which befell the Israelites? when the Lord had heald them of their
bondage, taken away the fear of Pharaoh his host, Exodus 12. compared with 15.
etc. and with Number. 11. and 15.
and the danger of the red Sea: when he had removed the sad disease of famine
and thirst: sent them quails in plenty, dropped Manna from heaven into their
bellies: and filled them with the Rock which gusht out and followed them with
water. when as there was a plague gone out among them, Aaron with his censer
went and stood between the living and the dead, and staid it: when scorpions
were let fly among them, to sting them to death, the Lord set up a brazen one
upon a Pole, to look upon, that beholding it, they might escape: What came of
all these cures? Nothing, their carcasses fell in the wilderness after all
these: themselves grew as base murmurers, rebels, and breakers of Covenant, as
ever: But as for any true spirit of a sound cure, I mean, any remembering of
him that had healed them, alas! it was far from them. and why I pray you?
Surely, because the cure was but by halfes, not a full and sound one: it came
from one Physician, but not from the like purpose of heart: it reached their
bodies, but touched not their souls.

How many are there among us, whom the Lord has wrought cures upon? Some of us
he has cured of our poverties, and filled our purses with money, paid our
debts, and set us on foot: others have been cured of our ill Names: healed in
point of our bad yoak-fellowes: others of us have been healed of our diseases
of body, agues, consumptions, dropsies: and God has betrusted us with second
lives, like Hezekiah, when as we would have given the hope of them for a straw:
but to what end have all these boones befallen us? surely to make us more
rank, proud, jolly in our selves: we have had a spirit of our cures too: but
it is such as the disease had been much better then the remedy, and had been
like to have held us in more humbleness and fear, then our cures: Eccles.
13.5.
I may say with Solomon, I have seen a misery under the Sun; a cure bestowed
upon a poor sick man to the ruin of him. 2 Chronicles. 28.22.
Is not this a fearful cure? Ahaz because he was worse for crosses, is thus
branded, This is King Ahaz: what shall our brand be, who are worse for our
cures? But this is not all: the preposterousnesse of it, That all the hope of
these seemed to be before their cure: False cures have a preposterous spirit.
O then if God would not destroy them of this disease, but let them live, what
manner of ones would they prove? but when they lived, what deivlls have they
proved? That good King sung, Esaias 38.19.
The living, the living shall praise thee. But these may cry, The living shall
do thee more dishonor then ever. And to leave these, others have been healed
by a better hand, by the Ministry of the Spirit, they have been healed of
their ignorance, uncleanness, profane lives, they have gotten knowledge, and
reformation of some gross evils: but what shall we say of them? Is the spirit
of a cure seen upon them? Can any man say, that grace has bred in them,
tenderness of conscience, love to the people of God, a change of heart? Alas!
no such matter: Nay there are some who are not so much as rid of their gross
lusts, and yet make great show of zeal and forwardness. Note.
As lately one arrested by the hand of God, with sudden fear of death, emptied
himself of all, and confessed that he was habited in a custom of adultery
with three or four harlots about the same time: and yet an hearer, noter,
repeater of Sermons, and a kind of Professor. Cures now are all men's cases. All
will be religious, and that shall be the cover of all their rank lusts:
plasters are now applied to all sores, let them be as festred within, as
rankled, and corrupt as they will; not to speak of secret evils of wrath,
frowardness, rage, unmercifulness, rebellion of heart, worldliness and the
like: Alas! these, men have no leisure to think of: they seek religion as
drunkards seek drink, to besot and disable their consciences, from stirring
and stinging of them.

Misery of such as rest in false and half cures.
What shall I say of such? Alas! there is no spirit of a cure to be seen in
them: they want the sound cure, which a spirit of conversion has in it. God
has two closets of plasters and medicines, the one outward, the other secret:
in the former he keeps universal salves for all sores: in the other
Medicines for an hard heart, a proud spirit, unbeleefe, subtilty, hollownesse,
imponitency: To the former, men flock apace: and if they can get them; they
care for no more. But the heart (which God only asks for) runs full of all
excess: and so long as the still stream of outward Religion possesses them
with security of their estate, they never lay ought to their hearts, till
wrath, and hellfire flash in their faces, and fear surprises Hypocrites: Esaias
33.13.
Then all turns to horror, and who shall endure everlasting burnings? But oh
ye woeful people! Might you not have been admitted into the inner closet, if
you had preased hard to it! yes verily. That paddle and ado which you have
made to soder and play the Hypocrites, might have been better spent, and sped
better to purchase a sound cure never to be repented of. Tell me, if a man that
has a dangerous sore upon his body, content himself with going to a base
Quacksalver with a budget at his back, and get of him a little salve in a
clout to skin his sore at times, or a little water in a glass to keep it
sweet; will this prove a cure? Or if he go to a cunning Surgeon, and he tell
him, I can cure you, and make you as sound a man as ever you were, but then you
must be at some cost, endure some pain, be content to be lanced, or to have
your sore searched to the quick, or to have the dead flesh deeply corrasived,
and then to be tented, and to be patient till it be quite healed: But then the
sore man should say, Alas! here is cost: I am loath to wait so long, Can you
not bind it up for me the whiles, and keep it warm, and the Ague from taking
it: if you can, I Will be content a while, and hereafter I will come again! But,
by that time, the sore is gangreen'd, or fistulated, or has taken the bone and
marrow, and the Cihrurgion tells him, it is incurable, his leg must be cut
off, or it will cost him his life. Would any man praise this man? Surely such
are many lazars cures, even such as will make them creeples or bedrid ones. But
sound cures we hear of few. In the fear of God, take warning: All cures are
not of one sort: God can be slight with the slight, and sound with the sound:
Therefore come unto him, open thy wound, move him to pity, thou art but a dead
man, if he help not; come, ere thy heart be quite hardened and past hope,
confess his skill, submit to his cure, let him search, tent, and handle thee
as he will: If a sound cure be thine aim, to get an heart truly purged of thy
humors, broken, believing and repentant, know the Lord can cure thee wholly,
as good cheap, as by halfes; renounce thy patchery and hollownesse, and come
to plain terms, and he can make thy flesh come again as a child's. But know,
that till then, no spirit of a cure will be seen in thee: nothing save a
shifting, shuffling, doubtful, dark, and staggering course, will be come by.
Only this sound cure will create a spirit of cure in thee, to be a zealous,
humble, and close Christian, to be for the honor of Him who has delivered
thee from death and hell, which no Physician under Heaven (save him self)
could have done for thee.

Secondly, Terror.
this may be terror to all whose frame is contrary to this spirit of Grace and
Conversion. So far from being for God, his Glory, his Gospel and Ordinances,
so far from the spirit of thanks, Terror to all such as nourish open and
notorious diseases in themselves.
zeal, and joy, for grace and pardon, that they still continue in the mire of
their own filth, and still wallow in their defilements, of covetousness,
profaneness, uncleanness, and the like woeful ways: So contrary to the
spirit of such as God has healed, that they carry about, and upon them, the
nasty and leprous skin of Naaman; An heathenish, brutish and ignorant mind,
void of all light of truth, an uncircumcised heart, a rebellious, obstinate,
and impenitent course, fraught with all sin, possesses them. I may say, these
rather have the spirit of deep and mortal disease upon them, then the spirit
of a cure: they carry that in their bosoms, which is far more mortal then
Naamans disease: To wit, the spirit of old Adam, of blindness, bad customs,
the spirit of the earth, and their lusts: nay worse, the spirit of rebellion,
malice, and untractablenesse of heart: they will not be reproved, nor
convinced; but fight against the Lord and his truth, yea some of them against
their own light: which is as contrary to the spirit of Grace as can be. Oh!
the sins they commit, are committed with an high hand, they were never slain
by the killing letter of the Law, but are alive, jolly, and secure, their sin
wears a Crown, the King is not higher when he wears his Crown, then these
are, when they are in their Alehouses, their games, their adulterous and
ungodly practices: Their tongues are their own (for they were never redeemed
with a price) their passions, humors are violent: Their thoughts, Psalm. 12.5.
1 Cor. 6.20. Esaias 13.22.
a very through-fare for the Devil: as Esaias says, an habitation of Dragons
and Ostriches: so furious, so false in their dealings, so intemperate, that
none can live by them. Brethren, it is one thing to have sin, another to have
a spirit of sin: A spirit of wrath, is a prevailing habitednesse of it: a
spirit of revenge, is a restless spirit, never quiet, till it have wreckt it
self upon an enemy: a spirit of uncleanness, is to be given over to it: a
spirit of the world, is when not only the soul has the world, but the world
has it: It is one thing for a man to fall into a river, and to have some water
got into his body, A spirit of sin, what, and how fearful it is. Heb. 13.5.
another to lie under water, and to be drowned in it. The Apostle Heb. 13.5.
tells us of a conversation in covetousness (or the love of silver, as the word
is) which is then, when a man is in the power of that lust, when it has got
the soul into her snare, and chains: so that the flame and bent of it, is for
gain, all the thoughts, affections, and devices of the heart, are that way,
sleeping, waking, alone, or in company, in calling, or in worship of God, worky
days or Sabbaths, all is fish comes to net with such a base heart, as is
powered out after that Idol: And (Brethren) how many still of our people are
such as these? So far from the spirit of Grace, tenderness, 2 Cor. 4.4.
compassions, bowels of dear affection to God, to his truth and Name; that
rather the spirit of the Prince of this world rules in them, acts and carries
them (as sworn slaves of hell, and foes of grace) according to his own
pleasure.

Oh brethren! these are the sad times, wherein the true spirit of Grace and
of a converted soul, are rare dainties. Since the power of the Gospel has
been resisted, God has given men over to the spirit of all sensual
profaneness: The spirit of roysting, swearing, drunkenness, long locks, and
all lust, yea scorning the Gospel and all wholesome Ministry, is come in stead
thereof. That promise of pouring out the spirit of prophecy upon all flesh is
gone: The spirit of the Stews and Alehouse, Joel 2.
ignorance, and every man for himself, is come in: The faces of men and women
are altered with their spirits, into the faces of Lions, Wolves, and foxes: The
Gospel serves either for a stalking-horse of hypocrites, or a scarecrow of the
lewd: Except God be a breaking off our whole frame, and knocking together of
our old brass and pewter to melt us, and mould us anew, in the Furnace of
affliction, I know not what to think of the spirit, that rules among us! If
Heathens should see some of us, it would make them loath the Gospel, and
embrace their gods, Bacchus, Venus, and the rest more strongly then ever.
Enough we have who are of the spirit of Caiphas his Hall, and those that
spited, scorned, and spit at Christ, crying, Crucify him: not many whose
spirits are toward him, tender to his glory, to his mercy, and grace, to his
poor Church and people. Oh the spirit of ambition! self-love is now all in
all.

What should I say to such? except they be accursed by Gods own mouth, that
never any good should seize upon them, let this point, in Gods fear, scare
them. Me thinks thou should not hear of such a spirit of Grace and
tenderness, as I speak of, but thy soul should tremble, and thy heart throb
in thy bosom, to consider what a contrary spirit of corruption and hell, thou
walk with? Oh! if God should leave thee to this spirit of thine own, to be
conceited of thy self, to fear no danger to be careless what may betide
thee, and to add drunkenness unto thirst, what shall become of thee? what is
wanting (save hell it self) to make up the woe of such a soul? And yet, I
tell thee, this is not far off from thee; Read Deuteronomy. 29. Deuteronomy 29.15.
If any man hearing the words of this book, and the curses thereof, shall yet
say in his heart, I shall have peace, I shall fare well, I fear nothing;
Especially if conceited of its own welfare.
the wrath of God shall smoke out against such a man, and God will not be
entreated of him for why? he is over head and ears in the spirit of gal and
bitterness, a thousand to one if ever he recover: Therefore look about thee
in season: As the Lord said to Elijah in the cave, so say I to thee, Up, arise
and go forth, for thou have a great journey to go, ere thou come at the Horeb
of God. I wish thee to go by mount Sinai, and has thy base spirit thoroughly
with those terrors of God, 1 Kings 19.7.
which may gaster thee with some feeling of thy condition. Sin is got into
thy spirit, and has seated it self deeply in the entrals of thy soul: A
great gulf is set between thee, and the spirit of grace: therefore pull down
thy rebellious heart, and (as Peter said to Simon Magus) try by all means,
whether this thy sin may be forgiven thee. The spirit of grace is joined with
the spirit of mourning: Acts 8.22.
Try whether God cannot bring thee out of one spirit of bitterness into a
contrary: for he promises, that all humbled ones shall be in bitterness, (as
a thing steept in vinegar) as he that is in bitterness for the loss of his
only son. Zach. 12.10.
Bitterness of a profane and presumptuous heart, must be turned into the
bitterness of a broken and subdued spirit: Oh! that ever I should exalt folly
so highly, and disdain mercy; yea, kill the Lord of life, as I have done! Read
Acts 2. Acts 2.
where this prophecy was fulfilled, in such as crucified Christ himself, and
yet, being pierced in heart for it, the Lord powered the spirit of grace into
them, and anointed them with oil of gladness and joy, so that they who
murdered him, had the first hansell of life and pardon from him; Oh blessed
art thou, if the like portion might befall thee, who have ventured as far as
they did! So much for this.

Indifferency and Neutrality of spirit, worse then profaneness. Numb. 23. 25.
but yet is as deep and dangerous, because they maintain a vile spirit of
indifferency, and mediocrity, in stead of this spirit of grace. They say as
Balac did to Balaam, Neither bless, nor curse. In this respect they are worse
then the former, because they utterly abandon all sense of the Gospel, and
become fulsome Atheists (upon point) neither hot nor cold, fish nor flesh: They
would seem to hate open villainies: But then they much more abhor the spirit
of the Gospel: Their spirits are flat and flash, whereas the spirit of the
Gospel is tender, Luke 14. ult.
zealous, and powerful: Woeful ones, hanging between Heaven and Earth, cast
down from Heaven, vomited up from the earth; Salt which has lost his savor,
good for nothing, no not for the dunghill! All their skill stands in
selfe-concealments, forsooth their religion, and conscience may not be known!
What? can you work wonders? can you carry coals in your bosoms and not be
burnt? Such have their Religion to choose.
Doubtless the not burning of your bosoms by this fire, argues that there is
not one coal of the Altar fallen upon them: you are Quench-coale, no sparkle
of grace can kindle upon your cold hearth! you must needs be ashamed of the
Gospel, because the spirit of magnifying it, and of justifying wisdom is not
in you, but rather an aloof, dead, and Gallio-like spirit is in you! Whether
you serve Christ or Beliall, whether you be Popish or Protestant, who (but God)
can judge? And surely you lie fulsome upon his stomach, Acts 18.15.
as lukewarm water, and that which makes you happy in your own conceit, will
prove you accursed in Gods: It were better you were hot or cold, then thus
wambling, and next to be vomited for ever out of the mouth of him, Revel 3.19.
who never returns to his vomit! Under pretext, that thou dare not trust
men, thou betrayest God, and the spirit of the Gospel: a remedy worse then the
disease! To be as wise as a Serpent I dissuade thee not: But shall this destroy
that naked simplicity and spirit of love to God and his truth, which where it
cannot go, will creep, and play at small game, rather then sit out? What?
Matthew. 10. 2 Cor. 10.4.
because we cannot express our selves in such acts and services as we would,
or have done, shall we serve God with neither might, spirit, or courage at all?
Is that command dispensable, and confined to this season or to that? has God
no need of thee in dangerous times? or, because thou dare trust no man, will thou therefore trust no God? Shall the Gospel carry thee no further, then ease,
and the serving of thine own fleshly turn will concur? Will thou dare to
do any thing against the spirit of the Gospel, because thou have not
elbow-roome sufficient, to act that part as thou would?

It is just with God to take it quite from thee, because thou walk contrary
to it: And to give thee over to a close spirit of thine own, that thou
should jeere and scorn the zealous, as Micoll did David, dancing with his
Ephod, before the Arc: 2 Samuel 6.20.
Was not the King a goodly fool to day? How many of these Neutrall spirits
have grown to it? Let it gaster us from it, and teach us to nourish such a
spirit in our bosoms, as the Gospel has wrought (if ever any such were
wrought) and to be far from disdaining it. He that cooles and checkes his own
spirit from zeal and grace, It commonly grows to open profaneness.
will (in a short time) be a secret discourager and checker of others. How many
are there, of years and discretion enough in other matters, who will bait
their children and servants from their diligence in hearing, and zeal in
profession? How many will say, I my self was as hot as you, but now time and
experience (they should say, time the Mother of truth, which has discovered
their hollow hearts) have made me wiser? And (I warrant you, say they) as hot
as you seem, we shall have a cooling card for you, and in time, when children
grow on, and debts increase, and an hard world besets you, you also will change
your zeal into wisdom, and become as temperate ones as we, and abate your
great resolutions. How many are there, whose great flames are now quailed, and
become as cold as ashes? But woe be to such, Satan has entered into them
again, (though he seemed to be cast out at the first) let none that have any
dram of this grace of the Gospel, be damped for such as these: For he that
has bred in them this spirit, either can keep them from such temptations, or
else can make their spirit rise above them, and increase: Matthew. 12.45.
whereas the end of such revolters as these shall be worse then the beginning.
So much also of this second sort.

Thirdly, this is terror to all Pelagian, Popish, and Carnal Pelagian spirits
far from the true spirit of a cure.
which are as opposite to the Spirit of Grace and conversion, as light and
darkness. The spirit of a true cure, of Jordan, differs in all points from
this spirit of self, and free will: The one is for God, and his glorious grace
sets him up in the soul with admiration and thanks: But the other is, to set
up and glorify it self, and the will of the flesh, to make God stoop to man,
to fetch him from Heaven, to the bar of humane censure, there to answer for
himself, why he should not vouchsafe grace to this man as well as that (both
being equally disposed:) and if the Lord answer, Because it is of my free love,
to show mercy to whom I will: Romans 9.13, 14, 15.
they strive with him, and tell him, This his pretended mercy, is mere
injustice: and cruelty above the most merciless Tyrants, to make a man and
damn him when he has done: to prescribe him a rule, which he never gave him
power to perform, and to require that of him, which himself has by an
eternal fore-decree disabled him from. O woeful pride! Shall potsherds contend
with their Maker? Esaias 45.9.
If they will needs clash, let them clash with potsherds, and try which pot is
stronger, but to quarrel with the Potter, how impudent and bootlesse is it?
And yet thus it is: Note it who will: The ancient spirit of conversion, tender
love and zeal to God and his truth, never prospered since this bastard spirit
of self and free will came upon our stage: It blasted all sincerity, and
gracious affections as sensibly as the East Wind blasts the tender buddes of
the Spring! What was Naamans spirit (I pray) so long as his Abana and Pharfar
lasted? Surely opposite to the Prophet, to Jordan and the promise. So is it
with this: Nothing will down with the spirit of self, save to pick quarrels
with free grace: it is no wonder, that they are opposite to men, 1 These. 2.15.
who are so contrary to God himself: Tell me, where will ye pick out a
Pelagian spirit, which ever was zealous for God, tender to his glory, jealous
of offending him, or careful to please him! The like I may say of the spirit
of Popish devotion, Popish spirits likewise.
standing in the bare letter of the Law, of duties, of outward ceremonies and
performances, putting a Religion into the work wrought, and deed done? What
does all the dunghill and dross of Popery seek to establish, save a carnal
Religion? What does it so much abhor as self-denial? (except it be in some
externals for the meriting of Heaven:) what is so odious to it, as faith to
justify? Alas! That pleads for salvation by justice, and not by grace! It uses
Christ only for a mere formal person to bear her name, Esaias 4.1, 2.
but she will bear all her charges her own self! And under a color of some
glorious ceremonies and outward worship, what does she but muzzle the mouth of
conscience, and nuzzle the soul in a rotten peace, which either will carry her
to hell laughing, or else break out into utter horror and desperation! I ask
but this question, When as once the Lord has truly turned the soul to God,
what is more odious and irksom to it, then that which overthrows the Word and
Promise, and sets up in stead of it, a Religion of man's brain and inventions,
garnisht and disht out with the shreds and dregs of flesh, without a drop
of true blood of Christ, or one spark of the spirit of grace! Who wonders,
that wheresoever this trash becomes, there the true preaching of the Lord
Jesus, the power of the Gospel, the honor and esteem of the Ministry of
Reconciliation is trodden in the dirt, and cast out as unsavory? But I cease,
and leave this Use of terror, and come to an Use of reproof.

And that shall be of all such, as in times past, have seemed to be the first
head of the Professors in this kind, for their spirit of zeal and love to the
Gospel, but have now caught a fall, and Reproof.
but remain and welter in a lukewarm and degenerate estate, both in the sight
of God and his Church. Brethren, the time has been, Revolters from their
zeal and grace of the Gospel are in a sad case.
in some of our memories, that men have thought no Ministry zealous enough for
them, but wished with David, Let the righteous smite me, and it shall be as
balm: But now, these men are grown weary of such, loath reproof, and will
teach Ministers, what, and how far they shall order their discourse. Each
thing spoken in particular, is spoken against them: They who would have given
their very eyes to Gods Minister, and with Naaman here, Psalm. 141.5. Gal. 4.15.
thought neither gold nor silver, nor changes of raiment, good enough for him:
will scarce give two brass farthings to keep them in their places: At first,
who but they, to get them in? and now, who but the same men to hunr them out?
What? Are we become your enemies for telling you the truth? is this your great
spirit of the Gospel (shall I say) or of self-love? The time has been, when
you came new minted (as you thought) out of Jordan, that such tenderness of
conscience was upon you for God, that you would scarce take up a pin or a
stick of another man's, lest you should sin: But now you that so strained out
a Gnat, can swallow a Camel: Some of you dare grind the faces of such as you
are to deal with, and no money is sweeter to you, then that which you get by
an hard bargain: Once (if you be remembered) you took thought how you should
subsist from week to week, for lack of the Word: Now, you can pass weeks
and months, and never come at a powerful Sermon: and, which is worse, whereas
the least offense in this or any other kind, would smite you like the sting of
an Adder, now, you are so brawned, that it never troubles you awhit! The time
has been, wherein the sorrows and sufferings of Gods servants went so near
you, that they made them deerer to you, then ever: Now no penny, no Paternoster,
as the Proverb says, and let them sink or swim, what care you! Once you
could forfeit your names, your states, your pains, your liberties for the
truth of God, Heb. 10.
and profess that it was better then ten thousand of your lives: Now alas! the
least stirring of a Mouse behind the painted cloth, is enough to make you
tremble like an aspen leaf! Oh! you love to sleep in a whole skin, and the
notion of a persecutor, an enemy, a prison, or a fine, is hideous unto you!
Rather had you to spend five pound to quit your selves of such a fear, with a
crasie conscience, to please a timorous and degenerate spirit; then five
shillings to hold out the Profession, the Resolution for that truth, which once
was dearer then your lives.

The days have bin when Novices and first Converts, Zeal of first converts
described.
were very scrupulous of their fashions in attire, their companies, their
liberties, games, and recreations, both for kind and measure, both for for
fear of sin, and also of scandal: mavelous loath to incur the least
suspicion of a carnal spirit, in these or any kind, as jarring with the
tenderness of heart, which the first sense of mercy wrought in them: Now every
man falls to his dispensations, and swallows down all these, as if there were
nothing, either within them to check, or without them to stumble at. Once, the
manner was, to enquire after the closest, strictest course of worshipping and
walking with God: as thinking no cost too much for God: Now the fashion is to
ask, what is the least degree of true faith, that if they can make themselves
believe they have that, there they may set down their staff! Now the first
question is, What liberty may a godly life admit, how may we be religious with
least ado, how may we save our selves best, and go near the wind, without
too much note for preciseness, or trouble for our profession? Judge. 9.
The fatness of the Olive, and sweetness of the Vine was wont to be so
precious with most of us, that we abhorred to exalt our selves above the
trees, with the forfeit thereof: But alas! those days are out of date, now
each Christian thinks it no bargain, except he may jolly it out in some
carnal manner, and live with reputation in the world, above his fellows, and
with note among them that are carnal: if they cannot brave it out with great
shows, fine clothes, matches for their children, raking up heaps, that they
may bestow upon the pride of life, that which they were wont to bestow upon
God, good persons and causes; it savours not in their nostrils. Once they
troubled them most, who suffered them not to be godly fast enough: now these
are no eye-sores, they can bear them well enough: but they trouble them most,
who will not let them be rich fast enough; who mourn to see that money, and
pleasures, and vanities, steal away their hearts: they could smite such, Numb.
22.27.
as Balaam did his poor Ass, who thus trumpe in their way, and stop their
pace, in that, which they cannot seek fast enough. Oh poor wretches! Went not
the spirit of Grace out with you to stop you also? What? had you laid this
sweet babe in the Cradle to sleep, while you thus play your parts?

Is there (think you no dinne to awake this sleepy spirit, no cross to sting
you, as fire in your flesh, and so to recover your temper? Take heed then you
cozen not your selves at last, as you have deceived the hope of others: for
sure, if you be, or ever were right, there must be a way to let out this
Pleurisy. Brethren, I can scarce tell to whom I speak, I scarce believe mine
own eyes! If I may, are there not some here, who counted it a mark of their
true tenderness, to shun the least appearance of evil? 1 These. 5.
But where is this become? Show me the man, whose jealous heart can prove, that
he has not by nibbling at smaller evils, so imbezzeled his peace, and gulled
down the Sea-wals of his fear and conscience, that now he is waxen hardened by
the deceitfulness of sin? What shall we say in these cases? Surely, either
Gods Word, and the work of Grace admits a change with the time, or else, these
are those sad days, wherein men have gotten the start of this spirit of
Grace, and gotten more wit then our Predecessors have had, to wit, to join
Religion with the liberty of our own wills: Such dispensations (doubtless) the
Church of God never knew: but rather, in the loosest times, counted it their
eare-marke, to be closest Christians. Those who now nourish tenderness, are
made scorns and by-words, as fools who know not their liberties. It was once
a mark of the true spirit of Grace, to make conscience of the Sabbath day, as
a moral charge (although changed by the special instinct of the Lord Jesus
(the Lord of the Sabbath) from the seventh day to the eighth:) But where shall
we come now, where every man speaks not his own words, if not profane, yet
common, and ordinary in all mixed discourses, about personal matters, or else
news and novelties? Who curbs his spirit, to the talk of a Sabbath, ruling
his thoughts, affections, or converse, so as at night he might lie down in
peace? Truly, Christians shall not have need of enemies to bring in a form of
godliness for ought I see; themselves, even in their distasting it outwardly,
love it too well inwardly; all love a Religion of ease, and breadths, and own
ends. This is that Viper which threatens to eat through the bowels of
Religion, and to bring it to naught. Ah! little do we think, that this temper
of ours does lie heavy upon Gods stomach, till he spue us out! How just is it
with the Lord, for such a deserting and revolt from the first spirit of our
conversion and falling to the mixture of Sardis, Ephesus, and Laodicea, that
is, a dead, a decayed, and lukewarm temper; to remove the Candlestick out of
his place, Revel. 2.5, and 3, 18.
to take his flight not from the Cherubims to the threshold, but from the
Temple into a Wilderness, there to gather a new body of people, (not defiled
with this scurffe) and live among them, Ezekiel. 9.
rather then to take these Coleworts of ours to feed upon, aad this refuse
remnant and scraps of that royal feast which we were wont to make him, whiles
the savor of his grace continued among us? Large I might be in urging
particulars, but by the Paw judge of the Lion, and let this sha^p reproof, in
Gods fear, warn so many of us, as in whom every spark of old spirit is not
extinct, to look about us, 1 These. 5.25.
that we nourish this mark of Grace in us, and quench it not!

And so I go on to speak of that Use of Admonition; And Admonit.
Admonition to the people of God to nourish the spirit of first conversion in
themselves.
that they nourish and nurse it in themselves continually: That they wax not
confident in their first beginnings, because their edge was quick at the first:
as if they were past danger, or as if this grace would grow up in them, without
their own industry and watchfulness! Alas poor souls! you have but saluted
Religion with the upper lip: Tender spirits and keen edges may be soon damped
and dulled: you have a great journey to go, a world of work to do, a woeful
heart of secret poison still to subdue, which will not easily yield, it is not
your affections which will bear you out against a sad body of death, and a
nature of old Adam: many crosses, fears, bad examples, and errors of the
wicked abide you, and early or late will shake your frame, and try what metal
you are made of: Do not prophecy to your selves a shot-free ease, and to walk
without fear of bullets and darts, in this world. The Devil seems to be sad
that he has lost you, but of all other people, he watches you a mischief,
and would be gladdest, if he could pay you home: you are his objects of fury,
and set in the forefront of his battery, if the dint light upon any, it is
likest to seize first upon you: And thousands who have given as great hope of
as sound and close a spirit to God, and have opposed sin, base formal
courses as much as you, have yet revolted to Satan: and he has laid seven
times as many irons upon them as at first, to secure himself from a second
escape: Tremble to think of it. Matthew. 12.45.
Seek to improve this first Grace of yours, this zeal and affection to the
Gospel, and against all enemies of sincerity; with a wise, steady, and full
resolutenesse of heart, to undergo any brunts, pursuits, discouragements,
offenses by false Hypocrites, or other affronts which may come in the way: It
is not possible, but this Age (affecting nothing more then a contrariety to
power of good, and upright walking with God) must needs put you to it daily,
and try you thoroughly with the infinite many trials which it has devised to
ferret out the good from themselves, that they and their hypocrisy might
predominate, and all soundness be abandoned: Lie not therefore as two irons on
both sides the loadstone, let not your souls play booty with God in this
weighty business: stagger not, be not now haled by the false flatteries of
this painted harlot, or scared by the terrors and threats of a frowning tyrant
(for the world is both) but seek to be insensible of her: If she find that
love of Gods truth wanzeth in thee, and thou coudst beteame to be at more ease
and elbow-roome in the world, or that thou fear trouble, or beginst to strew
and garnish thy false heart with any other lust, she has enough, she is sure
of thee.

Rather set before thine eyes, the woeful end of all decliners; All that come
rolling down the hill faster then they ever got up; Caveats against a declining
course in sundry particulars
They shatter themselves, and break their bones, without hope of setting
again, their end is commonly worse then their beginning: Loath each step of a
base heart, going this way, and allaying this spirit with her own mixtures: If
first heat chill, it will die a thousand to one; if that which should inflame
all the whole course, be it self cold, how great is that coldness? Discern
it in the first approach, whether it be by casting on cold water, Stumble not
at the infirmities of the religious, but cover, and interpret them mercifully:
take no occasions of offense: nourish every thing, which might breed in thee a
better opinion of holiness, Matthew. 24.13. Matthew. 24.13.
Daily ply the means, and lay on fuel: arm thy self by prayer against the
course of decliners, as David did, Ps. 101.3. Pal. 101.3.
Nourish humility and simplicity of spirit (next to faith) above all: Inure thy
self to deny much for God, that so he may grow dearer to thee, and thou to
him: Spend not, nor waste thy zeal needlessely and rashly upon objects of
lesser weight, but reserve Compare Number. 23. with Exodus 32.19.
Moses was a man who in his own matters was very meek and calm: and therefore
his zeal in breaking the Tables, and indignation against that Idolatry, became
him the better. Esteem and value each sin by the nature of it, not the cry
or outside of it. The loss of thy fellow in all the Country: love such an one
with all his infirmities, rather then another with the best accomplishments.

Admon. Recover again thy temper, if it be lost: and by what means.
never lin till thou have recovered it again. Many ways this may be: and
never falls out more frequently then in these false-hearted days. Sometimes by
overmuch piddling about the bables of this world (for every of us must have
some Psalm. 55.6. Ier. 2.2.
that I may flee into the Wilderness, and there with a pensive soul call to
mind the love of my youth, which the Lord in those first cords of his, and
drawings of my heart, inspired me withal. Oh! how little did I then look for
such a change? When I was one of the children of the bride-chamber, I was merry
and joyful: But now I had need to fast and mourn. Then I knew not what sorrow
and sin meant: but went in and out with God at pleasure. Oh! that some happy
messenger from God, might bring me news of the recovery of of my spirit again
to that temper whereof it was wont to be! yea, if it were but news of a way by
which it might be once restored! Well, if thou will not give God over, he will
not forget thee: For why? if thou be sure that ever this spirit was indeed
wrought in thee, by the work of God (whose works are perfect like himself)
then know that this spirit is eternal. And therefore, as I advise thee to
tremble at thy deadness, and lukewarmnesse, so yet I add, lin not, till some
beam of ray of that old spirit of Grace (as the Sun through a cloud) shine
into thy prison walls: and cause thy flesh to return again (through faith in
his promise) as the flesh of a little child. If things indifferent, or crosses
have disguised thee, the work will be the less to file thee bright again:
because the leprosy is but in the skin: But if any special and gross sin
have fretted inward, and rusted thy spirit, wasted thy first love: then let it
smite thee, as an arrow piercing thy liver: desire God to flayte and gaster
thee out of that lap and bosom, Simil.
as Sampson out of Delilah's. As they who work in Coalepits, if once they see
their candle to burn blew, make away, with all haste possible, lest they be
choked: So thou, whiles any life and spirit remains, have thy self out of
this sad damp, and look up to him to prevent utter death, who has promised
to establish thee with his free spirit, and so to renew it, that it might never
again waste or decay in thee: See that it do not. Thou have felt the danger
of losing it, and the presence of God to thy soul by it: If God have gathered
it up again, as water spilt on the ground, and girded up the loins of thy
soul with a second girdle of renewed zeal and fervor of heart, lock thy
door upon thy beloved, clip him faster in thine arms, then ever: and sin no
more, lest a worse thing befall thee.

Fifthly, this Use leads me to another and more weighty one of Examination.
to try thy self about this spirit of Grace, whether ever it were wrought in
thee soundly or not. There is no one thing within the whole compass of
Religion, more usually counterfeited then this: neither is there any one point,
in which either the deceit of the heart is more dangerous, or the soundness of
it more comfortable to the soul then this is. We read in stories, that all
brave Princes have been counterfeited by sycophants: Charles the fifth, Edward
the sixth of England, and others: But although their outsides favored them,
yet their spirit discarded them at last: a base-bred fellow cannot equal the
spirit of noble blood. All Judasses and Theudasses, Acts 5. came to naught,
Acts 5. end
because they had bastard spirits. There was once (as a French rare History
has it) a Soldier in the Camp wherein one Martin Guerra a rich Citizen of
Toulouse served: who being in all points like to that Guerra, A rare history of
a French counterfeit.
and getting so far in with him as to know the secrets that had passed
between him and his wife: at last brake from the Army to Toulouse, and boldly
went home to Guerra his wife, as his own: and after some little suspicion, yet
so cleared all doubts, that he accompanied her as his wife, and lived in peace:
till at last, the true Guerra coming home, and claiming his wife, a suit in
Law was commenced at Toulouse between them: and had not some privy marks at
last, between her and the true husband, cleared the controversy to the Court,
the counterfeit had brought them to such a demurre, that they knew not what to
determine. And so may it fare here: such are the apish imitations of impudent
and unsuspected Hypocrites, in point of zeal, devotion, affections, and
abstinencies from sin, that the very anointed of God seems to stand before
him: 2 Samuel 16.6.
Nothing in this case is surer to determine the controversy, then the spirit
it self of true breed and Nativity. Hardly can the spirit of birth and
regeneration, be long dissembled: but one way or other earlier or later, it
will be discovered. Trial of the true spirit of Grace, is from it self.
Therefore, let every one try himself by this mark: even the spirit of Grace
will bewray it self: Not at first perhaps: for Alexander was almost crowded to
death in the tumult at Ephesus, and in Paul's quarrel, almost pulled in pieces (a
terrible pattern, as a worthy Writer speaks:) But yet, at length, time tried
him, and he grew an open revolter after, and was delivered to Satan. Act.
19.33. compared with 2 Timothy 4.14. Acts 6.5. 1 Timothy 1.20. 2 Timothy 4.10. Matthew.
13.27.
Nicolas the Deacon cheated the twelve Apostles: but his spirit betrayed him,
to be a wicked unclean wretch. Demas, Hymenaeus, and Philetus, went far, but
their spirit failed them. The spirit of the Grape will not be counterfeited by
the fruit of a Bramble: the one is generous, the other base. Eagles breed no
Crows, nor Doves any Kites, nor Lions Foxes: No more does the spirit of Grace
breed false Hypocrites. Well said those servants, The envious man has sown
Tares, for the Husbandman sowed nothing but good Wheat. It will be an
infallible mark of thy true birth, if thine own principle be thrown out, and
if the spirit of mercy become that in thee, and unto thee, which thine own
spirit once was, even a second nature. Grace will casheire and throw out thy
usurping spirit, As they cast out Ipta. Judge. 11.2. Note.
that it shall not reign: A false spirit works from within to an outward, but
Gods Spirit works from without to an inward operation: That is, Grace going
out of her self, and suspecting her self, both for the metal, and for the
stamp, for the kind, and for the degree, for the quality, and for the
continuance, abhorring her own sparks and false blaze, still seeks out for a
new spirit of Heaven, a new frame of heart. But our own spirit seeks within
her self, what light, what affections, what imitations, shows, and duties she
can find out: never suspecting her impotency to reach truth and soundness.
Now, although such may go far with their Lamps a long time, yet at last,
want of Oil will make their lamps flagge: when their feelings cease, when the
praises of men fail, when some of their actions cause them to be questioned,
and when some right wind blows full upon them, then they totter: when the
winds and floods came, Mat. 7. ult.
the house ungrounded fell. By one way or other it must at last appear, who
are men of their own stocks, and who are bankrupts; not to say this moreover,
that a wise man well marking the Spirit of Grace, and comparing it with the
other, will by one sign or other, easily discern a Noble and true bred spirit
from violent pangs, even at the best. But although he should not, yet the
spirit of Grace will bewray it self in time, and discard the spirit of the
flesh.

A true son of faithful Jonathan is a most precious piece to David, though a
poor lame creeple, Genesis 25.6. Particular trials of the spirit of Grace.
then all the posterity of Saul besides. One Isaac is more worth then all
Ketura's brood. The breed of a thing is all in all with men, even in these
outward creatures, horses, kine, and the like. So one soul of the right stamp
is more precious with God then a thousand. Be sure that the Word of the
promise, that immortal seed of God, in the blood The Word of God is the
immortal seed which bred it.
and the assurance of pardon, and this will turn all false principles of flesh
and blood, out of doors. Prove thy genealogy, that thou art an Hebrew of the
Hebrews, a true borne Jew, not of the letter, but of the spirit of Grace, and
then thou have that mark upon thee, which will not be worn out. God looks
first at what thou art for thy spirit and breed, and then what thou do. Phil.
3.8. Romans 2. ult.
Never vie upon him with thy heaps upon heaps, of worships, of means, of
duties: but first approve thy self, See Prove. 23.26.
and these will follow alone as the womb that conceives truly, is free of all
other conceptions: so the true breed of the Spirit abandons all false
conceptions: If all other seed of thine own, all principles of flesh be cast
out, and the womb of the soul clean and clear, this spirit of grace may
live and come to the birth in thee. And all false preconceptions cast out.
The womb that bears a true bred soul, must be as the womb that bare
Immanuel, a Virgin womb, wherein never any other fruit lay before. The mere,
only, and pure love of the Father, purchased by the blood of Christ, must
only beget thee to God, if ever thou be begotten: and no less spirit, Like
Joseph's Tomb, never any had lain in it before. Luke 23.53.
then that which united the Godhead of Jesus to his flesh, will serve to beget
thee to him: if it would, if thy own hopes, works, or self could have reached
such a generation, in vain should the Lord have been at all that cost, when
he brought forth his eternal Son into the world, to die for it, to shed his
blood for it, that it might become the seed of his Church, by the Ministry of
the Word. Deceive not thy self in this trial, which is very easy to do,
except God give thee an heart inquisitive, willing to be resolved, and
earnestly craving, that thou may not be deceived.

Secondly, try thy spirit of Grace by the operations of it. As By the
operations of it.
Abishag may nourish David, while there is any natural heat left in him: but
if that fail, she can put no life into him. Adorn a dead King with a Scepter
and Crown, and all his Robes; Alas! it will make a good Pageant, 2 Samuel 1.2, 3.
but all is lost labor. Try then what the fruits of that spirit are, which
thou have: if they be such as flow from an outward accidental cause, violent
and overruling, they will fail, when that cause cease to work. But if thy
hope, joy, and peace be from within, let outward means and motives either
continue or cease, still thy operations will abide, and flow sweetly,
currantly, cheerfully from thee. Water taken off the coals cease to sees:
yea grows colder, then at first. A sive held in the water holds it as well as
a bucket: cork held down under water will sink as well as lead. But if the
one be taken out, and the other be left to her self, all returns to the old
course. So is it here. A curious Philosopher once framed an engine of metal,
in the form of a man, and brought it to such perfection, that it could jabber
and patter out some words: but one that beheld it cried out, Oh fair skull
without brains! As in man's body, all true operations of life and sense, to
move, to work, to sleep, eat, and the l ke, come from a principle of life,
and so serve the soul; even so here. Operations must not be the principle it
self, but only belong to it: but if they be the principle it self, they are
a false principle. He that commends a Preacher because his friends love him, 2 Chronicles. 24 16.
as Joash served God, while Jehoiada lived, has no love in his heart, and
therefore may hate his service after, as he did. He that cleaves to good
company, to hearing, to profession, for a vantage of his own reputation, to
get good custom in trading, or a good match, or to serve his own turn, or
keep some of his own heat, having no other Principle must needs turn
bankrupt, for lack of a stock of his own. And the misery of such a one is,
Note.
That he hears, prays, and worships, that he might hear, pray, and no
further, from no hottome; and so his operation becomes his principle. Of all
such we may say, such a principle will surely breed their ruin: either their
eternal ruin, if no outward affronts intercept their course; or else both
ruin here, and for ever, if crosses come. For why? they do as a fool who
commits himself to the seas, in a broken Barge. When means fail, when
Ministry cease, when it becomes a reproach to profess, when false friends
draw away the heart, when suffering for the Gospel comes, losses, trials, and
troubles, approach, then all Religion vanishes. No hypocrite can be above Gods
storms and tempests: especially if a right wind blow, it will be turned up by
the roots. Every wind perhaps will not search each rotten tree, 2 Timothy 4.
but some one or other will. The mind of the world searched Demas: the wind of
pride, and ambition, Diotrephes: The wind of secret lusts turn of some, 3 Ioh.
8.
the wind of affliction others: and the wind of time and continuance will
search deepest of all: for a stone can fly no further then the strength of the
hand which threw it, will carry it. Therefore be sure, that the operations of
goodness which come from thee, proceed not from a false principle, but from
the spirit of grace.

Thirdly, try this spirit of grace by the constituion and frame Try it by the
f^ame and soundness of it.
cannot reach that which soundness can. For why? The best in an unsound person
are his Negatives: real, positive, and habitual grace he cannot attain unto.
So far as a negative way may go, an unsound heart may attain. To side with
religion as good, to deny himself in many things for it, and to suffer
somewhat, from some confessed excellency therein deserving it, or some light
restraint, example, or ends, may be an unsound hearts condition: but positively
and really, to lay the honor of God to heart, inwardly to love, that he
commands, to grieve for the sin of such as resist it, inwardly to sympathize
the furtherance of it, that is beyond him; The reason is, because his love is
not from union, but from an adherence, or hanging by, in judgment, or pangs of
affection. Take two examples. It is said that two sorts strove for David to be
their Kings: the ten Tribes of Israel, and the two other Tribes. There was more
Negative spirit, in the ten then in the two: Why (say they) should not David be
more ours, then yours? we are ten, and you are but two: we have ten parts in
him: we can confer more honor upon him, and give him more subsidies then
you, and many good morrows. But whence came all this? from shame and pride,
that they should be backwarder to fetch him home then the rest; But the
positive grace of love to David came from Juda and Benjamin; for why? he was
bone of their bone, he was their flesh: Nature strove in them, 2 Samuel 19.43.
humor in the other; their words therefore were stronger then the words of ten
times as many tongues of counterfeits. They (no doubt) made as great a brable,
but geniall love could not be dissembled. So it was in those two harlots;
pleading for the child: both spoke earnestly, neither could put down other, in
point of words: 1 King. 3.26.
the false mother was as deep in her Negative principle as the other seemed to
be. For why? she meant to be even with the true mother, and would see her
childlesse, as well as her self. So the living child might be divided, she
cared not: But by this Solomon descryed her. The sword being brought, then that
real heart of a true mother appeared in the one, which could not in the other,
for she had it not in her. A wretch could be content to leave off all Religion,
if he were sure, that none would take it up after him: for he is good, because
it shall not be said, but he will be as forward as any: But if none would be
good, he could be willing to be naught: Why? for lack of that habit and savor
of grace, which makes the sound heart desire and resolve to be be good, whether
any other in the world be so besides himself, or not: The life of the child
was so dear to the true mother, that (although it went against the edge) yet
she chose rather the false mother should have it, then it should be slain: And
therefore it was adjudged to her as her own. So is it here, A true heart would
cose any loss, rather deny it self to the death, then the life of religion
should be endangered, because it is bred in her bosom. So then you see
(brethren) Positives coming from life cannot be assembled by the heart which
is dead and unsound. An hypocrite for his humor would have the the child
religion into his possession, for his credit, not for love of the life of it
(for he will starve and kill it, for lack of good keeping;) only the true
mother that bare it, and knows the price of it, will nurse and nourish it with
her breasts. Try thy self by this: Any Ape will imitate somewhat in a man, but
he can neither laugh nor speak for lack of Reason.

By the object, the order, and equality thereof.
falsehood at the branches only: The zeal, love, and grace of the spirit is
chiefly, and mainly against the chief corruption of the heart, then of life:
and it is first earnest for the maine, most weighty matters of God, and then
for second things. Not first for the latter, and then for the former. Again,
it is orderly, equal, not preposterous and disproportioned. Great are the
cries of many Separators from our Communion, against corruptions, abuses in our
Church: But you shall scarce mark any order in their spirits. They begin not
at home, are not zealous against the abuses of their own souls, see not the
pride, and desperate self-love of their own hearts: The glory of God in their
own Reformation they will not look at, Separatists from our Church, how blind
in the discovery of their own corruptions.
but suffer themselves to swarm with all base evils: see no want of Charity,
Mercy, Compassion, Discretion in themselves. If they would see their own
beams, they might the better discover others. But alas! if there were no
Church abuses to speak of, their occupation would cease. And why speak they
of these abuses? Not (as becomes them) in patience, and innocence, to wait for
a blessed redress, but to overthrow the Church quite, and pull down the very
frame and foundations of it, yea to raze it to the ground: which never did any
(of those who are ten times more judicious then the best of them) attempt or
intend. And so they bring an aspersion upon others, to be as giddy and rash as
themselves, who yet as much abhor it, as they do those abuses. If the Spirit
of Grace, of a sound, humble, and tender heart, cleaving to the Word, close to
the Ordinances, could be found in them: If Christ and the work of Faith and
Regeneration, were as great objects in their eye, as outward administrations of
the Church, we might hope better of their persons, then now we can. So I might
instance in other particulars. Many men have zeal and affections in them, but
how do they improve them? Surely not upon the real things of the Gospel, but
upon personal objects: censuring such as equal not themselves, in their
supposed grace, judging men for their ignorance, infirmities, errors. Whereas
the spirit of Grace looks inward: 1 Cor. 13.
it is merciful, long-suffering, meek, loving, hops all things, endures
all things: it judges her self in secret, and leaves others to stand or fall
to their own Master. So likewise the Spirit of Grace is free (as the Apostle
says) from all partiality, and hypocrisy. A false spirit cleaves to this
Minister, or to that, for some by-respects, Cephas, Apollo, Paul, Romans 14, 4.
Iam. 3.17 1 Cor. 3.22.
shall go for his money: and accordingly is carried in such affection,
sometimes above the clouds, sometimes lower then the earth, in likes and
dislikes. But a sound spirit loves all the faithful Ministers of Christ, with
suitable tenderness of heart, (though the measure be, as the peculiar relation
stands) and holds the same affection constantly to all, for Christ's sake: The
badge of their Master procures honor to them in his heart, whether old, young,
near, far off, the gifts and graces of God (though lying diversely) are the
object of his love. Not only will a faithful Minister be for God in Pulpit,
but out of it also: not zealous in public, and in private as another common
person. A good heart will not affect a strict closeness upon the Sabbath, and
then upon other days loose or careless in the duties of the second Table:
using all sorts of companies, taking all liberties, breaking promises, paying
no debts, running up and down with neglect of calling and family: this is no
spirit of grace, but of corruptiom, gilded over with some file of zeal,
without substance.

Fifthly, the carriage of the spirit of Grace, discernes it from the The
carriage of it.
that although a false heart will be as earnest, zealous, and forward, as an
honest: yet one fly or other of self reflection will bewray, whence it comes,
even from pride and seeking it self. It cannot beteame and afford the Lord the
clear and entire honor of the action, except in the dressing it lick her
own fingers. As a rat behind the painted cloth, so does falsehood discover it
self herein. It is as oil in the hand, which cannot be held in. If it be in a
Preacher, you shall find it thus, Truly you must pardon me, I was put to it
upon a sudden, but I trust to your patience: and why? Oh! to draw on praise and
admiration! Oh says another, I could not satisfy my self in what I did!
Another will ask, How did you taste my doctrine to day? even as feast-makers
cannot bid their friends welcome, be merry, but there must be a tang of folly,
You must pardon us for our poor cheer, when yet they know they abound: so
here. Others cannot bring forth a point, but it must be with a preface, I am to
speak to you of a special point, and I doubt it will search the most of us to
the quick, Sundry miscarriages of an unsound heart discovered.
a point that few of you have heard till now: and many there are so full of
themselves, that if they hear any man of worth praised for his worth, they are
upon thorns till they can set another copy of their own by the other to
blemish it. I was the first man (says one) that first brought the Gospel into
the town; I was the man who hunted out such a drunkard, and brought such an
Adulterer to shame: I do such and such good to the Ministry, to the poor, and
the like! I have such respect in my place, do so and so in my family, and the
like! Here Is eagerness, and zeal, but most unsavory stuff mixed with it, too
rank for an humble heart to smell of. Let thy hints and overtures be for God,
abhor thine own mixtures: nothing so opposes the true spirit of grace, as
the spirit of a Pharisee, Lord I thank thee, I am not thus and thus, I do so
and so: Luk 18.10, 11, 12.
nothing more consonant to it, as the spirit of that Publican, I abhor my
self; as the spirit of those that know not what they did, Mat. 25.
Lord, when saw we thee in prison, or naked, and visited or clothed thee? This
loadstone of self will become a loadstone for God, if thine heart be sound.
And to conclude, even so will the carriage of a true spirit, be wise,
considerate, and well balanced: such an one will establish his thoughts with
counsel: Better is he that is patient in spirit, Prove. 24.3.
then the hasty. A cool spirit, is an excellent spirit, Eccles. 7.8.
if it be but cool in the carriage, it may be fervent in the substance.
Whereas the unsound spirit is fiery, quick, rash, and utters more with a
breath, then it can undo with ten: and so brings it self upon its own knees
to cry, Peccavi, when perhaps it is with reproach to himself and religion. I
will not condemn all for unsound, who are rash: But I wish all sound spirits
to beware how they trench upon such suspicious marks: Bring not sorrow upon
your selves by this rashness, you shall meet with trouble enough in your best
discretion: but that which rashness procures, seldom brings peace, either in
suffering, or in the issue, Thus much for a taste of those marks of trial,
which may help us to descry our own spirit from Gods grace. Many more might
have been added, but I hasten to an end.

To conclude then, let this be an use of Exhortation, and that Exhort.
First, to all that have this spirit in them, to mourn bitterly for the loss
and decay of this spirit throughout the Germany where this spirit began by
Luthers means, where is so much as a spark of it to be seen? Declining of
the temper of zeal and power ought to be bewailed sadly.
Even in the days of Luther, what horrible opposition was made to this spirit
of the Gospel? By how many means did the devil then stop the proceedings of
Reformation? What ways were not used by Politicians to quash that zeal by
their interims, and sundry books of Reconciliation with Popery, in their most
Tenets? Since which times even to the age we live in, both in Germany, and the
Low Countries, the Reformed Churches in France, and among our selves, how has
Satan labored to quail the spirits of men from zeal of the Gospel? By what
means has Popery so much encroached upon us? how hardly is the name of it
odious, even at this day, in most places? And if perhaps it be here and there
so, yet as for the zeal of peoples to the Gospel, from the experience of that
grace of conversion, and the work of faith, how rare is it to find? Oh! that
our heads were welsprings (brethren) and our hearts fountains of tears, to
mourn for the desolation of this Spirit of Grace among us! As he said, Scarce
the^e is mention of Rome in Rome, the change is so great in the places, where
the Gospel has been most famous: It is recorded of those Jews of the
returned captivity, that many who had seen the first Temple mourned to see the
latter: Some Jewish writers render the reason, because not only the frame of
it was so poor in comparison of the former: but because of the radical
defects it had in it. It seemed Ichabod, the glory was gone; Ez^a 3.12.
The Holy of Holies was empty of the Arc of Gods presence, and the Merey Seat
upon it, no more going into it with blood to fetch atonement, no more fire from
heaven to kindle sacrifices, they were feign to kindle it from the Sunbeams
with a glass: and as for the Priesthood, the Jews used to call it, a
Priesthood of clouts or garments, 1 Samuel 4.21.
because only those were left the Priest to wear; the Urim and Thummim, those
holy shoulder pieces, and those precious stones of the Ephod and Breast Plate
were gone. Truly (brethren) believe me, as Elijah in his Cave once mourned for
the misery of his time, 1 King. 19.10.
so might we for the loss of this spirit of the Gospel among us. What, do I
deny, but through mercy and the government of our Princes, both living and of
famous memory, we have enjoyed the truth of God? Or that God has had, and
still has abundance of worthy, learned, and famous instruments of service,
both in Ministry, Magistracy, and Commonalty? No, God forbid; and I doubt not
but in many places, Truth and light are much improved: (although it were to be
desired, it were scattered more generally:) but the misery is, that there
lackes a suitable spirit of love, tenderness, closenes, affection and soundness
to the Gospel. The body of knowledge in many is so vast, and unweildy, for
lack of equal power, integrity and life to quicken it, that it is like to
totter by her own weight. That former effectualnesse in Preaching, convincing,
converting, waxes straightened, scant, and collapsed. That spirit of siding with
the Truth of God, defending it against errors, and lukewarmenesse, that
ingenuity and cordial simplicity in us that profess, seems to be quite gone.
Trash and dross of men's profits, pleasures, ease, form of religion, and such
other scurfe, as is not to be named, has eaten up all, as one said, The usury
of the New has eaten up the gain of our Old University. So may we say, The
spirit of our new has eaten up the power of our old days, in point of edge,
affection, earnestness, and zeal. All is grown to discourse, contemplation,
and empty shadows of sincerity. Not to speak of many, who formerly have stood
for diligent preaching, and for the power of it, and are now gone aside, and
slinke their necks out of the Collar. Alas! brethren, it is not your going
into new England, which will deliver you from the spirit of your old death and
sloth, except the Spirit of Grace conduct you thither. All cannot go, what
shall become of such as must stay, except God revive us at home?

Secondly, it should provoke us to pray to God, the great of exhortation.
to heal this decaying temper, and this consumption of our vital spirits,
that heat and moisture, life and vigor of grace, which threatens utter
consumption in us? How much better were it for us to fall into a burning ague,
then into such a dead palsy as this: yea to run into some moral evils
(which yet were damnable) then thus to play the hangbies upon Religion, Prayer
for healing of our times of this numbe palsy of spirit, necessary. Ier. 2.2.
and to eat out the very heart and entralls of her, by our woeful
unsavorinesse and declension? Oh that God would heal our backslidings:
cancel our Bill of devorce, and make new love to us, as in old times! As those
Martyrs, so pray we, Once again, Lord, the power and life of thy Gospel, give
unto us, the skin and bones of an empty profession, to be filled up and
beautified with flesh, and color, with countenance and savor of grace. Oh
Lord, thou who made the spirit of man, breath a second spirit of thy Word to
inspire our dead Carcasses, with a second and better life: Thou who causedst
that Sun of the Heavens to go back ten degrees, Esaias 38.
cause this Sun of Grace to go forward ten degrees, for it is gone
backward too many already. Thou, who by that happy wind of thine, scattered
upon the surface of the earth, did hazle and dry up the forlorn dregs and
slime of Noah's deluge, Genesis 8.13.
cause a new face of zeal and grace to appear upon our age, drunken and
soaked in ease and sensuality: Lord help us to cast our Eagles bill, Psalm.
103.5.
pluck off our Snake skin, and renew us as the flesh of Naaman after Jordan. Oh
command an heart and spirit, of first love, courage, thanks, joy, and esteem of
thy precious Truth and Christ, to return into us, let it be as new blood in our
veins, and marrow to our bones; count those days of our decay, declinings,
death and distemper, as if they had never bin: Impute not unto us our
unfruitful Ministry, unprofitable hearings, returning to our vomit, lingering
after Popery and her defilements, contempt and disdain of powerful
ordinances, which have deserved that we should be stripped and wasted of all
means, Malach. 4.2.
and left to utter woe and ruin: Come and bring healing in thy wings at last,
and pardon the sins of all sorts, that might hasten further wrath: for what can
be such a mark and symptom of misery coming, and spuing out of thy mouth,
Revel. 3.18.
as this decay of our temper? So many of us as cleave to God, let us not give
him over for this mercy: for surely, many of us here, especially of the richer
sort, whose gains come in merrily, and live at ease in Sion, do shrewdly lean
to this disease of luke-warmenesse: Amos 6.1.
beg it I say of the Lord, that he leave us not quite here in this corner,
and make us not an hissing to all our neighbors, for our barrenness and
desolation of the means, who have hitherto abounded and caused the borders of
our Town to be wetted with those streams, which have overflowed among us. So
much for this.

Naamans clensing and cure. Exhort. Genesis 18.12. Exhortation to get the spirit
of true conversion.
Alas! perhaps we laugh (as Sara did when she heard she could give suck) to
hear of this, that such dead blocks and lowering louts as many of us have
been to this day, surviving our own hopes, and outbidding all threats and
fears of the Word, by a carnal stupor of our own, savouring nothing save our
lusts and humors: I say, we think it impossible that ever we should become
any other. Should such as we ever be healed of our ignorance, hard hearts, and
senselessness? Should we ever come to be quickened by the hope of the Gospel to
be forgiven and saved? Should we ever become savory, humble, tender and zealous
ones? Truly I must tell you, considering how some of us in this place have
snorted out seven times seven years of Sermons (or well nigh) and fatted our
selves under the Gospel with nothing, but sottishness and security: me
thinks I am half afraid of it. Now am I leaving of you, but how many shall I
leave as I found them, if not far worse, and what is like to be their end, if
they should live under no means, or unfruitful, who knows? if a good day
have not mended them, must not a bad needs pair them? The Lord flaite many of
you this day out of your holes and corners: me thinks I behold your face with
horror and fear of any good: Esaias 55.8.
but seeing the long sufferings of God are bottomless, and his love as far
above our thoughts, as the heavens above earth, therefore I leave Gods secrets
unto himself, and spread before you still (even at this last farewell) the
cords of the Lord, and beseech you to come in, and be converted, and get this
spirit of grace into you ere you go hence, and be seen no more. Psalm. 39.3.
Gal. 1. ult.
Oh it would make the Angels rejoice, and the world to wonder, as Paul says,
Gal. 1. Those that having known me a persecutor, heard that I was become a
Preacher of the Gospel, they magnified God for me: so should praises be
offered up by many for you, if it should be thus. Who can tell brethren, long
has the Gospel been laid in three pecks of meal in some of you, Mat. 13.33.
if now it might at last break out as leaven, and season you throughout, what
a blessed parting should it be to you and me? As you are, I grant, (most of
you) no other is to be looked for, then has been; earth at first, earth
still, and earth hereafter. But if earth, earth, earth will hear the Word of
the Lord, it shall be otherwise: Naaman was as far off as you, till he washed
in Jordan: but afterward what a spirit of healing and conversion came he forth
withal? How does he come back to Elisha? Who can stay him? How is his lowering
heart enlarged to the Prophet? What is too dear for him? he loves the ground
he stands upon, and would carry it away upon mules, his heart is ravished with
God and his worship, and much water cannot quench love. Such might you be, if
the Lord would send Elisha to you. Elisha is gone, and the coming and going,
death and departure of many, both Elija's and Elishaes you have seen, and now
of me a poor Minister of Christ: What shall no fruit come of all? I am now
going to tell my Master, what fruit of all these six years work here, and
many more in other places, and by other my Predecessors has been reaped:
What? shall I be able to say nothing to comfort the heart of God and his
people? Oh sad thing! Well, I leave it to your thoughts, it is as much as I can
say, That if God persuade you, nothing was done upon Naaman, but might be done
upon you! Many of your own number, out of the stools wherein you sit, some of
your wives in your bosoms, children and servants under your roofes, have
tasted the like, and what hinders but you may? Oh choose rather to follow my
counsel, then to cause the wrath of God to smoke out against you, for adding
drunkenness to thirst, and speaking peace to your selves, Deuteronomy. 29.15.
and saying, Though I still walk on in the stubbornness of my heart, yet I
shall do well enough! God keep this plague far from you. And so much for
this.

Exhorta ions
and showed forth the fruit of this spirit of Conversion, go forward, and
persevere. I must not deny God the honor of his truth, And such as have to
nourish it in themselves
he has not left us without witness in this particular. Few are they, whom
this doctrine is verified in: yet some there are, and the very sight of their
faces this day, does not a little encourage me to speak unto them. If ever
then you saw cause at your first coming out of Jordan, to join with God, his
Religion, his glory, now especially join partners, and cle^ve to him: now side
with him, and the power of Christianity. Surely he that has hitherto kept you
alive, and brought you safely through so many waters, deserves it much more at
your hands now, being much nearer to your salvation, Romans 13.11. 1 King. 9.33.
then when you first believed. Do as those two Eunuchs of Jezabel, when Jehu
cried out, Who is on my side, Who? They looked out at the window, and became
agents for him. Could they thrust her down headlong, who were of her
bedchamber? how much more you, who have long since been sworn confederates
to the Lord Jesus? Never was there better season for you (if there be but a
spark of this spirit in you) to declare your selves, on whose side you are:
The power of godliness is on every side deserted, and she thrown to the
ground, if God mercifully did not by the power of the sword, and civil
Magistrate preserve us, what should we be, save a booty to Papists, and
enemies, who have long watched our overthrow? Now therefore, if you halt with
God, halt for ever. If God be not God, 1 King. 18.21.
give him over: If he be that God who has forgiven you, and will save you, let
Baal be Baal, and let him be as he deserves: Say thus, Have I but one poor
life to give for him, who gave ten thousand times a more precious one for me,
and shall I think it too dear for him? Shall Rimmon be more dear to me?
Shall I go and bow to that Idol, having received a better cure from the God
of Israel, then he could have given me? No Lord, There thou wannest my heart to
thy self for ever; That sweet welcome, those embraces which then I felt,
those Flagons and Apples can never be forgotten: Cantic. 2.5. Psalm. 73.19.
I behold the works of such as decline, but I bless thee, I repent not of my
choice, their Image is despised by me; My soul come not into their counsels.
Oh! if you can say thus, bless God, who has kept you! And for time to come, I
exhort you, that the more you shall see the power of truth scorned and forsaken
in the world, the closer you cleave to it, and if this be to be vile, be yet
more vile! 2 Samuel 6.22.
Pick out some special services, in which you may be useful to God and his
glory! If the Devil take any Apprentises, he will set his mark upon them,
both in their hands and foreheads: either they must show some singular zeal
for him, or else he will suspect them! And are you ashamed of your Master?
Matthew. 7. end.
Now this world destroys the Law, write it you, upon your frontlets, and the
fringes of your garments; show the world what Master you serve, Deuteronomy. 6.8.
and be not ashamed. Let the same spirit rest in your bosoms, for Grace which
you see now a days rests upon them, who are going from us into New England.
They will not endure you to speak one word amiss of it, but their hearts are
at their mouths presently: they magnify and extol it in all places,
wheresoever they become: their very spirits are possessed and taken up with the
hope and longing for it, they stand upon thorns, till they be there where
their treasure is, they are soon knocked off from hence, though their native
soil, where they have had all their conversation, yet as if they had not
known it, so do they renounce it, and all the contents of it: They use it as
if they used it not, for the affection sake, they bear the other: Parents,
neighbors, kindred, yea, wives and children, are deserted for it, and who may
control them? Tell them of the sad attempt of going, what danger by Sea, what
change of fare there, and want of all commodities. Oh! you do but encourage
them by your disswasives, they are content to learn to deny themselves, and to
change their dainty diet, for bare, their soft beds for hard, and what not? so
they may come thither. Pains, cost, selling all, and packing up their fardels
is nothing to them, for their desire sake. Oftentimes I have wished the place
good enough for such affections: But in this argument, touching the spirit of
Conversion and Grace, for the embracing of which, no affections can be
sufficient, how do we flagge? Where is the man who can do thus much for God
and his glory, from the experience of mercy? Ask thine own heart; Do I loath
the least appearance of evil? do I carry about me the zeal of Gods own
house? am I tender of the least offense? can I not endure the least affront to
his person, Laws, Gospel, Ordinances? do I honor his Ministers? do I think
nothing too dear for him, is my life, liberty, name, wife, children, vile unto
me, in respect of a good conscience? Oh! that it were so! How happy should we
be in approving our selves.

Let me leave generals, Particular urging of this exhortation to al sorts,
Ministers people, Magistrates, etc.
and come to particular estates and conditions: ye Ministers of God, pick out
special service for God, a few of you are left to wrestle for God, ply your
work, let not the glory of the Gospel fall, labor to inspire the souls of
your hearers with Christ; alas! they cannot choose but be dead hearted, when
there is no glad tidings brought them, no love shed into their souls. Ye
people, look up your old evidences for Heaven, and scour off your rust, you
see upon what costly terms the Gospel is maintained; this is no season to
palter out your time, show forth your courage for God, let not the spirit of
Popery nor profaneness quash that spirit of Grace which is within your
bosoms: Walk humbly, wisely, and yet boldly, hold out the truth of God
without fear, against all scorners and Edomites, God shall prop you up, fear
not, the vilest wretch shall never be able to resist that spirit, by which you
speak and walk. It is not your duties, hearing Sermons which will serve
turn, except you get into the way of God, and get your spirits whetted up to a
lively temper of godliness, you shall but add heaps to heaps, and die of
thirst: Rake up the ashes of your first sacrifice, and see if there be any one
sparkle alive, Judge. 15.16.18.
to kindle that old fire in your hearts God has now far more need of it,
then he had then: If you cannot find old sparks, go to Heaven for new, for a
double portion of it, else you will hardly hold out in these cold times. You
young Novices here among us, who in your youth have begun well, and honored
the labors of Gods servants by your zeal, by your answering to Catechism, and
by drawing on many to God, be not discouraged, that the same Grace which made
you young Sts. can make you old ones, I doubt it not, but bless God for the
hope I conceive of your growth and fruit: Esaias 8.18. 1 John 4.4.
though we are as signs (both we and the children which God has given us) and
wonders to the world, fear not, greater is he that is in us, then with them.
You Magistrates hereabouts, you Headborowes and Officers at home, do not play
the cowards in the cause of God, and the government of the Town: suffer not
drunkards to fill up your Alehouses here, upon the day of our Lecture, and to
rout in all cursed behavior, all the day after, going together by the ears,
swearing and swaggering: let not your Taverns and places of resort be more
frequented then Gods house: I see ruin before mine eyes, and the young fry
will prove worse then their Predecessors: your glory is gone, except you hold
together, and prevent sin from flowing down your streets, and overthrowing
all. 2 Cor. 2.14.^^
And in a word, to all sorts I speak, scatter the savor of this spirit of
Grace all about the places where you dwell: shine especially within your own
sphere, and families: lay in for grace and mercy, for your husbands, wives,
children, kinsfolk, and neighbors, who have long been ignorant, profane (or
formal worshippers at the best) pluck them out of the fire by violence; Jude
ult.
Perhaps some seed lies under a clod, they are not so deeply sunk under the
slavery of those Idols, but that God may fetch out somewhat of them at the
last: and shall it die for lack of stirring up? Be earnest with God, and
strive hard for the whole corner, this poor Country, in which ancient zeal
and the spirit of Grace, decays exceedingly: Easy serving of God for fashion,
and this love of the creature has eaten up all. The last year we were almost
starven for bodily bread, but God be thanked, better food did help well, both
to content the poorer sort, and to uphold their spirits with patience; yea, and
to persuade the richer sort to mercy and compassion. Now we fear a worse
famine, if not want of the Word, yet, that the Lord (for our wretched
unfruitfulnesse) may fill our mouths with Quails, Mumb. 11.20.
and suffer them to come out again at our nostrils; may fat us with means,
and curse us with leanness in our souls. Psalm. 106.15.
Lord suffer not the child to die at the breasts for lack of milk: nor having
it, to surfeit! Oh thou who have bred us by thy Word, with the lively spirit of
Grace, preserve us by the same nourishment, whereby we are begotten.

And so, for such among us (brethren) as have continued constantly Consolation
to all such as walk in the comfort of the spirit of conversion.
I do here reach out comfort unto them, and say to them, as Elisha to Naaman,
Go in peace. Though you and I should never hear the voice, nor see the face
of other, yet we shall do well, as long as the peace of God is with us: Nourish
your hearts still, till death, in this love of the Gospel; Make not shipwreck
in the havens. Think not now of any new way: Turn not to the world, for they
care not for you: you stink to them, therefore hold to your old Master, and be
his servants for ever: Let the Lord beat you out of his doors, before you
dare start from him: you have been his so long, that as Peter said, Whither
should we go (Lord) from thee? John 6.68.
thou have the words of eternal life. Though there be neither Calfe in the
stall, nor B^llock in the heard: though the Olive cast her fruit, and the Vine
decay, yet God shall be your salvation. Though means fail, Habac. 3.17.18.
yet this spirit of grace in you, shall be a lively immortal stock in you, and
preserve you by faith, to the day of salvation. 1 Pen. 1.5.
These are times wherein sin abounds, it is the very hour of darkness:
Revel. 3.10.
Pray that as you have kept the Word of Gods patience all this while, so he
would keep you, though all the world should be over-shadowed. And, although
(perhaps) you take thought for your first edge, which is blunted by long
continuance and custom: Ephesians. 3.16, 17
yet so long as your metal holds good steel to the back, and you grow rooted,
settled, and stable in all faith, love, and fruitfulness, fear not, he that
has begun, will perfect his work; Faithful is he who has promised. 1
These. 5.24.
To the work of whose Grace I commend you: which is able to sanctify you
throughout, and both to keep your bodies, soul, and spirits, 1 These. 5.25.
pure and blameless to his coming, through the Lord Jesus; to whom with the
Father and the Spirit, that immortal, invisible, and only wise God, 1 Timothy
1.17.
be all honor and praise, for ever, Amen.

FINIS.
AN APPENDIX, OR POSTSCRIPT TO THE READER.
ANd thus (good Reader) thou have these Lectures penned to the uttermost
wherein they were preached: And as I intended to preach no more, so neither do
I purpose to trouble thee with more then I preached: The Verses following to
the twentieth, savor wholly of a spirit carried zealously toward God, whose
mercy cured both Naamans body and soul: a draught whereof I gave thee in this
last Lecture. I grant, there are some passages of obscurity attending the words
next to them I have handled: which some scrupulous Reader might think himself
wronged, if they should wholly be unsaluted. Wherefore (to give a very short
touch of them) thus conceive of the severals thereof.

THerefore take a blessing, etc. But he said, Verse. 15. end 16.
As the Lord liveth] Touching this Addition of his large gifts, to his large
heart, I have already spoken of it in the servants arguments: and showed there
the duty of the people to their Ministers. And we must know it did not abhor
from the custom of those times, either to off^r or accept gratuities by the
Prophets. But, touching his refusal, he was intimated from God, to reject it,
and that with a solemn oath, by the life of God. Not that rash oaths are to be
admitted, in every solemn or serious case of truth: But partly for the
settling of Naamans spirit, that he might spare needless obtrusions, and
partly, that he might know, it came from no distaste in the Prophet, but it was
God who barred it. And why? Doubtless the Lord would not that rewards coming
from a Novice (whose strength was small, though his wealth great) nor any
brute thereof among Heathens (who must have heard of the fees, as well as the
cure) should disparage and prejudice the grace and freedom of so miraculous a
work, as the conversion of a soul, and the healing of a Leper. And therefore
he would have all such sinister constructions to be dashed: Gods Prophets never
stand in such deep needs, that God must be dishonored by their supply. God
scorned to be thought to send for Naaman, to possess his Treasure, or enrich
his Prophet: Teaching us, not to rake together boons and gifts from men, or
advantages to our selves, counting all fish that comes to net: But wisely to
lay things together, considering what our persons, the cause of God, the
persons that give, either unable, or ungrounded, or any other circumstances may
admit for the warranting or disabling of the receipt. For some cases are too
hot, and too heavy, to meddle with such matters, tending to a snare, and
therefore let them perish rather then Religion should suffer thereby. This
latitude of giving and receiving, is not easily restrained, where Wisdom and
Discretion holds not the reine. And Naaman said, Shall there not then be given
two Mules load of earth to thy servant? For thy servant will worship no other
God, etc. A reply of Naaman to this refusal, with his reason: Jn the former,
he seems to speak thus, If thou only aimest at my souls good, and not thine
own: hearken to my motion, of two Mules load of earth, (that is, so much as
will serve me to worship upon) for J hear that God will only be worshipped in
his holy Land, or the bounds of his Church. This argued his weakness: for God
might be worshipped by true Proselytes any where, though not in Sacrifices.
And, it was not so far from Aram to Jerusalem. Wonder not therefore, if the
Prophet yielded not. For herein be showed himself a Novice, and no wonder:
Young beginners must be hatched up and encouraged. But, for the thing which is
to be noted, it is this, That in ignorant beginners, there are many tolerable
follies, and infirmities, inseparably mixed, till better light and information
ripen and rectify them. There must be a time allotted for every thing and the
Disciples of Christ while he lived with them, were extremely weak: Christ
being in his humility, they were bare: but after when he came to his Crown, he
gave them gifts abundantly. And we need not wonder if Popery after so long a
soking in their dregs, are so stale and settled in their superstitions: when
as, even at, and with the first onset upon Religion, and creeping out of
Paganism, this poor pilgrim here grows superstitious. When are we free from
evil? Whiles drowned in profaneness, we are on the left hand, when brought
to Religion, then a right-handed enemy invades us, Superstition as a Canker
breeding in the fairest Apple of Devotion, to defile it Religion cannot quit us
from danger. There is a white Devil as well as a black: Ignorance and
weakness being unable to avoid many right hand evils. Yet better (of the two)
that our milk sees a little over, then be eaten raw: although both would be
shunned. What a world of scurffe brake into the Church of God after the first
three hundred years since Christ? Persecution ceasing, and Christianity (under
Constantine) beginning to prosper, how did Satan (hedged out one way) creep in
worse another? We say, Out of the ashes of sin, sin may spring up. Out of
those ashes of persecution, arose undue honor to Martyrs, Orations, Sepulcres,
Prayers to God at their Tombs, Censings, and the like, till Superstition
without a word, bred Idolatry against it, and laid a nest egg for a world of
Popish trash to ensue upon it. The sad issue of it this day, argues of what
stamp it is. Let us labor therefore to keep devotion within due bounds, lest
else she which was at first legitimate, after breed bastards for lack of
knowledge. And so much for this.

The other thing is his Reason, Verse 17.
fetched from the integrity of his heart, in point of the worship of his only
God, who had converted him, and no other. It is the same which is said in verse.
15. which gave occasion to the last Lecture, proceeding from the spirit of his
cure. It is (as I have said) an instinct and inbred affection of all true
converts, to clasp and cling wholly to the God of mercy, and to the truth of
his worship, who has accepted them to favor. And therefore the first real
consequent, and formal adjunct of his conversion, is wholly and for ever to
ejure Jdols. So that all defiled Schismatickes and Heretics, Jdolaters,
justly question their true conversion. Jnto their counsel let not our souls
come.

Verse. 18.
In this the Lord be merciful to thy servant, etc.] As he is resolved touching
the last term and object of his worship: so yet he sadly staggers about the
circumstances. It has long possessed the spirits of most men, that Naaman
resolved upon the bowing before the Jdoll, and craved pardon for it, as a
gainful sin, and that which he was loath to forgo. But they are much
deceived. For the opening of his speech, consider there is somewhat in it good:
somewhat doubtful. That which was good was this, that out of a tender respect
to preserve his purpose of sound worship, he smites first upon his chiefest
fear, lays his hand upon the pained plat, and is most solicitous, for that
sin which had been, was like to be most difficult and offensive in his way.
This he takes most thought how to be rid of. Fire always consumes that matter
which most opposes it: so does grace carry the soul with most jeal^usie, ca^e
and resolution against that sin which has been beloved'st, and th^eatens
greatest resistance to a repentant course That which was doubtful in his
words, is this, That he desires to be pardoned in his bowing afterward (for so
J take the words to import, not for time past:) but the opinion of most men
concerning his resolution, is very uncharitable. He is now in his chief heat
and zeal for God, therefore to come in with a dispensation for a thing,
contrary to his vow (in some kind) were very absurd and unseasonable to
imagine. But we must conceive this verse to contain the pith of all that had
passed betwixt him and Elisha; touching his complaint J take it thus therefore,
that here is a fight in Naaman, viz. betwixt zeal on the one side, and
ignorance, doubtfulnesse, and infirmity on the other. Having therefore (no
doubt) debated with the Prophet, touching this great stumbling block which was
like to lie in his way, by his Masters leaning upon him before the Jdoll, and
the Lord (for the present) hiding from him the particular counsel, which he
then needed: as a man not knowing what he should do at the instant, whether to
abhor such concurrence, enduring what ever should ensue, or correspond with
h^s Master: he breaks out into this passionate speech, that if it must be so,
that for avoiding of some inconveniences, till God did further reveal himself
in that point, he must go in and bow (which God knew how irksome it would be
to his tender heart, and derogatory to God) that then the Lord would dispense
with his weakness, and doubtfulnesse in that case, When I shall (says he) go
in: he does not affirm he will, much less has he delight and resolution in
it: but if God do not between this and that occasion, more fully resolve him,
that then he would not strictly look upon his act, but his intent. Neither is
this new in Scripture in some cases, that God tolerates for a time, that which
is not warrantable in case of a strait, as in the midwives lie to Pharaoh. If
any shall object, that he should have renounced such a concurrence directly,
and made no pause: J answer, Who doubts of the Rule, That in Gods matters no
deliberation must be admitted (as that holy Martyr said:) But is this Rule so
soon learned by heart, by a Novice which has scarce time to conne his lesson?
No doubtless, fear, and ignorance what should be done in a case so difficult,
and so sudden, beset his sad heart, and forced this humble suit to the Prophet,
that look what hitherto was doubtful, he would be his mouth to God, to
resolve and satisfy his perplexed spirit in it when it should seem best. This
conclusion J suppose the Text may well bear, When I shall go, that is, b^
urged to go; When I shall bow, that is, be expected to bow: then in this, or
about this, the Lord be merciful to me; that is, resolve me beforehand, what
J am to do; Whether to trust God for my place and office, more then fear the
displeasure of the King; or to bow with him in the Temple, till further light
and strength shall be revealed. All this, though it savor of such weakness
and ignorance (as in a Novice, in a trial of such consequence is not strange)
yet I deny, that it ought to be construed to come from a spirit of mere base
collusion and purpose to sin against conscience. Now since the Text may admit
such a construction, I demand, why ought it not? for it is a rule of
interpretation, In doubtful senses charity must oversway. And who knows what
light God might afford him, when he was gone from the Prophet? Sure it is by
the Prophets farewell (Go in peace) that Elisha little doubted of it For to
still his anxious mind he bids him so do. Touching the point of Aequivocation,
J have handled it upon verse. 13.

Go in peace] q. d. Let not this overmuch disquiet thy spirit, to hinder and
dash thy joy and comfort in God. Possess thy soul in peace: go not wilfully
against thy light: nourish this thy tenderness still; and that God who has
done the far greater, will much more do the lesser for thee; either
overpowring thy Master to release thee of this snare, or else strengthening thy
timorous and weak spirit, to take leav, eand to reject the show of any
Aequivocation, let whatsoever danger come thereof, that possibly may. So much
for the Readers satisfaction, leaving my judgment to them that are wise. Enjoy
this with the rest, and profit by all, repaying me thy Prayers.

FINIS.

