THE Loyal and Impartial SATYRIST: CONTAINING Eight Miscellany Poems, VIZ.

I. The Ghost of an English Jesus addressing himself to the Royal Cabal in
France. To the Honorable, T. C. II. Looking on Father Petre's Picture. To his
Honored Friend, Sir T. W. Knight. III. Ecebolius Britannicus, Or Memento to the
Jacobites of the Higher Order. To the Truly Orthodox Critic and Poet, J. D --
n Esquire IV. The Grand Decision, to the Memory of Cranmer. To his Magnanimus
Friend Mr. H -- ll, of H -- y. V. To an Old Factious Miser, who wept at the
Loss of a Bag of Gold. To his Generous and Ingenious Friend Capt. B -- w. VI.
The True Christian Philosopher, written to his much Honored Friend, W. B. Esquire
VII. The Refuge, written to the Honorable, Sir R. F. Barronet. VIII. The
Comical Cabal; or Humors of the Mobile. To the Truly Honorable and Ingenious,
Sir P. D. Bar.
Jamque I^ae patuere Deum, manifestaque belli
Signa dedit Mundus.
Lucan. lib. 2. -- Dabit Deus his quoque finem, Virg. Aeneid. lib. 1. LONDON,
Printed for Richard Baldwin, and Sold by the Booksellers of London and
Westminster, 1694.

TO My much Honored Friend, GEORGE LUCY, Esquire
Honored Sir,
BEING under some Obligation to communicate these following Essays to the
World, and being my self sufficiently satisfied with the good meaning and
tendency of 'em; I am thereby induced in a peculiar manner to recommend 'em to
your Perusal and Acceptance: And in you (I am sure) I at once Honor a
Gentility becoming the Politest Age, and a Wisdom that adorn that Ancient and
much celebrated Family, of which you are now the principal surviving part, and
to which I must ever own my self most particularly obliged.

I have here presented you as a trial of your kind and wonted Constructions
with some slight and unaccurate productions of a little leisure; and which at
first I designedly formed in some hurry of thoughts, for my own satisfaction
and ease; but have now ventured to Publish in times of more Public and
Universal Danger. For though I was never much surpised and alarmed with popular
or artificial Fears and Jealousies; (which will perhaps make a noise, even in
the most promising Seasons, as long as the World endures) yet when Matter of
Fact is notoriously plain and evident; when Tyrannical, Base, and Undermining
Principles are seconded with Power, Revenge, and successful Issues; It Is a weak
piece of bravery merely to defy Danger, and Rank Folly and Stupidity not to be
Nationally concerned.

The Politics of France are now fairly legible in Speeches and Bravadoes, in
Actions and Menaces, and many Self-evident Tokens of a designed Usurpation: And
we are not only to expect the same Burning Effects from the same Damning Cause;
but have also too just and apparent reason to fear, that we shall be graduated
up, through all the dectnt forms of Ingenious Cruelty, and the several Stages
of Torture to a more Solemn and Ceremonious Death, if ever Popery lift up it is
Head in England.

Perhaps the more dull and half-witted Priests may content themselves with a
short Fiery Trial; with the Plain and Old-fashioned way of Sacrificing
Heretics to the Roman Idol: And I have Charity to believe there are many kind
and good-natured Romanists amongst us, who are so much our Friends, as to
shrink and tremble even at the thoughts of such Barbarities as these: But all
their good wishes must prove but vain and plausible Nothings, when the Insolent
Jesuit has once (...) Ascendant, and is roaring up and down with Racks, Wheels,
and Damnation in his Mouth, and all the Terrors of the Ten Persecutions: And
what will a not swearing, or, who would have thought it, signify, when our
Gates are set open to that Royal Thunderer, who has been so far influenc't by
his Beloved Oracles, an the Omnipotent Charms of Canonical Executioners, as to
give no rest either to the World or himself; and whose magnified Conduct bears
a near resemblance to that Awful sort of Majesty, which Mr. D -- n presents us
with, in his notable Description of a Bull after this manner, While
Monarch-like he ranged the listed Field,
Some tossed, some gored, some trampling down he killed.


I would here take occasion (had I a Commission so to do) to entertain the
Courteous and Benevolent ^eader with some obliging Prophecy, or comfortable
Revelation about Futurities and Events: But at present I must own my self not
sufficiently skilled in Astrological Enquiries, Synchronistical Schemes, and
other ingenious Whimseys, which sound but immusically to a Judicious Ear, and
rather amuze, than improve the Rational Faculties. If I can compose or allay an
ill-natured Passion, or gratify a good one, by perusing the Books of Homer, I
am not much concerned with Didymus the Grammarian, where he was certainly born;
or with others, which were first written, the Iliads or Odysses. So long as I
can enjoy the Benefits of the Reformation occasionally begun by Luther; I need
not anxiously enquire, what his Name seems to import in the Muscovitish Style,
or High Dutch. And if I could but see my Native Country in a Triumphant
Condition (of which I do not despair) I care not whether Albion take it is Name
ab Albis Rupibus, from Olbion, or the Son of Neptune.

Be pleased to accept of what I have written, as a Testimony of my Zeal and
Love for Old England, and Honor for your self: I am,

Honored Sir, Your Humble Servant, S. S.

THE GHOST OF AN English Jesuit, Addressing himself to The Royal Cabal IN
FRANCE.
BRavely performed my Friends! and who can tell
But this rare Change may add new Life to Hell?
It shall; Success shall all your Fears confute,
And bring the Devil again into Repute.
In spite of Heaven your Fame shall wider spread,
And stamp a Terror both on Quick and Dead:
The Northern Heresy shall now go down,
That has so long out-brav'd the Gallick Throne;
And Heaven it self shall with new blushes glow
At the dire Ills which you transact below.
O Britany! thy Fate rides on apace,
And Rome shall punish thy accursed Race:
The Leaguing Powers of Hell and Earth combine
With cruel Martyrdoms to make thee shine,
And nobly to revenge my fall by Thine.
I thought that Monarch for whose sake I sell,
And Headlong went before my Time to Hell;
Would have atton'd my Fate with active speed,
When Time should plant the Crown upon his Head:
Had he done so and showed true Roman Skill,
I could have owned him for my Master still;
Had he but marked each Week or Day with Blood,
Begun with his own Vile, Apostate Brood;
Had he thought Mary's Reign too soft and good,
And scorned to have been b'a Woman thus outdone;
Had he from London Tower lanc't Thunder down
When like a Trojan Horse it faced the Town;
Had he inverted Seasons, forced a Day
With blazing Bishop, showed the foulest play
That Rome could Act, or Hell it self can Name,
'Till he by poaching had destroyed the Game:
Nay had he been the second of his time,
Blessed with a Genius for some lower Crime;
Had he taught Heretic Tiburns steps to climb,
Mowed 'em down thick, and left no work for time;
Trod on their Necks with true Ignatian Pride,
And braved 'em with the Gospel on their side;
Had he done this, and more he should have done;
Rome might have owned him for her True-born Son:
But he alas! was Innocent and Tame;
Too much oth' Brother's Metal in his frame
Checked all the Praise that hope did e're create,
And stopped those Glories which on slaughter wait:
But I forget -- The Infernal Council sat,
And much was said about Affairs of State;
At length the Unanimous Sages have decreed,
You should their Glory raise with generous speed
Hail Mighty Monarch! who alone art fit
To mix with Hell in Council, and to sit
Commissioner of the Infernal State,
The Destinies of Kingdoms to debate:
To thy wise Conduct, and famed Policy
Satan with all the Royal Progeny
Submits a weighty and important Cause;
Which if well managed will subvert all Laws
Divine and Humane, those of Nature too;
And therefore only fit for such as you:
Nor can I doubt thy gallant helping hand,
For though thy Arms were lately at a stand;
Though sprightly Rage run out of breath gave ground,
And thy sunk Cause felt an inglorious Wound;
Yet these last Triumphs do all Fears control,
And now brave Thoughts gild thy enligten'd Soul:
Despair is gone, that Lethargy oth' mind,
Which did thy stagg'ering Vassal's Spirits bind;
The drowsy Spell's dissolved; the Enchantment's gone;
Fear's now deposed, and Vengeance sits 'th' Throne;
Commands all Faculties, and rules alone.
Hell soon perceived, when first this Change began;
Through the horrid Vale the rising Rumor ran:
Fame through the deep-sunk-Vault did Echoing bound,
While thick'ning Shades snatched and devoured the sound:
With sudden Rapture winged, they did resort
To the place of Rendevouz, with Antic Sport,
And a long Jubilee gracing the Report.
Great Loyola's Ghost did seem to quit his pains
Strutted in Bonds, and Triumphed in his Chains:
He laid aside his Rage, and made a pause;
With envious Joy he muttered your Applause:
And I methinks, in sweet disorder toss't
Am in a Labyrinth of Wonder lost,
While my illuminated Eyes behold
Tyranny flush't, and Execution bold:
How is my Soul imparadi'st, to see
These nice Black Arts so well improved, which I
So slowly did push on? By Hell I Am glad
To see the Charm survive, though the Magitian's dead.
Advance Great Potentate with bold Alarms,
And make the World pay Homage to thy Arms:
Advance, 'till raised above all sense of Good
Thou do in Jolly and Triumphant Mood,
Upon poor bleeding Europe's Ruins stand,
And with thy Armies Thunder-shake the Land.
Sin on to such a brave Transcendent pitch,
'Till hardened like some Covenanting Witch,
Ages as yet unborn may call thee cursed,
And think thee by some Bear, or She Wolf nursed;
Hatched in a Storm, and in some D^sart bred,
And Mithridates-like with Poison fed:
May pious Wretches, and Seraphick Fools
That sneakingly pretend to Holy Rules,
The Annals of thy Reign with Horror read,
And fear thy Rising Ghost, when thou art Dead.
May Matrons faint when e're thy Name they hear,
And suffer Pangs greater than Women bear:
May Virgins which never knew unchaste desires,
While sleeping Dream they feel thy Lustful Fires,
May they shriek, sob, and cry, and long complain
To the proud Ravisher of their Joys in vain.
Thou need not Caesar-like thy Deeds proclaim,
Which have already filled the Mouth of Fame;
Ambitious Villains nothing read but thee,
The Godly put thee in their Letany:
The Brave accost thee with a generous flame;
Even England in distress invokes thy Name.
And when the wretched World must lose its Lord,
Such as Fate never shall again afford,
Nature shall feel the Change; the Infernal Rout
Shall shake the Earth's Foundations with a shout;
A Pompous Train of Sprights shall upwards go
To meet thy Mighty Shade;
They shall conduct thee in, and crown thy Ghost below
Legions of Fiends shall be at thy Command;
Even Lucifer himself shall proudly stand,
And place thee in a Throne on his Right Hand:
Surviving Sinners shall thy Shade implore,
If they but see thy Picture they will Adore;
They will rise up and say,
Lo this is the True Stamp of Majesty,
This is the Mighty Lewis, this was he
That Hectored Heaven, chaste Monarchs up and down,
And made all Powers alike stoop to his own;
While he like Jove, and as secure from Crime,
'Twixt Lust and Thunder did divide his time.
And you My Lords and Friends, that are thought fit
In Bloody Council with your Prince to sit;
You, who by being his Slaves far greater are,
Than other Puny-Monarchs do appear,
Act equal to the Character you bear.
Let no Sex, Age, or Innocence be free
From your quick All-Attoning Cruelty,
By an Herodian Provident Act Destroy
Young Sprawling Heretics, blast the blooming Joy:
Let 'em in Mother's Tears Baptized be,
And Martyred the next Moment, and when she
Has seen and felt her Tender Infants dye,
With one kind Thrust let her away be hurled,
TO Attend her Darling Brats in the other World.
Snatch Blushing Females from the Nuptial Bed,
And on their suffering Honor boldly tread,
Seize 'em all Pale and Panting in Despair,
With Tattered Vail, and Wild Dishrevel'd Hair;
And then with Sacred Knife for Death make room,
And turn their Bridal-Bed into a Tomb.
Lastly in Sport, and at your Leisure slay
Tame Aged Heretics: 'Twill be rare play
To Thaw their Frozen Blood, and make 'em feel
The Brisk Devouring Fire, or Broaching Steel.
O it is a Ravishing Sound!
More sweet and Charming than the Voice of Fame,
To hear the Old Martyrs crackle in the Flame.
Like Hills on Mountains pil'd, heap Perjury
On Common Lies, and Old Hypocrisy;
Let Faith be banished, with it Nature too:
Dull and Fantastic things, bid 'em adieu:
Compassion's Cowardice, and o'erthrows that State,
Which might subsist by Violence and hate:
Patience is Dullness, Goodness, Lethargy,
Mercy's a Pompous Name for Foolery:
It Is just whatever hurts you to destroy;
Besides in Injury there is a Secret Joy.
Well acted Fury is a generous Fire,
And conquering Arms a Reverence inspire:
The Voice of Cannon best proclaims a King;
The Law oth' Sword does the best Title bring;
And hired Dragoons will better plead your Cause,
Than if you bribed an Oracle oth' Laws.
The Jesuits Glory now is past the Full,
Priests in the Trade of sinning are grown dull:
And daily cancel all that Fame and Praise,
Which their Illustrious Ancestors did raise:
It Is time the World out of its Sleep should rise,
It Is time new flaming Orders to devise;
Which may refine gross sin to such a strain,
That Men may fear some Angels fallen again,
Struck from some Loftier Orb for their disdain;
And in the way to Hell by Heaven designed
To visit Mortals, and blast Humane-kind.
To Common Lust and Murderbid Adieu;
Such puny Toys Rome's Infant Greatness knew;
Such Jewels in her Cradle she did wear,
Let now some Manly Wickedness appear.
Invent new Tortures, such as poynted Wheel,
The gnawing Vulture, or Ignatian Steell
Did never inflict, or a forced Conscience feel;
Worse than Domitian e're designed to act,
When with soft Words he did Men's Dooms protract,
Or what is still more cruel and unkind,
Than Kings by their fair Edicts e're designed.
To this add things obscene, and in one day
More foul and brutal Scenes of Lust display,
Than Priest or Bawd e're by Example taught,
Than Popes by their Indulgences e're wrought
Ithe' Three Hot Months,
Or Nuns confined in their whole Life e're thought;
Such as were never equaled in Romance,
Or formed by A'ry Poet in a Trance:
Such as great Jove could never act to the full,
Even when he turned himself into a Bull.
Let no base cowardly disaster stain
The matchless Triumphs of your sinful Reign;
Those Heroes only do true Honor share,
That sin without a Blush, without a Tear.
Not all the Odours oth' Arabian Fields,
Nor the choice Scents the Indian Climate yields,
Nor luscious Gales, nor balmy Springs that meet
In Paradise, are so profusely sweet
As groans of Heretics, and the Nid'rous Flood
That comes from streams of their hot fuming Blood:
Fill up some Hugonots Skull with Reeking Gore;
And thus a Blessing on your Cause implore;
Begin a Health; (no fitter Sacrament
To back your Zeal and Villainous intent)
To Lucifer; round let it freely go
To all your Grim Confederates below:
Thus strengthened with an Oath, and fixed with Zeal,
Revenge in Privy Ambuscade conceal
No longer, but with proud adventurous Force
Great Britains Royal Officer unhorse.
Begin with him, who has your Councils Awed,
Were he the Son of some bold Thundering God:
It Is gallant Sport to hunt a Monarch down,
And having don't, to scramble for a Crown;
Nor can your Wit invent a Nobler Game,
To be the Basis of your Rising Fame:
What Sniveling Dioclesian never could do,
Destroy your Enemies, and their Bibles too:
Thus a new War against Heaven will be begun:
What spite you show this way, to Heaven is done.
Then quickly your Avenging Flames display;
And what at Sea you felt, with Interest re-pay.
Then though Death Revel in a Thousand Forms,
In Scaffolds, Gibbets, Racks, Wheels, Fire and Storms;
Though Myriads mount up to their Native Sky,
Though King and Subject undistinguish't lie;
Yet may you set, when Armed with Lawless Power,
The vast Expense of Blood on England's Score.
Rebellion shall Eclipse the Tyrant's shame,
And Heresy soften the lewd Murderer's Name.
Had Hell ungrateful been, you justly might
Turn Tame and Canting Cowards out of Spite:
But well, and to its cost, the World does know,
How much to our Dread Sovereign here you owe:
By him your Rising Glory first began,
And over the World in gay Procession ran:
By him the Lordly Boniface did prevail,
And on his Successors did Blood entail:
By him the Immortal Harry did advance,
And lay the Model of Aspiring France.
By him poor Charles the boasted Martyr, fell;
And dyed deservedly for acting well:
The Fame of which shook the round Dusky Ball;
And distant Nations trembled at his Fall.
Thus Hell kept pace with your Ambitious Will,
Blessed all your Wishes with Success; and still
For all past Service Gratitude does pay,
But chides your late past Dullness and Delay.
Therefore Redeem the Time, consider well
What you have lost, how much you owe to Hell:
Antaeus like you should Misfortunes make
Your Spoils; and from your Foils fresh Courage take:
Valor 'twixt Two Extremes confined and pent,
Swells like a Torrent struggling for a vent.
What, though repulst by Men and Seas Unkind!
The next Decision you may happier find;
Even Fate it felf soon varies with the Wind.
You Have lost a Battle! So did Caesar too:
Let not such trifling Thoughts your minds pursue:
Remember what you have acted, what you have won;
And scorn to be by one poor loss undone.
Think with what Awful Pride, and Brave Disdain,
You Rode before Triumphant on the Main:
While England's Fortune to your Arms gave way,
And Dutch, like filth, were shovel'd into the Sea:
Death flew about in black and hideous Forms;
While Top-Masts fell, like Oaks and Pines, in Storms:
English at distance gazed, as Men do creep
On Rocks, to view the Wonders of the deep:
Let such Incitements animate your Spleen;
Let no vain Airy Terror step between,
To crush Aspiring Hope: Go on, and may
Those Stars, that Slaughter guide, point out your way.
Old Time, methinks, stalks on with lazy feet;
Methinks it is long before my Lords I meet
With your grim Forces walled in glittering Arms,
Stunning the Nations rounds with fierce Alarms:
This do: Drive on unwilling Destiny;
And to your Arms let Victory reply.
Or, if you fail, may you full Vengeance share:
May those Twine-Devils, Cruelty and Fear,
Which once possessed you, plague you every where.
O that I were Omnipotent in Ill!
Or that my Pow'er ran equal to my Will!
I Would soon Anticipate the Worl'ds last Fire;
At every blast whole Kingdoms should expire:
Born on the Wings of Pride I Would upwards fly,
Pierce through the Clouds, those Bubbles of the Sky;
Hunt all the Guardian Spies from Sphere to Sphere,
And the Black Demon should out-brave the Fair.
Looking upon Father PETRE's Picture.
BEhold True Petre here! that High-flown Saint
Has ever been mere Masquerade and Paint.
Religion was his Pimp; The Name of Just
Was Glorious Pandar to his Pride and Lust:
View well that Leer, which looks as if 'twere meant
A Libel on Our King and Parliament.
His Stormy Visage, and Erected Head
Look Fierce and Proud, like Cataline when Dead.
There Is more Confusion in his Printed Looks,
Than in all Bellarmine's Enchanting Books:
Fate's Book can scarce more terrible appear
To a departing Lover in despair,
Than this to me, raw damps my Spirits seize;
No Common Murderer's Ghost could so surprise.
The very Picture like Medusa's Head,
Does with dire Horror Tender Hearts invade;
There Is rank Confusion in his very Shade.
Vile Image of a Steeled Apostate, Go,
And sink down to thy Brethren Shades below:
For sure thy mere Effigies should be
Sentenc't-for Witchcraft, burnt for Heresy.
Caligula did childishly complain
That no Misfortunes dignified his Reign:
He feared calm times his Memory would blot;
And his blurred Name would quickly be forgot.
How blessed had the Conceited Tyrant been,
Had he but known thy Luscious Arts of Sin?
Had he like thee, with one Envenomed Breath,
Raised, and Entailed strange Famines, Storms, and Death?
In vain would Monarchs, like the Sun, disperse
Their Vigorous Warmth throughout the Universe,
While Priests like a Black Cloud, or Northern Wind,
Stifle those Beams which are so warm and kind.
How are the Mighty fallen from their High Seat,
And sunk down from their Precipice of State?
How soon are Kings to swift Destruction hurled?
It Is Priests and Women that undo the World.
Ecebolius Britannicus, OR, A Memento to the Jacobites of the Higher Order.
YOU, whom Religion sits so loose about,
That you want Charity to fill it out;
You that cannot swear (that might consist with Love)
Yet Curse and Damn like the Great Lateran Jove;
Remember him who lately seemed to say,
What is Religion but a Solemn Play?
We do but Act a while, and then give over;
And when we quit this Stage, we are no more.
In vain Men hope the Alyss of Light to see,
No Spirits wait in hollow Trees beneath,
Nor is there any bellowing after Death,
It Is all but vain and senseless Poetry:
Death shuts the Comic Scene; when parted hence
None ever cried, What am I, or from whence?
No Demons walk, no glaring Eye Balls roll,
But horrid stillness then invades the Soul.
Great Souls discern not when the Leap's too wide;
Heroes will ever be for changing Sides:
And since Religion's vary like the Wind,
Who would to one be cursedly confined?
He that can servilely creep after one,
Is safe, but never shall reach Promotion.
Sell Plays for Legends (that is the way to prosper)
I Will part with Scenes for a more costly Shrine,
Phillis for Bridget, or Saint Katherine,
Bizarre and Escapade for Pater Noster;
My Maximin for Lewis; and I hope
To find a New Almanzer in the Pope.
Rome's Church, though once a Whore, now cannot be;
She must be chaste, because she is loved by me.
How Dear is Mother Church, how Charming Fair,
To a Distressed Sinner in Despair?
The World shall see I Will turn, because I dare.
As once Empedocles to get a Name,
Winged with Ambition to be thought a God,
Over unfrequented Hills, and Peaks untrod,
Passed into scorching AEtna's Liquid Flame:
So to be dubbed a Saint, and fill a Story,
From Fairy Lands, and dark Enchanted Isle,
From Mountains of the Moon, and Head of Nile
Immortal Bays will pass to Purgatory.
2.
But ha! What strange new Project is here shown,
So long kept secret, and so lately known?
As if our Old Plot modestly withdrew,
And here in Private were brought forth anew.
New Almanacks foretell some Change at hand,
When Bear-skin'd Men in Floating Castles land;
And all our hopes, like Old Men's Children, be
Blasted and withered in their Infancy.
Parsons and Curates careless of their Charge,
And safe in Holy Ease now live at large;
Unguarded leave their Posts, away they fly:
And all dissolved in New Allegiance lie.
The Prelates are protected by the Bar,
Dull Heroes fatten still with Spoils of War;
Ah why should a worse Fortune be designed
For him that wrote the Panther and the Hind?
Is this the State his Holiness has given?
Is this our Cape of Hope, and promised Hav'n?
This Province my Unhappy Change has got,
This Portion is the losing Converts Lot.
This Region my false wandering steps have found,
And Fortune flies me like Enchanted Ground.
Best take the occasion, and this Clime forsake,
While Time is given; Ho, Brother Teague awake,
If thou art he; but ah! How sunk in Tone?
How changed from proud Bullero to O Hone?
How faded all thy Laurels are? I see
My Fate too soon, and my own Change in thee.
Into what wild Distraction am I brought?
I Am lost, and caught in my own Web of Thought:
I burn, I Am all on fire, I more than burn:
Stand off, I have not leisure yet to turn.
What have these Bears, these Boars, and Dirty Swine,
These Heretic Dogs, to do with me or mine?
I Will never repent of such a Gallant Crime:
When Wits are down, Dull Fops will watch their Time.
Our Fame is hush't, as Hope it self lay dead,
And Rome begins to Nod her Drooping Head:
The little Teagues in Dreams their howls repeat,
And weeping Laurels with the Night-Dew sweat:
Panthers are now at rest, but Fear denies
Sleep to my Hind, and to her Poets Eyes.
The Grand Decision. To the Memory of CRANMER.
WHEN Heaven no longer could suspend its hate,
Stop its winged Vengeance, or adjourn our Fate;
When Englands Sins to a Monstrous growth did swell,
And we, the Darkest Nation next to Hell,
Had Armed God's Wrath against our selves, and given
Proud and Insulting Challenges to Heaven:
Then Mighty Cranmer, after Gods own Heart,
Was singled out to act his Mournful part,
With Sacred Blood Heavens Wrath to Countermand,
And to Convert anew the Apostate Land.
Methinks I see the Illustrious Criminal
Hurried from Prison to a Judgment-Hall,
Where he met Devils in the shape of Men,
And 'twas the Noblest Triumph he could gain;
Heaven had decreed that he should downwards tend,
And visit Hell, before he could ascend.
Methinks I see the busy Tempter stand,
Crying, Hold back, Cranmer Hold back thy hand;
While he urged on by Zeal, and Glorious shame,
Plunged his Immortal Hand into the Flame.
The Blazing Pile could not his Soul affright,
But Halo like did play before his sight,
And served to light the Martyr on his way
To Blessed Canaan, and Eternal-Day:
So when God's Chosen Favorites were to go
From Aegypt's Bondage, and a Land of Woe;
The obsequious Waters did their rage suspend,
And though they seemed to threaten, did befriend:
As Adam's Fortunate Offense made way
For a more Happy and Triumphant Day,
So Cranmer by's Officious Erring-hand
Brought Prouder Trophies to his Native Land,
And conquered, though his Soul was at a stand:
For though He gave back in a tempting hour,
Yet soon he rallied with a vaster Power;
And by his leading Arm the Laurel won,
Had he not erred, how little had he done?
Had Our Cause, backed but with an equal Power,
Been ballanc't in Uncertainty before;
His Hand had turned the Scale of the Dispute,
This Act did all Rome's Miracles confute:
By this alone it amply did appear,
What Romish Rage can Act, what Flesh inspired can bear.
Called not his Death, but Coronation:
'Twas but the Earnest of a Braver sway,
'Twas not his Dying, but Ascension-Day,
The Stage seemed not his Funeral Pile, but Throne:
Brave to the last he faced his Destiny,
When it was somewhat more than Death to see.
With blissful thoughts he did past Toyls recount,
And seemed Transfigur'd on the Fatal Mount:
With Port Divine, and with Attoning Breath,
He pardoned, prayed, and blessed in the hour of Death.
He prayed and upward looked to the opening Skies;
Then blessed again with lifted Hands and Eyes,
And as his Body Fell, his Soul did Rise:
It flew cloft upon the Wings oth' Wind,
The Prophet upward soared, his Mantle fell behind.
TO AN Old Factious Miser Who Wep't at the Loss of A Bagg of GOLD.
DO thou, who can behold without a groan
An Envied Nation, and a Shaken Throne,
Afflicted Heroes, and a bleeding Main,
At the poor Loss of Puny Gold complain?
For shame, thou vilest of the Whining Herd!
Thou Everlasting Scandal to a Beard,
Correct thy blubbered Eyes, and sob no more;
What, do thou think to weep a Golden Shower?
Judas, who for a Bag his Lord betrayed,
For loss of it had not been thus dismayed:
No Irishman for puling famed ever howled
Over the Hearse of his Departed Gold.
Thy Bags, which thou esteem'st thy Sacred Shrine,
Are not thy Goods, but a dull useless Mine;
And he that of one part did thee beguile,
No Robber was; 'twas not a Theft but Spoil:
He only took from the Rich Massy Throng,
What to the Public did before belong.
He only did redeem the Captive Store;
Thou art the Thief; the Bag was stolen before.
Take heed gray Crim'nal, and in time Repent:
Think not to make thy Chest thy Monument.
Thy Bags by Plunder and quaint Knav'ry gained,
Should now to Pious Uses be Restrained,
Let thy poor Naked Friend thy Liv'ry wear,
And feed not Lazarus with an Empty Prayer.
Part with thy Golden Gods, and give what is due
To Caesar, and the Starveling Vicar too.
If thou can give thy Thoughts this Glorious Range,
'Twill not Commence a Loss, but Wise Exchange.
In The Rolls oth' Just thou shall Recorded stand,
And find a fair Estate in the Promised Land.
Of all the Idolatries, by Heaven accurs't,
This creeping Zeal for Mammon is the worst.
They that have Worshipped Malefactors Bones,
Cats, Dogs, Leeks, Onyons, hallowed Stocks and Stones;
Still strained their Worship and Affections higher;
To a more Noble Object did Aspire.
(...) Miser has no taste of things Divine;
(...) highest thoughts still terminate in Coin:
Wealth (...) Principle, not Property:
(...) ta^^is tender Conscience does annoy,
A^^ ^ll his Christian Liberty destroy.
(...) his Temple where his Bags are laid;
(...) his Altar, where his Vows are paid:
^ne may but his Darling Idol serve,
(...) suite flourish, and Three Kingdom starve.
He rowls in sordid Mire like grunting Hog;
He Is Tyrant that would thus enslave his Dog.
He broods over Bags, sits poring on his Pelf,
Usurps on Public Justice, wrack's himself:
Drudges and Toils; like a Thin Meager Hack,
With a fierce Dunning Tradesman on his back.
With him compared a Monkey is discreet,
And the Grave, Long-Ear'd, Solid Beast a Wit.
With Eyes turned up toward Heaven, the unthinking Clod
Kneels but in Sport, and Complements his God.
With knackish Prayer he does the Poor undo;
So Cain could Sacrifice and Murder too.
'Twixt him and Fiend there is this odds alone,
The one wears Flesh and Blood, and the other none.
And sure that Wretch too justly is undone,
Though in the Name of God his Will may run,
Who has no Mercy, at the last dark hour,
Not one Attoning Item for the Poor.
THE TRUE Christian Philosopher.
To My Much Honored Friend, W. B. Esquire.
I.
WHile War and Rumors through the World do blow,
And Om'nous Clouds on Common Brows do sit;
How Happy in a Gay Retirement you,
Blessed with Philosophy and Sacred Wit?
II.
You seem to stand above the Shock of Time;
Wisdom from you does unaffected flow:
Your Speech is like our Poet's Hill Sublime,
Or Sweet and Pleasant like the Plains below.
III.
While the Universe groans, in you, methinks, I see
All Elements Calm, and Nature's self at Rest:
In your fair Bosom the Loved Graces play,
The Sirens sing, and Halcyons build their Nest.
IV.
In you Socratick Wisdom does survive,
And flow with purer percolated streams;
The Sages of Old Rome and Athens live,
And Ancient Lights shine with United Beams.
V.
With Innocence Armed the Globe you boldly tread,
And through a boist'sous World securely steer:
While meaner Mortals by low Maxims led,
Are tossed betwixt Alternate Hope and Fear.
VI.
So trim Mock-Warriours trip away, and run,
When Saucy Danger bids 'em stand their ground;
The busy Trumpet, and impert'nent Gun,
With rude, unmannerly Noise their Spirits wound.
VII.
But Englands Hero fortunately lives;
The grimmest prospect Fame or Conquest yields;
Through sparkling Deaths, and splendid Wounds he drives,
Secure as Caesar in Pharsalian Fields.
VIII.
Great Souls are still resigned, serene, and gay;
Each place to them a sweet Arcadia proves,
And he that never from Virtue's Path does stray,
Walks in Elizian Fields, and Golden Groves.
IX.
Though placed on Aetna's Top, or in the Vale
Of scorch't Vesuvius, he will a shelter find;
No Storms without his Gallant Mind Assail,
While in his Breast the Season's fair and kind.
The Refuge.
To The Honorable, Sir R. F. Baronet.
TO you, kind Sir, this bold Address is due,
Who are my Worthy Friend, and Patron too:
For he is my generous Friend, my Patron kind,
That gives me Knowledge to enrich my Mind.
I Have found, I Would almost said in you alone,
A Varro and Mecaenas both in one.
In you the Court and Academy join,
The Christian and Philosopher Combine:
The Favors which you willingly display
Exact more thanks than I have power to na^
Each Ornament I view, each moving Grace
Is a vast Theme, and would Engross my Praise.
In vain do Mortals wantonly Aspire,
When the best thing in the World is to retire
In vain on Greatness their Devotion fix,
And think to fly to Heaven with Coach and Six:
Unhappy, while they lay down restless Head
On a soft Pillow in a gilded Bed;
And want those peaceful slumbers which caress
The Peasant's Soul, and lull his Thoughts with ease:
The Prophet slep't, and dined in greater State,
When his kind Angel did upon him wait
Under a Tree, and bid him rise and eat.
There Is a more cheap Compendious way to Bliss;
A safe and brighter path to happiness:
Friendship to true Aspiring Souls is given,
As the best Emblem of the Joys of Heaven.
The choicest Wits, that Ancient Rome ever bred,
Never cared on lofty Pinnacles to tread:
But with Romantic Scenes of Grandeur tired,
Or else with pure Philosophy inspired,
Forsook the Banquets oth' Imperial Court,
(Where Fortune's Golden Minions did resort)
And sought for Refuge in some Country Town,
Where they might call their Time and Friends their own:
A Friend with his gay Looks, and kind Embrace,
Gilds every Walk, and Consecrates each Place:
A Cheerful Friend that knows no horrid Crimes,
Is a Deliv'rer in the worst of Times:
His Mouth's an Oracle can Doubts appease,
His Tongue's all Harmony, his Looks all Peace.
In gloomy Days; when in our Breasts the Sky
Looks foul; when Vapors crowd and upward fly:
When Spirits in disordered measures roll,
And every Thought shoots Poison through the Soul:
Our groaning sad Companions that condole,
Appear like Ghosts, and seem to shreik and howl;
But a dear cheerful Friend soon drives away
Black forms, and busy Spectrums of the day;
Or, like an Angel, does the Pain allay.
One touch from his soft charitable hand
Strikes Joy: Each glance a Care can countermand:
His Words are Balm, his Smiles a Cordial prove,
And Wit and Mirth the incumbent ill remove.
Each blissful Minute does fresh Sweets display;
Care fly^^, like Time, insensibly away:
Raw Damps, Cold Shades, and Pestilential Air
Depart, and the whole Man looks bright and fair.
I Would rather sit with Friend without control,
Than live a softly, tame, obsequious Tool
At Great Man's Ellbow, with a strait-lac't Soul;
Visit that House, where Wit or Love prevails,
Than view Loretto's Shrines, or proud Versails.
Or were I Monk; your Friendship to partake,
I Would quit my Cell, and Sweetest Nuns forsake.
It Is pleasant too, when Friend is gone, to fly
To the Sacred Muses, and Philosophy.
With these Wise Seneca made some amends,
When banished, and sequestered from his Friends:
And Caesar took a Muse, 'midst Civil Broils,
To ease his Labors, and divert his Toils.
One Happy Thought a brighter Treasure Coyns,
Than what is gained by strength of Lungs, or Loins:
One (...) all sensual Toies excels,
While the flush't Soul with lasting Rapture swells:
An Ode of Horace, Rapin, Casimere,
Transcends the softest Airs that charm the Ear.
Sweet Virgil! Thy blessed Fate I Would rather choose,
Thy Sacred Walks, and thy Immortal Muse;
Than proudly climb the much famed Emperor's Seat;
'Twas thy brave Pen that made Augustus Great.
With thee and Plato I Have been pleased abroad,
At Home, Alone, and in a Senseless Crowd:
I Have supped with thee, when at a Great Man's Feast,
Where 'twas a breach of Law to vent one Jest.
In Bed I Have been with thy Fair Dido blessed,
And in the dark by Anna too caress't.
There are more sprightly, and enticing Charm^
In Ovid's Poesy, than Corinna's Arms:
The Sweet-Tongu'd Sidney's Wit did far excel
All the famed Wealth oth' Land wherein he fell.
One Golden Leaf of Cowley writ with Art and Flame
Out-weighs a Miser's Store, or Bank of Amsterdam.
THE Comical Cabal; OR, Humors of the Mobile.
To the Truly Honorable and Ingenious Sir P. D. Baronet. -- Hanc etiam,
Mecaenas, aspice partem. Virg.
BEfore the All-seeing Sun did rule the Day,
Black Night with Pomp of Horror did display
Her gloomy Wings, and covered all the Globe;
The World was then one Universal Mob.
Hail more than Princely Mob! whose Ancient sway
Does only to Eternity give way:
Hail thou, who do derive thy Pedigree
From a dark Line, and strange Antiquity
From Mighty Nothing, and Immortal Anarchy.
And here, behold, Mankind in the Lump appears
A Gracious, Awful Rout of Thundering Seers,
Stanch Pedlars, Damning Porters, and their Peers.
Slaves, that are acted by the Power of Words,
And swallow Notions down, as Daws do Curds.
Their Peace of Soul consists in want of thinking,
Their Wisdom's shown in solemn Nod, and winking;
In waggish Leer, and a Judicious Shrugg;
You Would think they went to School to honest Pug:
Have you not seen, at Christmas-Carnaval,
Some Country Coridons, in a 'Squire's Great Hall,
Look shamefac't for a while, then duck and bow
In Civil, Surly Fashion all arow?
And all for Master 'Squire: As Dancing Mare
Shows Tricks and Postures for the King at Fair.
But when at length the jolly 'Squire puts on,
Salutes with Gentleman each Nodding Clown,
And cry's, what is in the House is all your own:
Soon Noddles raised with Healthing and Alarms,
Their Souls and Bodies both are up in Arms;
Prepared to fight, and weild a Club or Fist
Against any thing called Whore, or Antichrist;
Just so strong precious Nonsense will prevail,
If you do but infuse't instead of Ale;
Blind Zeal will soon Intoxicate, and Steer
Their Souls like Christmas, or Election-Beer;
The one a Kingdom fires, as the other Town, or Shire.
What is their Rage, whose Love's a dangerous thing?
Their kind Embraces look like Duelling:
With Civil shake oth' hand they will pinch and squeeze;
And almost smother when they mean to kiss;
Kick backwards when they think to Congee low,
And break your Shins in making of a Bow:
Like Cats, which Scratch and Mawl, even while they move
To kindest Essays of Entrancing Love.
Speak some Athenian Sage; instruct my Mind,
And tell me what new Politic Charm can bind
Our slippery Mob:
When Bedlam Wights, and a Prophetic Crew
(What cannot a Rabble joined with Providence do?)
Do Stare and Damn in Conscientious fit,
And, like mad Dog, all that oppose 'em bite:
What bars of Art or Reason can oppose
The sinewy force of such enlightened Foes,
When Zeal with brawny Arms and Shoulders joins
And Conscience mingles with the strength of Loins?
Bright Lances are but Toies, where they Engage;
And, like Waves against a Rock, but lose their Rage:
Stones, Polish't Timber, Adamantine Wall,
The Weeping Marble, Brazen Pillars, all
Submit; and scatter Ruin where they fall.
True the poor Slaves, like the first Matter, still
Are equally disposed to Good or Ill;
At most it is but Chance-Medley, if they kill.
Like Stone in Sling they are under a Command,
Mere Implements in Politicians Hand:
And if they are rightly set, or let alone;
Like other parts of the Creation,
In peaceful Order undisturbed they move,
Like Sun, and Stars, or Elements above.
But if they are jog'd from their allotted place,
Where Nature fixed this dull and heavy Race;
You may as soon, when it is on Wing recall
A flying Dart, or a Laplanders Ball.
Do but buoy up their Souls, framed to obey
With Dreams and Fictions of Original sway;
They Are proud as Welchman on St. David's day:
With Eyebrows they will the Government run down,
And with grave Folly dictate to the Throne.
With Finger thrust forth wisely they will Dispute,
And by the dint of Back and Arms Confute;
Put Cases in most wondrous solemn way,
Like little Jerry Blackacre in the Play.
And though they scarce can spell Poor Robin's Jests,
Are far above a Statesman or a Priest.
A General Council sits within their Skulls;
And the least words they speak are Oracles,
As firm as Fate, or any Papal Bulls.
They drive and hurry on like Phaeton
When he did mount the Chariot of the Sun:
That which before did serve for use, does harm;
Those flames now burn, which did refresh and warm:
That Wind which gently fanned, now loud does blow,
Swell big, and soon does to a Tempest grow.
Those Waves which were confined, now know no shore;
Against King, Church, State they dash with law less power
And fright Mankind with their unbounded rore.
FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
COnversation in Heaven: Being Devotions, consisting of Meditations and
Prayers, on several considerable Subjects in Practical Divinity. Written for
the Raising the Decayed Spirit of Piety. By Lawrence Smith, LL.D. Fellow of St.
John's College in Oxford. Price Two Shillings.

Lusus Amatorius: Sive Musaei Poema de Herone and Leandro, E Graec a in Latinam
Linguam Translatum. Cui Alix (tres scilicet) accedunt Nugae Poeticae. Authore
C. B. e Coll. Di Jo. Bapt. Soc. Price 6d.

An Anatomy of Atheism: A Poem by a Person of Quality, Price Six pence. All
Three sold by Thomas Speed, at the Three Crowns, near the Royal Exchange in
Cornhil.


