LVX OCCIDENTALIS: OR Providence Displayed, IN THE CORONATION OF King WILLIAM
and Queen MARY; AND Their Happy Accession to the Crown of England: With other
REMARKS.

By T. R. A.M. Oxon.

Jam redit and Virgo, redeunt Saturnia regna:
Jam nova progenies coelo demittitur alto.
Virg. Eclog. 4. -- (...). Hom. Il. 1. LICENSED, April 9. 1689.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be Sold by Randal Tailor, near Stationer's-Hall,
MDCLXXXIX.

THE PREFACE.
SInce the unanimous Wisdom of a whole Nation has determined, and thought fit
to offer up their most solemn Thanks to Almighty God for our late Deliverance
from Popery and Slavery, I hope it will be thought no rash or indecent sally of
my Pen, if I presume at some distance to Commemorate the same, (together with
some other providential Occurrences) which we must certainly conclude to be the
wise Product of an overruling Deity; unless, with Epicurus, we would place him
without the World, and suppose him to be an indifferent Spectator of all humane
Affairs.

Indeed the History of the Britain Church will appear to any, that will take
the pains but seriously to peruse it, a continued Series of providential
Revolutions: How wonderfully obliging has Providence been unto us, in ordering
that the British Church should be the firstborn of all Christian Churches in
the World? For though Christianity was privately preached to other Nations
before the Days of Lucius, yet ours was the first that received the Faith under
the Seal of Authority, and public Approbation: Nor had it only the Honor of
Primogeniture, but the Blessing too; it grew up, and flourished under the
Influence of Peace, without being watered with the Blood of Martyrs; for when
Persecution raged throughout the Synagogues of the East, our Church continued
unmolested, and free from such tyrannical Invasions, and suffered no signal and
inhumane Violence, till the great and general Eclipse of Christendom, about the
latter end of the Reign of Dioclesian: Nay, when Persecution was in its highest
Ferment in Italy and France, and other adjacent Regions round about us, there
were many poor and distressed Fugitives fled hither, as they have done since,
for Sanctuary and Protection. And when in aftertimes our Land was polluted
with the thick darkness of Romish Superstition, there appeared many great and
venerable Worthies, who opposed the Doctrines and Usurpations of Rome, with
their Votes and Writings, with their Fortunes and with their Blood; which
laudable Endeavors of our renowned Ancestors were preparatory steps to the
Reformation that ensued, and looked like so many important Skirmishes, before
they came to the main Battle. Again, if we consider our Church in its reformed
State, and trace its Beginning, Preservation, and Progress to this day, we
shall find it has been an illustrious Instance of God's presidential Care, and
blessed in a short time with a glorious Compendium of astonishing Mercies: For
though God for wise Ends, did suffer it for sometime to lie as it were dead, in
the hot interval of the Marian Persecution, yet how did he illustrate his
Almighty Power in granting to it a speedy Resurrection? What a long Catalogue
of Wonders run through the Reigns of Edward the Sixth, and Queen Elizabeth of
ever blessed Memory, when God was pleased to magnify his own Strength in the
Weakness of a Child, and of a Woman? How many Attempts afterward, Plots and
Conspiracies have been formed against our Church, and yet how miraculously
defeated? And how, above all Examples of former Ages, did he make his arm bare
in our late preservation, when Ruin star'd us in the very Face, and was laid
in open view? and all this designed and deliberately carried on under the
specious mask of Apostolical Meekness, of Tenderness and Moderation: But such
Moderation as this is the very Rack of Extremity, such Kindness is fatal, and
such Courtesies cruel. The modest Pretensions of these sort of Men are the
unpassable Pillars of triumphant Impudence; their very Tenderness is neither
better nor worse than the unexampled Horrors of an Inquisition; and Fire and
Faggot is the last result of their Politics. What christian Zeal, and yet what
hellish Cruelties has the Church of Rome produced in these latter Ages? What
pretended Love, and yet real Inhumanities? Inhumanities that would make us
extol the Clemency of a Dioclesian, and would almost stagger the Charity and
Faith of an Origin.

Of all Creatures in the World, the Woolf, in Sheeps Clothing, is the most
dangerous Adversary: And those undaunted Heroes, who could look with Scorn in
the grim Face of naked Danger, have always dreaded those quaint Murderers, and
stanch Assassines, that stab while they kiss, and embrace only to gain an
opportunity to destroy; as it is said of Caesar, That he did not so much fear
the magnanimous Anthony, as the pale and meagre Cassius; who could dissemble
his Passion with a treacherous smile, and take a kind of malicious delight in
contriving the secret methods of Revenge.

And here, to be just, I shall observe, that Kings, and Magistrates and Rulers
of the Earth, have been generally inclinable to moderation and tenderness
toward those that have differed from them in Religion; that as they bear Gods
character; and are Christ's Vicegerents upon Earth, so have they for the most
part been adorned with the attributes of mercy and compassion, 'till they have
been incited and provoked to rigorous courses by the instigation and lurry of
malicious Men about 'em. If we take a survey of the ancient Records of the
Christian Church, we shall find that most of the Primitive Persecutions did owe
their original to this root of bitterness: Severus, Valerianus, and other
Persecuting Emperors were mild and gentle for a time, and their Courts were
open to the professors of Christianity; and as they could not but have an
inward reverence for the Gospel, in that it provided so well for the
establishment of civil Righteousness and Morality; so did they also extend some
kind of benevolence to the Professors of it, and vouchsafed 'em the honor to
let 'em serve in their Armies; but being abused at length by the false
suggestions of some designing Favorites about 'em, they turned their former
clemency into fury, and raised most dreadful and inhumane Persecutions. 'Twas
the false information and accursed malice of the Heathen Magicians, that
stirred up Sapores King of Persia against his Christian Subjects, about the
time of Constantine the Great: 'Twas through the juggling insinuations of an
Arrian Priest that lurkt in the Court and bosom of Constantius, that the good
Bishop Athanasius was Deposed and Persecuted, and a way laid open to all sorts
of barbarities upon the Orthodox Christians; and when at length the glory of
the Cross was turned into the scandal of an Inquisition; how gallantly and
industriously did the Princes of Europe oppose the establishment of such an
unmerciful Tribunal? and yet how was it Voted up, and themselves awed by
Preachers and Confessors, by Bulls and Croisadoes, and the sanguinary
determinations of the Lateran Council? and what was the design of those
audacious men, who lately declaimed against the Church of England, but to
transport a generous and indulgent Sovereign into indignation and fury against
his Protestant Subjects? That all that noise and loud exclamation was mere
illusion, juggle and Disguise, will very evidently appear; if we do but
consider that at first our Church was caressed by those Men, who afterward
began to spurn and revile her: The Romish Factors did seem at first to have
such a passionate devotion for her, that they put on the garb and fashion of
fond Suitors, accosting her with the sweet perfume of fine Language, and all
the winning ornaments of address; but being not able to make good their
promises and propositions of Marriage, and finding themselves for that just
reason cast off, and utterly rejected; they found it necessary, for the better
support of their own sinking credit, to libel her honor, and assail her
reputation; and she was therefore proclaimed naughty and dishonest, because she
would not yield to the wanton and treacherous Embraces of the Church of Rome.
Being thus cast off for discovered cheats, they soon began to display
themselves in their true Roman antipathy and Italian bravery of Spirit;
Sanguinary Laws, Church of England's severity, were made the ordinary Topics
of discourse; and we had some reason to fear, bad those Heroes went on, that
fire and faggot, and an Holy Inquisition, would have been made at length the
Characteristical note of the Antichristian Church of England, since it is easy
to imagine, that they who can give credit to contradictions and impossibilities
on the one hand, may quite invalidate the evidence of demonstration on the
other.

But it has pleased God (who makes his Church the object of his care) to blast
all their policies with an inglorious defeat; and by his omnipotent arm (which
neither the Roman nor Infernal powers can resist) to rescue the Virgin from the
Dragons jaws, when she was but one remove from inevitable destruction; such
folly and madness it is for Men to vye power with Heaven, and to countermand
omniscience with maxims of state, and foolish artifices of humane wisdom. How
pleasant is it to observe the vanity of aspiring projectors; to see the
politicians taken in their own snare; meeting with shame where they hoped for
promotion, and confusion where they grasped at glory? such providential
disappointments may make us expect that they will be weary at length with
plotting to no purpose; and that they will be both ashamed and afraid to bring
their base cause to another Trial, which God himself has condemned by such a
number of Miracles.

The only thing that can obstruct the progress of our present felicity, is that
spirit of discord that is gone into the World, and which still reigns in the
Children of disobedience: Whosoever is sensible of those fears and convulsions
which lately threatened us, must think it high time to bind up those wounds, at
which Protestancy it self was just ready to expire. And indeed God seems to
have put this gracious opportunity into your hands; but we must not expect that
he will perfect our deliverance without our own concurrence; and therefore, if
after all the experiments and demonstrations of danger, as well as mercy, which
we have seen and heard, animosities still reign, divisions prosper, and
punctillio's still divide us; we have just reason to expect a reverse of Gods
providence; nay, we deserve to perish without commiseration.

THE Phoenix AND THE PEACOCK.
IN a fair Island, like Arabia blessed
With the rich Plenty of the bounteous East,
Where all the Glories of both Indies meet,
And Blessings crowd around each Natives Feet,
A Phoenix once did Reign; and all the Land
With peaceful sway did willingly command:
Her Feathered Subjects with obsequious awe,
Stooped to her Will, which was her mildest Law.
Where ere she walked, in Woods, or on the Green,
No plumed Potentate was ever seen
With so much joy, as was this Maiden-Queen:
Long was her Reign, and full of Halcion days,
Her Subjects all did warble forth her Praise:
So quick was their Allegiance, that it might
Seem not so much their Duty as delight.
Wide was her Sovereignty, and great her Bliss,
Yet greater still all wished her Happiness:
Few were the ills and Dangers she sustained,
Yet more than she deserved; so well she reigned.
For as she thus indulged her Subjects Ease,
And slept her self in the warm Lap of Peace,
Some black and envious Fowl came from afar,
Threatening Disturbance, and at length a War;
Which, because signal, in the Event I Will tell
How it began, advanced, and ended well;
For all this pompous Noise, and proud Intent
Soon vanished into Sport and Merriment.
In a strange Country, where the scorching Sun
Breeds loathsome Monsters, Plagues, Infection;
Where Ravens, Vultures, Bats and Owls do dwell,
(A place that is famed, for Horror, next to Hell)
An haughty Peacock reigned, and bore great sway,
Ruled over ravenous Fowl, and Birds of Prey.
High on a Mountains top he fixed his Nest,
Displayed his Plumes, and reared his gilded Crest
Nigh to the Stars, thinking himself to be
Allied to the Sun, the Worlds bright Deity.
Often would he, when pricked on by nature's Pride,
In gay Procession stalk with formal Stride,
Then, perking up, would pompously unveil
The golden Scutchions of his tawdry Tail:
While all around his Vassals did him greet,
And with an awful Reverence kiss his Feet.
But though his Plumes were of Angelick Hue,
And his bespangled Feathers wonder drew,
His puny upstart Greatness did arise
From glorious Robberies, Rapine and Surprise:
The Imperial Eagle he had quite overcome
By Force or Fraud, and made him cheep at Home;
Had pulled his Feathers, clipped his Wings, and stood
Upon his Neck in a disdainful Mood,
Poor and ashamed, he scarce durst peep. Abroad.
Or, if he did assume a Princely Mien,
(A daring Glory which was seldom seen)
Into the Warlike Claws, by wiles well laid
Of the great Scythian Bird he was betrayed.
The Eagle tamed, the rest did soon give way,
The Feathered Kings did servilely obey
This strutting Tyrant, who with Pride over born,
Made 'em the Objects of his Rage and Scorn;
Wide did he his victorious Wings Display,
And fondly grasped at universal Sway.
It grieved the aspiring Peacock to behold
The Royal Phoenix fortunately bold;
He grieved to see her single Force withstand
His potent Sway, and rigorous Command;
He raved, and Cursed her, made a hellish Noise,
(For what is more like Hell than a Peacock's Voice?)
Then doubtful stood, and hovering in Suspense
How to chastise and stop this grand Offense.
At length great things he in his mind revolves,
And hastily her final Doom resolves;
He vows her Death and unlamented Fall;
A Troop of Vultures Echoed at his Call.
These Birds that feed on Blood he did command
Forthwith to visit her detested Land.
And soon the winged Missionaries came
In various Shapes, prepared for Royal Game;
From grave and silly Birds they Feathers took,
And put on a demure and harmless Look,
Hoping such specious Dressings and Disguise
Might render them secure from jealous Eyes.
Long time did they remonstrate and complain
Against the Phoenix and her Tyrannous Reign;
They said, She did affect too high a Port,
And that 'twas fit she should Reform her Court;
That her ambitious Highness was akin
To the gay Peacock's domineering Line,
Her Subjects did too rich a Livery wear,
Those gaudy Birds which were to her most dear,
Which round about her Highness daily stood,
Had some of the Peacock's Feathers, and his Blood.
Thus for some time did these Impostors get
Some small Esteem, and draw Birds to their Net;
Thus did they with deluding Notes Surprise
Some vulgar Birds, and catch poor Jacks and Pies;
Till some of 'em, whose Feathers, loosely joined,
Dropped off, and proved 'em of another kind;
Betrayed themselves, together with their Cause,
And so became the Mark of the Phoenix and her Laws.
The Peacock heard this; Vengeance adds new Charms,
And a fresh Rage his sinking Spirits arms:
The Phoenix now he is resolved to burn
Before her time, and seal her funeral Urn.
Streightway he sent a Messenger on Wing
To a Puissant and Victorious King
Of the same Feather; and thus to him said,
With haste I challenge your officious Aid;
There is a Princess, in the World well known,
Usurps a Realm which I do justly own
By ancient Charter and Prescription:
Me she has scorned, my Vassals has annoyed,
Her and her puny Train I Will have destroyed;
This must be done, and this to you is given
By gracious Juno, the fair Queen of Heaven.
Juno does through the Earth her Power extend;
The World to her does in Obedience bend.
When Winds and Seas do swell, and Lightnings play,
If she but speak, the Elements obey:
The Winds with soft pacifick Murmurs fly,
And gentle Gales calm the distempered Sky;
This Patroness alone my Glory raised,
Let her great Name be above all things praised.
And now vast winged Legions did prepare
To cut their Passage through the tender Air;
Flushed with vain certain Hopes of Victory,
With vigorous haste, and active speed they try
Their nimble Wings, and threaten as they fly.
With Pride they spread their wide expanded Sails,
Brandished their shining Claws, and glittering Tails;
They looked like some vast Cloud gilt over with light,
In Form and Figure like a Rainbow bright.
With joyful Omens all along they came,
As if they rode upon the Wings of Fame.
So sometimes when a Kingdoms Fate draws near,
It Is said, Bright airy Horsemen do appear,
And make an ominous Flourish in the Air.
At length some nimble Scout the News conveyed
To the Phoenix and her Court; she not dismayed
(For Innocence can never be afraid;)
Soon Summons all her Guards, bids 'em prepare
And readily wait the Events of War;
And when prepared, she bids 'em rest that Night,
And by next Mornings wake resolve to Fight;
Then leaves 'em all, (this was the last she spoke)
To the Conduct of the World-surrounding Drake.
Scarce had the Sun resigned the vacant Sky
To kind and lovely Cynthia's Regency,
When Clouds full charged, Granado-like, did fly,
Breathing contagious Lightning through the Sky,
And Thunder too, while Storms began to Jar,
Turned Trumpeter, and loudly called to War:
In The laboring Air were such Convulsions seen,
One might have justly thought they would have been
The Worlds last breath;
Nature did seem to Travel with the Event,
And sighed and groaned as if she was nigh spent.
Mean time these Birds with fearless vigor blessed
Do unconcerned lay down their Heads to rest;
Yet sleep abruptly, and ere Mornings peep
Kill their Foes in Effigy while they sleep.
In Dreams and broken Slumber^ they foretell
That Conquest which soon afterward befell.
Thus slept they, till the Cock, that Sentinel stood,
Began to clap his Wings, and crow aloud.
For now Aurora with her beauteous Hand
Unbar'd the Gates of Light; at whose Command
Grim Night with her black Equipage gave way
To the bright Arrival of revolving Day;
The Elemental War began to cease,
The Storms were hushed, and listened to a Peace:
Black Mists already had their flight begun,
And rolled in gilded wreaths before the Sun;
Yet still the Winds were sometimes heard to groan,
The tinctured Skies a crimson die put on,
As if already they were purpled over
With streaks of Blood, and Red with Wounds and Gore.
Up rose these Birds, and with quick Order flew
To meet the barbarous Rout, and foreign Crew;
When spied, with martial Shouts they did 'em greet
Before their pointed Claws, and Wings could meet,
When met, they charged 'em boldly in the Face,
With moving Order, and a warlike Grace,
And with undaunted Force maintained their place.
Have you not seen two Rival Navies join,
And turn and meet, and justle on the Main,
And thoughtless of the Danger and the Toil,
Bravely salute with Blows, and so Recoil,
And again grapple as they both draw nigh?
So Birds met Birds, and battel'd in the Sky.
Hot was the Contest, while the trembling Skies
Echoed with gallant Shouts, and mingled Cries:
The brave Phoenician Birds fought to a wonder,
As quick as Lightning, and as bold as Thunder;
Many they deeply wounded, more they slew,
Their Foes forced back, durst not the Fight renew.
At length the Birds of Paradise came down
To guard the Phoenix, and her Enemies drown;
For now loud sounding Storms began to play
Against these Foreigners, and Birds of Prey;
About their Ears a sudden Tempest Rings,
Sends 'em away with shattered Legs and Wings;
Thick mangled Troops lay floating on the Main,
Some gasping, some half dead, and others slain;
Some few poor tattered Birds their heavy Wings display,
And with much heavier Hearts these Tidings home convey.
This Fight, which made the Islanders much Sport,
Did soon alarm the plumed Tyrant's Court,
Where on a sudden all in mournful Weeds,
Hang down their drooping ignominious Heads:
The Peacock and his Train no Comfort found,
Nothing but dismal Elegies go round;
All this sad Story in wild Notes repeat;
The ravenous Birds amuz'd forget their meat;
The Pheacock stormed, and blamed the Seas and Wind,
Called Juno Cruel, and the Stars Unkind;
Down dropped his painted Tail, low hung his Crest,
Through fear he foul'd his Feathers and his Nest;
Stripped off his Pride, and from his Wishes torn,
He Is made a Sport to the Pies, to the very Jacks a Scorn.
But now what artful or harmonious Voice
Can sing our Maiden Queen's triumphant Joys?
The Birds at Home with Emulation strove
To tell her wondrous Praises, and their Love.
The tuneful Orators of the Woods and Plain
Did sing the Triumphs of her happy Reign;
All different Notes were reconciled in this;
All did Congratulate her mighty Bliss;
Praised and admired she was where ere she came,
Each Forest was made Vocal with her Name;
The stately Trees with Reverence seemed to bow
Their lofty Tops, to adorn and grace the Show;
All things conspired to make the Joy complete,
And render her magnificently great.
Ye Birds that now dwell in that lovely place,
Which the Famed Phoenix heretofore did Grace;
Praise that thrice Fortunate and Happy Isle,
Which she adorned with Favors and her Smile:
Praise Heaven, that with fair Days and Halcion Weather
Blessed both the Island, and its Birds together:
That Island which does seem so rudely hurled
By scornful Nature from the wider World,
Did then in her sweet Solitude enjoy
The choicest Smiles of Heaven; what could destroy
That Place, which Vultures could not much annoy?
Pray Heaven, ye still may see such happy Days,
May Heaven in sending such make short delays:
May ye Phoenicians never forget the Fame
Of your Illustrious Queen;
May Birds unfeather'd yet be taught to Chirp her Name;
May Nightingales it chant from every Tree,
And may it, like her self, Immortal be:
For, unless ancient Story utter Lies,
The Phoenix is Immortal, never dies:
Her Dust is pregnant, a new vital Fire,
As quick as thought, her Ashes does inspire:
At least, when parted hence, she still does reign,
And in her Successor alive remain.
An Elegy upon the Late King.
THAT Sun, which rising with a joyful Ray,
Seems to foretell a long and happy day,
Stripped of all Beams, and wrapped in mournful Shroud,
Often sets obscurely in a midday Cloud.
Thus Mighty James, who by the Vote of the Laws,
Rose to a Throne, and with the World's applause,
From his Meridian sunk has set apace:
And, as it were, in the middle of his Race,
Looks like a poor neglected nameless thing,
The Shade and Ghost of a departed King.
And yet give leave (Great Sir) (I cannot yet
Thy awful Name and Character forget)
Give leave, I say, before I celebrate
Our present Twins of Majesty and State;
To drop a short Encomium on thy Hearse,
And to lament thy Fate with untuned Verse.
For sure thou was it by Heaven for Empire framed,
And virtue to thy Breast a little claimed:
Honor in thee chose her Imperial Seat,
And, because joined to Virtue, looked more great;
But amongst all the Plagues on Earth, there is none
So great a Plague as False Religion:
Religion, when corrupt, o'recasts with night
Men's Souls, and darkens where it should give light.
This blots that Virtue which it should adorn,
Whilst men by blind Zeal are in Triumph born.
Blind Zeal, that Lust o'th'Soul, t'affliction brings
The headlong Bigot, and destroys even Kings;
'Twas this that soiled thy Virtue in its prime,
'Twas thy mishap, I will not called thy Crime.
'Twas thy mishap, brave Soul, to be misled
By Slaves that Merit not their daily Bread:
By men that Lucifer himself outdo,
That Saintship claim, while they his steps pursue:
Men whose Religion's nothing but Grimace,
Hypocrisy set off with Paint and Grace:
Men that have shown how far a Christian can
Out-sin a Heathen and a Publican:
Men that by solemn Oath to sin are driven,
Yet fawn and pass a Complement on Heaven:
Men that grow Rich by vows of Poverty,
Grow Fat with Fasting and Severity;
Who, while they Fast, enlarge their Mouths like Hell,
And could devour both Indies at a Meal:
Men that renounce the World, yet haunt the Court
Where Kings must Hood winked be to make them sport.
Who, when Religion's made the darling Theme,
Can whistle the tame Vulgar after them,
And shuffle Souls into a Stratagem;
Establish Treason with a graceful awe,
And stamp Rank Murder Orthodox by Law.
If all that men report or fear be true,
May Heavens just Scourge thy Counselors pursue,
May it light all on them, and none on you.
Pardon this Liberty, and I Will atone
All that I Have said with a repeated groan:
I speak't with troubled Breast, and trembling Lips,
And with some fear I gaze on thy Eclipse.
I never rejoiced with those that sing thy shame,
Nor will I ever persecute thy Name.
May I th'infamous Brand of Slanderer bear,
If ever I blot thy name but with a Tear.
A Panegyric upon their Majesty's King William and Queen Mary.
IT was a lovely and a cheerful night,
The Skies were decked with living Gems; the light
Did not overflow with too redundant Streams,
But cheaply interwove the Clouds with Beams:
The lower Regions were all calm and fair,
And no rude Gusts disturbed the peaceful Air.
It was a night by Heaven sent from above,
T'invite soft Vows, sweet Ardors, and chaste Love;
When sleep with gentle wiles besieged my Breast,
With willing haste I laid me down to rest:
All things as yet were cheerful, it did seem
Nature's Vacation, and the rest of time.
But as I slept secure from outward harms,
With sense fast bound in sweet and pleasing Charms,
My active Fancy waked, and from afar
Displayed a Visionary Scene of War:
Death seemed to blacken and overspread the Plain,
And airy Troops in Purple heaps lay slain.
Bless me, said I -- and ever I more could say,
Behold a sudden Beam of gladsome day
Chased all this ghastly Spectacle away.
Quick as the light arose a glittering band
Of men whose joyful Songs did cheer the Land:
Before them a Fair Hero marched, whose head
With Laurels bright was decently arrayed:
Whilst Halo-like bright Glories played around
His comely face with graceful sorrow crowned:
Tears, which adorned his Cheeks, ran streaming down,
Shed for a Nations Sufferings not his own,
And over his Head there hung a starry Crown.
In Golden Characters some hand above
Had stamped upon his Breast Plate, Truth and Love;
Each Letter looked like an auspicious Star,
The whole a Constellation did appear.
To the King.
I waked and soon did find the Vision true;
And this Illustrious Hero, Sir, was you:
Strange Omen! for just then to us you came
Peace and perpetual Triumphs to proclaim:
To save us from a Wild and Savage Brood
Of Squeamish Monsters loathing all that is good:
To quell, while you restore our Liberty,
The worst of French Diseases, Tyranny:
To stop the Plague, to calm a Nations Moan;
This was, and could be done by you alone.
Your Powder, Sir, is Sympathetick sure;
It saves at distance, does not kill but cure:
So mighty Tempests sometimes as they fly,
Do serve to clear a thick infectious Sky.
Heaven bless your generous Aid; you seem the care
Of Providence and Charge of every Star:
All things are reconciled to your command,
At Sea you're Neptune, and a Jove at Land:
Where you frequent, there Fame still keeps her Court,
And Victory grown proud to make you sport,
With her bright Train does thither too resort.
Often have I heard how in times past you stood
Undaunted amidst dangers, death and blood;
When ruin wrapped in dismal sounds did fly,
And drowned the noysless whispers of the Sky;
Yet to your Fortune Death it self gave way,
And danger round you only seemed to play:
As if, like Juliue, trusting to your fate,
You braved the tempest which around you sat
Brooding destruction, and unmoved surveyed
The Tragic scene which Destiny displayed.
How did you lately too with brave disdain
Your self seem an Armado on the Main;
Whilst Winds grew tame, and the tempestuous Sea
Grew proud her Lord and Master to obey?
Sure some officious, fond Intelligence
Stoop't from its Orb, and with kind influence
Guided your Vessel, steered it in the dark,
And turned your floating Chariot to an Ark:
An Ark I Will called, since things succeed so well;
For before it Rome's mighty Dagon fell.
Good Heaven! What raptures of enormous joy
Did lull our senses, and our vitals cloy;
How were we all in sweet distraction tossed,
And in a maze of speechless wonder lost,
When Fame first sang aloud,
At length the time is come, when Britanny
Shall be for ever from Rome's bondage free?
As Men confined to Caves, and doomed to Night,
But faintly bear the sudden start of Light,
And seem to shun with a dejected face
Its pleasing violence, and its wished embrace;
So were we overwhelmed with sudden bliss,
And scarcely stem'd the Flood of happiness:
The span of mortal life did seem too small
To grasp a joy so great, so general.
Go on (Great Hero) and in time advance
To the utmost bounds of domineering France:
Crush that Great Monster dead, who all on flame
Thinks the whole World too narrow for his Fame;
One Globe's too little for his mighty span,
The Universe must stretch e're it contain
His boundless thoughts; how does he fret and rage
Like Bajazet confined within a Cage?
Yet this fine swelling Fop that looks so gay,
This spruce embalmed lump of gilded clay,
Must shortly to ignobler dust return,
And his proud ashes shrink into an urn:
Look him but in the Face, and speak the word,
He Will die with fear, at least put up his Sword;
His martial Troops will quickly scorn to obey
His sneaking greatness, and pedantick sway;
When you appear, they will wisely run away.
Monarchs that grasp at too much power and might,
Look small when raised above their lawful height,
And mounting higher vanish out of sight.
If Poets may divine (and sure I Am told
They challenged that Prerogative of old)
I Will say, Heaven seems to have selected you,
Rome's warlike Church, and Empire to subdue:
Your Name now sounds through Italy and Spain,
Where grave unerring ignorance does reign,
Where venerable Nonsense sits in the chair,
And Pagan pomp does Catholic Titles wear:
And where (as each sad Traveller can relate)
Poor defunct Piety now lies in stare
The Italian Monsters tremble at the same
Of Britan's Hercules; his very Name
Makes Cerberus quake; whose Massy, Triple Crown
Begins to totter; and with look cast down
He sneaks, and fears the Light of Reformation.
To the QVEEN.
And now Illustrious Paragon, to you
Somewhat I fain would speak, yet scarce know how:
The task appears too weighty for my pen;
An Angel's voice may reached, not that of Men:
What glorious charms lie coucht within your frame,
The wonderful event does best Proclaim:
At your approach the Oracles of Rome
Returned to their old shades, and were struck dumb:
Your breath, which you so kindly do dispense,
Has countercharm'd a Popish Pestilence.
Your presence raised our hopes when they were dead;
Before you the Destroying Angel fled.
The Unconquered Prince, that did mankind subdue,
Yielded, when he first fixed his Eyes on you:
Surely from you one conquering art he took;
From you he learnt to vanquish with a look:
Welcome now (Royal Madam) to a Throne;
Now welcome to our Nation, and your own,
It Is true, a Crown adds nothing to your Power;
For you were chosen Queen of Hearts before:
Yet may you light to us and influence give,
And luster to the Crown which you receive:
Mary does now Elizabeth out shine;
That which looked Monstrous, now appears Divine,
You Have made that Sacred which was once accursed,
Made that the best of Names which was the worst:
Britannia sighed and grieved where gone;
Pensive she lay, and uttered many a groan:
She sat encompast with ill-boding fears,
And like a Widow all dissolved in tears:
But now, her sorrows having laid aside
She reassumes her ornaments and pride,
And looks gay like some new expecting Bride.
A joy like this Great Charles our gracious King
Did to a sad afflicted Nation bring,
When homwards bent proud swelling Seas he crossed,
As strangely found as Romulus was lost.
A joy like this, though more refined and bright,
Departed Spirits find, and those that live in light;
When first they come to that Harmonious place,
Where friends do meet again, where Angels do embrace.
Happy that day (and may it n'ere be torn
From the fair Book of Fame) when you were born:
May it for ever shine, and still appear
A Diamond in the Circle of the year:
May it still be as happy amongst the rest
Oth' days, as you are amongst Women blessed:
And may your following Reign a Sabbath prove
Of Peace, of Joy, of Ecstasy and Love:
When you have completed what you have begun,
May you look down with pleasure from a Throne
Upon the works and wonders you have done.
Long may you live encircled round with joys,
Blessed by consent, by our unanimous voice:
May Sovereign Virtue all your wishes steer,
And harmless pleasures sweeten all your care.
And when at length (O may the unhappy day
Move slowly on) your life must pass away;
May you retire to everlasting rest;
And may these Nations be securely blessed
By Heirs descended from your fruitful Womb,
'Till Shiloh shall again in Glory come.
The Ghost of St. Ignatius, addressing himself to a Cabal in France.
FRom the unhallowed Mansions of Despair,
O'erflown with black and pestilential Air,
Where mut'nous Billows roar and never sleep,
And wanton winds still revel on the deep;
From that infernal Gulf where Demons dwell,
(A place best known by the great name of Hell)
I Am come an angry spright, urged by just rage
Against th'unthinking Zealots of this Age:
O! I could tear with groans my dusky shrine,
While I behold these wretched Sons of mine
Hunted like Beasts of prey, and homeward driven
By an accursed Legerdemain of Heaven.
How frail is Happiness, how quickly gone,
By the eager rapt of time still hurried on?
How fading are the Glories and Applause,
Which here the proudest sinning Heroes raise?
How poor and scanty are the Crimes they know?
Perfection's only to be found below:
Here soon the bold are to Destruction hurled;
It Is plain Discretion does not guide the World:
No; every Kingdom, every reeling State
Is whirled about upon the poles of Fate.
Falsehearted Britain! how I grieve to see
The Italian Legions thus undone by thee?
O had the Belgian Brisk been cast away
To Neptune, and the scaly rout a prey;
Or given a Bait to great Leviathan,
That Monarch and proud Hector of the Main.
Happy Britannia then had never borne
The rigid shock of his imperious Scorn,
And Hell had had less reason to complain;
But now ill Destiny succeeds again:
His Foes like Iron Images stand mute,
Shrunk in their Arms, not daring to dispute
The cause by noble Force; No, they appear
A Fairy Scene, a Poppet-show of War.
His pointed Aspect does the work of Steel,
And distant Troops his awful Nod do feel.
Hark, hark, methinks I hear th'ill-boding noise,
The voice of Conquest, and the Victors Joys:
Te Deums, Shouts, Hosanna's, and the like
Fantastic sounds my shattered Senses strike:
The Heavens aloud with Gratulations ring;
Angels above their grateful Anthems sing;
And seem to promise by this signal Grace,
That Romish Rage shall never again deface
Fair Britanny, nor drown the lovely place.
Curse on these Guardian-Saints, these Tell-tale Spies,
That lurk i'th-secret Foldings of the Skies;
That with a wakeful and indulgent care
Pry into Hells Arcana's, and declare
The Councils of the Deep:
These peevish Powers Leagues and Cabals detect;
This puny Lifeguard of the poor elect,
Have lately blasted our beloved Theme,
Our hopeful Plot, and thriving Stratagem,
Involving the most black and monstrous things
That night ever sheltered with her gloomy wings.
Hell sickens at the News, each Fury groans,
And gasping Fiends do mingle their sad tones
Into a signal Grief, a deeper Woe:
Satan at first could hardly undergo
The shock of this report; with hollow sound
He bellowed loud, and whirled his Eye Balls round:
No soft persuasion could his Wrath assuage,
But thus he breathed out his long pent rage:
Into what maze of horror am I led?
Sure some Almighty hand holds fast the thread:
I toss from side to side, and roam about,
Spurred on by rage, but hopeless to get out.
Ah! how am I transformed by treacherous Fate?
Shadow and blank of what I was of late:
Out-brav'd by him, whom I even still disdain,
From Empire rent, and tossed from pain to pain:
Distempered Nature's Agonies, when she
Labors to vent some unborn Prodigy,
Th'amazing Terrors of the torturing Steel,
Are sports to those Convulsive Pangs I feel:
Pain beats so thick upon my staggered sense,
That Thought it self has scarce time to commence:
Heaven can no more; it has upon my head
The very dregs of all its Viols shed.
O that I could imp't with strong rapture fly,
And justle through th'unnavigable Sky;
With rapid violence knock the Thunderer down,
That sits so proudly perched upon a Throne,
Take new Jerusalem, race The Imperial Town;
Seize all the Guards of Heaven with powerful sway,
Lay waste with fire those Cells of purer clay,
Or cover all with night, and blot Eternal day.
Thus rallied the Dread Sovereign of the Deep;
The lesser Fiends did awful silence keep,
Whilst Irish howls, Pope's Bulls, and French Grimace
Doubled the wonted horror of the place.
'Twould make a pale-faced Ghost even blush to see,
From what a glorious height of Villainy
Your noble Friends are fallen in Britanny.
Hell! can you this unmoved and silent hear?
When will you rally, if you now forbear?
What! do you tremble too? for shame give over:
So great Alcides once a Distaff bore;
And the renowned Achilles to his shame
Unsinew'd did assume a Virgins name:
But soon the great Duum virate with disdain
Quitted their Toys, and roused to arms again:
And thus your Courage, which has ebbed so low,
By a Cessation now should stronger grow,
And like a Flood damned up, all Banks should overflow.
Can Hurricanes forget to roar, and fly
With lazy wings calming the ruffled Sky?
Can sullen Waves conspire to lull the Deep,
And bind the Ocean in a lasting sleep?
Or can the Needle Nature's Laws control,
And shun th'embraces of its darling pole?
Can a sworn Witch find leisure to repent?
Can Tygres fawn, or Lions complement?
No more can you by adverse Fate be driven
To turn tame Fops, and basely cringe to Heaven.
The Spears shall halt, Nature shall make a pause,
And quite invested change her ancient Laws;
Discord shall split the Universe in twain,
And shake the solid Globe to dust again;
Ever those Barbarians start whose Souls have been
But once strained up to the highest pitch of sin.
Therefore let Death begin his march; drive on
Unwilling Fate; and let Crimes yet unknown
The guilt of your past innocence atone.
Do not despair, but reassume a will
To plot on, and usurp a power to kill.
Prepare to attack the insulting British Slaves,
And if repulsed fight back into your Graves:
Quickly begin, before it be too late;
Stake all at once in the doubtful hand of Fate:
Life, Church, and Empire in a cause so good:
Let your Religion set, as it arose, in Blood.
But Ha! what Fiend-like form salutes my Eyes?
And rends me from my self with quick surprise:
Am I deceived? or do I plainly see,
The Saint-like Monster, brave Le Chese? it is he,
The very same; as may be partly seen
By his Lampooning Face, and frightful Mien.
Thy Pardon Reverend Sage,
That I should dare to be thus proudly rude,
Before thy face my Dictates to obtrude;
When it is well known the Fiends themselves from thee
May copy out choice Rules of Policy,
And wait the Dictates ever they do Decree.
All the black Dwellers in the Plains below
At thy name with submissive Reverence bow;
If they but hear't, they seem to steal a bliss;
And never speak't without an Emphasis:
Now I see thee, some glimmering hopes return;
And my chilled Spirits with fresh Passions burn.
Thy single force can Heavens attempts control,
For it has tried in vain to steer thy Soul.
Thy Prowess from mean Acts no Honor wins,
But Sinewy, solid, and substantial Sins
Are thy Diversion; thou art framed and built
For strange Exploits, and some unusual guilt.
Clement and Ravillack, compared to thee,
Were but poor Padders in Iniquity,
And superficial sinners; in thy fame
Their little Tricks are lost, and want a name.
Old Petre to thy brave and manly Port
Seems but a Poppet, only made for sport,
And for experiment in Vacation time,
And formed for some obscure and vulgar crime.
Racks, Fire and Faggot have been caused by me;
But these are now dull things, too light for thee:
A thousand Mariana's in thee dwell;
And thy rare Deeds add blackness even to Hell.
At thy Nativity the factious Stars
In lucky consult met, portending Wars;
And shedding noisome influence on the Earth,
With various Terrors signalized thy Birth:
Nature grew pale, Heaven frowned when it did view
The little Monster; and the angelick Crew
Cried, a bad Omen! as if thou had been
Born to advance the Theory of sin.
Nor did thou frustrate the design of Fate;
Water on thee was thrown away,
For thou was it ever unregenerate;
Shut out from Grace when from thy Mother torn,
A Wretch consummate in thy Infant Morn:
Brave polished Villain, and incarnate Spright,
To whom sin is both business and delight;
What Miracles in mischief had thou done,
How had thou braved the Gods, had thy Glass run
In Saturn's or Jove's Reign? had thou lived then
When Gods were known to have less Wit than Men.
Giants (those Prototypes of the Romish Race)
Had once the Monarch of the World in chase;
By force they hurled Mountains against Heaven;
Pelion was like a Hand-granado driven:
While Jupiter from his high Crystal Fort
Looked down, and dashed them with a Godlike Port,
Making their Toils his Merriment and Sport.
But had thou helped, the Boys had then prevailed,
By thee Elysium had been stormed and scaled:
Thy wit had rallied, nay even baffled Jove,
When brandished Mountains useless Toys did prove.
Go on great Genius; let whole Nations be
Demolished and undone to set up thee:
Since thou art now just in thy plotting prime,
Court not delay, but snatch the present time.
Do thou but speak, vast crowds shall make reply;
Thick Troops of fighting Fools will follow thee.
Tho can the senseless Multitude beguile
With solemn nod, and artificial smile,
And Magic sense disguised in Gospel style.
Thus flattering Phoebus to the Spectator's Eye,
Dresses and tricks up a tempestuous Sky
In a bright Livery, and the World beguiles
With gaudy mischief, and ill natured smiles:
Thus treacherous Pirates wantonly display
Deceitful colors to invite a prey:
Thus wiser Fiends with false assumed light
Gild their dark Vests, and play upon the sight:
And so can thou delude men unawares
With flowery Nets, gay Wiles, and Golden snares.
What are the Vulgar but mere passive Tools?
A pack of poor predestined Fools:
It Is their lot and prerogative to be
Made slaves to men of Wit and Policy:
Moved by the Breath, and guided by the Hand,
They Will all things do, though nothing understand;
And thus inspired by thy example, they
Will sin by rote, and fight extempore.
Neither will I be wanting, for I Will be
An Actor in the Black Solemnity:
With airy Legions from the boundless Deep
I Will come, and through your Foes with fury sweep:
Hag-like I Will clog their Vitals, and destroy;
Then Vulture-like I Will seize upon my prey:
Hot vapors, steams and gore shall be my Food;
I Will quench my thirst with nectarous draughts of Blood:
Thus I my vengeance shall accomplish quite;
Were it to gain Heaven I Would not lose the sight.
And now methinks I see impartial Fate,
Like a Colossus, stand with equal feet
On great and vulgar; with an even hand
Dealing Destruction all around the Land:
Methinks already I behold the Peers
Of the celestial Senate clad in Fears:
Each drooping Saint, with heavy trembling heart
Does from his Golden Dormitory start,
And every Singer in the Harmonious Quire
In thoughtful hurry throws aside his lyre:
The first brave Rebels that attacked the Skies,
Did not Omnipotence so much surprise,
As shall your sprightly and well-ballanc'd Rage;
Look to it well, and I Will dare to presage
For one short act the Triumph of an Age.
I saw this written, when I last did pry
Into the dark Volume of Eternity:
There I did read Britannia's Mournful Doom;
After six Moons were past, it was to come:
Three are past by, the rest are rolling on,
And the kind hours seem eager to be gone:
Though Death, Time, Fate, and the incensed band
Of injured Heaven in opposition stand;
All their united force shall not dispel
That gloomy sentence that is sealed in Hell.
What nobler praise, or more exalted bliss
Then that which is achieved by wickedness?
Did not the World's first famous Monarchies
By glorious rapines, thefts, and murders rise?
The Assyrian, Persian, and the Grecian Sparks,
Scorning the censure of dull dreaming Clerks,
Advanced to that bold height of Regency
By crimes too great for weak Posterity:
So the brave Roman too,
With Diabolick inspiration filled,
With Blood his Everlasting Name did guild,
And upon conquered Necks a lasting Empire build.
Such was the genius of those Men of worth
Which the first Ages of the World brought forth;
Thus 'twas 'till Gospel pedantry came in,
And every gallant Act was deemed a sin:
Hence pious Fools with painted terrors scarr'd
Poor injured Nature of all rights debarred:
They robbed themselves to enrich their Enemies;
They stole from Nature, but they gained no prize,
Unless the Gibbet, Rack, and servile toils
Were counted Trophies, and embraced for spoils:
For what more eligible things then these
Did the Sots find in many Centuries?
Blessed Souls! that feel at distance unknown joys,
That feed on tales of bliss that never cloys,
On sacred nothings, and immortal toys:
But our Progenitors with unerring steel
These innovations quickly did repel:
Their charms have laid the Gospel in a trance,
And turned the Bible to a grave Romance.
Those tame Mock-Heroes who themselves betrayed,
Those Legendary Saints in Masquerade,
Were quickly Damned, and made a comic Theme;
While glorious Murderer drowned the Martyr's Name.
By such rare Arts our Faction first did grow,
And that which did create, must still conserve it so.
O that I could at present but survey
That dismal Scene which my fond hopes display:
Blessed in the midst of Curses I could dwell,
And think my self imparadic'd in Hell.
But lo, the Sun with an aspiring Beam,
Joys and diverts me from this wanton Dream:
The all-surrounding Globe with darted Ray,
Begins to snatch back and redeem the day:
The blushing Moon has modestly withdrawn
Her glittering Mantle, and her Silver Lawn:
The Feathered Quire already does salute
Rising Aurora; but I Will soon confute
Their promised Mirth by forcing back the night,
And breathing Storms in my Fantastic Flight:
I Will blot the Sun with a tempestuous yawn,
And blast Aurora in her blooming Dawn.
The EPILOGUE.
SEarch all the Records of the World, pass over
The Tripple Continent t'th' Western Shore,
And tell me after all if you can find
A man without some darkness in his mind:
Tell me if any can by Humane Skill
A clear discernment make 'twixt good and ill,
Without some cloud of Error in the will.
Vain Shows, tumultuous Pomp, and endless Strife
Fill up the vacant Scenes of Humane Life:
In these we idly spend long days and years;
Bereaft of Reason which should guide our cares;
For Reason nothing covets nothing fears.
In vain Men talk of God and Providence,
While they reject the Favors they dispense;
In vain the Stars are kind, the Skies are clear,
While cloudy Passions in our Breasts make War.
Hopeless perhaps we pray, when danger's nigh;
And Heaven in pity sends some quick supply:
But when the Danger and the Storm is over,
We court that Ruin which we feared before.
Thus to our loss we wantonly combine,
And pull down Wrath, which Heaven did never design:
We bribe the Deity to our own ill,
And make him punish us against his will.
Good Heaven, since such wild thoughts Mankind infest,
Tell me where I may fix my Soul and rest:
With generous mind, neither depressed nor proud,
Teach me to soar above the unthinking Crowd:
That placed in a fair Orb, and calm retreat,
I may look down with pity on the great,
And view the Storms of State beneath my feet.
And, that I may with one well-fram'd desire.
Grasp all the Wealth to which I do aspire,
Give me, kind Heaven, a body firm and sound,
With steadfast mind, and a good Conscience crowned:
A Conscience that can bear, without affright,
The Dangers of the day, and Terrors of the night:
A Conscience free from fashionable Crimes,
That stands unmoved, and turns not with the Times:
A Conscience that never can with pressures bend,
But can call Death himself a welcome Friend:
That counts the Primitive Martyrs fruitful Toils
Far better Trophies, more illustrious Spoils
Than Gifts of Courts, and all that tempting Fate
That springs from the rich falls in Church and State.
Happy's that Man whom nothing can defeat,
Who bravely scorns to be ignobly great:
Who over himself does unmolested reign,
And seeks no wider Empire to obtain:
Who blessed with obscure Ease, not gaudy Strife,
After the dull fatigue of Humane Life,
When Death draws nigh Life's Ligaments to unbind,
Feels no convulsive Tremblings in his mind:
But with a look Serene, and peaceful breath,
Falls undisturbed, and smiles in the face of Death.
FINIS.

