Rome for Canterbury: Or a true Relation of the Birth, and Life, of William
Laud, Archbishop of Canterbury: Together with the whole manner of his
proceeding, both in the Star Chamber, High Commission Court, in his own House,
and some observations of him in the Tower.

With his carriage at the sight of the Deputyes going to the place of
Execution, etc.

Dedicated to all the Arminian Tribe, or Canterburian Faction, in the year of
grace, 1641.

Whereunto is added all the Articles by which he stands charged of High
Treason, etc.



Printed also in the same. 1641.

Room for Canterbury: or the Relation of the Birth, Life, and Proceedings of
William Laud, Archbishop of Canterbury, and Metropolitan of all ENGLAND.
GReatnesse^ and Goodness are two several blessed attributes co^ferred upon
man, but seldom meet in one person: Greatness man be styled a gift in^erd
by fort^ne: but Goodness, a grace i^fused by God. The fir^^ labo^rs in
mistrust, and is borne the bonds^ave of Chance; seldom attended without ^^vy;
and though to many pers^ns it appear exceeding pleasant, yet the higher we
are seated (alt^ough by virtue) the greater is our fal^, if corrupted by vice.
By Honor and Office men ^^come great; yet is it not the place that mak^th the
pers^n, but the person that makes the place honorable: and that preferment
and power, which is both well acquired, and worthily con^er'd, Non est
invitamen um ad tempus, sed perpetuae virtutis praemium: is no tempo^arie
invitation, but a perpetual inheritance.

Goodness is of a co^tra^y condition, men are not t^ be accounted good, either
for their authority or age, but for their sincerity and actions: He that is
good, is better than the good he does; and he that is evil, is wo^se ^^an the
bad deed done by him. All great men are not (consideratel^) goo^^ but all good
men are consequently great: Greatness and goodness with grace add^d (^o
ciment them together) make unques^i^nably a perf^ct and complete man. Here was
grace, which had it ^^ene ^^l^s^i^lly inspi^e^, as it was but temporally
disposed, might t^ that grea^nesse ^ave so combined goodness, as from thence
could have grown no such tribula^ion.

Hows^^v^r, let no man grieve at his present afflictions, for they are the rods
by which God ^hallis^th his children: I here is nothing that the wo^ld can ^ake
awa^ ^^om us^ bec^u^e it can give nothing unto us; fame fades, pote^cy
perishes, weal^h wasse^^: True riches consist, in our constancy in casualty,
and though perturbation and punishment be the prison of the body, yet courage
and comfort are ^he libe^ty of the soul, to which I only add Patience, which
is so allied to Fortitude, that she seems to be either her sister or her
daughter: things that compulsively come upon us, should be borne with patience
and co^^rage, (of which we have had late president) and more generous it (...)
for a man to offer himself to death in triumph, than to be drawn unto it with
terror: Gaudet patientia duris. I come now to the person.

He was borne at Reading, of honest parents; his father was a Clothier in that
Town, of a competent estate, and careful to see his children to be well
educated and instructed: This his son William being of an excellent wit, and
pregnant capacity, was sent from the Grammar school to Oxford, where he was
admitted into St. John's College, where shortly he proved an ingenious
disputant, and ere he took his first degree of Batchelour, was well verst in
Logic, philosophy, and the Liberal Arts: after he devoted himself to the
study of Theology, in which he proceeded Doctor, with no common applause,
attaining to these dignities belonging to so famous an Academy; and being of an
active spirit, was called from thence to the Court, where he grew so gracious,
that after some private preferments, he was first made Bishop of St. Davis, and
thence removed to London: and after the decease of the right reverend George
Abbot, Arch^Bishop of Canterbury, was inaugurated into that prime See, and was
Metropolitan of all England: (steps that his predecessor, who was a Clothiers
son in Guilford, had trod before him, whom less than two years was Bishop
of Coventry and Lichfield, London and Canterbury.)

What this Prelates deportment (now in agitation) in so high a dignity was, is
sufficiently noys'd amongst all; made apparent by his Dia^conicall Censures in
the Star Chamber, the High Commission Court, etc. And it was a great aspersion
justly cast upon such high authority, that he so much affected summum jus,
justice without mercy, as sparing neither person nor profession, and to leave
all others) witness how he did persecute the good Bishop of Lincoln. D.
Williams, being of his own degree and function: his (more than) severity, in
his rigorous censure and sentence, upon Master Burton the Divine, Master Prin
the Lawyer, and Doctor Bastwick the Physiciqn: and even that poor fellow
Thomas Bensted, whom he caused to be hanged, drawn, and quartered; he could
make that a matter of Treason, though he was but a subject: His threatening of
the honest Judges, his (...) other Officers and Ministers of tge Kings: his
sternnes and (...) a^^wers even to Gentlemen of worth and now Parliament men,
who have but pleaded for poor men in just causes: it was a good wish, that
either he might have more grace, or no grace at all, which is now come to pass.

It is observed by some, that in all the time of his Pontifical Prelacy, he
never promoted any to Church preferment that favored not of the Arminian ^^et,
and still when Benefices fell, that were either in his gift, or where his power
was to have them bestowed, he has caused such men to be instituted, and
inducted, as either were dunces in learning, or debaucht in their lives: such
men being most apt (for their tempo^ising or ignorance) to embrace any
Innovation that should be brought into the Church: nay, when places have not
been void, but supplied by pious Pastors, and devout Ministers, that were
constant professors of the Protestant faith, yet by spies, and intelligencers,
such Cavills have been made at their Doctrines and Disciplines, that
notwith^tanding their charge of wife and children, and that their utter
undoings impended upon the taking away of their means, yet they have been
supplanted, that the other might subsist in their places; the first turned out,
the latter took in; but that which far transcends the former, that he has
labored to suppress the French and Dutch Protestant Churches here in London,
who for their Conscience and Religions sake have abandoned their Countries, to
aveyd persecution, and have made this famous City their Asilum and Sanctuary
for themselves and families.

It has been observed also that he never gave censure upon a Jesuit, or
Seminary, or any Popish Priest, though brought before him by his own warrant,
and the Pursuivant employed by himself. For though apprehended yet they were
never punished: but if to ni^ht imprisoned, to morrow infranchized and set at
liberty, or else he so cautelously and cunningly dealt by his agents,
Secretary Windibank, Sir John Lamb, and others, that they were sent abroad, and
he seen to have no hand in the business; when in the interim all the rigorous
sentences that past him, were against the zealous professors of our Protestant
Religion.

A poor Prelate having long waited to speak with this great Archbishop, and
being after much attendance admitted to his presence, in their discourse, the
great Metropolitan told him, he was an idle fellow, to whom the other
replied, it is most true, for had I not been so, I could not have spared so
many idle hours to attend upon your grace, to such small purpose. At which he
being much moved said; Why, what (fellow) do thou think of us Bishops? who
replied, I will in plain terms tell your grace what I think of you: I can
no better compare you than unto the huge Brass Andirons that stand in great
men's Chimnies, and us poor Ministers to the low Creepers: you are they that
carry it out in a vainglorious show, but we the poor Curates undergo, and
bear the burden. Another told him (when h^e used to play upon other men's
miseries) that his Lordship must needs be witty (he being a very little man)
that his head and his heart were so near together.

Some have observed, that as he was a Prelate, and Primate, so he greatly
favored the letter P. (by which may be coniectured) the Pope, w^ose
Emblasons, amongst other of his Pontifical Escutchions, are three Bishops,
viz, (I take it three Bibles) and to show he much affected that Episcopal
Letter, his three beneuolent and well benefit'd Chaplains were Brown Bray,
and Baker. And for the letter P. he was also a great patron and protector to
Doctor P^ck^i^ton, who for publishing one Book called Sunday is no Sabbath,
wherein he vilified all the observance due to Dies Domini, the Lords Day, and
another entitled the Christians Altar, wherein he would have first produced,
and after propagated Popish superstition, he did confere upon him three or
four Benefices, worth some two or thr^^ hundred per annum, and a Prebendary in
Windsor, valued at three hundred more by the year.

Many are the probabilities that he purposed to bring popery into the
Kingdom; as the Scotch Service Book, differing from our English Liturgy,
especially in words concerning receiving the Eucharist, or the Lords Supper,
which was the first incendiary of all these late troubles between the two
Kingdoms of England and Scotland, in which some blood has been drawn, but
infinite treasure exhausted (apparancy needs no proof) but tha^ we leave to
the ^e^sure of the higher powers, being an argument, as it has been long, so
now at this present in agitation: yet the better to define that which before
was but disputable, when he came first into the Tower, (and not being
acquainted with the place, he desired, that by no means he should be lodged
where the Bishop of Lincoln had before lain; and being demanded the reason.
because they were sweet and good, he made answer, O but I fear they ^mell so
of Puritanisme, that the very air of them will half stifle or choke me.
These sympathising with the rest, may give the world reason to suspect his
Religion.

Upon monday, being the tenth of May, when it was known that the Lieutenant
should prepare himself to dye, tidings was brought to the Arch Bishop of the
setting up of the Scaffold^ upon Tower Hill, whereon the Deputy of Ireland was
to suf^er death, he immediately spoke to his men saying; It is no matter when
or where we dye, so we first have time to make our peace and reconciliation
with God; we are all of us borne to dye, though there be many several ways to
death: for death must at last conquer and have victory over the bodies of all
flesh whatsoever. Be ye of good comfort, do not ye be discouraged for me; I
am a man of sorrow and borne to this sorrow; Lord give me strength to bear thy
chastisements patiently, and endure them constantly, even to the end and period
of my life: I am indeed a man borne of a woman, of a short continuance, and
full of trouble and heaviness: a man indeed, ma^^ like to vanity, and compared
to the flowers of the field, here this day, it may be gone to morrow; nay, I am
worse, a child of wrath a vessel of dishonor, begotten in uncleanenesse,
living in care and wretchedness, and dying in distress: O Lord I will cry
unto thee night and day before I pass through this vale of misery, I will
sum up all my offenses, I will confess my vileness before thee, and will
not be ashamed; for true confession is the very way whereby I may come unto
thee, which art the way, and the only true way that leads unto life eternal.

O the most happy life which the Angels enjoy, in the right blessed Kingdom,
void of death everlasting; where no times succeed by ages, where the continual
day without night has no end, where the conquering soldier, joined to that
joyful quire of Angels, and crowned with the Crown of everlasting glory,
does sing to his God a Song amongst the Songs of Syon.

I meddle not with any state business whatsoever: but it seems he bore no great
affection to the Scots, which is probable by the little love they bear unto
him: But most sure we are, that he was arrested of high and capital Treason,
first committed to the Knight of the black rod, and thence convayed to the
Tower, where ever since he has been in custody of the Lieutenant, of whose
demeanor during his abode there I shall next speak by the true information of
some credible persons, that have observed his deportment. He was not only
frequent and fervent in, and at his Orisons in his own chamber, where he
spent the greatest part of the morning at his private meditations, but very
careful and observant at the week days service, at the Chapel, but
especially on the Lords day he came duly, and prostrated himself devoutly on
his knees, giving great attention both to the service and sermon; and taking
special notice of some particular Psalms that were sung before the Parson
went up into the pulpit, especially the second part of the three and thirtieth
Psalm, the second part of the forty ninth, and the first part of the hundred
and fortieth (which are worthy any man's reading, being so aptly picked out for
that purpose) he called the Clark one day unto him, and courteously demanded of
him whether he happened on them by accident, or had called them out by his own
conceit? the plain old man ingenuously confessed unto him, that he chose them
out purposely to put him in mind of his present estate: at which he modestly
smiling, made him no further answer, but departed toward his lodging. Further
he was heard to say, that if ever God delivered him from that present durance,
and that the King would restore him to his pristine dignities, he would much
improve that place, (meaning the Church) in remembrance that he had been there
a prisoner. It is also reported that a gentleman of quality coming to the
Tower to give him a visit, and asking his grace how it fared with him at that
present? he made him answer, I thank God I am well, for it has pleased his
Sacred Majesty my Sovereign to provide for me an honorable and convenient
lodging, where I have good and wholesome fare, and where (not withstanding all
my troubles and tribulations) I never yet broke an hour of my usual and
contented sleep. And the morning when the late Earl of Strafford past by his
lodging, as he was led to the place of execution, and moved his ha^ unto him,
then standing and looking out of his window, he held up his hands and eyes
toward heaven, without speaking any thing audible to the observers, as if he
prayed earnestly, and inwardly for the salvation of his soul, etc. He was
observed also sometimes to speak those words of the Psalmist, Psalm. 82. v. 6,
7. I have said ye are gods, and children of the most high, but ye shall dye as
men, and ye Princes shall fall like others, etc. Now follow the Articles
exhibited, etc.

The true copy of the Articles whereby William Laud ArchBishop of Canterbury
stands charged with high Treason.
FIrst, That the said William Laud, Archbishop of Canterbury, has
traitorously labored to subvert the fundamental Laws and Government of the
Kingdom, by giving his Majesty advise privately, and in other places said,
that he would have them governed by Civil Laws; and further said, he would
make the proudest Subject in the Kingdom, give way to him; and being told it
was against Law, he replied he would make it Law, and that the King might at
his own pleasure take away without Law, and make it warrantable by Gods Law.

Secondly, His countenancing of Books and their Authors, for the maintenance
of his unlimited and absolute power, wherein the power of the Parliament is
denied, and the Bishops power of Prela^y set up.

Thirdly, That he traitorously went about to interrupt the Judges by his
threatenings, and other means, to constrain them to give false Judgment in the
case of Ship-mony, as will appear both by writings, and his hand, by testimony
of diverse persons of good worth and quality.

Fourthly, That he has taken bribes, and sold justice in the High Commission
Court, as he was Archbishop, and has not only corrupted the Judges there, but
has also sold judicial places to be corrupted.

Fifthly, That he has endeavored the incroachment of jurisdiction and
institution of Canons, which are not only unlawful, but prejudicial to the
Subject: and that he has exercised his authority very cruelly, both as a
Chancellor, Commissioner, and Judge.

Sixthly, That He has traitorously assumed a capital power over his Majesty's
subjects, denying his power of Prelacy as from the King.

Seaventhly, That by false erroneous Doctrines, and other sinister ways and
means, He went about to subvert the Religion establish^d in this Kingdom, and
to set up Papistry and superstition in the Church.

Eighthly, That by undue means and practice he has gotten into his hand the
power of nominating of Ministers to Spiritual promotions, and has preferred
none but scandalous Ministers thereunto, and that he preferred corrupt
Chaplains to his Majesty.

Ninthly, That his own Ministers, as Heywood, Laifield and others, are
notoriously disaff^cted to Religion.

Tenthly, That he has Traitorously endea^oured to reconcile us to the Church
of Rome, and to that end has employed a Jesuit, and a Papist-priest, and has
wrought with the Popes Agents in several p^i^ts.

Eleventh, That to suppress prea^hing, He has suspended diverse good men, and
u^ed u^lawfull means by Letters, and otherwise to several Bishops, to
suppress them.

Twelth, That he has Traitorously endeavored to suppress the French Religion
here amongst us, which is the same we are of, and also the Dutch Church, and
to set divisio^ between them and u^.

Thirteenth, That he has Traitorously ende^vored to set Division between the
King and his Subjects, and has gone about to bring in Innovatio^s into our
Church: And has induced the King to War with the Scots, and many upon their
death beds, to give toward the maintenance of the War. And has caused the
Clergy to give fr^^ly toward the same; and has broug^t in many Superstitions
and Innov^tions into the Church of Scotland: And that he procured the King to
break the pacification, thereby to cause a bloody War betwee^ the Kingdoms.

Fourteenth, That to preserve himself from being questioned, for these and
other his Traitorous designs, from the first year of his Majesty's Reign
until now, he has labored to subvert the Rites of Parliam^ntary
proceedings, and to incense h^s Majesty against Parliaments.

By all which Words, Councels, and Actions, he has Trait^rously labored to
ali^nate the h^arts of the Kings liege people from his Majesty, ^o set a
Division between them; and to ruin and destroy his Majesty's Kingdoms. For
which they impeach him of high Tre^son against our Sovereign Lord the King,
his Crown^ and Dignity.

And the said Commons, by protestation, saving to themselves the liberty of
exhibiting at any time hereafter, any other Accusation or Impeachment against
the said William La^d, Archbishop of Canterbury. And also, of replying to the
Answers that he^ the said Archbishop shall make unto the said Articles, or any
of them,

And of offering proof also of the Premises, or a^y of them, or any other
Impeachment or Accusation, that shall be exhibited by them, ^^ the course of
Parliaments require: Do pray, that he the said William La^d, Archbishop of
Cant^rbury may be put spe^dily to answer for all and every the premises, that
such Proceedings, Examin^tions, Trials and Judgments, may be upon every one of
them had and used, as is agre^able to Law and Justice.

FINIS.

