Mel Heliconium: OR, POETICAL HONEY, Gathered out of the weeds of Parnassus.

The first Book: Divided into VII. Chapters, according to the first VII.
Letters of the Alphabet: Containing XLVIII. FICTIONS, Out of which are
extracted many Historical, Natural, Moral, Political, and Theological
Observations, both delightful and useful: With XLVIII. MEDITATIONS in VERSE;
By ALEXANDER ROSSE His MAJESTY'S Chaplein in Ordinary.

HORAT. Lib. 4 Ode 2. Ego apis Matinae
More modoque,
Grata carpentis thyma per laborem
Plurimum, circum nemus, uvidique
Tiburis ripas, operosa parvus,
Carmina fingo.
LONDON, Printed by L. N. and I. F. for William Leak, and are to be sold at his
shop in Chancery Lane, near unto the Rolls, 1642.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE WILLIAM Marquess of Hartford, Lord Governor to the
PRINCE His Highness.
MY LORD:
THe duty of affection which I bear to the memory of your Honorable
Grandfather, the true Maecenas of my young Muses whilst he lived; the
knowledge which I have of your eminent worth, both for learning, religion, and
courtesy, your good opinion and kind usage of me, still, when I had the
happiness to see you, have imboldned me to grace the frontispice of this begun
work, with your Honorable name, it is the fruit of some sequestered hours
from my Divinity exercises, it has lain long neglected among my other papers,
but by the importunity of some worthy friends, drawn out at last unto the
light; here may be seen what use can be made of poetical fictions: The spoils
of Egyptians, and a Babylonish garment, may be serviceable for the Tabernacle.
Accept this small present as a pledge and testimony of that duty and service
which I owe to your self, and honorable Family, to whom I wish all increase of
true happiness, which still shall be the prayer of

Your Honors in all duty and service devoted, ALEXANDER ROSSE.

(...).
(...)
(...)
(...),
(...).
(...)
(...),
(...),
(...),
(...)
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...);
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...),
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...).

A CATALOGUE OF THE Poetical Fictions handled in this Book.
A.
AChelous: fol. 1. Actaeon: 2. Adonis: 3. Admetus: 6. Aeacus, Minos,
Rhadamanthus: 7. Aegeon: 9. Aenaeas: 11. Aeolus: 14. Aesculapius: 16. Alphaeus:
19. Amphion: 21. Antaeus: 23. Apollo: 25. Arachne: 33. Arion: 35. Aristaeus:
37. Atalanta: 41. Atlas: 44. Aurora: 46.
B.
BAcchus: 50. Belides: 56. Bellerophon: 57. Boreas, Boreadae, Harpiae: 60.
C.
CAdmus and Harmonia: 65. Castor and Pollux: 70. Centauri: 73. Cerberus: 76.
Ceres: 80. Charon: 87. Chimaera: 90. Chiron: 92. Circe: 94. Coelus: 79. Cupido:
101. Cyclopes: 106.
D.
DAedalus: 111. Deucalion: 114. Diana: 118.
E.
ELysium: 125. Endymeon: 129. Erychthonius: 133. Eumenides: 137.
F.
FOrtuna: 143.
G.
GAnymedes: 152. Genii: 156. Gygantes: 160. Gorgones: 163. Gratiae: 170.
CHAP. I.
ACHELOUS.
HE was the son of Sol, and Terra, or of Oceanus and Terra; fighting with
Hercules for Deianeira, he turned himself unto a Serpent, then unto a Bull,
whose right horn Hercules pulled off, which that he might redeem again, he
gave to Hercules the plentiful horn of Amalthaea, and afterward for grief of
his overthrow choked himself in the River.

THE MYSTERIES.
ACHELOUS was a River which as all others, has its beginning and increase from
the Sun, the Sea and the Earth: it was called a Serpent from the many windings
thereof, and a Bull, from its noise and bellowing 2. The two horns are its two
streams, the one whereof was cut off by Hercules, and divided unto diverse
brooks, by which the country was enriched; and Hercules for his pains
received the greater increase. 2. They that strive against mighty men had need
to be both Serpents in policy, and Bulls in strength. 3. They who turn
themselves into wanton Bulls, and spend their horn, that is, their strength on
women and wine, are at last choked with melancholy and hydropicall humors. 4.
If great men lose their horn, that is their power and honor, let them redeem
them with their wealth, for honor is better then money. 5. If God for thy sins
take thy power and glory away, or thy bodies strength by sickness, let the
poor partake of thy plentiful horn, and choke thy sins, in the river of
repentance.

Who against the world, and sin, and Satan fights,
Had need of Bullocks strength, and Serpents slights.
If God pulls off thy horn, knocks down thy pride;
Go to repentance river, there abide,
Till sin be choked in tears, and do not scorn
To offer him thy Amalthaean horn
To feed the poor; but if thy strength thou spend
On drink, and whores, a slood shall be thy end.
ACTAEON.
HE was a great hunter, who by mishap having spied Diana washing her self, was
by her turned into a stagge, and torn by his own hounds.

THE MYSTERIES.
DIana is the Moon, by whose light, influence, and motion, the Sun works on
sublunary bodies; Dogs madness (by which they prove dangerous to their masters) is
an effect of the moon; whith rules much over the brain. 2. Curiosity is
dangerous, pry not too much into the secrets of heaven, least with Actaeon,
your understanding be taken from you; and ye become a prey to the beastly
imaginations of your own brain. 3. Cruelty is here forbid, he that takes
delight in murdering of beasts; proves sometime with Nimrod a murderer of men;
and such for want of humanity may be said to be turned unto beasts, and
tortured with their own dogs, that is, by an evil conscience. 4. When men
neglect their estates and callings, and spend their patrimonies profusely on
dogs and hunting, they may be said to be devoured by their own dogs. 5. They
who suffer themselves to be abused, and their estates wasted by Parasites and
flatterers, not unfitly may be said to be a prey to their own dogs. 6. They who
look upon women, and lust after them, lose their reason, and are devoured by
their own lusts. 7. If Diana's nakedness seen unawares, was the occasion of
his misfortune; how blame worthy are these women, who with naked breasts,
immodest looks, light behavior, fantastical attire; entice men to their
destruction; and of men do metamorphose them unto beasts.

Think you on this, who spend your days, and strength,
And means, on Whores, Dogs, Parasites; at length
They Will woorry you: before you feel their wounds,
Look to their teeth, shun these Actaeons hounds.
ADONIS.
HE was a beautiful youth, with whom Venus was in love, but whilst he was
hunting, was killed by a boar, or by Mars in the shape of a boar, and by
Venus was turned unto a red flower called Anemone, he was kept after death by
Ceres or Proserpina, six months under ground, and other six months by Venus,
above.

THE MYSTERIES.
IF by Adonis we understand wheat, that lodges with Proserpina, that is lies
buried in the ground six months in the winter; the six summer months it is
above in the air with Venus, by which the beauty of the year is signified,
by the boar may be meant the cold frosty and snowy season, in which the wheat
seems to be killed. 2. If with Macrobius, by Adonis we understand the Sun; he
may be said to lodge six months with Proserpina, in respect of his southerly
declination; the other six months with Venus, for then the creatures give
themselves to procreation; he is killed by the boar, and lamented by Venus,
for in winter his beams are of no force; to dispell the cold which is the
enemy of Adonis and Venus, that is of beauty and procreation. 3. Mars in the
form of a boar; kills him; because wars and hunting are maculine exercises,
and not fit, for weak bodies, and effeminate spirits. 4. Adonis is from (...)
to sing, for beauty and music are friends to Venus. 5. Adonis may signify the
good government of a Commonwealth, which is the beauty thereof, which is
killed by Mars in the form of a Boar; for Mars and wantonness are enemies of
all government. 6. Beautiful Adonic is turned into a fading flower; to show,
that beauty quickly perishes. 7. Young and fair Adonis is killed by a Boar; so
wantonness and leachery are the destroyers of youth and beauty. 8. Our
Resurrection in this may be typed out; for although death kill us, it shall not
annihilate us, but our beauty shall increase, and we shall spring out of the
ground again like a beautiful flower in the Resurrection. 9. Though our bodies
dye, yet our good name shall flourish, and like a fair flower, shall live and
smell when we are gone. 10. Myrrha of her own Father begot this child Adonis,
which Myrrha flying from her angry Father, was turned into a tree, and with the
blow of her Fathers sword was delivered of this child; because the Sun the
common Father, begot the sweet Gum Myrrh, of that Arabian tree of the same
name; which Gum does cause much delight and pleasure, for so in Greek Adonis
signifies: In this Gum Venus is much delighted, as being a help to decayed
beauty, to a stinking breath, to procreation, and the vitiosity of the matrix.
11. Let them remember, who hunt too much after pleasure, that the Devil is that
great Boar who lies in wait to kill them.

You that hunt after pleasures, eye that Boar,
Who would your health, and wealth, and souls devour.
Dote not on beauty; beauty's but a flower,
Whose pride and luster fades in an hour.
Strive that your names may flourish after death,
Let them outlive Adonis flower, and yield a fragrant breath.
ADMETUS.
HE being a suitor to Alceste, carried her away by the assistance of Apollo and
Hercules, in a Chariot drawn by a Lion and a Boar; afterward being like to
dye, was recoverd by the voluntary death of his wife; whom Hercules delivered
out of hell, and restored her to Admetus.

THE MYSTERIES.
HE that intends to marry, had need take the aid of Apollo and Hercules, that
is, of wisdom, and strength of body. 2. (...), is one that cannot be tamed, as
many lusty young men are; therefore it is good for such to marry, with (...)
robur.
Alceste. 3. Many foolish women, like Alceste, refuse many good matches, and at
last are carried away by a Lion and a Boar; that is, by one that is
lasciviously given, and who can put on the bold face of a Lion. 4. Fruitful
women are like Alceste, who cast themselves unto the jaws of death by
childe-bearing, that their husbands may live in the fruit of their womb; for
parents live in their children: But by the means of Hercules, that is, of the
strength of Nature, women are delivered from death. 5. Alceste is our hope,
with which we shall marry, if first we can subdue the Lion of pride, and the
Boar of concupiscence. 6. Admetus, or the untamed spirit of Satan, does carry
away the soul, which is the daughter of God, in the Chariot of vanity, drawn
with pride and fleshly pleasures; and in hell the soul should have continued
for ever, if Christ our Alcides had not delivered it from thence.

Let not Man think on Hymen, till he find
What is Apollo's and Alcides mind.
And you weak Maids, and Widows too, before
You marry, shun the Lion and the Boar.
Think not to carry Hope and Confidence,
Till you subdue pride and concupiscence:
By Hope lay hold on Christ, he will sustain
Your souls in death, and them restore again.
AEACUS. MINOS. RHAD AMANTHUS.
THese were Jupiters sons, and Judges in hell; at the request of Aeacus, when
the Island Aegina was depopulated with sickness, Jupiter turned the Ants unto
men; so was Graecia delivered also by the prayers of the same Aeacus.

THE MYSTERIES.
Just Judges are the sons of God; 2. The good laws of just Judges shall not be
forgotten, but when they are in Hell, that is, when they are dead, their laws
shall be still in force. 3. These three Judges are the three effects of a
wicked man's conscience, to wit, to accuse, condemn, and torment the sinner:
and in this sense; a man may be said to be in hell, whilst he is on earth; 4.
Aeacus by his wisdom causing the barbarous inhabitants to forsake their caves
and holes wherein they dwelt; and to build houses; to leave their diet, of roots
and fruits, and to sow corn; in teaching of them civilitie, and military
discipline, whereby they overcame the Pirates, which used to molest them: for
these respects, he was said to turn them from Ants unto men. 5. In relieving
Graecia by his prayers from the plague, does show us, That the prayers of the
just avails much. 6. Before Christ came, the Gentiles were but Ants, men of
earthly conversation, being fed with roots of superstition; molested with
spiritual pirates, but by the preaching and intercession of Christ, the
wisdom of the Father, and the Judge of all the world: they were made men,
taught to forsake the dark holes of Idolatry, and to build them an house in
heaven, to feed upon the bread of Gods Word, and to fight against their
spiritual enemies.

Consider Judges, though you be but dust,
Gods sons you are, yea Gods, if you be just.
Let no man sin securely, though alone;
For each man has three Judges in a Throne
Within his breast: these Judges will torment thee
Here and in Hell, where no man shall lament thee.
Now we are men, which heretofore were Ants;
Then let us live like men, and not like Wants,
Still digging: leave your holes, and fix your eyes
Upon your starry-house, the spangled skies,
Where Christ your head, and Lord and Judge does dwell,
The only Judge of Heaven, Earth, and Hell.
AEGAEON.
HE was begotten of the Heaven and Earth, or of the Sea; he assisted Jupiter,
when Juno, Pallas, and Neptune, made insurrection against him, and would have
bound him; for whose good service, he was made keeper of Hell gates, but
afterward rebelling against Jupiter, he was over-throwne with his thunder, and
laid under the hill Aetna, which always bursts out with smoke and flames when
he turns himself about; he had an hundred hands, and fifty heads; he is
also called Briareus, and Enceladus.

THE MYSTERIES.
BY this many-handed and many-headed mo^ster, is meant the Wind, the power and
virtues whereof are many and wonderful; it is begot of the vapors of the earth
and sea, by the heat and influence of heaven, when Jupiter, that is, the heaven
is obscured, and as it were bound up from us with thick mists extracted by
Minerva, that is, the Sun, out of Neptun or the Sea, and received by Juno, or
the Air; these three are said to conspire against Jupiter; then comes the
wind, and blows away these mists; and so Jupiter is relieved, and the Heavens
cleared. Aegaeon is said to keep Hell gates, because the winds are often
enclosed in the bowels of the Earth and Sea. 2. Aegaeon fights against Jupiter,
when the Southwind obscures the Heaven with clouds, then with his Sun beams,
or thunder, the Air is cleared, and the wind settled, and because Aetna never
vomits out fire, but when there is wind generated in the hollow holes, and
cavernosities thereof, therefore Aegaeon is said to lie and move there. 3. God
has made our stomach and belly to be the receptacle of naughty vapors, which
notwithstanding sometimes rebel, and obnubilate the heaven of our brain, and
fight against our Jupiter, that is our judgment and reason; but oftentimes are
overcome and beat back by the strength of nature, and property of the brain.
4. Juno, that is, vapors; Neptune, that is, too much moisture; and Pallas, that
is too much study, oftentimes molest the brain, and assault judgment and
reason; but the help of Aegaeon, or the strength of the animal spirits do
releeve the brain and make peace. 5. In 88. the Spanish Juno, that is, their
wealth; Minerva, their policy; and Neptune their sea-god, I mean their great
Fleet, which affrighted the Ocean, conspired to invade our heaven, that is, our
Church and State; but Aegaeon, the stormy wind, sent by Thetis, but by the
power of the Almighty; scattered their forces, and releeved our Jupiter. 6.
Every piratical ship, robbing honest men of their goods, may be called Aegaeon,
for they fight against God himself, and their end for the most part is
fearful. 7. Arius and other heretics, opposing Christ's divinity; with Aegaeon
fight against God; and being struck with the thunder of Gods Word, without
repentance they are sent to hell. 8. All seditious persons rebelling against
the Church and State, are Aegaeons fighting against God, and they must look for
this reward.

As he who did against great Jove rebel,
Was struck with Thunder, and knocked down to Hell:
So God will all you Monsters over-turn,
Who against the King, the Church, the State dare spurn.
Your glory shall be shame, black Hell your mansion,
Furies your fellows, brimstone and fire your pension:
Your motion's like Aegaeons; when he turns,
Aetna does shake, and for a while it burns:
But when you move, you shake the world asunder,
Whose bowels smoke, and burn and roar, till you be struck with Thunder.
AENAEAS.
HE was a Trojan Prince, son of Venus, by whose help he was delivered from
being killed by the Graecians: he carried his old father on his shoulders out
of Troy, with his household gods; he was seven years, by the malice of Juno,
tossed upon the seas, and kept back from Italy; who when he arrived thither, was
molested by a long war, caused by Juno and Alecto; having at last killed
Turnus, ended his days in peace and honor; he went down to Hell, to visit
his father in the Elisian fields, who by the help of Sybilla and the golden
Branch, overcame all the dangers of Hell; his acts are eternised by the Prince
of Poets.

THE MYSTERIES.
HE was called the son of Venus, because that planet was mistress of his
horoscop, or because of his beauty and comely proportion; and to show that love
is the chiefest guard of Princes, and that which does most subdue and keep
people in subjection. 2. Juno and Aeolus, the air and wind conspired against
him to drown him; so sometimes Princes are oftentimes vexed and endangered by
the storms of civil dissension. 3. Neptune was his friend, both in the Trojan
war, and to help him forward to Italy; Vulcan made him armor, Mercury was
his counselor and spokes-man; Cupid made way with Queen Dido to entertain him;
to show that a Prince cannot be fortunate and powerful, without shipping,
armor, eloquence and love. 4. The golden Branch made way for him to
Proserpina, and brought him to hell, and so does the inordinate love of gold
bring many unto hell; again, gold makes way through the strongest gates, and
overcommeth the greatest difficulties; besides, gold is the symbol of wisdom,
without which no man can overcome difficulties; Lastly, he that will go
through the dangers of hell, that is, the pangs of death with cheerfulness,
must carry with him a golden branch, that is, a good conscience; and perhaps
this golden branch may be the symbol of a Kings Scepter, the ensign of
government, wherein a King is happy, if his Scepter be straight and of gold,
that is, if wealth, and justice, and wisdom go together. 5. Aenaeas had not
found the branch without the Doves, his mothers birds; so without love,
innocence and chastity, we cannot attain to true wisdom. 6. He that would
attain unto the true Branch, that is, Christ, the righteous Branch, and wisdom
of the Father, must follow the guide of the two Doves, the Old and the New
Testament, they will show us where he is. 7. Aenaeas, by the help of Sibyl,
went safely through Hell; so shall we by the assistance of Gods counsel (for
(...) and (...).
Sibyl signifies so much) we shall overcome all difficulties. 8. His companion
was Achates, for great Princes are never without much care and solicitude, as
the (...) and (...).
word signifies. 9. Aenaeas went through the dangers of hell, sea and land,
before he could have quiet possession in Italy; so we must through many dangers
enter into the Kingdom of heaven. 10. Aenaeas is the Idea of a perfect Prince
and Governor, in whom we see piety toward his gods in carrying them with
him, having rescued them from the fire of Troy; in worshipping the gods of the
places still where he came; in going to Apollos Temple, as soon as he lands in
Italy, in his devout prayers he makes to Jupiter, Apollo, Venus, and other
gods; piety also toward his old father, in carrying him on his shoulders, in
bewailing of his death, visiting of his tomb; going down to hell to see him;
his love was great to his wife Creusa, in lamenting, and casting himself into
open danger for her; his love was great to his son Ascanius, in the good
breeding and counselling of him; to Palinurus, Mysenus, and others; his
vigilancie in guiding the helm, at midnight, when his people were asleep; his
liberality to his soldiers, his magnanimity, constancy, wisdom, fortitude,
justice, temperance; are fit by all Princes to be imitated, and the Aeneads to
be diligently read.

He that would safely pass black Acheron,
And escape the dangers of hot Phlegeton,
Must carry with him Wisdoms golden rod,
Sybill must guide him; that's advice from God:
So shall he not fear dangers, nor miscarry,
When Styx he crosses in old Charons wherry.
What strength of Towns, or Castles can withstand
Sibyllas head-peece, and a golden hand.
But yet, beware of gold, I would advise thee;
For gold ill got, will down to Hell entice thee.
And if thou would true gold and wisdom find,
Seek after Christ, and on him fix thy mind.
Be chaste like Doves, and let Gods Word instruct thee,
There are the Doves which will to Christ conduct thee.
If Kings will fear great Jove who reigns above,
Then Vulcan, Neptune, Mercury, and Love
Shall serve them; Juno's spite shall not destroy them,
Nor Aeolus with all his breath annoy them.
AEOLUS.
HE was Jupiters son, a King over diverse Islands, and reigned in a City walled
with brass; he kept the Winds in a cave or hollow hill; which at Juno's
request, and promise of a marriage with her Nymph Deiopeia, he let out against
Aenaeas.

THE MYSTERIES.
HE is called Jupiters son, because the winds are begotten by the influence and
motion of the heavens. 2. He was an Astronomer, and could foretell storms and
calmes, therefore it was thought he had the command of the winds. 3. His City
was said to be walled with brass, because it was guarded with armed men. 4. He
kept the winds in a hollow cave; because some caves be full of vapors, which
sometimes burst forth with violence. 5. He reigned over Islands, because they
are most subject to storms. 6. Juno could not sink Aenaeas his ships without
the help of Aeolus; neither can the air violently work, if it be not moved by
the vapors, which are the winds, or else without vapors, by the Planets. 7. The
marriage between Aeolus and the sea Nymph, shows the relation that is between
the wind and the sea. 8. He may be called Aeolus, and the God of winds, that
can curb and keep under anger, and other unruly passions. 9. It is a
dangerous state, when Juno and Aeolus, that is, wealth and power band
themselves against innocent men.

He Is Aeolus, a God, and not a man,
That anger can
Subdue, and keep unruly passions under,
He Is a wonder.
He is a King, and stronger then the wind,
That curbs his mind.
It Is ill, when wealth conspires with violence
Against innocence.
That State's a Sea; Ships sink, or drive on shore,
When such storms roar.
AESCULAPIUS.
HE was the god of Physic, and son of Apollo, and Coronis the Nymph, whom
Apollo shot with his arrows, and cut out the child, who was nursed by a goat,
or bitch, as some would have it; he relieved Rome from the plague in the form
of a Serpent, being brought from Epidaurum in a ship; he restored Hippolitus to
life, therefore was killed by Jupiters thunder.

THE MYSTERIES.
A Esculapius is the mild temper of the air, as the (...) blandus.
word shows, which is the effect of the Sun, or Apollo; and is the cause of
health; therefore Hygiaea and Iaso, that is, health and cure, are the children
of Aesculapius. His mother, is (...), misceo and tempero.
Coronis, or the due mixture and temper of the air; which because it depends
from the influence o the Sun, therefore Apollo is said to beget Aesculapius of
her; but when he killed her with his arrows, is meant, that the Sun with his
beams did over-heat, and infect the air with a pestilence. 2. I had rather
understand by this fiction, the true temperament of a sound man's body, caused
by Apollo and Coronis, that is, the due proportion of the natural heat, and
radical moisture, called (...); and the true cause of health. Then Coronis is
killed with Apollo's arrows, when the natural heat degenerats into a feverish
inflammation, and dries up the moisture; but when the heat returns to its
former temper, Aesculapius, that is, health is recovered, and nourished by a
goat, because goats milk is good to feed, and restore decayed nature. 3. By
this fiction, I think is represented to us the properties of a good Physician;
he is the son of Apollo and Coronis, that is, of knowledge and experience;
knowledge kills experience, when the learned Physician trusts not to
experiments, but by art and knowledge he cures; for indeed in physic,
experience is little worth; for what experience can one have of such infinite
varieties of temperaments which are amongst men, every man having a peculiar
costitution, which is also still differing from it self; as Aesculapius was
nursed by a goat or bitch; so Physicians are maintained by gluttony and venery:
Chiron, Saturns son, was Aesculapius schoolmaster; for time has brought the
knowledge of physic to perfection, or because Chiron being half a man, and
half a horse, shows that a Physician must be a Centaure, that is, a man in
judgment, and a horse in courage, it is fit that Physicians should be brought
to Rome, that is, to great Cities infected with sickness; the Serpent, Cock,
and Raven were consecrated to Aesculapius, so was the Goat also; to show that a
Physician must have the Serpents wisdom, the Cocks vigilancie, the Ravens eye
and forecast, and the Goats swiftness; for delays are dangerous, and if
Physicians cure desperate diseases, they must not be proud, and attribute the
glory to themselves, or skill, but to God, lest they be punished in his just
anger, as Aesculapius was. 4. Christ is the true Aesculapius, the Son of God,
and the God of Physic, who was cut out, as it were, of his mothers womb, by
the power of God without man's help; and cured all diseases; the true brazen
Serpent, he only who was struck with the thunderbolt of his Fathers wrath, and
sent to hell, to deliver us from death and hell.

He that would prove a good Physician,
Must be a Centaur, that is a horse and man:
And he that will keep men from Charons boat,
Must be a Cock, a Crow, a Snake, a Goat.
Let him that is sick, and bruised, who cries and groans,
Repair to Christ, he will heal the broken bones:
He can do more then Aesculapius,
Who brought from death to life torn Virbius.
He first subdued death in himself, and then
Restored us all to life, who were dead men,
Dead in our sins, and dead in Gods just ire;
But Christ has killed our death, and quenched that fire
Which does torment and burn, but not consume,
A fire which gives no light, which yields no fume.
His death then is our life, our drink his blood;
His stripes our physic, and his flesh our food.
And when he comes again in Majesty,
To plague the workers of iniquity,
Sitting upon the clouds, whose voice like Thunder,
Shall shake heavens Tower, and cleave the earth in sunder:
Then will he raise all those that sleep in dust,
And crown with immortality the just.
ALPHAEUS.
HE was a great hunter, and fell in love with the Nymph Arethusa, who that she
might escape him, was by the help of Diana turned into a Fountain, and he
afterward sorrowing became a River, which still runs after Arethusa.

THE MYSTERIES.
ALphaeus is a River of Elis in Arcadia, through secret passages running under
the earth and sea, empties it self in the spring Arethusa, in Scicilie; which,
though Strabo denies it, it cannot be otherwise, seeing so many witnesses
confirm, that whatsoever is cast into Alphaeus is found in Arethusa. 2. As
this water running through the Sea loses not its sweetness, by receiving of
any salt relish; so neither must we lose our integrity and goodness by
conversing with the wicked. 3. Husbands must learn from Alphaeus to be kind to
their wives, and to make them partakers of all their goods, as Alphaeus imparts
all it receives, to Arethusa. 4. We must never rest, till we have obtained him
whom our soul loves; the salt sea of afflictions, and the distance of place
must not hinder our course. 5. Arethusa is from (...), virtue which we should
still run after. 6. Alphaeus, is from (...), a spot, we are full of spots and
sin, therefore had need to be washed in Arethusa, that is, in the water of
Baptism. 7. This water was held good to kill the Morphew, called therefore
Alphos, for which cause it was consecrated to Jupiter; and it was unlawful to
wash the altar of Jupiter Olympius with any other water; so Baptism does wash
us from original sin, and by it we are consecrated to God. 8. Alphaeus is as
much as (...), the light of truth, which runs after (...), or virtue; to show
that knowledge and theory, should always be joined with goodness and practice.

As Arethusa running through the main,
Yet does its taste and color still retain:
Salt Doris cannot taint it; let us then
Be good still, though we live with wicked men.
And as Alphaeus runs, and will not stop
Until he rests in Arethusa's lap;
So run my soul, until thou be possessed
Of thy beloved, and of eternal rest.
And who would think, that love could set on fire;
Cold waters choose cold waters to desire:
Can Cupid wound a river, can he scorch
The senseless waters with his faming Torch?
No, no; but thou, O Lord, the God of Love
Can wound my heart, and warm it from above.
My cold and waterish heart, to now inflame
With love of thee, that I my course may frame
To thee through a^l the (...) on cares and fears,
And through the salt sea also of my tears.
I am Alphaeus, tho(...) that living Well
To which I run, and where I hope to dwell.
AMPHION.
HE was Jupiters son of Antiopa; she flying from Dirce to a solitary mountain,
was there delivered, and the child was brought up by shepherds; he learned his
music of Mercury, and received his Lute from him; by the force of his music
he caused the stones to follow him, with which the walls of Thebes were built;
but afterward out-braving Latonas children, and upbraiding them for want of
skill, was by her killed.

THE MYSTERIES.
AMphion was called Jupiters son, because music is from God; or because the
heavens by their perpetual revolution, show, that music without continual
exercise cannot be attained unto; or to show that there is in the heavenly
bodies a harmony, as well as in music; or if by Jupiter we understand the air,
as sometimes Poets do, then as Jupiter gave life to Amphion, so does air to
music, for no sound either by voice, instruments, or water, without air. 2.
Jupiter in the form of a Satyr begot Amphion; Satyrs were great Dancers, and
dancing requires music. 3. Amphion was bred by shepherds; for these living an
idle and solitary life, were invited to invent music, partly by the singing of
birds, and partly by the whisting of the wind among the trees, or by the
running of waters. 4. He was born in a remote hill, because musical inventions
require quietness, and a private life far from troubles and business. 5.
Mercury taught him, and gave him the Lute; to show the resemblance, and equal
power of eloquence and music; eloquence being a speaking harmony, and music a
speechless eloquence, the one by words, the other by sounds working on the
affections. 6. His building Thebes walls by his music, shows what is the force
of eloquence, to draw rude people to religion, policy, and civility. 7. His
out-braving of Apollo and Diana, does not only show the insolency and pride
of some men, when they have got some perfection in an Art; but also, I suppose,
may be meant the power and delight of music, that it no less affects and
delights the soul by the ear, then the light of the Sun and Moon does the eye:
So that music may as it were challenge the light. 8. Amphion may be said to be
killed by Latona, when musical knowledge is lost by negligence and oblivion.
9. Our Savior Christ is the true Amphion, who by the preaching of the Gospel
has built his Church, and made us who were but dead and scattered, living
stones in this building; his music has quickened us, and his love has united
us. 10. Amphion was said to build the walls by the help of his music, because
perhaps he employed Musicians at that time, who by their music encouraged the
builders, and made them work the better.

In this we see the force of Eloquence,
By which grea Towns have walls, and stones have sense.
This is the only pleasant melody,
Which caused rude men embrace civility.
Stones hear not sounds; its not the warbling Lute,
Nor solemn Harp, nor Trumpet, nor the Flute,
Nor Songs, nor any Organ musical
That could give sense to stones, or build a wall:
But Christ our Lord with his celestial lays,
Has from Amphion born away the praise;
Whose charming voice no sooner 'gan to sound,
But Sions walls were lifted from the ground:
He raised us senseless stones out of the dung
Of Error, by the music of his tongue,
That we might, at his voice, and in his name,
Make up the walls of new Jerusalem.
ANTAEUS.
HE was a Giant, 40 cubits high, begotten of Neptune, and the earth, with whom,
when Hercules did wrestle, still as he was flung on the g^ound his strength
increased; which Hercules perceiving, lifted him from the ground, and squeezing
him to his breast, stifled him.

THE MYSTERIES.
THe bigness of his body showed, that earth and water were extraordinarily
predomina^t in him, therefore he was called the son of Neptune, and the earth.
2. A covetous man is like Antaeus, the more that his affections touch earthly
things, the stronger is his covetousness; till he be lifted up from the earth
with heavenly thoughts, and then covetous thoughts dye. 3. Satan is like
Antaeus, for the more he is beat down by the Herculean strength of Gods Word,
the more violent and fierce he grows; but being squeezed by the Breast Plate
of justice, he loses his force. 4. Satan deals with good men, as Hercules with
Antaeus; he flings them down, by oppression and persecution; but when he
perceives, that by this means they grow stronger and more resolute, he lifts
them up by pride and prosperity, by which many are overthrown which grew strong
by adversity. 5. The Sun like Antaeus, when he is come to his perigaeum, or
that point nearest the earth, he begins to gather strength, which increases
till he come to his apogaeum, or that point in heaven farthest from the earth;
and then his force begins to weaken. 6. He that will cure a Fever with hot
things, or an Hydropsie with cold and moist things, he does as Hercules to
Antaeus, increase the disease by applying things of the same nature, whereas
diseases should be cured by contraries. 7. Every thing in its own element, with
Antaeus, does gather strength and prospers, but being put unto another
element dies, as fishes in the air, and beasts in the sea.

Take heed, all you that would overthrow
Your greedy minds, and them subdue,
You fling them not ^n things below,
For so their force they will still renew.
But lift them up with all your strength,
That they may see the wealth and joy
Which is above, and so at length
You shall your Avarice destroy.
At any time if Satan shall
With crosses fling you on the ground,
Lose not your virtue with your fall,
But let your courage then abound.
Take heed he lift you not too high
With pride in this your spiritual strife:
For then he will get the victory,
And spoil thee of eternal life.
Lord lift my mind out of the dust,
And make it mount above the skies;
Be thou my treasure where no rust
Can come, which Moaths and Thieves defies.
And when with crosles I Am cast down,
Let not my strength and courage fail;
Let constancy Lord be my Crown,
Then in my fall I shall prevail.
APOLLO.
HE was the son of Jupiter and Latona, born in Delos; he killed the Serpent
Python, the Giant Tytion, Marsyas the Musician, and the Cyclops that made
Jupiters thunder, with which his son Aesculapius was slain; for which fact
Jupiter banished him, and drove him to feed Admetus his sheep, and to help
Neptune in building of the walls of Troy; he was the god of Wisdom, of Physic,
of Music, and Arching.

THE MYSTERIES.
BY Apollo is ordinarily understood the Sun, which as his (...) perdo (...)
salvo and solvo (...)quasi (...) a late^^^.
name shows, is both the destroyer and preserver of things; he is the son of
Jupiter, because he is a part of heaven, or because he was created by God; he
was born of Latona, because God brought light out of darkness, and the Sun out
of the Chaos; born in Delos, which signifies manifestation, for the Sun
discovers all things; he killed Python the Serpent, because the Sun by his
heat disperseth all putrified vapors, and clears the air from mists, for of
putrefaction venomous beasts are procreated; so he killed Jupiters
Thunder-makers, because the Sun cleers the air, and consumes those exhalations
and moystures, of which Thunder is engendered. When Apollo was born, Diana his
sister, who was first born, was the Midwife to bring forth Apollo; that may
signify that the Sun is freed from his eclipse and darkness, when the Moon
departs from him; he is still Beardlesse, to show his perpetual youth, his
long hair shows his beams; he feeds sheep, because his heat produces grass;
he is carried in a Chariot drawn with four horses, to show his motion, and the
four seasons of the year, or the four parts of the Artificial day; as his
horses names do show, Erythraeus, i. e. ruber Actaeon splendens Lampas fulgor.
Philogeus terram amans.
Erythraeus, Actaeon, Lampos, Philogeus; for he is red in the morning, clear
about nine of the clock, in his full splendor at noon, and draws to the earth
in the evening; he is the god of Wisdom, not by infusing the habit or essence
thereof, but by preparing and fitting the Organs for the use and exercise
thereof, therefore Southern people are more subtle, wise and ingenious, then
the Northern. And because from the Sun diverse predictions are gathered of the
alteration of weather, and other Vide Virgil. Geor. 1.
sublunary mutations, he was called the great Prophet, and God of Divination;
he was also called the god of physic, both because physical herbs have their
strength from the Sun, and oftentimes, the spring cures the winter diseases,
and the summer the infirmities of the spring; he was called the god of music,
because he cleers up the spirits of al things; therefore the birds do welcome
his approach with their melodious harminonie; therefore the Swan was dedicated
to him, and the grasshoppers also; and as in music so in his motion and
operations there is a harmony; and because he fits the air, which is the medium
of music and of all sounds; the muses for this cause are in his custody;
which were enlarged from three to 9 according as the number of strings
increased in musical instruments; he was called an Archer because his beams
like arrows fly every where; His Tripos, which some will have to be a table
called also Cortini potens dictus Apollo.
Cortina, from Pythons skin with which it was covered, others a three footed
vessel, others a threefoot chair, wherein they sat that prophesied; I say
this Tripos may signify the three circles in the zodiac which every year he
touches, to wit, the ecliptic, and the two tropicks. They that died suddenly
or of any violent disease were said to be killed by Apollo, because the Sun
with extreme heat does cause famine and infectious Fevers. Thus he was said
to shoot with his arrows, Amphions children; to him were dedicated the strong
Bull, the white Swan, the quick-sighted Raven, to Phaneus dictus Apollo a
manifestando.
signify the power, and beauty, and piercing light of the Sun; which because
it detecteth obscure things, he was called a Prophet; the Olive, Palm, and
Bay Tree also were dedicated to him, both because the Olive and Palm grow not,
but in hot countries; and because they are, as the Bay tree useful in physic,
and of a hot quality like the Sun, therefore he was said to be in love with
Daphne a (...).
Daphne the daughter of the river Peneus, because on the banks of that River
are good store of Bay-trees: his shoes and garments were of gold, to show his
color; he with Neptune built the walls of Troy, to show that without Gods
assistance no City or State, can stand, or be built. His love which he bare to
the flower Hyacinthus is to show that flowers do bud and prosper by the Sun,
and die with cold winds; therefore Zephirus was the cause of his death; and
perhaps Apollo and Neptune were said to build Troys walls, because mortar and
brick are made by the help of heat and water; or because Laomedon either stole
or borrowed some treasure out of the Temples of Apollo and Neptune. 2. Our
Savior Christ is the true Apollo, both a destroyer of Satan's kingdom, and a
saver of his people; for (...) is as much as to lose by paying the price of
redemption, he is the Sun of Righteousness, by whose beams and arrows, that
is, his word, Python the devil is subdued; he is the Son of God, and the God of
Wisdom, the great Prophet, the Son of Latona, that is, of an obseure maid: the
true God of physic, who cures all our infirmities; and the God of Music too,
for that harmony of affections and communion of Saints in the Church is from
him; he has subdued our Giants, that is, our spiritual foes, by whose malice
the thunder of Gods wrath was kindled against us: He is immortal, and the good
Shepherd, who has laid down his life for his sheep; having for his sheeps sake
forsaken his Fathers glory, and he it is who has built the walls of Jerusalem.
Apollo was never so much in love with Hyacinthus, as Christ was with the sons
of men. 3. As the Sun amongst the Planets; so is a King amongst his subjects;
a King is Apollo, the destroyer of the wicked, and a preserver of good men; the
light and life, and beauty of his people; a God of wisdom amongst them, to
guide them with good Laws; a God of physic, to cut off rotten and hurtful
members, to purge out all gross humors, that is, bad manners, with the pills of
justice, and to cheer up with cordialls our rewards, the sound and solid parts
of the politic body; he is a God of music also, for where there is no King or
head, there can be no harmony nor concord; he is a Prophet to foresee and
prevent those dangers, which the people cannot: he is a subduer of Pythons and
Giants, that is, of all pestiferous disturbers and oppressors of the State: his
arrows are his Laws and power, which reaches through all the parts of his
dominion: he is a good shepherd, and Kings are (...).
so called; and a King thus qualified shall be like the Sun, still glorious,
immortal, youthful, and green like the Palm, Olive, and Bay Tree; but if he
does degenerat unto a tyrant, then he is the cause of mortality, as the Sun is,
when he inflames the air with excessive heat.

When God out of rude Chaos drew the light,
Which chased away the long confused night
Over all this All, it did display
Its golden beams, and made the day.
So when mankind did in the Chaos lie.
Of ignorance and gross idolatry,
There did arise a light, a Star
Brighter then Sun or Moon by far.
Who with his fulgent beams did soon disperse
The vapors of this little universe
Till then no morning did arise,
Nor sparkling Stars to paint the skies.
This is that Sun, this is the woman's seed,
Who with her arrows wounded Pythons head*
Its he who killed the Giants all,
Which were the causes of our fall.
He is that shepherd which in flowery Meads
Does feed his wandering flock, and then he leads
Them to the brook that softly glides,
And with his shepherds-crook them guides.
Its he that did Jerusalem immure,
And made it strong, that it might stand secure
Against all foreign enemies,
Against assaults and batteries.
He Is Wisdom, he that Prophet which displaid
What was before in darkness bosom laid;
Whose Oracles did never fail,
Whose Miracles made all men quail.
He is the Sun that rides triumphantly
On the blew Chariot of the spangled sky,
Whose Chariot's drawn with horses four,
Justice and Truth, Mercy and Power.
He is the God of all sweet harmony,
Without whose word there is no melody;
He Is sweeter to a pensive mind,
Then any music we can find.
He is the God of physic, he can ease
The soul of sin, thy body of disease.
He only helps the heavy heart,
He only cures the inward smart.
But sometime he his winged shafts lets fly
Amongst his foes, and wounds them mortally.
Who can unbend his reaching Bow?
Who can avoid his piercing blow?
Then seeing Christ is this resplendant Sun,
Which Gyant-like about the world does run;
Who showed to Jews his rosy face,
And to all Gentiles offers grace.
Let us at last with reverence admire
This great Apollo, heavens greatest fire:
Come, let us Palms and Laurels bring,
And to him Io Paeans sing.
Apollo and a King paralleled.
Like as Apollo's sparkling flame,
Does cherish with his beams the frame
Of this round Globe we see:
So Kings extend on us the light
Of their just Laws, and with their might
Keep us from injury.
They let their Arrows fly at those
Who dares their Rules and Laws oppose,
And vex the innocent*
A King the plaguey Python slayes,
And Giants that will Thunder raise
Within his firmament.
He is a good Physician,
That bitter Pills and Cordialls can
Prescribe when he thinks cause
He makes a sweeter harmony,
Then Harp, or Lute, or Psaltery,
With his well tuned Laws,
He holds his bow with his left hand,
And at his right the graces stand,
As white as driven snow,
To let us see that by his reign
More good we have, and much more gain
Then damage by his bow*
The Muses in a grove of Bays
About him dance, and sing sweet lays,
Each has her instrument,
To show, that under such a King
All things do flourish, Schoolers sing
With comfort and content*
He has the Ravens piercing eye,
He Is a white Swan in purity,
And has the Bullocks strength:
He shall outlive the Palm and Bay,
His Name and Laws shall not decay,
But conquer all at length.
His head does shine with golden locks,
He is a shepherd of great flocks,
Whom in the fragrant Meads,
He feeds and guides them with his crook,
And drives them to the silver Brook,
And to the shades them leads.
He wears a Tripos on his Crown,
A Triple Monster trampled down,
Before him prostrate lies.
Now if this Sun shines any where,
He shines sure in our Northern sphaere,
And moves in British skies.
ARACHNE.
She was a Lydian Maid, skillful in weaving and spinning, and by Minerva (for
her insolency, in provoking a goddess) was turned into a Spider.

THE MYSTERIES.
THis Arachne did learn of the Spider to spin and weave; for the beasts are in
many things our schoolmasters. 2. It is not good to be proud and insolent of
any art or knowledge. 3. Subtle and trifling sophisters, who with intricacies
and querks entangle men, are no better than Spiders, whose captious fallacies
are no less hateful to the wise, than Arachnes web was to Minerva. 4. Partial
Judges use their laws, as Spiders do their webs, to catch little flies, and
let the great ones pass through. 5. Covetous men are like Spiders, they
unbowel, that is, they consume and spend themselves with care and toil, to
catch a fly; for wealth in the end, will be found little better. 6. Envy and a
slandering tongue is like a Spider, which does crack the purest glasses, so do
they poison the best men. 7. We should be Spiders in providence they hang their
nets in windows, where they know flies most resort, and work most in warm
weather, for then the flies come most abroad; and like Mice, they foretell the
rume of an house, by falling and running away, as Pliny shows.

Thou that in knowledge do excel, Must humble be,
And think what on Arachne fell, May fall on thee:
It was her pride did her undo,
And pride may overthrow thee too.
Let not the miser spend his strength, And lose his health
To catch a silly Fly at length, For such is wealth:
The careful wretch at his last gasp
Shall find that wealth is but a wasp.
Take heed thou do not use thy tongue To sting the good;
For they that thus good men do wrong, Are Spiders brood:
Nay worse; for bad tongues far surpass
That poison which cracks but a glass.
Judges your Laws you must not make, Like Spiders cords,
Which only Pesants use to take And pass by Lords:
This is indeed a powerful Law,
Which keeps both rich and poor in awe.
But we must Spiders strive to be In providence,
Where dangers are we must foresee, And fly from thence;
Seamen for want of good forecast,
Are soon surprised with every blast.
ARION
WAs a skillful musician, who having got great wealth, and sailing to Lesbos,
was robbed by the mariners, and appointed to be flung in the sea, who having
leave to play on his Harp, so charmed the Dolphins, that they received him on
their backs, and carried him to Tenarus, where the Dolphin dyed, that carried
him, being left on the shore, and was placed among the stars; the mariners
were taken and put to death.

THE MYSTERIES.
THis Dolphin was a ship (...), Thucid.
so called, from the image of the Dolphin upon the stern. 2. Here also we may
see the force of eloquence, by which wild men are charmed. 3. No sin is done
in secret, but shall be revealed, especially murder, which oftentimes is
strangely discovered. 4. God does not let good turns go unrewarded, which is
signified by the Dolphin made a constellation. 5. Here we see Arions
ingratitude, who let the Dolphin die on the shore. 6. The love of Dolphins to
man, may teach us love one to another. 7. The Vide Aelian. Plin. etc.
Dolphins never rest, not when they sleep; they are the swiftest of all fishes,
and most intelligent; pious to their own kind, in carrying out their dead
bodies to the shore. 8. When Satan drove us out of Paradise into the sea of
this world, the Dolphin, that is, the Church, received us, and by the music of
Gods Word, we are saved.

That arch-Thief Satan, Pyrate of mankind,
Had robbed us of Gods grace, had spoiled the mind,
And flung us in the sea of misery,
In which we must have dyed eternally:
Even as those Thieves who had conspired to 'ntomb
Arion in old Glaucus glassy womb;
Who by his Harp from that salt grave was saved,
And on the Dolphins scaly back received:
On which, as on a horse triumphing rides,
And with his music charms the winds and tides.
The sea-Nymphs are amazed to hear such noise,
And with unusual dancings show their joys.
Stern Neptunes Trident does the waves appease,
And Tritons blew horse tramples on the seas;
Thetis stands still and hears, the fishes skip
To hear this Song, to see this living ship.
The Dolphin was the ship, the pilot, and
The compass too, that brought him to the land.
If this was true, it was strange, sure this I know,
That Satan out of Paradise did throw
Adam unto a briny sea of cares,
Which had more dangers then his head had hairs.
The breath of Gods just indignation
Did raise the billows of this Ocean,
Which with a night of clouds obscured the sky,
And did involve with mists heavens brightest eye.
This incontrolled storm did rore and rage,
And nothing could the wrath thereof assuage,
Until that storm was heard which calmed the seas,
Unmasked the Sun, and did the winds appease.
The Gentile Princes, who before were wild,
Are by this music charmed, and made more mild.
Sions new Song has caused great Potentates
Submit to Christ their crowns, their wealth, their states.
They yield their backs to him, him they support
In his sea-tossed members to their port.
And as Arion did the fish bestride,
Which through the main was both his ship and guide:
So Christ supports us to our wished for shore,
He Is Wind, and Star, Card, Pilot, Ship, and Oar.
Or else the Church the Dolphin is; the Gale
Gods Word; the World's the Sea on which we sail:
Who through this Sea would pass, and come to land,
Must use this Gale, and on this Dolphin stand.
ARISTAEUS
WAs the son of Apollo and Cyrene, a shepherd, a keeper of Bees, who first
found out honey and oil; he was in love with Euridice, who being pursued by
him, run away, and was killed by a serpent; therefore the Nymphs were angry,
and destroyed his Bees; he obtained of Jupiter and Neptune, that the
pestilentiall heat of the Dog-dayes, wherein was great mortality, should be
mitigated with winds.

THE MYSTERIES.
BY Aristaeus may be meant Wisdom, which is the best thing in man, as the (...)
optimus.
word shows; which is begot of Apollo and Cyrene the daughter of the river
Peneus, because the moderate heat, and proportion of moisture make a good
temper, and so the Organs are fitted for the exercise of wisdom; by which honey
and oil, things most pleasant and useful for the life of man were invented; by
wisdom the heat of the Dog-dayes is tempered, because a wise man knows how to
prevent and avoid the inconveniences of the heaven; sapiens dominabitur
astris: Euridice, is a deep or large judgment which is nothing else but that
act of the intellect in (...) latus (...) iudicium.
determining what is right, what wrong, what to be chosen, what avoided, and so
the will, whose office it is, to choose or refuse is directed and guided by the
judgment: A wise man desires to enjoy a right judgment, and to regulate his
actions accordingly; but this Euridice does often fail Aristaeus, and is
wounded by the serpent of our corrupt nature; so that this failing, Aristaeus
loses his Bees, that is, fails in his inventions, and wants the sweetness
and comfort which he should take in his actions; this made S. Paul confess,
that he did what he would not do, and what he would do, he did not. 2.
Aristaeus is a King, a shepherd, and the best man of his Kingdom, by whose
invention we have honey and oil, that is, delight, and all things necessary by
his good government; whose wisdom does prevent the infectious heat of Dogdayes;
that is, of oppression, tumults and rebellion; but if at any time Euridice,
right judgment, being stung by serpentine flatterers who mis-inform him be
wanting, then the Bees perish, and the subjects go to ruin. 3. Aristaeus is
the celestial heat, the effect of the Sun, joined with moderate moisture, by
which. Bees, and Olives, and all things useful for our life are procreated and
cherished; by the secret influence of this heat, those Northern winds in
Pontus, Egypt, and other places are raised, which after the Summer solstice,
blow, and last four days, by which the rage of the Dog Star is mitigated;
these winds are called Etesii, because every year they blow at the same season;
in Spain and Asia these Etesian winds blow from the East; this heat working
upon Jupiter and Neptune, that is, on the air and sea, does cause and generate
these winds; now, as this celestial heat produces and cherishes Bees, so
Euridice, man's judgment, art, and industry must be joined; otherwise by the
Nymphs, that is, too much rain, or by many other ways the Bees may fail, and
if they fail, the same heat, out of putrified matter may make a new generation.
4. Christ is the true Aristaeus, the good shepherd, the best of men, and the
son of God, by whom we have honey and oil, comfort and spiritual joy, and all
things else, at whose request the heat and Dog Star of Gods anger was appeased;
he is in love with our souls, as Aristaeus with Euridice; but we run from him,
and are stung by the serpent the Devil; we dyed with Euridice, we were
destroyed with Aristaeus his Bees, until he restored us again to life by the
sacrifice of his own body.

When Aristaeus lost his troops
Of honey, people, and their hopes;
And when Cyrene he adored,
He had his swarms again restored.
We are the Bees, and Christ is he
Who would himself an offering be;
He was both Altar, Priest and Host,
He found us out when we were lost.
He got us pleasure by his pain,
His death's our life, his loss our gain.
In that we do enjoy our lives,
In that our wexin Kingdom thrives:
In that we sit on fragrant flowers,
Bedewed with pearly drops and showers;
In that our Cells with Nectar flow,
In that our young ones live and grow:
In that we play in open air,
In that the Heavens are so fair;
In that we have so long a Spring,
And with our humming Meads do ring:
All this we have, and more then this,
By virtue of Christ's sacrifice.
Its he who with his gentle breath,
Tempers the heat of Jova's wrath.
Its he that loves us night and day,
And yet like fools we run away.
He is our husband, not our foe,
Then whither will you from him go?
You run, but do not see, alas,
The Serpent that lurks in the grass.
O Lord, when thou do call on me,
Uncase my eyes, that I may see
Thy love, and beauty of thy face;
And so support me with thy grace
That I may stand; or if I fall,
I may not lose my soul withal.
ATALANTA.
SHe was the daughter of King Ceneus, so swift in running, that no man could
match her; only Hippomenes overcame her, by casting in her way three golden
apples, at which whilst she stooped to take them up, she lost her race; she
was the first that shot the Calydonian Boar; and with the sharp point of her
spear, brought water out of a rock; but for lying in Cybeles temple with
Hippomenes, she was turned into a Lioness, and he into a Lion, which drew
Cybeles Chariot.

THE MYSTERIES.
HEre we have the picture of a whore, who runs swiftly in the broad way that
leads to destruction; if any thing stay her course, it is wise counsel and
admonition; for wisdom is represented by gold. It is she that kills the Boars,
that is, wanton and unruly youths, wounding both their bodies, souls and
estates, and therefore has a sharp spear, to draw water out of rocks; because
many who at first were senseless like stones, being deeply wounded with
remorse for their former folly and stupidity, fall to repentance, to weeping
and lamenting, considering what they have lost: and as Atalanta defiled Cybeles
temple, so does a whore pollute her body, which is the Temple of the Holy
Ghost; so does the whoremaster make his body all one with the body of an
harlot; and so both degenerat from humanity, and participate of the cruelty and
lasciviousness of Lions, and by this means become miserable slaves and drudges
to Cybele, mother earth, that is, to all earthly affections and lust. 2. As
Atalantas course was interrupted by golden apples, so is the course of Justice
oftentimes stopped with golden bribes. 3. Here we see that one sin draws
after it another, worse than the former; fornication begets profaneness,
and profaneness cruelty, and miserable servitude to earthly lusts. 4. Let us
with Atalanta run the race that is set before us, and wound the boar of our
wanton lusts, and draw water from our rocky hearts, let us take heed, that the
golden apples of worldly pleasure and profit, which Hippomenes the Devil flings
in our way, may not hinder our course; commit not spiritual fornication with
him in the temple of Cybele, lest God in his just anger, make our condition
worse than the condition of the brute and savage beasts.

We Are all in Atalanta's case,
We run apace,
Until our wandering eyes behold
The glittering gold:
And then we lose in vanity
Our race, and our virginity.
Gods holy Temple we pollute,
And prostitute
Our souls to foul Hippomenes,
With all boldness;
So having lost humanity,
Fierce Lions we become to be.
And then our heads we must submit,
To curb and bit
Of mother earth, whose heavy Wain
We draw with pain:
And yet we cannot cease to draw
Earth, till earth hide us in her maw.
O that we could our sins deplore,
And kill the Boar
Of wanton lusts, e're we hence go
To shades below:
O that our rocky hearts could rend,
And from them Crystal Rivers send.
O God, all filthy lusts destroy,
Which me annoy,
And give my flinty heart a blow,
That tears may flow:
O let me not thy house profane,
Which thou have purchased with thy pain.
ATLAS
WAs the son of Iapetus, and brother of Prometheus, or as others say, he was
begotten of heaven and the day; if this was not another Atlas; he was King of
Mauritania, and had a garden where grew golden apples, he was turned into a
mountain by Perseus, Jupiters son, upon the sight of Gorgons head, because he
refused to lodge him.

THE MYSTERIES.
ATlas is the name of an high hill, which for the height thereof, being higher
than the clouds, was said to support heaven, and to be begotten of heaven and
day, because of the continual light on the top of it, as being never obscured
with mists, clouds, and vapors. 2. This is the name of him who first found out
the knowledge of Astronomy, and invented the Sphere; which some think was
Henoch, and for this knowledge was said to support heaven. 3. This is the name
of a king in Mauritania, who perhaps from the bigness, and strength of his
body, was called a mountain; and was said to have a garden of golden apples,
because of the plenty of golden mines in his Kingdom. 4. God is the true Atlas,
by whose Word and power the world is sustained; that mountain on which we may
securely rest, who only has golden apples and true riches to bestow on us. 5.
The Church is the true Atlas, a supporter of a Kingdom, the child of heaven,
the hill on which God will rest, on which there is continual light and day, a
rock against which hell gates cannot prevail; where is the garden of golden
apples, the Word and Sacraments. 6. A King is the Atlas of his Commonwealth,
both for strength and greatness, there is the day and light of knowledge in
him, which the people cannot see; (...).
Prometheus, that is, Providence is his brother; by the means of his knowledge
and providence the Kingdom is supported, and his gardens are filled with
golden apples, that is, his treasures with money. 7. He deserves not to be
called a man, but a monster, who will not be hospitable; for homo ab humanitate;
and (...).
Jupiter is the god of hospitality, who punishes the violation of it. 8. As
Perseus the son of Jupiter, sought lodging from Atlas, but could have none, and
therefore turned him into a senseless hill. So Christ the Son of God, knocks at
the doors of our hearts, whom if we refuse to let in, we show our selves to
be more senseless and stupid then hill Atlas.

Go too my soul, thy doors unlock,
Behold the Son of God does knock,
And offers to come in:
O suffer not to go from hence,
So great a God, so just a Prince,
That were a grievous sin.
Refuse not then to intertain
So great a guest, who would so fain
Come lodge and sup with thee:
If thou refuse, he can command
The Gorgon which is in his hand
Thy soul to terrify.
His word the Gorgon is, which can
Turn unto senseless stones that man
Whose gates will not display
Themselves to him, who still entreats
To come unto our Cabinets;
And yet we will not give way.
O Lord, whose word does me sustain,
And all that is in the earth and main,
And in the painted skies:
Let me those goodly fruits of gold
Which in thy gardens shine, behold
With these my feeble eyes.
Lord give the King a lasting name,
And strength, that he may bear the frame
Of this great Monarchy:
From whom if Prudence do not part,
Nor light of Knowledge from his heart,
We Will fear no Anarchy.
Make thou his golden splendour shine
As far as did King Atlas Mine
To earths remotest bound,
And let his head ascend as high
As Atlas did above the sky,
With light and glory crowned.
AURORA.
THe daughter of Hiperion and Thia, or as others write, of Titan and the Earth,
the sister of Sol and Luna drawn in a chariot, sometimes with four horses,
sometimes with two only; she uses to leave her husband Tithonus with her son
Memnon abed in Delos; she made old Tithonus young again, by means of herbs
and physic.

THE MYSTERIES.
AUrora is the daughter of Hiperion, which signifies to go above; for it is
from above that we have the light of the (...).
Sun, and every other good thing, even from the Father of lights; her mother is
Thia, for it is by divine gift we enjoy light, and nothing does more lively
represent the Divinity then the light, as Dionys. Areopagit. shows at large,
she is the daughter of Titan, that is, the Sun, who is the fountain of light
and of the earth, because the light of the morning seems to arise out of the
earth: The leaving of her husband abed with her son, is only to show, that all
parts of the earth do not enjoy the morning at one time, but when it is
morning with us, it is evening with those of the remotest Eastcountries from
us; whom she leaves abed when she rises on us, and leaves us abed when she
rises on them: for all parts are East and West, and all people may be called
her husbands, and sons, for she loves all, and shines on all; and by her
absence, leaves them all abed by turns. Her chariot signifies her motion; the
purple and rose color, do paint out the colors that we see in the morning, in
the air, caused by the light and vapors: She has sometime two, sometimes
four horses, because she rises sometime slower, sometime sooner. The making of
old Tithonus young with physic, may show that the physical simples which come
from the Eastern countries, are powerful for the preserving of health and
vigor in the body. Again, fair Aurora leaving old Tithon abed; does show,
that beautiful young women delight not in an old man's bed; or by this may be
signified a virtuous woman, whom Solomon describes, who rises whilst it is
night, is clothed with scarlet and purple, who does her husband good, etc.
Prove. 31.
Last, our Savior is the true Aurora; who was in love with mankind, whom he
has healed from al infirmities, and has bestowed on him a lasting life, which
knows not old age; his light from the chariot of his word, drawn by the
four Evangelists, shines over all the world.

As fair Aurora from old Tithons bed,
Flies out with painted wings, and them does spread
Upon the firmament;
So from the heavens golden Cabinet,
Out flies a morning all with Roses set
Of graces redolent.
Whose presence did revive the hearts of those
Whom night of sin and error did enclose
Within her darkest Cell;
This morning on a purple Chariot rides,
Drawn by four milk-white Steeds, the reins he guides
In spite of death and hell.
Christ is this morning, who triumphantly
On the bright Chariot of his Word does fly;
The four white horses are
The four Evangelists, whose light does run
As swift as does Aurora, or the Sun,
Or Moon, or any Star.
Its he that Eagle-like our youth renews,
And in us all infirmities subdues;
Its he whose radiant wings
Displaid abroad, has chased away the night,
And ushered in the day, which mental light
And true contentment brings.
O thou whose face does guild the Canopy
Which does infold fire, air, and earth, and sea,
Extend thy glorious rays
On me, Oh let me see that countenance
Which may dispell the night of ignorance,
So shall I sing thy praise.
CHAP. II. B
BACCHUS.
He was the son of Jupiter and Semele, who was saved out of his mothers
ashes, after that Jupiter had burnt her with his thunder, and was preserved
alive in Jupiters thigh; he was bred in Egypt, and nursed by the Hyades and
Nymphs; he subdued the Indians and other nations; was the first who wore a
Diadem, and triumphed, and found out the use of wine.

THE MYSTERIES.
BY Bacchus is ordinarily meant Wine, which is the fruit of Semele, that is, of
the Vine, so (...).
called, because it shakes the limbs; for no liquor so apt to breed palsies,
as wine; ashes, because hot, make good dung for Vines, therefore Bacchus is
said to proceed of his mothers ashes, and to be cherished in Jupiters thigh,
because the Vine prospers best in a warm air, and in a soil most subject to
thunder, which is caused by heat which is most fervent, and thunders most
frequent in July and August, when the grapes do ripen. He was bred in Egypt,
because a hot air, and mellow soil as Egypt is, is fittest for wine; and
because moisture is required for the increase of wine; therefore he was said to
be nursed by the Hyades and Nymphs. He subdued the Indians, either because
wine makes resolute soldiers, or because most countries are subdued with
excessive drinking and abuse of wine: and indeed Bacchus may wear the Diadem,
for he does triumph over all nations, of all sorts of people and professions;
there be few that with Lycurgus will oppose him; his Thirsus reaches farther
than any Kings Scepter, or the Roman Fasces; if we would see his Orgia or
sacrifices, his Priests or Vel T^yades and Mimallones and Bacch.
Maenades, his Panthers, Tigers and Lynces, with which his chariot is drawn,
the Satyrs and Sileni his companions, with their Cymbals and vociferations, we
shall not need to go far; he never had greater authority over the Jndians, than
he has over this Kingdom; he once slept three years with Proserpina, but we
will not let him rest one day. The Thebans tore Orpheus for bringing in Bacchus
his sacrifices among them; and Icarius was thought to have brought in poison,
when he brought in wine; but the case is otherwise with us; if any discommend
the excess of wine, he shall have Alcithoes doom, she for discommending
Bacchus, was turned into a Bat; and he shall be accounted no better, yet I
discommend not the moderat use of wine, which is Jupiters son, or the gift of
God; for it strengthens the body, comforts the heart, breeds good blood; for
which cause Bacchus was always young, for wine makes old men look young, if it
be moderate, otherwise it makes them children, for so Bacchus is painted; he
had also both a virgins and a bulls face, he was both male and female,
sometimes he had a beard, and sometimes none, to show the different effects of
wine moderatly and immoderatly taken; he was worshipped on the same altar with
Minerva, and was accompanied with the Muses, to show that wine is a friend to
wisdom and learning. Mercury carried him, being a child, to Macris the
daughter of Aristaeus, who anointed his lips with honey; to show that in wine
is eloquence; and so likewise the naked truth, therefore Bacchus is always
naked, and if Amphisbaena the Serpent, that is, sorrow or care bit the heart,
let Bacchus kill him with a vine-branch: wine refines the wit, therefore the
quick sighted Dragon was consecrated to Bacchus; and to show that much prattling
was the fruit of wine, the chattering Pie was his bird. And because wine makes
men effeminat, therefore women were his priests; he slept three years with
Proscrpina, to show that Vines the first three years are not fruitful; he was
turned unto a Lion, to show the cruelty of drunken men; he was torn by the
Titans, buried, and revived again, for small twigs cut off from a vine, and
set in the earth, bring forth whole vines. He was called Liber and (...) idem.
Liber, because wine makes a man talk freely, and freeth the mind from cares,
and makes a man have free and high thoughts; it makes a beggar a gentleman.
(...) mentem and (...) pungo.
Dionysus from stirring up the mind; he was the first that made bargains, and
so it seems to be true by the Dutchmen, who will make no bargains till they be
well liquored. 2. Bacchus is the Sun; who is both Liber and Dionysus, free from
all sublunary imperfections, and freeth the world from darkness and
inconveniences of the night, and pricks forward the minds of men to their
daily actions; he is still young, not subject to age and decay, naked, for he
makes all things naked and open to the eye of the author of generation of all
things, as well as of wine, the son of Jupiter, because he is a part of heaven,
and of burned Semela, because they thought that the Sun was of a fiery matter;
he dies and reviveth again, when after the cold winter he recollects his heat,
strength, and vigor; his sleeping with Proserpina, shows his abode under our
Hemisphaer; the wild beasts which accompany him, shows the extremity of
heat, with which beasts are exasperated; he is a friend to the Muses, for by
his influence our wits are refined; a destroyer of Amphisbaena, that is, the
winter, which stings with both ends; for at its coming and going, it breeds
diseases and distempers in our bodies; he was painted sometimes like a child,
sometimes like a man, because in the winter the days are short, and his heat
weak, but in summer his heat is strong, and days are long; he is clothed with
the spotted skin of a Deer, to show his swiftness, and multitude of Stars with
which he seems to be covered at night; the travels of Bacchus, do show the
motion of the Sun. 3. Original sin, like Bacchus, received life by the death
of Eva, who for her disobedience was struck with the thunder of Gods wrath; and
it has been fomented by Adams thigh, that is, by generation; this unruly evil
has traveled farther then Bacchus did, and has an attendance of worse beasts
then Tigers, Panthers, etc. to wit, of terrors, and of an evil conscience, and
actual sins, it has subdued all mankind; and as Bacchus turning himself unto
a Lion, made all the mariners in the ship wherein he was carried, leap into the
Sea; so this sin turned us all out of Paradise, unto the Sea of this world. 4.
Christ is the true Dionysius, (...), the mind of God, the internal Word of
the Father, born of a woman without man's help, as the Graecians fable their
Bacchus to be; and yet they give (...) bonus filius; nomen Bacchi.
credit to their figment, and not unto our truth; he is Liber, who makes us
only free, the great King, who has subdued all Nations, whose Diadem is
glory. He has killed Amphisbaena the Devil, the two-headed Serpent, his two
stings are sin and death, with the one he has wounded our souls, with the
other our bodies; he triumphs over all his foes; his body was torn with
thorns, nails, and whips, and went down to hell, but he revived and rose again;
he is the true friend of wisdom and learning, and who has given to us a more
comfortable wine, then the wine of the grape; that wine which we shall drink
new with him in his Kingdom; his lips were truly anointed with honey, grace was
diffused in them, and never man spoke as he did; he is that Lion of the Tribe
of Judah, who has overcome the Giants, and the Pirates who would have bound
him, that is, the wicked Angels and Tyrants of this world; he is still young,
as not subject now to mortality.

If you would a Monarch see
All arrayed in Majesty,
Who triumphed first, and wore
Such a Crown, as none before
Could attain too; Christ is he
Who triumphing on a tree,
Killed the Snake with his two stings,
Death and sin, and captived Kings,
And the Titans who combine
Heaven it self to undermine.
This is he whose eloquence
Does surpass all humane sense:
From whose lips, as from a Still,
Drops of Nectar down did drill;
When our hearts with fear did pine,
He found out that pleasant wine
Which has made us laugh and sing
Hallelujahs to our King.
He flung overboard, and drowned
All the Pirates that him bound:
When they had his body torn
With their whips and crown of thorn;
When they thought he had been slain,
He revived and rose again.
Hecate queen of the night
Held him not for all her might;
But this uncontrolled Prince
Burst her gates, and got out thence.
O thou only God of wine,
Comfort this poor heart of mine
With that Nectar of thy blood,
Which runs from thee like a flood.
On thy fruitless servant pour
From thy veins a crimson shower:
Let that dew of Rubies which
Fell from thee, my soul enrich;
Let me taste of that sweet sape
Which dropped from this squeezed grape:
It Was for me this grape was pressed,
Drink my soul, and take thy rest.
BELIDES.
THese were the 50 daughters of Danaus the son of Belus, who killed their
husbands all in one night by the persvvasion of their father, except
Hypermnestra, who saved her husband Lyncius: these daughters for their murder
are continually in hell, dravving water in a sive which is never full.

THE MYSTERIES.
OUr mother Eva, for murdering her husband with the forbidden fruit, has
this punishment imposed on her, and all her children, that they are still
dravving water in a sive which will never be filled; that is, still toyling
and laboring for that which will never fill, and content them; the covetous
man is still dravving riches; the ambitious man honors, the voluptuous man
pleasures, the learned man is still laboring for knowledge; and yet they are
never full, but the more they dravv, the more they desire; the drunkard is
still dravving liquor, but his body like a sive is never full; there be also
sives that we are still filling, but never full, unthankful people, on whom
whatsoever good turn we bestow is lost; hollow-hearted people, to whom we can
commit no secret, but pleni rimarum, being full of chinks and holes, they
transmit all; prodigal sons, for whom careful parents are still drawing, but
these sives let all run out, and sooner then the parents could put in;
Preachers and Schoolmasters have to do with sives, whose memory can retain
nothing of that they learn. 2. Let us take heed of sin, which has a virgins
face, but is secretly armed with a dagger to wound us. 3. Children must not
obey their parents in that which is evil, lest they be punished in Gods just
judgments.

Children obey your parents, but if they
Bid you do mischief, you must not obey:
For sure you must not yield obedience
Against Gods Laws, against your conscience,
Least with these cruel sisters you partake,
Of their vain toiling in the Stygian lake.
Let all beware of sin, which men beguils
With her enticing looks, and flattering smiles.
She has a virgins face, but traitors fist,
Which without grace we hardly can resist.
Let no man join himself to such a wife,
Whose mouth presents a kiss, her hand a knife.
BELLEROPHON.
HE being falsely accused by Antea the wife of Praetus, for offering violence to
her, was sent with

In power and honor, and at last did soar
On Fames swift wings, above the high extent
Of air, and fire, and starry firmament.
His Word's a winged horse, which he bestrides,
And over Lions, Goats, and Dragons rides;
O thou who rides now on the arched sky;
Who for my sins was once content to dye;
Who has subdued all monsters with thy word,
And now triumphs with that two-edged sword;
Destroy in me these monsters which rebel
Against thy Laws, save me from death and hell.
Make me to spend my days without offense,
And let my daily guard be innocence.
And Lord, whereas I Am mounted on the wings
Of nimble Time, which fly'th with earthly things
Swifter away then Pegasus; teach me
How I may fight to get the victory:
That e're I go from hence, I may subdue
Chimaera with Pentheselaea's crew.
Whilst I in holy raptures mount to thee,
From swelling pride good Lord deliver me.
And whilst I Am carried on Faith's golden wings,
Keep back mine eyes from sublunary things:
Least whilst I gaze on them, I tumble down,
And so lose both the victory and crown.
BOREAS, BOREADAE, HARPIAE.
BOreas being in love with fair Orithyia, whilst she was gathering of flowers
near the fountain Cephisus, carried her away, of whom he begot two sons, Calais
and Zetis, who were born with long blevv hair, and vvings at their feet;
these with their vvings and arrovvs drove away the Harpies, ravenous and
filthy birds (which had Virgins faces, and Eagles talents) from the Table of
blind Pheneus, whose meat was still polluted and devoured by the Harpies.

THE MYSTERIES.
THese Harpies are flatterers, they are called also Jupiters dogs; hunting and
flattering parasites have undon many men's estates. 2. Many fathers are like
blind Pheneus, they are still gathering and providing wealth for rapatious
children, of whose riotousnesse they take no notice; who like Harpies, in a
short time devour all, and are still hungry, like Pharaohs lean kine, pallida
semper ora fame. 3. There be three Harpies very hurtful in a Commonwealth, to
wit, flatterers, usurers, informers. 4. Boreas is the son of Neptune, and
brother of Iris or the rainbow, for the winds are ingenerated of the sea
vapor, so are rains, clouds, and rain-bows by the help of the Sun. 5. Boreas
is the Northern wind, who carries away fair Orithyia, for the cold wind
takes away beauty, his two sons Zetis and Calais, that is, frigidity and
siccitie, drive away the Harpies, that is, Southern pestilentiall vapors, which
consume and devour living creatures, for in the Southern wind there are three
properties, answering to the three names of the Harpies, to wit, sudden and
swift blasts, that is, Ocypete; storms, Aello; and obscurity, Celaeno. 6.
Sacrilegious Church robbers are these Harpies, who fell upon Christ's patrimony
like Ocypete or Aello, a sudden blast or storm; and like Celaeno, have brought
obscurity on the Church, and have eclipsed her light; and indeed the names do
agree, for (...), id est, (...) alienum tollens.
Aello is he that takes away another man's goods, Ocypere, suddenly, Celaeno
blackness or darkness, so they on a sudden snatched away those goods that were
none of th irs, and with the obscure cloud of poverty have turned the Churches
beauty into blackness; but these goods make them never the fatter, they pass
suddenly from them, as Pheneus meat did through the Harpies, they are troubled
with a continual Foedissima ventris proluvies.
flix or lientery, neither can their crooked tallants hold them long, I grant
the blindness and wickedness of Pheneus, that is, of the Clergy, gave
occasion to this; but now their eyes are open, and their lives reformed:
therefore the sons of Boreas, the Magistrate and Minister, with the arrows of
authority, and wings of Gods word, may be expected shortly to drive away these
Harpies. 7. Pheneus is a covetous miser who is blind, and sees not what a
number of Harpies gape for his death, that they may deyour these goods, which
he himself had not power to touch. 8. Gods Spirit, like Boreas, a cooling and
refreshing wind, which filled the Apostles, and came on them like the rushing
of a mighty wind delights in the soul of man, whilst that in the flowery
meadows of the Church, watered with the clear fountain of Gods Word, she is
gathering spiritual comfort, and when she is joined to that blessed Spirit,
Zetis and Calais, that is, divine raptures are begotten, whose hairs are
skie-coloured, and feet winged, that is, heavenly meditations and swift
affections, which are nimble in the ways of Gods Commandments, and ready to
fly upward from earthly things, are the effects of this spiritual conjunction;
and so by these, all Harpies, that is, covetous and earthly desires are driven
away. 9. God, like Boreas, being in love with his Church, h^th begot in the
womb of the blessed Virgin that winged Conqueror, who with the arrows of his
power, and wings of his Word, have driven away all spiritual Harpies.

Who think you may with privilege
Rob Churches, and the Priests annoy?
Know this, that for your sacrilege
The Lord at last will you destroy:
You Are like those monsters virgin-fac'd,
Whom Calais and Zetis chased.
Your virgin-looks do show you are pure,
Your Feathers make you very gay:
But by your tallents I am sure
You Are nothing else but birds of prey;
Which eat our tithes, and them pollute,
But what you eat you quickly mute.
These Tables shall you not avail,
These Morsels shall not make you fat;
For still you eat, and still you are pale,
Your craw's never full, your belly's flat:
Those blew-hair'd winged sons one day
Perhaps shall blow you quite away.
And you rich grubs who do abound
With wealth, and meat laid up in store,
Hark how the Harpies wings resound
About your windows and your door:
They wish you dead, that they might share
Those goods among them which you spare.
And now Lord with thy powerful breath
Drive all these hellish birds away,
Which have conspired to work my death,
And of my Table make a prey;
Restore my sight that I may see
Their filthiness and treachery.
And whilst I Am gathering fragrant flowers
Of comfort by the Crystal springs
Of thy pure Word, drop down sweet showrs
Of grace on me, and give me wings
To fly to thee, and make my hair
In color like the Azure sphaere.
Make (though my feet walk here below)
My head may always be above;
O let thy cooling spirit blow,
And ravish me with thy true love.
Let me go with winged paces
To enjoy thy chaste embraces.
Sweet Boreas come blow on me
With thy cold breath, and do not stay;
My soul longs much to join with thee,
O let this be our wedding day,
Wherein I (which is still my wish)
Thy Myrrhe-distilling lips may kiss.
CHAP. III. C
CADMUS and HARMONIA.
HE was King of the Thebans, to whom Jupiter gave Harmonia to wife, who was the
daughter of Mars and Venus, the chief gods were present at the wedding, and
gave several gifts: This Cadmus was sent by his father to seek out his sister
Europa, whom when he could not find, and not daring without her to return
home, built Thebes, and killed a Dragon which kept a Well, the teeth of which
he sowed, and of them were begot armed men, who by means of a stone which
Cadmus flung among them, fell to quarrelling, and killed each other; afterward
he was turned unto a Dragon, and by* Jupiter was sent unto the Elysian fields.

THE MYSTERIES.
CAdmus may be meant of a wise Governor; who marries with Harmonia, when he
does all things with order and Harmony, and where this Marriage is, God
bestows many blessings, Ceres will not be wanting with her corn, nor Apollo
with his Cithern, nor Mercury with his Harp, nor Minerva with her golden
chain, and artificially wrought Cloak; that is both profit and pleasure, and
arts are to be found where wisdom and order go together in Government: it is
this which seeks out Europa, that is countries for new Plantations; by this
Thebes and Cities are built, by this the Dragon, that is, malicious and subtle
enemies are slain, and if of one enemy many should arise; it is the parr of a
wise Prince, to fling among them, that is, to use some means whereby they may
fall out among themselves that so they may be weakened, and their violence kept
off from Him; he must also be of a favourer of learning, for Cadmus brought
from Phaenicia unto Greece sixteen letters Alphabeticall, and a Prince must
have the Dragons eye; and be turned unto a Dragon, when wickedness gets the
upper hand, that he may be fearful to those that do evil; and such a Prince
at last shall be received unto the Elysian fields, that is shall have rest and
liberty, again a King must do nothing but by advise of Minerva, that is of his
wise and learned Counsel; the two chief props of a Kingdom are Mars and Venus,
war and propagation, and these two live in harmony and order, as parents in
their children; a wise man that cannot live securely in a public place, will
with Cadmus turn himself unto a Serpent, that is, live a private and solitary
life. 2. A good Minister, like Cadmus, must do all things with order and
decency, he must do nothing without advice from God; he must seek out Europa
his sister, that is, every lost soul, and if she cannot, or will not be found,
he must not be idle, but must give himself to build the city of God; for these
two a Minister must do, seek those that be lost, and confirm or stablish those
that stand; he must also kill the Dragon that infecteth the Well, that is, the
Heretic, who poysoneth the clear fountain of Gods Word; and if the destruction
of one Heretic be the generation of many, as we see in the Arrian Heresy,
being overthrown by the Nicene Synod, of which, as out of the Dragons teeth,
arise Eusebians, Photinians, Eudoxians, Acacians, Eunomians, Macedonians,
Aetians, Anomians, Exucontii, and Psatyrians; we must fling Minerva's stone,
that is, wise Arguments out of Gods Word amongst them, that these armed men may
destroy one another; so we read in that the Council of Selentia, the Arrians
went together by the ears among themselves, being divided into Arrians and
Semiarrtans; a Minister also must be turned unto a Serpent for wisdom, and so
shall be received unto the Elysian fields. 3. Christ is the true Cadmus, who
was sent of his father to seek that which was lost; he is the husband of order
and harmony, the builder of a greater city then Thebes; the destroyer of Si
veteres sapientes satis hydrae dentibus, armatorum segetem inhorruisse
crediderunt, etc. quanto magis credendum, etc. Ambr. de fide resurrectionis.
the great Dragon the Devil, and of all his armed teeth, or associates; he has
opened unto us the fountain of grace and knowledge; upon him God bestowed all
gifts and perfection; that Serpent that was lifted upon the Cross to cure all
beholders, and at last was received unto glory. 4. Here is a type of the
Resurrection.

Behold that Prince which once with Majesty
Invested was, whose throne was far more high
Then is the starry Cabinet
That over this low Globe is set.
Yet was content to leave that state, and throw
Himself upon his footstool here below.
He stepped down from his lofty throne
To seek his Sister that was gone.
And whilst he sought her, he reared up the wall
Gf that great City which shall never fall,
And then the Dragon, he did wound
And all his toothbread sons confound:
He did those glassie springs of life discover
Which drill the flowers, and pleasant meads run over,
In his pure heart all graces met,
And beauty in his face was set.
But yet this all-commanding King was deemed
A worm, no man, and as a Snake esteemed.
Men hide their faces from this King,
Whose face makes men and Angels sing.
Though men despised him, yet he was received
Into these joys which cannot be conceived;
By all the winged companies,
Whose dwelling is above the skies.
O thou who guides the heavens as with rain,
And dwells in light which no man can attain,
Vouchsafe to look from those high Towers,
On these low Cottages of ours.
Seek out my soul which has forsaken thee
To follow after lying vanity,
Tread down the Dragon and his brood*
For they have still my soul withstood.
The Picture of a King.
He is of noble pedigree,
His wife is called Harmony;
The chiefest Gods in their best state,
His Nuptials do celebrate.
Jove that shakes heaven with his brows
Unto the King presents this Spouse;
Whose Father is the god of war,
Whose Mother is the morning star.
Minerva brings her golden chain,
And Ceres makes them rich with grain;
Joves daughters, with their beardlesse King,
From Helicon their music bring;
Each one with flowers and Laurels crowned,
And Arca's harp does sweetly sound.
The gods all in their best array,
With dances crown this wedding day.
Thus honor, wealth, and pleasure wait,
Where such a King does rule the State;
He by Minerva's help can wound
The Dragon, and his brood confound:
That under him we freely may
Drink of that fountain in the way.
But yet he has the Dragons jaws,
To tear all those that break his Laws;
Thus in his life this King is blessed,
And in his death in peace shall rest.
Now if there be above the ground,
A Prince so perfect to be found,
He Is either in King Arthurs chair,
Or else he does reside no where.
CASTOR and POLLUX.
THese were twins begot of Leda's egg, with whom Jupiter conversed in the
form of a Swan; the one was a champion, the other a horseman, they went
against the Calydonian Boar; and accompanied the Argonautes, upon whose heads,
when two flames were seen, when they were in the ship, the storm ceased; and
they were afterward thought to be gods of the sea: when Castor was killed,
Pollux obtained of Jupiter that the immortality should be divided between them;
therefore when one dies, the other lives.

THE MYSTERIES.
I Think, not unfitly against the Peripateticks, we may gather out of this
fiction, the creation of the Sun and Moon, for in the beginning the Spirit
of God, like a Swan, moving on the waters, out of a confused egg, that is, out
of the chaos brought forth these two glorious flames, whose dominion is over
the sea, because by their influence, light, and motion, storms and vapors are
raised and settled: the Sun is the Champion, who by his heat subdueth all
things: The Moon is the Horseman, if you consider its swift motion, it is well
and comfortable when they both shine, but if either of them be eclipsed, it is
dismal and ominous: Immortality may be said to be divided between them,
because when the one lives, that is, shines, the other is obscured, and in a
manner dead, at least to us. They ride on white horses, to show their light;
and they found out the golden Fleece, because no metals are generated but by
their influence, nor can they be found out, but by their light. 2. The soul
and body are like Castor and Pollux, for when the one dies, the other lives;
and when the body is a sleep, and as it were dead, then is the soul most
active; and when the body is most vigilant, the soul is less vigorous. 3. By
this fiction the Gentiles wound themselves; for if they believe that these
Dioscuri were begot of a god and a woman; why will they not believe the true
generation of Christ, of a Virgin, and the Holy Ghost. 4. By this also,
judicial Astrologers may be confuted; for we see that the souls and
dispositions of men depend not on the Stars; these two were twins, borne under
the same constellation, yet of far different studies and inclinations, the one
being a wrestler, the other a horseman. 5. Satan who can transform himself
unto any shape, appeared to the Romans in the Latin war in the form of Castor
and Pollux, on horse back, for which cause a Temple was errected to them, by
A. Posthumous dictator; have not we more cause to errect the Temple of our
hearts to Christ, who upon the two white horses of the two Testaments, has
brought us good news of our victory against our spiritual foes. 6: This
temple was erected both to Castor and Pollux, but Castor the less worthy
carried the name from the other, by which we see, that honor is not always
given to those that deserve best. 7. Dioscuri were preservers of men, but
Helena came out of the same egg, which was the overthrower of Troy; so in the
same Church are good and bad, savers and destroyers. 8. It was love in Pollux
to share his immortality with Castor, but in this he did him more hurt then
good, for it had been better to dye once then so often; thus our affections are
oftentimes preposterous. 9. Christ has done more for us then Pollux for
Castor, for he lost his immortality for a while, that we might enjoy it for
ever.

If Pollux was so kind and free,
To share his immortality
With Castor that was slain;
That they might both participate
Of life and death by turn, and that
They both might grow and wain;
How much more gracious was he,
Who was a King, and yet would dye
For him that was a slave;
That he might never dye again,
But might be freed from endless pain,
And from the eating grave.
O Lord thou art that King, and I
The slave, who for my sins must dye,
And to my dust return:
O raise me by thy mighty aid
In that last day, from deaths black shade,
And from my silent Urn.
And let me not with Castor trace
So often too and from that place
Where night and darkness reign;
But join me to these winged wights,
Which far above heavens twinkling lights
With thee in bliss remain.
CENTAURI.
THese were half horses, half men; begotten of Ixion, and of a cloud, which was
presented unto him in the form of Juno, with which he was in love; they
quarreled with the Lapithae, and carried away their wives being in drink, for
which cause many of them were killed; they were given to many naughty
qualities, but Chiron, who was Achilles Schoolmaster, for his wisdom and
justice was much commended, but was wounded accidentally by one of Hercules his
arrows, which fell upon his foot out of his hand, and was cured by the herb
Centurie, and was then made a Star.

THE MYSTERIES.
MAny many men are like Centaurus, whose foreparts are of a man, but
hinder-parts of a horse, they begin in the spirit, but end in the flesh; their
younger years are spent civilly, their old age wantonly and profanely. 2. Kings
have oftentimes Centaurs for their Counselors, Achilles had Chiron for his
Schoolmaster; they have men's faces, fair and honest pretenses for their advice,
but withal a horse tail, for the event is cruel and pernicious oftentimes;
these are children of clouds, Nubigines bimembres. Virg.
for their intentions are oftentimes wrapped up in a cloud and mist, that they
cannot be discovered. 3. A drunkard is a right Centaur, a man in the morning,
and a beast in the evening; the son of clouds, for whilst he is sober, he is
heartlesse, melancholy, and as a dead man; but when his head is full of
clouds, and vapors arising from the wine, then he is full of life, talk, and
mirth, and then he is most given to quarrel, with the Lapithae, even his
dearest friends, and to offer violence to women. 4. Misshapen and
hard-favoured men, have harsh and ill-favored conditions. 5. Every regenerate
man is in a sort a Centaur, to wit, a man in that part which is regenerate, and
a beast in his unregenerate part. 6. There is no race or society of men so bad,
but there may be some good amongst them, one Chiron among the Centaurs, as one
Lot among the Sodomites, and one Job among the Edomites. 7. Drunkenness,
whoredom, and oppression, are the overthrow of Kingdoms, as we see here by the
Centaurs. 8. Sin is a Centaur, having a man's face to persuade, but a horses
heels to kick us in the end. 9. Where things are not ruled by Laws, order, and
civility, but carried headlong with violence and force, we may say that there
is a Commonwealth of Centaurs. 10. A Comet may be called a Centaur, as having
a horse-tail; and the wisdom of a man, in foretelling future events, it has
its generation in the clouds, or air, and upon the sight of it, bloodshed,
wars, and desolation follow. 11. Just Chiron was wounded by Hercules, but was
afterward placed among the stars; so, although might does oftentimes overcome
right here, yet the end of justice and goodness shall be glory at last. 12.
Our life is a Centaur, for it runs swiftly away, and as the Centaurs are
placed by the Centauri in foribus stabulant. Virg.
Prince of Poets in the gates of Hell; so is our life, as soon as we are born
in the gates of death, Nascentes morimur. 13. Governors, Soldiers,
Schoolmasters, should be Centaurs, to have the wisdom of men, and the strength
and courage of horses.

He that runs in the way of grace,
Must careful be
He fall not, lest he lose his race
And victory:
What folly is it, to play the Saint
At first, and in the end to faint.
It Is not enough to seek and know
God whilst we are young,
And when age on our heads does snow,
To dote on dung:
A good youth who in age does fail,
A man's head has, but Centaurs tail.
So drunkards, when they roar aloud,
And fight and swear;
They show that they are of that same cloud
That Centaurs were:
He that in drink will fight, and force
A woman, is both man and horse.
So every sin at first appears
With man-like face,
But we shall find within few years
The horses trace:
Sin looks on us with smiling cheeks,
But in the end it flings and kicks.
And as the Centaurs had swift heels
To run away,
So has our time, which runs on wheels,
And cannot stay:
O that we could consider this,
How short a time, how swift it is.
O Lord so order thou my time,
That all may see
My falls as hot as was my prime,
In love to thee;
That so of me they may not find
A man before, a horse behind.
CERBERUS.
PLuto's dog, begot of Typhon and Echidna; he had three heads, and Snakes in
stead of hair, and lay in the entry of Hell, who by Hercules was drawn from
thence, who vomited when he saw the light; and of his foame sprung up the
poysonable herb Aconitum or Wolfbain.

THE MYSTERIES.
CErberus is a glutton, whose three throats are his threefold desire to eat,
much, often, and varieties; he lies in the entry of Hell, for gluttony is
indeed the gate of Hell, and that which brings many men to untimely deaths,
Plures gula quem gladio; and intemperance of Diet causes oftentimes that
Bulimia and Canina appetentia, dogs appetite, which is an unsatiable desire of
eating, the effect whereof is vomiting: This proceeds of Typhon and Echidna,
heat and cold; to wit, of the heat of the Liver, and cold malancholly humors
of the stomach, when the stomachicall Nerves are too much refrigerate; but this
is sometimes cured by Hercules the Physician. 2. Cerberus is a covetous man,
Crescit amori nummi quantum, etc.
whose greedy desire of having is never satisfied, he is Pluto's dog, for he
makes riches his God, which like a dog, he is continnually watching his wealth,
and by consequence his desire of having proceeds of Typhon the Giant and the
snake Echidna, that is of oppression and secret cunning, the 3 heads, or as
some writ, a hundredth heads, do show his unsatiable desire; his snakie hairs
do show how uggly he is in the sight of good men, and how much by them
abhorred: he lies in the gates of Hell, from whence gold comes, for his
affections are there, and his punishments are already begun in this life, he
lies in a den, as lying basely and obscurely, and when he is drawn out from
thence by Hercules the King, to any public office, or service for the state,
he frets and foames, and at last against his will, or else profusely without
judgment vomits out his wealth, as a misers feast is always profuse, and this
breeds a poysonable herb, which is bad example. 3: Death is Cerberus: which is
Plutos dog, Satan's mastiffe, by which he bites us; Typhon that is the devil
begat death upon Echydna the serpent in which he poisoned our first parents.
His three mouths or hundredth rather, do show the many ways that death has to
sease on us; the snakie hairs does shadow out the ugglinesse and fearfulness
of death; it lies in Hell gates, for the wicked must by death come to Hell,
this dog does suffer all to go in, but none to return; from Hell is no
redemption; but Hercules by his strength overcame and bound him, and Sybilla by
her wisdom cast him asleep: so the Son of God by his power and wisdom has
overcome death, and taken away its sting. 4. An evil conscience is Cerberus
still barking, and with his snakes affrighting and stinging the wicked, and
lies in hell gates, for the wicked man's hell is begun here, it vomits out all
by confession, when it is convinced by the light of Gods Word, and that inward
light which is in the mind. 5. The grave is Cerberus, the great (...).
flesh-eater, still eating and never full: the snakie hairs show, that the
ground is full of worms, and snakes; it is also the entry of Hell. The light
of Christ the great Hercules, when he went down to Hell, caused this dog to
vomit up his morsells, for the graves were opened, and many of the Saints
bodies arose, and at the light of Christ second coming, he shall vomit up all
that he has eat; out of Cerberus his foame grew the accomitum, to show that
poysonable herbs grow out of the corruption of the earth. 6: Satan is this
Hellhound, whose many heads and snakes, does show his many malicious and
cunning ways he has to destroy men, he is begotten of the Giant Typhon and
the snakie Echidna, because as parents live in their children, so violence and
craft live in him, he is the vigilant door keeper of Hell, lying in wait to
tole in souls but never to let them out. The true Hercules Christ, by his
strength and wisdom has bound him, at the presence of whose light, he foames
and fretts, and was forced to vomit and restore those souls which he held in
captivity, 7: Time with his 3 heads, that is, past, present, and future, is
this dog, which devoureth all things. And he shall vomit up all hid things, for
time reveals all secrets. He lies in the gate of hell, all must go through
his throat, that go thither; that is, all must have a time to die, and it is
time that brings forth poysonable herbs as well as profitable: and time has
brought us to the knowledge thereof.

Lo then the hundred-headed dog at last
Is bound with Adamantine chains so fast,
That though he bark and foame, yet cannot bite,
H'hath lost his power, but has not lost his spite.
How much are we beholding to our Lord,
Who by his power and all-subduing word,
Charms monsters three, black-mouthed infernal hounds,
Death, Hell, and Satan, and their power confounds.
When he descended to black Pluto's Tower,
Where this three-yawning Mastiff keeps the door,
He caused him to disgorge himself of those
Which in his bowels he did long enclose.
He durst not stare upon these glorious rays,
Which turn the darkest nights to cleerest days:
But frets and soames; his Snakes, as with a spell,
Stood all amazed to see such light in Hell.
Then let us all with one joint harmony
Chant forth his noble praise, and pierce the sky;
That as the winged quirristers still sing
Celestial Hallelujahs to this King;
So we with them may chant, and Carroll forth
With warbling notes his everlasting worth,
Who freed us from this prison where we lay,
And makes us now enjoy a brighter day,
Then any that within our Horizon
Was ever seen, or in the burning Zone.
And you rich hounds who almost split with store,
And yet your jaws are yawning still for more,
Your ill-got gobbets vomit up in time,
Remember you are but dust, and gold's but slime.
Unlock your iron Goals, break up your caves,
In which your gold lies buried as in graves.
And let your pale-faced money see the Sun,
Let free these captives from their dungeon:
That they may walk abroad, and let them serve
Poor men that are in want, and like to starve.
And thou, O Lord, who only durst encounter,
And only could, with that three-headed monster;
And who has pulled the prey out of his jaws,
And broke his teeth, and pared his scratching claws;
So satisfy my craving appetite,
That it in thee alone may take delight;
For neither honors (Lord) nor wealth I see,
This gaping heart of mine can satisfy:
For what are these but transitory toys,
Compared with thee, compared with inward joys.
The more my soul feeds on these aicry dishes,
The more she hungers, and the more she wishes.
Hydropick men, still drink, and still are dry,
The horse-leach cries, Give, give, and so do I:
Then seeing there is no end of my desire,
But wealth, like oil, does still increase this fire;
Give not too much, but what is sufficient,
And having thee, with thee I Will be content.
CERES.
SHe was the daughter of Saturn and Ops; of her brother Jupiter, she had
Proserpina; of Jason she did bear Plutus; and of Neptune, a horse; at which she
was so much displeased, that she hid her self in a dark cave, and was found out
by Pan, whilst her daughter Proserpina was gathering flowers with Juno,
Minerva, and Venus; Pluto carried her away in his chariot; therefore Ceres
lighted torches, and sought her up and down the world, and in her journey being
kindly lodged by Celeus, she taught him to sow corn, and nourished his son
Triptolemus, by day with milk, by night in fire; which Celeus too curiously
prying unto, was slain by Ceres; and Triptolemus was sent through the world in
a chariot drawn with winged Dragons, to teach men the use of corn; Proserpina
could not be delivered from Hell, because she had tasted of a Pomegarnet in
Pluto's Orchard; yet afterward she was admitted to remain six months above the
ground, and six months under.

THE MYSTERIES.
CEres is the Moon, which one half of the year increases, to wit, 15 days
every month, which time she is above the earth; the other half year, that she
is decreasing, she is under; her daughter Proserpina may be the earth, which
she loses when Pluto, that is, darkness does take away the sight of it; and
her lighting of torches, is the increase of her light, by which the earth is
seen again; her hiding in a cave is her eclipse by the earths interposition,
but Pan the Sun makes her appear again. 2. Ceres is corn, which Saturn and Ops,
that is, time and earth produce; Proserpina is the seed, which Pluto ravisheth,
because it lies a while dead underground; Ceres hides her self, that is, the
corn is not seen, till Pan the Sun by his heat brings it out; Ceres begets
Plutus, corn brings money to the Farmer, and a horse also, because the desire
of corn makes the Farmer labor like a horse, or because the plenty of corn
makes men wanton and unruly like horses, as it did the Sodomites; the lighting
of Torches is the heat and light of the Sun and Moon, by whose influence the
corn is produced, the nourishing of Triptolemus by day with milk, by night with
fire, is the cherishing of the corn with rain by day, and heat in the bowels
of the earth by night, the tasting of Pluto's fruit is the food which the corn
receives from the ground. 3. Ceres is (...)
the earth, by whose benefit, we have Proserpina, corn, Plutus, money, and a
horse, that is, all cattle fit for use; this is the nurse of all living
creatures affording them milk and fire, food and heat; hence come these
phrases, cereale solum; cereales caenae, for plentiful suppers, and a
fruitful ground; and cerealis aura, for a temperate climat; when Proserpina
gathering flowers, that is, the corn which grows with the Cereale papaver.
Virg.
flowers, especially the Poppie (therefore consecrated to Ceres) was carried
away by Pluto, that is, fails by reason of sterilitie of the ground, and
intemperance of the air; then Ceres hides her self, that is, the earth loses
her beauty; but by the means of Pan, that is, the shepherd with his sheep fold,
the land is enriched, and Ceres comes abroad in her best array, and by the help
of her two lamps, the Sun and Moon, she recovers Proserpina or corn again; for
half of the years she affords corn to Triptolemus the husbandman, who in
the chariot of time, drawn by the winged serpents, that is, used, guided, and
employed by his diligence and prudence, he sends his corn abroad to those
that want. 4. Ceres may be the tipe of an earthly minded man; who is not
content with one calling, but is still trying new ways to grow rich, sometimes
he is in love with Jupiter, or the aier, and of him begets Proserpina, that is,
he will be a husbandman, then finding that life too laborious and not gainful
enough, falls in love with (...) sano, (...) sanatio.
Jason, and plays the Physician, and of him begets blind Plutus, that is,
money, and yet not being content, he courts Neptune, and will play the Merchant
venturer; and so being in love with the sea, begets a horse, that is, a ship,
but losing this way what he had got before, hides himself and dares not show
his head, till Pan, that is, money, (for money is every thing) get him abroad
again; in the mean while he is run so far in the usurers books that his
Proserpina, his land, to which he would fain return, is carried away by Pluto
the usurer. 5. In this fiction is reproved curiosity, by the example of
Celeus; it is a dangerous thing to pry into the secrets of God. 6. Here also we
see the reward of hospitality. 7. Triptolemus is a spend-thrift, who scatters
abroad his goods, as he did his corn, in traveling; being carried by winged
serpents, cunning flatterers, who suddenly exhaust him. 8. Let us take heed,
that whilst we are gathering flowers with Proserpina, that is, delighting our
selves in these earthly vanities, Pluto the Devil do not take away our souls,
and so shall we be forced to leave the company of Minerva, Juno and Venus, that
is, be taken from all our wordly wisdom, wealth and pleasures. 9. Ceres, that
is, parents should be very watchful over their daughters; for a virgin, that
has Minerva, Juno, and Venus with her, that is, wit, wealth, and beauty, is
in danger to be carried away, by Pluto, by some debauched and untoward ruffian.
10. As Triptolemus could not be immortalized without Ceres milk, and fire,
neither can we attain Heaven without the sincere milk of Gods word and the
fire of affliction; and as in the day of prosperity we are content to drink
the milk of his good things, so in the night of adversity we must not refuse
to suffer the fiery trial of persecution. 11. Ceres was both a good
Lawgiver, and feeder of men; therefore her sacrifices were called (...).
Thesmophoria; so Princes should be both. 12. Beware of eating Pomegranets in
Pluto's orchard, for that hindered Proserpina's deliverie from thence; so, it is
a hard thing to reclaim those from the power of Satan, who do relish and
delight in sin. 13. Ceres is a tipe of Gods church; which is a grave Matron in
rustic apparel, as being of little esteem in the world, having the spade of
discipline in her right hand, and from her arm hangs a basket full of the seeds
of Gods Word; by this hand stands two husbandmen, the one turning up the
ground with a spade, the other sowing the seed; on her left hand (which holds
the hook and flaile of correction and excommunication) stands two other
husbandmen, the one reaping, and the other threshing, these are her ministers,
whose office is Ier. 1. 10.
to root out, and pull down, to build and plant; she sits upon the ox of
patience and labor, with a crown of wheat ears upon her head, as having power
to distribute the bread of life, her breasts are open and stretched forth with
the Mammosa Ceres.
sincere milk of Gods words; over her right side, Juno is dropping down rain,
and over her left, Apollo shines; to show that by the heat of the Sun of
righteousness, and influence of graces Sive quod gerat omnia, sive quod creat
omnia.
from Gods spirit, she does flourish and fructify. 14. Christ is truly Ceres;
which having left mankind, being carried away by the devil, he came, and with
the torches of his words found him out, and being drawn with the flying
serpents of Zeal and Prudence, dispersed his seed through the world; went down
to Hell and rescued us from thence.

You that walk among sweat flowers,
Dashed with drops of twilight showers,
Which with smells refresh the sense;
Look about and careful be,
Of the plots and policy
Of that black infernal Prince.
Who Is still ready to incroach
On your souls, and in his Coach,
To hurl you from hence away
To that dark and dismal place,
Where you cannot see the face
Of Apollo and the day.
And let us take heed that we
Taste not that Pomegranat tree,
Which in his sad Orchard stands;
If we do, we shall remain
Captives still, and never again
Shall escape out of his hands.
Juno then cannot help us
With her wealth, nor fair Venus
With her sea-froth countenance;
Neither yet that blew-ey'd maid,
Which out of Joves head was said
To proceed, can help us thence.
Only Christ did undertake,
When he passed the joylesse Lake
To release our souls again;
When we were in Pluto's power,
All inthrall'd within his Tower,
Where we should have ever lain.
But he broke the gates of brass,
And made way for us to pass,
Though we tasted of that tree
Which bereaved us of Gods grace,
And enclosed us in that place
Where dwells endless misery.
He dispersed has that seed
Of his Word, which does us feed;
Dragons now his chariots draw,
Who before were Gentile Kings,
Fierce as Dragons, swift with wings,
Are now subject to his Law.
He holds out his burning Lamps,
Which expel unwholesome damps
From us that in darkness lie:
He does raise us from below,
Not for half a year or so,
But for all eternity.
O my God, amongst May flowers,
When I spend some idle hours,
When my joys do most abound,
I will think on Deaths black Coach;
That if then it should approach,
I may be then ready found.
Thou do feed me daily, Lord,
With sincere milk of thy Word;
O then give me constancy,
That I may by night endure
Thy hot furnace, for I Am sure
Thou know what is best for me.
CHARON.
HE was the son of Erebus and night; the boatman of Hell, who admitted none
to his boat without money, and till they were dead and buried; Yet Aenaeas by
his piety, Hercules and Theseus by their strength, Orpheus by his music were
admitted there before their death.

THE MYSTERIES.
BY Charon doubtless death was understood; from (...), to dig or make hollow,
for death is still holow eyed, or from (...) joy, for good men in death have
true joy; (...), also is a benefit, and death is such, and an advantage to good
men; but so it is made by Christ, for in it self, death is the child of Hell
and night, and as Charon is described by Aen. 6.
the King of Poets, to be old, but yet vigorous, uggly, furious, terrible, sad,
covetous, so is death; that which they fable of Aenaeas, Hercules, etc. was
true in our Savior, who overcame Charon, or death by his piety, strength,
power of his word, etc. He that would be admited into Charons boat, that is,
have a joyful death, must carry money in his mouth, that is, make him friends
of his unjust Mammon; for what we bestow on the poor, that we carry with us,
to wit, the benefit and comfort of it, and we cannot have a joyful death, or
be admited into Charons boat, till our body of sin be buried by repentance. 2.
Charon is a good conscience which is a continual feast; this carries us over
the infernal rivers, that is, over all the waters of affliction in this life.
3. Charon is the sin of drunkenness, the cup is the boat, the wine is the
river Phlegeton which burns them, and Acheron wherein is no true joy, Styx
which causes sadness and complaints; for these are the effects of
drunkenness; Charons fiery face, ragged clothes, brawling and scolding
tongue, rotten boat still drinking in water, are the true emblems of a
drunkard; he is the child of Hell, and begot of Satan, and the night, for they
that are drunk, are drunk in the night; he admits of no company but such as are
dead in this sin, and buried in it, and such as have money in their mouths, that
is spend-thrifts who spend all on their throats.

Remember this, all you that spend
Your life on drink, and mark your end:
As often as cups and pots you toss,
So often the river Styx you cross.
You Are Owls, you do not love the light,
You are the sons of Hell and night:
Black Erybus begot you then,
You Are Monsters sure, you are not men.
You are afraid, that if you dye,
Your bodies should unburied lie;
And so your souls be forced to trade
A hundredth years in death's black shade,
Before you can admitted be
In Charons boat; this you foresee:
And wisely to prevent this soar,
You Will be entombed in drink before.
And thus you make your Funeral
Your selves by times in wine and oil.
You have an old and leaking throat,
Still sucking in like Charons boat;
No company you will admit,
But who are buried in the pit
Of wine, whose mouths must fraughted be
With coin, such are your company.
O Lord, before I go from hence,
Give me a joyful conscience,
That I may joyfully ride on
The billows of affliction.
Save me, O God, from this foul vice
Of drunkenness, and from avarice:
When D ath's wherry shall receive me,
Let not then thy comfort leave me;
So shall I not fear Charons looks,
Nor be dismayed to cross these brooks,
Of Styx, Cocytus, Acharon,
Nor waves of scalding Phlegeton.
CHIMAERA.
THis was a monster, having the head of a Lion, breathing out fire, the belly
of a goat, and the tail of a Dragon; which did much hurt, but was killed at
last by Bellerophon.

THE MYSTERIES.
SOme think that this was a Hill, on the top whereof were Lions, and Vulcans of
fire, about the middle was pasture, and goats, at the foot serpents, which
Bellerophon made habitable; others think this was a Pirates ship, having the
picture of these three beasts in it, others that these were three brothers
called by these names, which did much hurt, others that by this fiction is
meant a torrent of water, running furiously like a Lion, licking the grass
upon the banks like a goat, and winding like a serpent, as may be seen in
Natal. Comes, and others; but I had rather think, that by this Monster may be
meant a whore; which is the wave or (...).
scum of love, wherein many are drowned; she has a Lions devouring mouth still
craving, and devouring men's estates; she has the wanton belly of a goat, but
in the end will sting and poison like a Dragon. 2. By Chimaera I think wine
may be meant, which makes men furious like Lions, wanton like goats, and
cunning or crafty like serpents. 3. The life of man may be meant by this
Monster; for man in his youthful years is an untamed Lion, in his middle age
a wanton, or an aspiring goat, still striving to climb upon the steep rocks
of honor; and in his old age he becomes a wise and crafty serpent. 4. Satan
may be understood by Chimaera, who in the beginning of the Church did rage like
a Lion by open persecution; in the middle and flourishing time thereof, like a
goat made her wanton; and in the end will show himself to be that red Dragon,
laboring by secret cunning, and slights, to undermine and poison her; but
Christ already has, and we in him, shall overcome this Monster.

Then let us all take heed of wine and whores,
If we will save these wretched souls of ours:
Or if we would preserve our lands and moneys
From these devourers of men's patrimonies,
Against these monsters rather fight then fly,
I Will rather kill them then they shall kill me;
The Lions fury's killed with patience,
The goatish wantonness with abstinence,
Against the Dragons sting use Antidotes,
Resist his cunning plots with counterplots.
Fear not, our life's a warfare; either we
Must fight, or else where is our victory?
Without which, there is no triumph, no renown,
And where there is no conquest, there is no crown.
O Lord, in this great combat strengthen me,
That through thy power I may victorious be;
And let thy presence cheer my heart, refresh
My fainting spirits, and my trembling flesh;
Thou art the Lord of hoasts, O let thy word
Be unto me a Buckler, Helmet, Sword:
What can Chimaera do, if thou assist me?
Be thou my God, and then who dare resist me.
CHIRON
WAs a Centaur begot of Saturn in the form of a horse, of Phyllyra the
daughter of Oceanus; he was an excellent Astronomer, Physician and Musician;
whose scholars were Hercules, Apollo, and Achilles, he was wounded in the foot
by one of Hercules his arrows, of which wound he could not die being immortal,
till he entreated Jupiter, who placed Sagitarius.
him among the stars, with a sacrifice in his hand, and an Altar before him.

THE MYSTERIES.
THat Charon is begot of Saturn and Phillyra, is meant that Astronomy,
Physic, Music, and all other arts begot of time and experience, or of time
and books; for Phyllyra is a thin skin or parchment, or paper, or that which is
betwixt the bark and the wood of the tree, and is called Tyllia, on which they
used to write. 2. Saturn or time begets learned Chiron, that is, arts and
sciences by the help of reading, but he must do it in the form of a horse,
that is, with much patience and labor. 3. Chiron may signify to us the life
of a Christian, which consists in contemplation, and so he is an Astronomer,
whose conversion and thoughts are in heaven, and in action, which consists in
speaking well, and so he is a Musician, and in doing well, and so he is a
Physician; and because Christianity is more a practick then speculative
science, he has his denomination Chiron from (...) manus.
the hand, not from the head; lastly, suffering is a part of Christianity, and
so Chiron patiently suffered the wound of Hercules his arrow. 4. Chirons feet
were wounded before he was admitted amongst the stars; so our affections must
be mortified, before we can attain heaven. 5. Chirons pain made him desire to
die, so affliction makes us weary of this world, and fits us for heaven. 6.
Chiron has his Altar still before him, and his sacrifice in his hand, so
Christ our Altar must be still in our eyes, and our spiritual sacrifices still
ready to be offered. 7. In that a Centaur had so much knowledge, we see that
sometime in misshapen bodies are eminent parts, as were in Aesop, Epictetus,
and others. 8. Achilles so valiant, Hercules so strong, Apollo so wise, yet
were content to learn of a deformed Centaur; so all should hearken to the
Ministers doctrine, be his life never so deformed, though he be a Centaur in
his life, yet he is a man, nay an Angel in his doctrine.

To gaze upon nights sparkling eyes,
Which still are rolling in the skies,
Is Chirons head; but we
Must have his curing hands also,
And's feet, which may endure Gods blow,
And's voice of melody.
Our hands must work salvation,
Our heads must meditate upon
Heavens shining Canopy:
Our tongues must praise Gods actions,
The feet of our affections
For sin must wounded be.
I will before my Altar stand,
With sacrifices in my hand,
And thus to God will pray:
Lord heal these wounded feet of mine,
Then make me as a Star to shine,
Or as the brightest day.
Give me the head of knowledge, and
A well-tuned tongue, a working hand,
And feet which may thy blow
Endure; O wound me, so that I
By wounds may be prepared to dye,
And weaned from things below.
CIRCE.
THe daughter of Sol and Persis, and by her grandchilde of Oceanus; she was a
witch, and skillful in herbs, she poisoned her husband, King of Scythia, and
for her cruelty was banished thence, and carried by her father Sol in a
chariot, and placed in the Island Circaea: she turned Ulysses fellows unto
swine, but over him she had no power; she could not procure the good will of
Glaucus, who loved Scylla better then Circe; she infected the water, in which
Scylla was wont to wash, and was (having touched this water) turned unto a
Sea Monster.

THE MYSTERIES.
CIrce, says Not. Comes, is the mixture of the Elements, which is caused by
heat and moisture; the 4. Elements are the 4 handmaids; she is immortal
because this mixture is perpetual; and the strange shapes show the variety of
strange forms brought in by generation, she had no power over Ulysses because
the soul comes not by mixtion of the Elements, or generation. 2. By Circe, I
suppose may be fittly understood death; caused by Sol and Oceanus grandchild,
because death and corruption proceed out of heat and moisture; the poisoning of
her husband shows that death is no accepter of persons; Sol carries her in his
chariot, for where the Sun shines there is death and corruption; her turning of
men unto beasts, shows that man is like the beast that perishes, yea a living
dog is better then a dead man; but she has no power over Ulysses, that is,
over the soul which is immortal, death has no power; the four handmaids that
gathered poison for her, were Adams pride, gluttony, infidelity, and
curiosity, which made Adams death poison all his posterity. 3. By Circe may
be meant the Devil, who has caused beastly dispositions in the nature of man,
and has poisoned us all; as Circe infected Ulysses fellows, but not himself;
so he poisoned Jobs body, but had no power over his soul; and because God had
set his love upon man, and had rejected him for his pride, being an Angel, he
to be revenged poisoned man, as Circe did Scylla. 4. Circe is physical
knowledge consisting much in herbs; she is the daughter of Sol, because herbs
proceed of his heat; she turns men unto beasts, because some physicians
searching too much unto nature, become beasts, in forgetting the God of nature;
she dwelt on a hill full of physical simples, to let us understand wherein the
physicians skill and study lies; he has no power over Ulysses, the soul, but
the bodies of men he may poison or preserve; his 4 hand-maides are, Philosophy,
Astronomy, Anatomy, and Botancie or skill of simples. 5. Sin is a Circe,
chiefly drunkenness and whoredom which poison men, and turn them unto swine;
Circe has both a cup and a rod, with which she poisoned men; so in sin there
is a cup of pleasure, and the rod of vengeance; though Ulysses fellows were
poisoned, yet he would not himself be enticed by Circe; but by means of the
herb Moly, and his sword, he has defended himself, and made Circe restore his
fellows again to their wonted shapes; so Governers and Magistrates must not be
overtaken with the Circe of drink and fleshly pleasure, howsoever others are;
but they must use Moly, that is, temperance in them selves, and use the sword,
against this Circe in others.

All you that love your souls,
Beware of Circes bowls;
And go not to her feasts,
Where men are turned to beasts.
Remember whilst you are drinking wine,
How Circe turned men to swine.
The whore with painted smiles
The wanton youth beguiles,
She has a pleasant cup,
Which silly fools drink up:
But whilst you are drinking, eye the wand
Which Circe bears in her hand.
At first sin seems to be
A pleasing thing to thee,
And fools with vain delights
Do cloy their appetites;
But every pleasure has its pain,
In sweetest honey there is bane.
If men of meaner sort
Make drunkenness but a sport,
Yet let not men of place
Their state so much disgrace:
Ulisses must have temperance,
Although his servants lose their sense,
Lord arm me with thy Word,
Which like Ulisses sword,
From Circe may defend me,
And then herb Moly send me:
Having this sword and herb, O God,
I Will shun the cup, I Will escape the rod.
CAELUS.
THis was the son of Ether, and Dies, who married with Terra, and of her begot
Giants, Monsters, Cyclopes, Harp, Steropes, and Brontes; he begot also of her
the Titanes and Saturn; mother earth being angry that Coelus had thrown down
his sons to Hell, caused the Titans to rebel against him, who thrust him out
of his Kingdom, and Saturn cut off his testicles; out of the drops of blood
which fell from them, the Furies were engendered.

THE MYSTERIES.
BY Caelus I understand the upper region of the air; for the air is called
heaven, both by Poets and divine Scripture: this may be said to be the son of
Ether and Dies, not only because it is always clear, free from clouds and
mists, but because also it has the nature of elementary fire, to which it is
next; for it is hot and dry, as that is, and more properly may this fire be
called Ether from its continual burning, then the heaven which has no
elementarie heat at all; his marriage with the earth, of which Titans, Cyclopes,
etc. are procreated, do show that those fiery Meteors in the upper region of
the air, are procreated by its heat and motion, of these thin and dry smoaks
which arise out of the earth; the names of Steropes and Brontes show that
lightning and thunder are generated there in respect of their matter, which
being received within the clouds of the middle region, cause the rumbling, as
if there were some rebellion and wars within the clouds; Saturn his son, that
is, time the measurer of heavens motion, shall geld his father; that is, the
heaven shall grow old, and in time shall lose that power of generation; for
this shall cease, when there shall be a new heaven; and upon this new change
in the heaven, the Furies shall be engendered, that is, the torments of the
wicked shall begin. 2. They that geld ancient records, fathers and scripture,
are like Saturn, rebelling against heaven, being encouraged thereto by those
spiritual monsters, enemies of truth, who were thrust down from heaven, and
that light of glory, wherein they were created; unto the lowest Hell; and of
this gelding proceed nothing but Furies, that is, heresies, schisms,
dissentions. 3. Saturninus, Tatianus and his scholars, the Encratites,
Originists, Manichaeans, and all other heriticks who have condemned matrimony,
as an unclean thing, and not enjoined by God; they are all like Saturn, being
assisted by their brethren the Monsters of Hell, and do what they can to geld
their father Adam, of his posterity, and to rebel against heaven; and what
ensues upon this gelding or condemning of wedlock, but Furies and all kind
of disorder and impuritie. 4. The children of heaven and of the light, must not
as Caelus did, join themselves in their affections to the earth; for of this
union shall proceed nothing but Monsters, to wit, earthly and fleshly lusts,
thoughts, and works which will rebel against our souls, and geld us of all
spiritual grace, and of our interest in the kingdom of Heaven; and then must
needs be engendered the Furies, to wit, the torments of conscience.

You sons of heaven, and of the day,
Stoop not so low,
As to betroth your souls to clay;
For then I know
That of this match will come no good,
But rather a pernicious brood.
A race of Monsters shall proceed
Out of thy loins,
If thou in time take not good heed
To whom thou joyn'st
Thy soul in wedlock, earth's not fit
For thee to fix thy heart on it.
For she will bring thee such a brood
That shall resist thee,
And when thy soul they have withstood,
They will divest thee
Both of thy Kingdom and thy strength,
And bring thee under them at length.
And if earths Adamantine knife
Emasculate
Thy soul, then shall thy barren life
And gelded state
Engender in thee endless cares,
And Furies with their snaky hairs.
Lord join my heart so close to thee
With fervent love,
That I may covet constantly
The things above,
Where glory crowns that princely brow
To which both men and Angels bow.
Lord let not earth effeminate
My heart with toys,
But let my soul participate
Thy heavenly joys,
Where Angels spend their endless days
In singing of Elysian lays.
And if my mother be the light,
And heaven my fire,
Then let my soul dwell in that bright
Aetheriall fire,
Where Giants, Furies, and the race
Of Titans dare not show their face.
CUPIDO.
OF Cupids parents, some say he had none at all; others, that he was engendered
of Chais without a father; some say he was the son of Jupiter and Venus;
others, of Mars and Venus; others, of Vulcan and Venus; others of Mercury and
Venus, etc. He was the god of love painted like a child, with wings, blind,
naked, crowned with Roses, having a Rose in one hand, and a Dolphin in the
other, with bow and arrows, etc.

THE MYSTERIES.
THere is a twofold love, to wit, in the creator, and in the creature;
Godslove is twofold, inherent in himself, and this is eternal as himself,
therefore has no father nor mother: or transient to the creature, this love
was first seen in creating the Chaos, and all things out of it; therefore they
said that love was engendered of Chaos without a father; and when they write
that Zephyrus begot Cupid of an egg; what can it else mean, but that the
spirit of God did manifest his love, in drawing out of the informed and
confused egg of the Chaos, all the creatures; the love of the creature is
twofold, according to the twofold object thereof, to wit, God and the
creature; that love by which we love God, is begot of Jupiter and Venus; that
is, God, and that uncreated beauty in him, is the cause of this love; and
because the main and proper object of love is beauty, (for we do not love
goodness, but as it is beautiful) and it is the object that moves and
stirs up the Passio movetur ab obiecto.
passion, therefore Venus goddess of beauty is still the mother of Cupid or
love, which notwithstanding has many fathers because this general beauty is
joined to many particular qualities; which causes love in men according to
their inclinations and dispositions; some are in love with wars, and count
military skill and courage a beautiful thing, so this love is begot of Mars
and Venus; others are in love with eloquence, and think nothing so beautiful
as that; and so Mercury and Venus are parents of this love; some love Music,
and so Apollo begets this Cupid, and so we may say of all things else which we
love, that there is some quality adherent to beauty, either true or apparent,
which causes love in us; now that love which all creatures have to creatures
of their own kind, in multiplying them by generation, is the child of Vulcan
and Venus; for it is begot of their own natural heat and outward beauty; by
beauty I mean whatsoever we account pleasing to us, whether it be wealth,
honor, pleasure, virtue, etc. 2. The reasons why love was thus painted, I
conceive to be these; Cupid is a child, because love must be still young, for
true love cannot grow old and so die; amor qui desinere potest, nunquam fuit
verus; He has wings, for love must be swift; he is blind, for love must wink
at many things, it covers a multitude of sins; he is naked, for amongst
friends all things should be common, the heart must not keep to it self any
thing secret, which was the fault that Dalila found in Sampsons love; he is
crowned with roses, for as no flower so much refreshes the spirits, and
delights our smell as the rose; so nothing does so much sweeten and delight our
life as love; but the rose is not without prickles, nor love without cares; the
crown is the ensign of a King, and no such King as love, which has subdued
all the creatures rational, sensitive, vegetative, and senseless have their
sympathies; the image of a Lioness with little Cupids playing about her, some
tying her to a pillar, others putting drink into her mouth with a horn, etc.
do show how the most fierce creatures are made tame by love; therefore he has
a rose in one and a Dolphin in the other, to show the quality of love; which
is swift and officious like the Dolphin, delectable and sweet like the rose;
his arrows do teach us that love wounds deeply, when we cannot obtain what we
love; some of his arrows are pointed with lead, some with gold; he is wounded
with a golden arrow, that aims at a rich wife, and cannot obtain her; to be
wounded with leaden arrows, is to be afflicted for want of ordinary objects
which we love; and so his burning torches, show that a lover is consumed with
grief, for not obtaining the thing loved, as the wax is with heat; Ardet amans
Dido; Vritur infaelix; Caeco carpitur igne, Est mollis flamma medullas; Haeret
lateri laethalis arundo etc. These are my conceits of Cupids picture; other
Mythologists have other conceits, applying all to unchaste and wanton love,
whose companions are drunkenness, quarrelling, childish toys, etc.

Alas my soul, how men are vexed
That fix their love on gilded dung,
Which when they want they are perplexed,
And when they have it they are stung.
Great riches wounds
With cares man's heart;
As wealth abounds,
So does their smart.
Does not the love of earthly things,
Divest men of their richest robe,
And then they fly away with wings,
And leaves them naked on this Globe:
Besides all that,
They blind men eyes,
That they cannot
Behold the skies.
And does not earthly things besides,
With burning torches men torment;
And with sharp arrows wound their sides,
So that our days in pain are spent:
Then why should I
Affect these things,
Which misery
And sorrow brings.
This love makes men like foolish boys,
Who place their chief felicity
In bits of glasses, shells, and toys,
Or in a painted Butter-flye:
So riches are
(Which we, alas,
Scrape with such care)
But bits of glass.
Lord let me see thy beauty, which
Does only true contentment bring;
And so in thee I shall be rich:
Oh if I had swift Cupids wing,
Then would I flee
By faith above,
And fix on thee
My heart and love.
That Christ is the true God of Love.
Christ is the only God of Loves,
Who did his secrets all disclose;
Whose wings are swifter then the Doves,
Who only has deserved the Rose:
Thou only art
That potent King,
Both of my heart
And every thing.
Both Principalities and Powers,
And all that is in the sea and land,
Men, Lions, Dolphins, Birds and Flowers,
Are all now under thy command:
Thy Word's the torch
Thy Word's the dart
Which both does scorch
And wound my heart.
It was not Cupid (sure) that spoiled
The gods of all their vestiments;
But thou art he that has them foiled,
And stripped them of their ornaments:
Then thou alone
Deserves to be
Set in the Throne
Of Majesty.
Sometime a Crown of Thorns did sit
Upon that sacred head of thine;
But sure a Rose-crown was more fit
For thee, and Thorns for this of mine:
O God, what love
Was this in thee,
That should thee move
To dye for me!
Thy youth is always green and fresh,
Thy lasting years, Lord, cannot fail;
O look not on my sinful flesh,
But mask thy eyes with mercy's vail.
O Lord renew
In me thy love,
And from thy view
My sins remove.
CYCLOPES.
THese were the sons of heaven, their mother was earth and sea; men of huge
stature, having but one eye, which was in their forehead; they lived upon men's
flesh, Polyphemus was their chief, he was a shepherd, and in love with
Galathaea, he having devoured some of Ulysses his fellows, was by him
intoxicated with wine, and his eye thrust out; These Cyclopes dwelt in Sicily,
and were Vulcans servants in making Jupiters thunder, and Mars his chariots,
etc.

THE MYSTERIES.
THese Cyclopes are by some meant the vapors which by the influence of heaven
are drawn out of the earth and sea, and being in the air, engender thunder and
lightning to Jupiter, as their Brontes, Steropes, Harpes, Pyracmon.
names show; they dwelt in Sicilie about hill Aetna, because heat is the
breeder of thunder; they were thrust down to Hell by their father, and came up
again, because in the cold winter these vapors lie in the earth, and by heat
of the spring are elevated; wise Ulysses overcame Polyphemus, that is, man by
his wisdom and observation found out the secrets of these natural things and
causes thereof; Apollo was said to kill these Cyclopes, because the Sun
dispelleth vapors. 2. I think by these Cyclopes may be understood the evil
spirits, whose habitation is in burning Aetna, that is, in Hell burning with
fire and brimstone, being thrown down justly by God, from heaven for their
pride, but are permitted sometimes for our sins to rule in the air, whose
service God uses sometimes, in sending thunder and storms to punish the
wicked; they may well be called Cyclopes from their round eye, and circular
motion; for as they have a watchful eye, which is not easily shut, so they
compass the earth to and fro; they may be said to have but one eye, to wit, of
knowledge which is great; for outward eyes they have not; their chief food and
delight is in the destroying of mankind; Polyphemus or Beelzebub is the chief,
who having devoured Ulysses fellows, that is, mankind; the true Ulysses,
Christ the wisdom of the father, came, and having powered unto him the full cup
of the Red wine of his wrath, bound him, and thrust out his eye; that is, both
restrained his power and policy; these evil spirits, because they are the
chief sowers of sedition and wars among men, may be said to make Mars his
chariots. 3. Here we see that little Ulysses overcame tall Polyphemus; policy
overcomes strength. 4. We see also the effects of drunkenness, by it we lose
both our strength, and the eye of reason. 5. Servius In Lib. 3. Aen.
thinks that Polyphemus was a wise man, because he had his eye in his forehead
near the brain, but I say, he was but a fool because he had but one eye,
which only looked to things present; he wanted the eye of providence, which
looks to future dangers, and prevents them. 6. Here we are taught to beware of
cruelty, and security, for they are here justly punished. 7. The state of
Rome, which at first had two eyes, to wit, two Consulls, became a Polyphemus, a
huge body with one eye when one Emperor guided all; this Giant fed upon the
flesh of Christians in bloody persecutions; but when she was drunk with the
blood of the Saints, Ulysses, that is, wise Constantine, thrust out the eye,
and weakened the power of Rome; of that Giant which had made so much thunder of
war in the world, and so many chariots for Mars. 8. A common wealth without a
King, is like great Polyphemus without an eye; and then there is nothing but
Cyclopum vita.
Cyclopian cruelty and oppression, great men feeding on the flesh of the poor;
then is nothing but intestine wars and broils, the servants of Vulcan making
thunder bolts and chariots for Mars; Aetna Resonat positis incudibus Aetna.
resounding with the noise of their hammers on the anvill; Brontesque
Steropesque, et nudus membra Pyracmon; so it was in Israel, when every man did
what he listed. 9. An envious man is like blind Invidus non videns.
Polyphemus, he has no charitable eye; he feeds and delights himself with the
ruin and destruction of other men. 10. The Sun in the firmament is that great
eye in the forehead of Polyphemus, which is put out oftentimes by vapors and
mists arising out of the earth.

When that one-ey'd Cyclopean race,
Which in earths burning entralls dwell,
Had pulled us down as low as hell,
Where we should never have seen the face
Of that bright Coachman of the day,
Whose horses drive all clouds away.
We had been all for ever lost,
For Polyphemus in his den
Was feeding on the souls of men,
When Christ sent by the holy Ghost,
Entered into that horrid cave
Which should have been our endless grave.
The deadly wine he made him drink
Of his just indignation,
And bound him in his dungeon
So fast, that now he cannot shrink,
And with his word he has made blind
That eye which fascinates mankind.
If sometimes this Aetnaean brood
Are heard to thunder in the air,
And if with lightnings they do tear
The mountains that have so long stood:
It is because our sins do reign,
That he will not their power restrain.
And when we see the earth is stained
With bloodshed in our cruel wars,
We may be sure they break their bars,
And that their power is not restrained;
It Is for our sins God suffers them
To reign thus to our loss and shame.
O Lord of hosts, with mercy's eye
Look on this torn estate of ours,
And now at last dissolve the powers
Of that Aetnaean company
Whose bellows coals of envy blow,
Who still amongst us discord sow.
Whose hammers on their anvils sound
Continually, who chariots make
For Mars, and so our peace they break;
But thou, O Lord, their work confound,
Let fire their chariots all consume,
And turn their armor all to fume.
And as thou with thy mighty word
Did thrust out Polyphemus eye,
So save me from this tyranny;
And let thy wisdom guide me Lord,
In that last day out of the grave,
Which is his flesh-consuming cave.
CHAP. IV. D
DAEDALUS.
HE was a famous artificer; who having killed his sisters son fled to Creta,
and was entertained of King Minos, whose wife Pasiphae being in love with a
Bull, or a man rather of that name, she obtained her desire of him, by the help
of Daedalus, who shut her within a wooden Cow; and she brought forth the
Minotaure, or man with a Bulls head, which the King perceiving, shut the
Minotaure and Daedalus with his son Icarus within the labyrinth that Daedalus
had made; but by a thread he got out, and flew away with wings which he made
for himself and Icarus: who not obeying his fathers advice, but flying too near
the Sun, fell and was drowned; the wings he used were sails and oars.

THE MYSTERIES.
HEll is the labyrinth unto which we were cast for our sins, by a juster Judge
then Minos; and should have bin devoured by Satan the Minotaure, had not Christ
helped us out by the thread of his word, and wings of faith. 2. They that give
themselves to unlawful pleasures, with Pasiphae, shall bring forth that
Monster which will devour them. 3. Daedalus made this labyrinth, and was cast
into it himself; so the wicked are caught in their own nets, and fall into the
pit which they dig for others. 4. Daedalus was guilty of murder, therefore is
justly pursued, for murder is never secure. 5 Icarus is justly punished for
refusing to hearken to his fathers counsel, a good lesson for all children. 6.
Let us take heed of curiosity, pry not too much into the secrets of God, least
we have Icarus his reward; for all human reason is but waxen wings. 7. Here we
see for the most part that young men are high-minded and proud, but pride
always has a fall. 8. Astronomers, and such as will undertake to foretell
future contingencies, or will take upon them such things as pass humane power,
are like Icarus; they fall at last into a Sea of contempt and scorn. 9. The
golden mean is still best, with what wings soever we fly; whether with the
wings of honor, or of wealth, or of knowledge and speculation; not to fly too
high in pride, nor too low in baseness. 10. If we will fly to Christ with the
wings of faith, we must not mount too high in presumption, nor fall too low by
desperation. 11. We see by Pasiphae, that a dishonest, and disloyal woman,
will leave no means unattempted, to fulfill her lustful and wanton desires.
12. Many women are like Pasiphae, outwardly they seem to be mortified, having
the skin of a dead Cow, or wooden cover; but within they burn with wanton
lusts.

He who has Faith's swift wings to fly
Out of the labyrinth of sin,
In pride will neither soar too high,
Nor fly too low, lest he fall in
The sea of desperation;
He knows the golden mean is best.
Or if he with the pinion
Of honor flies; or if he is blessed
With Fortunes wing, he will always hold
The middle way; and when he flies
With mounting thoughts, he will not be bold
In needless curiosities.
On that bright lamp he will not stare,
Nor draw too nigh with waxen wings
Of humane reason, but forbear
To pry into transcendent things.
What mortal blear-eye can abide
The splendor of those flaming rays,
From which the purest Angels hide
Their faces; O who knows his ways,
Whose light is inaccessible;
Whose paths in the deep waters lie,
Whose ways are all unsearchable,
Whose judgments no man can discry.
O that I had Faiths nimble wing,
To cut this airy region,
Away how quickly would I spring
Out of this sinful dungeon;
Where Satan that great Minotaure
Lies feeding on the souls of men;
Lord let him not my soul devour,
But raise me out of his black den:
For none can furnish me with wings,
But thou alone, whose mighty power
Exceeds all created things.
And thou can kill the Minotaure.
Lord guide me in my flight, lest I
Should fly too low in vain desire
Of earthly things, or least too high
In proud conceits my heart aspire.
I crave not honors airy wing,
For golden Feathers I Will not call:
And if I fly not with a King,
Then with a King I shall not fall:
High hills, tall trees, and lofty towers,
To storms and winds are subject more
Then valleys, shrubs, and poor men's bowers;
The mean estate give me therefore.
Each fall does answer his ascent;
The highest elevations
Of Planets in the firmament,
Have lowest declinations.
DEUCALION.
HE was the son of Promethus and Pandora, a just and religious man, who was the
first that built a temple to the Gods, when the earth was drowned; he and
Pyrrha his wife were saved on Pernassus; and being advised by Themis they flung
behind them the bones of mother earth, that is, stones, and they became men
and women, with which the earth was again peopled.

THE MYSTERIES.
BY the circumstances of the dove which Deucalion sent out, and by the ark in
which he was saved, it is plain, the scripture has been used in the contriving
of this fiction. 2. Deucalion may be the tipe of a minister; he must be the son
of Prometheus, and of Pandora, that is, he must have both prudence and
forecast, as also all gifts fit for his function; his name should be Deucalion,
which may be made of (...), to moisten or water, and (...) to call; for their
office is, to water the barre^ ground of men's hearts, and to call them to
repentance and grace; they must be just as Deucalion was, and build up the
living temple of God; they must strive to save both themselves and others from
the flood of Gods wrath; and if others will not be saved, yet let them do their
duty, and be Deucalions still, and so they shall save them-selves when others
shall perish; Pyrrha, which may be derived from (...), must be their wife; that
is, they must have the fire of Zeal; and Gods word must be in their mouth like
a fire to burn up the chafe; Pernassus the hill of the Muses must be their
place of retreat and abode; without universitie learning they are not fit to
save themselves and others, and when they come down from Pernassus, or come
abroad out of the universities they must strive, of stones to raise up children
to the God of Abraham; and they must fling behind them all earthly and heavy
burdens, forgetting that which is behind, and striving to that which is
before, and so they shall make the stony hearts of men, hearts of flesh. 3. By
this fiction, the Gentiles might have taught themselves the doctrine of the
resurection; for if stones cast on the ground could become men; why should they
not believe that Idoneus est reficere qui fecit. Tertul.
our bodies fallen to the earth, shall in the last day resume their ancient
form, by the power of him who first gave it. 4. Magistrates and such as would
bring rude and barbarous people to civilitie, and of stones to make them men,
must have the perfections of Deucalion; prudence, religion, justice, etc.
Themis or justice must be their counselor, without which nothing should they
do; but chiefly let them take heed of covetousness; they must cast the love of
earthly things behind them; and so they shall make men of stones, that is, men
will be content to forsake their stony caves and rocks, and will frame
themselves to the City life; and what are men without Petrones Festo: Rupices
apud Tertul. l. 1. de anima.
religion and civilitie but stones, representing in their conditions the nature
of the place where they live. 5. Deucalion turned stones to men, but Idolaters,
of stones make gods, such a god was Iupier lapis among the Romans, by whom they
used to swear; and these stony gods turned the worshippers unto stones, for
they that make them are like unto them, and so are all they that worship them;
the Idolater is a spiritual fornicator, commiting whoredom with the earth,
which affords the materials, and he brings in the form. 6. It is not the
least happiness, to hide ones self in Pernassus amongst the Muses; for a
scholar to spend his time privately and quietly in his study, whilst the
tumultuous floods of troubles and crosses prevail abroad in the world. 7. Here
we see that God is a punisher of impiety, and a preserver of good men. 8. By
Deucalion and Pyrrha may be understood water and fire, heat and moisture, of
which all things are generated in the earth.

The happiness of Britain.
Clap hands, O happy British clime,
Thrice happy, if thou knew the time
Of this thy happiness:
Wherein thou do enjoy sweet peace,
With health, and freedom, and increase
Of wealth and godliness.
Thy roses and thy thistles blow,
Thy fields with milk and honey flow,
Thy ships like mountains trace
In Neptunes watery Kingdom; and
With traffic they enrich thy land
And goods from every place:
From where the morning wings are spread,
From where the evenings face looks red,
And from the torrid Zone:
And from the pole and freezing Bares,
Thou furnishest thy self with wares,
And with provision.
Thou have no foe to cross thy gain,
Thy Altars are not made profane
With vain Idolatry:
Thy Priests are clothed with holiness,
Thy Saints sing all with joyfulnesse,
And calm security.
Here each man may at leisure dine
Under the shadow of his vine;
Thou hear'st no Canons rore:
Thou hear'st not Drums and Trumpets sound,
Dead carcasses spread not thy ground;
Thy land's not red with goare:
Thy Temples Hymns and Anthemns ring,
And Panegyricks to the King
Of this great Universe;
Down from thy sounding Pulpits fall
Gods Word like Nectar, who can all
Thy happiness rehearse?
Sure thou art that Pernassus hill,
On which Deucalion did dwell
When all the earth was drowned:
So whilst the earth now swims in blood,
And men walk through in a Crimson flood,
Thy head with peace is crowned.
Here all the Muses with their King,
Bay-brow'd Apollo fit and fing
Their envied quietness:
So nothing's wanting as we see,
To make thee blessed, except it be
Submissive thankfulness.
Here we have just Deucalions
Who make wise men of stupid stones,
And who behind them cast
The love of earth; whose innocence
Keeps off the flood of wars from hence,
So that our hill stands fast.
Much of this happiness we gain
By him, whose sacred brows sustain
The threefold Diadem
Of these Sea-grasping Isles, whose ground
Joves brother does not only round,
But as his own does claim.
Great God, prime author of our peace,
Let not this happiness decrease,
But let it flourish still:
Take not thy mercy from this land,
Nor from the man of thy right hand,
So shall we fear no ill.
DIANA.
She was the sister of Apollo, and daughter of Jupiter and Latona; the
Goddess of hunting, dancing, childbearing, virginity; who still dwelt in
woods and on hills, whose companions were the Dryades, Hamadryades, Orades,
Nymphs, etc. she was carried in a silver chariot, drawn with white staggs; she
was painted with wings, holding a Lion with one hand, and a Leopard with the
other; on her altar men were sacrificed.

THE MYSTERIES.
DIana is the moon, called Apollos, or the Suns sister, because of their
likeness in light, motion and operations; the daughter of God, brought out of
Latona or the Chaos, she came out before her brother Apollo, and helped to play
the midwife, in his production; by which I think was meant that the night
whereof the Moon is ruler, was before the day; the evening went before the
morning; so that the Moon did as it were usher in the Sun; therefore the Calends
of the months were dedicated to Juno, or the Moon, she has diverse Juno, Luna,
Diana, Lya, Hecate, Proserpina, Dyctinnis, (...), Lucina, (...), Fascelis, (...)
names for her diverse operations, as may be seen in Mythologists; in Macrobius
she is called (...), fortune, from her variableness, as both being subject to
so many changes, and causing so many alterations. Scaliger observes that she
was called Lya, or Lua, from lues the plague, because she is the cause of
infection, and diseases, by which the soul is loosed from the body; she was
called Fascelis from the bundle of wood, out of which her image was stolen, by
Iphigenia Agamemnons daughter; but I should think that she was called Lya,
from loosing or untyjng of the girdle which young women used to do in her
temple, called therefore (...), in which temple virgins that had a mind to
marry, used first to pacify Diana with sacrifices; she was also called (...),
that is, earthly; because they thought there was another earth in the Moon,
inhabited by men; doubtless in that they called her Hecate, or Proserpina. the
Queen of hell, they meant the great power that she has over sublunarie bodies,
for all under the Moon may be called Infernus or Hell, as all above her is
heaven; this free from changes, that, subject to all changes; and perhaps she
may be called Hecate, from the great changes that she makes here below, every
hundredth year; she may be called Diana from her divine power, Juno, from
helping, Proserpina from her creeping, for though she is swift in the lower
part of her Epicycle, yet in the upper part thereof she is slow; Luna quasi vna,
as being the only beauty of the night, Dyctinnis from a net, because fishers
and hunters use nets, and of these she is said to have the charge; for the Moon
light is a help to both, they called her (...) quasi, (...), from cutting the
air; Lucina, from her light; her hunting and dancing was to show her diverse
motion, for she has more then any planet, six at least, as Clavius observes;
her virginity shows, that though she is near the earth, yet she is not
tainted with earthly imperfections; she is a help to childe-bearing, for her
influence, and light when she is at full is very forcible, in the production
and augmentation of things; her conversing on hills and in woods shows that her
light and effects are most to be seen there; for all herbs, plants and trees
feel her influence; and because she has dominion over the fiercest beasts, in
tempering their raging heat by her moisture; she holds a Lion and Leopard in
her hands, whose heat is excessive, but tempered by the Moon; her silver
chariot shows her brightness; the staggs and wings do show her swiftness; and
because her light increasing and decreasing appears like horns, therefore the
Bull was sacrificed to her, as Lactantius observes; her arrows are her beams,
or influence by which she causes death and corruption; in respect of her
corniculated, demidiated, and plenarie aspect, she is called Tria virginis ora
Dianae.
triformis, and trivia, because she was worshipped in places where 3 ways met,
the dancing of all the Nymphs and Satyrs, shows how all take delight in her
light; her hunting is to show how in her motion she pursues and overtakes the
Sun. 2. A rich usurer is like Diana, for he is (...), an earthly man, a great
hunter after wealth; who has his nets, his bands and bills, he wounds deeply
with his arrows, Proserpina and Lya; for he creeps upon men's estates, and he
brings a plague upon them; though he dwells in rich Cities, yet his hunting and
affections are set in hills and woods, that is, in farms and manors, which by
morgages and other tricks he catches, he is carried in a silver chariot drawn
with staggs; because fearfulness does still accompany wealth, with which he
is supported; he would fain fly up to heaven with the wings of devotion, but
the Lions and Leopards in his hands with which he devoures men's estates, keeps
him back. Diana was a virgin, yet helped to bring out children; so money though
barren in it self, yet brings great increase; he will not be appeased without
bribes, no more then Diana; nay many a man's estate is sacrificed upon his
altar; who does not unloose their girdles, as in Diana's temple, but quite
bursts them. 3. They that will live chaste, must with Diana live on hills and
woods, and use continual exercise; for idleness and great Cities are enemies
to virginity. 4 Every good man should be like Diana, having the wings of divine
meditation, the courage of the Lion, and swiftness of the stagge, his feet
should be like Hinds feet, to run in the way of Gods commandments. 5. Gods
Church is the true Diana, the daughter of God, the sister of the son of
righteousness, who is a virgin in purity, and yet a fruitful mother of
spiritual children, whose conversation is sequestered from the world; she is
supported in the silver chariot of Gods word, in which she is carried toward
heaven, being drawn with the white staggs of innocence and fear; she holds
in her hands Lions and Leopards, the Kings of the Gentiles who have suffered
themselves to be caught and tamed by her; she flies with the wings of faith
and devotio^; and hunts after beasts, that is, wicked men, to catch them in her
nets, that she may save their souls, and with her arrows to kill their sins;
Diana was midwife to bring forth Apollo; so the Church travells in her birth,
till Christ be formed in us, and brought forth in our holy lives; and as it
fared with Diana's temple, which was burned by Erostratus, so it does with the
Church, whose Temples have bin robbed, defaced, and ruinated by profane men.

Who would a chaste and constant virgin be,
Must shun the worlds impure society;
And idleness, for want of exercise,
Corrupts our limbs, and kills our souls with vice.
On cloud-transcending meditations
We must have still our conversations;
In Cities, chaste Diana never dwells,
But in green woods, and on the airy hills:
In woods she hunts wild beasts, on hills she dances,
And on her shoulder blades her bow advances:
Oreades about her in a ring
In measures trace the ground, and sweetly sing.
Oh that I had Diana's wings, that I
From tumults to these calm retreats might fly,
Where she amongst her Nymphs does reign as queen,
Where Flora keeps her fragrant Magazin;
Where wood-Musitians with their warbling throats
Chant forth untaught, but yet melodious notes
Near Chrystall-brested rivers; O that I
Could still enjoy this harmless company,
Which know not pride, nor malice, nor deceits,
Nor flattery, the moth and bane of states.
O that I had Diana's silver bow,
To kill my beastly sins, before they grow
Too savage; if I had the nimble feet
Of her two Stags, then would I be as fleet
As they, to run the way of Gods commands,
Then would I hold the Lion in my hands,
And Leopard; O if I could subdue
My wild unruly fins, a savage crew.
O let my weary soul be carried, Lord,
In that bright silver chariot of thy Word;
And let thy fear, and milk-white innocence,
Be these two Stags to draw my soul from hence.
And whilst my glass runs in obscurity,
Let me not lose my virgin purity;
And let not fair Diana, thy chaste love,
Thy spotless Church, thy silver feathered Dove
Abuse her self with gross idolatry,
And lose the honor of virginity.
Let that Ephesian perish with disgrace,
Who would her Temple and her state deface:
Let no Records eternize that foul name,
And let it not be mentioned but with shame.
CHAP. V. E
ELYSIUM.
THe Elysian fields were places of pleasure, in which the souls of good men
after this life did converse; enjoying all those delights, which they affected
in this life.

THE MYSTERIES.
ELysium is a place of liberty, as the word shows; for they only enjoy it,
who are loosed from their bodies; not only Poets, but scriptures also have
described those heavenly joys under earthly terms for our capacity; there
is Paradise, in which is the tree of life; there shines another Sun then here,
to wit, the sun of righteousness, there are rivers of pleasure; there are the
flowers of all divine graces; there is a perpetual spring, the Music of
Angels, the supper and wedding feast of the Lamb; the new Jerusalem, all built
of precious stones; the fountain of living waters, all kind of spiritual
fruits; the continual breath of Gods spirit, etc. And as none could enter the
Elysian fields, till he was purged, so no unclean thing can enter into the new
Jerusalem; the blood of Christ must purge us from all sin; and as they must
pass Acharon, Phlegeton, and other rivers of Hell, before they can have
access to those delightful fields, so we must pass through fire and water,
troubles and persecutions, before we can enter into heaven; and thus we see the
Gentiles were not ignorant of a reward for good men, and of punnishment for the
wicked.

You that delight in painted meads,
In silver brooks, in cooling shades,
In dancing, feasts, harmonious lays,
In Crystal springs, and groves of bays*
Draw near, and I will let you see
A Tempe full of majesty,
Where neither white-hair'd Boreas snows,
Nor black-wing'd Auster ever blows;
But sweet-breathed Zephyr still does curl
The meads, and purest streams here purl
From silver springs which glide upon
Rich Pearl, and Oriental stone:
Here on the banks of Rivers grows
Each fruitful tree, here Laurel groves
Never fade; here is a perpetual spring,
With Nightingales the woods still ring:
Meads flourish here continually
In their sweet smelling Tapestry;
The Pink, the gilded Daffadilly,
The shame-fac'd Rose, the white cheek'd Lilly*
The Violet, the Columbine,
The Marigold, the Eglantine,
Rosemary, Time, and Gilli-flowers,
Grow without help of Sun or showers.
Vines still bear purple clusters here,
New wine abounds all the year.
The ground exhales that pleasant smell
Which does all earthly sents excel,
And this place of it is own accord
Does all these benefits afford:
There needs no husbandmen to toil,
And labor in this happy soil;
Rage, tyranny, oppression,
Fraud, malice, and ambition,
And avarice here are not known,
And coals of discord are not blown,
But in this blessed mansion
Dwells perfect love and union.
Here are no cares, nor fears, nor death,
Nor any pestilentiall breath
Which may infect that wholesome air,
But here is continual dainty fare;
Ambrosia here on trees does grow,
And cups with Nectar overflow;
Tables with flowery carpets spread,
Are still most richly furnished;
Drums, Trumpets, Canons roaring sounds
Are never heard within these bounds;
But sacred Songs, and Jubilees,
Timbrels, Organs, and Psalteries,
Sackbuts, Violins, and Flutes,
Harps, silver Symbals, solemn Lutes;
All these in one joined harmony,
With Hallelujah's pierce the sky.
Here Is neither night nor gloomy cloud
Which can that world in darkness shroud;
But there is an everlasting day
Which knows no evening, or decay:
There shines a Sun, whose glorious fire
Shall not with length of time expire;
And who shall never set or fall
In Neptunes azure glassie hall.
Here are no birds or beasts of prey,
Here is no sickness nor decay,
Nor sorrow, hunger, infamy,
Nor want, nor any misery;
Nor silver-headed age, which bows
The back, and furrows up the brows:
But here is the ever-smiling prime,
Of youth, which shall not fade with time.
Mirth, plenty, glory, beauty, grace
And holiness dwell in this place.
Such joys as yet has never been
By mortals either heard or seen.
What tongue is able to rehearse,
What Muse can sing, or paint in verse
This place, to which all earthly joys
Compared, are but fading toys.
Sure, if I had a voice as shrill
As thunder, or had I a quill
Plucked from an Angels pinion;
And if all tongues were joined in one;
Yet could they not sufficiently
Express this places dignity:
Which golden feathered Cherubims,
And fire-dispersing Seraphims
Have circled with their radiant wings,
To keep away all hurtful things.
O thou whose glory never decays,
When these my short and evil days
Are vanished like a dream or shade,
Or like the grass, and flowers that fade;
Lord let my soul have then access
Unto that endless happiness,
Where thy blessed saints wi^h warbling tongues
Are chanting still celestial songs;
Where winged quiresters thy praise
Still Caroll forth with heavenly lays:
When shall my bondage Lord expire,
That I may to that place retire?
When shall I end this pilgrimage?
When will thou open this fleshly cage,
This prison, and this house of clay,
That hence my soul may fly away?
Untye the chains, with which so fast
I Am bound, and make me free at last;
And draw aside this Canopie
Which keeps me from the sight of thee;
Lord let me first see thee by grace
Here; then, hereafter face to face.
ENDYMEON.
HE was a fair shepherd, who falling in love with Juno, who was presented to
him in the form of a cloud, was thrust down from heaven, into a cave, where he
slept 30 years, with whom the Moon being in love came down oftentimes to visit
and kiss him.

THE MYSTERIES.
IT is thought that Endymeon being an Astronomer, and one that first observed
the diverse motions of the Moon, gave occasion to this fiction, that the Moon
loved him; but I think these uses may be made of this fiction. 1. Endymeon is a
rich man; and riches make men fair, though never so deformed; and with such the
Moon, that is, the world, as unconstant as the Moon, is in love, these are the
men whom the world kisses and honoreth, but when these rich Endymeons set their
affections upon wealth, (for Juno is the goddess of wealth) then do they lose
heaven, and fall into the sleep of security, saying, Soul take thy rest, thou
have store laid up for many years, with that rich farmer in the Gospel; and so
they lose their souls for a shadow, for such is wealth; and this shadow brings
upon them spiritual stupiditie, they that cannot be roused from their cave,
though Gods word should shine on them as clear as the Moon. 2. By Endymeon,
Adam may be meant, who was fair whilst Gods image continued with him, but when
he fell in love with Juno, Jupiters wife, that is, affected equality with his
maker; he was thrust out of Paradise, into this world as unto a cave; where he
was cast into a dead sleep, or the sleep of death, from which he shall not be
awaked though the Moon so often visit him, that is, so long as the Moon shall
shine and visit the earth, which shall be till the dissolution of all things,
man shall sleep in the grave. 3. By Endymeon may be meant these, over whom the
Moon has dominion; for Astrologers observe, that every man is subject to one
Planet, or other, more or less, such men then over whom the Moon rules are
instable, subject to many changes; nimble bodied, quick in apprehension,
desirous of glory, and such a one perhaps was Endymeon; therefore the Moon was
said to love them; and such because they affect hohour and popular applause,
which is but air, may be said to be in love with Juno, which is the air, and
indeed honor is but air, or a cloud. 4. Every man may be called Endymeon, for
we are all in love with air and empty clouds, with toys and vanities which
makes us so sleepie and dull in heavenly things, and the Moon is in love with
us; changes and inconstancy, still accompany man's life, to signify which
instabilitie of human affairs, the feast of new Moons was kept among the Jews;
and the Roman Nobility used to wear little pictures of the Moon on their
shoes, to show that we are never in one stay; for which cause I think the
Turks have the half Moon for their Arms. 5. When Endymeon, that is, mankind
slept in sin; the Moon, that is, our Savior Christ, (whose flesh is compared
to the Moon, In Psalm. 73.
by S. Augustine, as his divinity to the Sun) in his flesh visited us, and
dwelt amongst us, this Moon was eclipsed in the passion, and this Moon slept in
the cave with Adam; and the full of this Moon was seen in the resurrection;
this is he who has kissed us with the kisses of his mouth, whose love is
better then wine, whose light shined in darkness, and the darkness
comprehended it not. 6. The Moon falls in love with sleepie Endymeons; that is,
carnal and sensual pleasures, and earthly thoughts invade those, that give
themselves to idleness, security, and laziness; for the Moon, in regard of
her vicinitie to the earth may be the Symboll of earthly minds; and because
she is the mistress of the night, and of darkness, the time when carnal
delights are most exercised, she may be the Symboll of such delights; and
because of her often changing she may represent to us the nature of fools,
which delight in idleness, as the Moon did in Endymeon. 7. Endymeon in this
may signify the Sun, with whom the Moon is in love; rejoicing, and as it were
laughing in her full light, when she has the whole veiw of him; and every
month running to him, and overtaking him, whose motion is slow, and therefore
he seems to sleep in regard of her velocitie.

What means the Moon, to dote so much upon
The fair Endymeon?
Or why should man forsake his Sovereign good,
To catch an empty cloud?
From heaven shall any man for riches fall,
And lose his soul and all?
How can we sleep in such security,
As that we cannot see
Our dangers, nor that lamp, whose silver ray
Drives black-fac'd night away?
What madness is it for thee to lose thy share
Of heaven, for bubling air
Of honor, or of popular applause,
Which does but envy cause,
And which is nothing but an empty wind,
That cannot fill the mind;
How changable is man in all his ways,
Now grows, anon decays;
Now clear, then dark, now hates, anon affects,
Still changing his aspects.
Much like the Moon, who runs a wandering race,
And still does change her face.
But Lord give me strait paths, and grant to me
The gift of constancy:
And quench in me, I pray, the sinful fire
Of lust, and vain desire.
Be thou the only object of my soul,
And free me from the hole
Of ignorance and dead security;
O when shall I once see
The never fading luster of thy light,
To chase away my night;
The golden beauty of thy countenance
To clear my conscience.
O Lord, thou came to rouse Endymeon
Out of his dungeon,
Wrapped in the black vail of Chimerian night,
Who could not see the light
Of Moon or Star, until thou did display
Thy all-victorious ray;
Brighter then is fair Phoebe's glittering face,
Which is the nights chief grace,
Whose silver light, as sometimes it does wain,
And then it primes again:
So was thy flesh eclipsed from it is light
By Pluto's horrid night,
And muffled for a while from that bright eye
Of thy Divinity.
But when black deaths interposition
Was overcome and gone,
The silver orb of thy humanity
Did shine more gloriously,
Then when the white-fac'd empress of the night
Shines by her brothers light.
O rouse me from my drowsiness, that I
May see thy radient eye
Which pierces all hearts with its golden beams,
From which such glory streams
That all the winged Legions admire;
Lord warm me with thy fire,
And stamp the favor of thy lips on mine,
Whose love exceeds new wine;
Then will I sing uncessantly thy praise,
And to thy honor will due Trophies raise.
ERYCHTHONIUS.
THis was a monster, or a man with Dragons feeet, begot of Vulcans seed shed on
the ground, whilst he was offering violence to Minerva the virgin; which
monster notwithstanding was cherished by Minerva, and delivered to the daughter
of Cecrops to be kept, with a caution, that they should not look into the
basket to see what was there; which advice they not obeying, looked in and so
grew mad, and broke their own necks.

THE MYSTERIES.
VUlcan shedding his seed on the ground, is the elementarie fire, concurring
with the earth, in which are the other two elements, and of these all monsters
are procreated; and by Minerva, that is, the influence of heaven or of the Sun,
cherished and fomented, though not at first by God produced, but since Adams
fall, and for the punishment of sin. 2. Vulcan offering wrong to Minerva, is
that unregenerate part of man, called by the Apostle, the law of our members,
rebelling against the law of the mind; of which arises that spiritual
combat and strife in good men, which is begun by the flesh, but cherished and
increased by the spirit, till at last the spirit get the victory. 3. Minerva,
that is, he that makes a vow to live still a virgin, must look to have the
fiery Vulcan of lust to offer him violence, and so he shall never be free from
inward molestation and trouble; therefore better marry then burn; and if he
intertains any unchaste thoughts, though his body be undefiled, yet he is no
pure virgin, as Lactantius De falsa religione. l. 1. c. 17.
shows, that Minerva was not, because she cherished Erychthonius; therefore
an unchaste mind in a chaste body, is like Minerva fomenting Vulcans brat; he is
a pure virgin, says Lib. 1. Adver. Iovini.
S. Hierom, whose mind is chaste, as well as his body; and this he ingeniously
confesses was wanting in himself. 4. Minerva, that is, wisdom, has no such
violent enemy as Vulcan, that is, fiery anger, which does not only overthrow
wisdom in the mind for a time, for it is short fury; but is also the cause of
Erychthonius, that is, of all strife and contention in the world. 5. War is a
fiery Vulcan, an enemy to learning or Minerva; the cause of Erychthonius, of
monstrous outrages and enormities; and oftentimes fomented by seditious
scholars, and learning abused. 6. Erychthonius is a covetous man, as the world
shows; for (...) is contention, and (...) is the earth, and what else is
covetousnes but a presumptious desire of earthly things, and the cause of so
much strife and contention in the world; this monster came of Vulcan the god of
fire, that is of Satan the god of this world, who reigns in the fire of
contention, and in the fire of Hell, and is fomented by Minerva the soul, which
is the seat of wisdom. 7. Tertullian Lib. de spectaculis.
says, that Erychthonius is the devil, and indeed, not unfitly, for he is the
father of all strife, and of avarice, he has a man's wisdom, or head to allure
us to sin, but a Dragons feet to torment us in the end for sin; whosoever with
delight shall look on him, shall at last receive destruction. 8. Let us take
heed we pry not too curiously in the basket of natures secrets, lest we be
served as Cecrops daughters, or as Pliny and Empedocles were. 9. A Magistrate
or Governor must be like Erychthonius, who was himself King of Athens; he must
be both a man and a Dragon; if the face of humanity and mercy will not
prevail, then the Dragons feet of vigor and justice must walk. 10. If any fiery
or chollerick Vulcan shall offer us wrong, we must wisely defend our selves
with Minerva; and conceal the injury and our own grief, as she did
Erychthonius. 11. Though the preserving and cherishing of Vulcans child is no
certain proof that Minerva lost her virginity, neither did she lose it though
Vuloffred her violence, because there was no consent; yet it becoms all,
chiefly virgins to aovid both the evil and the occasion thereof, that there may
be no supition,

1.
Why Vulcans fire
With Vesta did conspire,
To make the monster Erychthonius:
It was because
Man would not keep Gods Laws,
But run the course that was erroneous.
2.
There was no hell,
Nor death till Adam fell,
Nor monster, or deformed Progeny:
Minerva's thigh,
Nor Sols resplendant eye
Did neither cherish, nor such monsters see.
3.
Now Vulcan sues
Minerva to abuse,
And to pollute her pure virginity:
So does the coal
Of lust inflame my soul;
The flesh against the spirit strives in me.
4.
O if my mind.
Could peace and freedom find
From inward broils, and Vulcans wanton eye!
O if the fire
Of lust, and all desire
Of earthly things in me would fade and dye!
5.
My soul is vexed,
And too too much perplexed
With angers, fear, and fiery violence;
Which breeds in me
Much strife continually
That darkneth both my judgment and my sense.
6.
And how shall I
Resist the tyranny
Of Vulcan, if I have not arms of strength?
Therefore, O Lord,
Lend me thy conquering sword,
That I may be victorious at length.
EUMENIDES.
THese were the 3 furies, the daughters of Pluto and Proserpina, or of hell,
darkness, night, and earth; in heaven they were called Dirae, in earth
Harpiae, in hell Furiae, they had snakes in stead of hairs, brazen feet;
torches in one hand, and whips in the other, and wings to fly with.

THE MYSTERIES.
COmmonly these 3 furies are taken for the tortures of an evil conscience,
proceeding from the guilt of sin, they cause fear, and fury, as the word
Erinnys signifies; hell is the place of their abode, and where they are, there
is hell; the tortures whereof are begun in the conscience of wicked men. 2.
There are three unruly passions in men, answering to these three furies;
covetousness is Alecto, which ^ever gives over seeking wealth, and indeed
this is the greatest of all the furies, and will not suffer the (...)r to eat
and enjoy the goods that he has gotten; Aen. 6.
(...)riarum maxima, juxta accubat, et manibus p(...) contingere mensas; this
is a Harpie indeed, (...)ly delighting in rapine, but polluting every t(...)
has; Aen. 3.
contracting omnia faedat immund(...) may be called Jupiters dog, or rather a
dog (...) manger, neither eating himself, nor suffering others to eat; the
other fury is Megaera, that is, en^^^, full of poison and snakie hairs; the
third is Tisiphone, which is inordinate anger, or a revengefull disposition;
the burning torch, and wings show the nature of anger; all these have their
beginning and being fr^^ Hell, from darkness and night, even from Satan, and
the twofold darkness that is in us, to wit, the ignorance of our
understanding, and the corruption of our will; but as the Furies had no access
unto Apollo's temple, but were placed in the porch Aen. 8.
ultricesque sedent in lumine Dirae, although otherwise they were had in great
veneration; so neither have they access unto the minds of good men, which are
the temples of the holy Ghost. 3. Gods three judgments which he sends to
punish us, to wit, plague, famine, and sword, are the three furies; (...).
Megaera, is the (...)t sweeps and takes away multitudes; the fa(...)lecto,
which is never satisfied; and the (...) Tisiphone, a revenger of sin, and a
murderer* ^^^se have their seat in hell, as they are sent from, (...)ed by
Satan, and in heaven also, as they are(...)y God, without whose permission
Satan can (...) nothing; they may be called (...).
Harpies, as the furies were; because they snatch and carry all things
h^ad-long with them; and, Dirae quasi dei irae, being the effects of Gods
anger, they are Jupiters dogs, the ^^^cutioners of Gods wrath, and devourers of
sinn^^s; they come swiftly with wings, and tread hard with their brazen feet;
the plague is the snake that poysoneth, the famine is the torch that consumes
and burns, the sword is the whip that draws blood. 4. Ministers should be
(...).
Eumenides, that is, gracious, benevolent, of a good mind, as the word
signifies, being properly taken; they should have the wisdom of Serpents in
their heads, the torch of Gods Word in one hand, the whip of Discipline in the
other; the wings of contemplation, and the brazen feet of a constant and
shining conversation.

See how the grim-fac'd hags from Hells black lake
Ascend, and all their hissing tresses shake:
They look as fearful as their mother night,
Their black flamed torches yield a dismal light:
Who raised these monsters from hot Phlegeton,
These ghastly daughters of sad Acharon
To torture men; hark how their lashes sound,
See how they poison men, and burn and wound.
Alas, we can accuse none but our selves,
We are the raisers of these dreadful elves,
And we are the cause of all the misery
That falls on us and our posterity.
Our sin, alas, procures us all our woe,
Sin makes our dearest friend our greatest foe:
Almighty God, whose highborn progeny
We are, is now become our enemy,
And he gives way to these infernal hounds
To roame abroad, and rage beyond their bounds.
Gold-fingred avarice, with yawning jaws,
And piercing eyes, and ever-scraping claws:
Whose heart like bird-lime clings to every thing
It sees, and still is poor in coveting:
Flies over all, and which (the more's the pity)
Has poisoned both the Country and the City;
A greedy dog, that is never filled with store,
But eating still, and barking still for more.
The cries and groans of poor men wronged, can tell
That this devouring fury came from hell.
Then pale-faced, squint-eyed, black-mouthed envy flies,
And with her sable wings beats out men's eyes,
That they cannot on virtues glittering gold
Look cheerfully, nor good men's works behold.
Like Owls they see by night, black spots they spy,
Then run their tongues on wheels of obloquy,
But have not eyes to see the shining day
Of goodness; nor good words have they to say.
This fury is the bane of each good action,
And is the spightfull mother of detraction:
She blasts the bads and blossoms of true worth,
And chokes all brave achievements in their birth.
Her pestilentiall breath, her murdering eye,
Her slandring tongue which goodness does belie;
Her whip, and torch, and crawling looks can tell,
That she is one of those hags that came from hell.
Then raging anger with a scarlet face,
And flaming eyes, and feet that run apace
To shed man's blood, who for a harmless word
Will make thy heart a scabberd for her sword;
Whose heart is always boiling in her breast,
And whose revengefull thoughts are never at rest.
The panting breath, the trembling lip, the eyes
Sparkling with fire, the groans and hideous cries:
The stammering tongue, the stamping foot of those
That are possessed with these infernal foes,
May let us see, that when there is so much ire
Without, the heart within is set on fire.
By that sulphurious torch of Tisiphon,
Kindled with flames of fiery Phlegeton;
The cry of so much blood shed in this age,
Does show how much these hellish monsters rage.
These are the hellish furies, but from them
Swarm multitudes, which now I cannot name;
As pride, theft, lust, bribes, rapes, ambition,
And sacrilege, drunkenness, oppression:
And thousands more which I cannot rehearse,
And, if I could, I would not put in verse
This damned crew; these furies causes are
That we are scourged, with famine, plague, and war:
Famine with meagre cheeks, and hollow eyes,
Lank belly, feeble knees, and withred thighs,
Does often by The Almighty's just command,
Rage, roar, and domineer within our land.
The wasting plague with sudden unseen darts
Invades the stourest, and assaults their hearts;
And with a secret fire dryes up the blood,
And carries all before her like a flood.
How often does this spotted fury rage,
With pale-faced horror on this mortal stage,
And makes our Towns and Cities desolate,
And does whole countries too depopulate:
But War the barbarous mistress of disorders,
How does she rage within our Christian borders?
Good God, who can without a briny flood
Of tears, behold the loss of so much blood?
Who can, but such whose hearts are made of stones,
Hear (with dry eyes) the mournful sighs and groans,
The screechings, yellings, roarings of all ages,
Weltring in blood, where this grim monster rages:
Temples profaned, maids ravished, Cities razed,
And glory of Christ's kingdom thus defaced;
Where ought to reign peace and tranquillity,
With love, and goodness, truth, and civility.
And then to see the Turk that barbarous Lord,
Enlarge his horned Moon by our discord,
And daily to insult on Christ's poor sheep,
These things would make a Niobe to weep.
O turn for shame your fratricidall swords
Into the sides of those proud Scythian Lords,
Who raised themselves by our unhappy fall,
And now aim at the ruin of us all.
Recover once again your ancient glories,
And make your valor Themes of future stories.
Alas, I may with tears express my grief,
Which has a tongue to speak, but no relief:
Except, O thou that art the God of wars,
Compose in time our too too civil jars.
We grant, O Lord, thy plagues we have deserved,
Who have so often from thy precepts swerved;
And that of thee we should be quite sorlorn,
And be the objects of contempt and scorn:
But Lord, let not thy wrath for ever burn,
Remember those that now in Sion mourn:
And save us though we have deserved thy stroke,
And keep us from the proud imperious yoke
Of Ottomans, who like dogs lap our blood,
And take our flesh like Canibals for food.
And Lord preserve in constant union
The little world of this our Albion;
Enlarge his life, who does enlarge our peace,
And make his glory with his life increase:
That being mounted on the wings of fame,
This age may see his worth, the next admire his name.
CHAP. VI. F
FORTUNA.
She was the daughter of Oceanus, and servant of the gods, a great goddess
her self, in sublunarie things; but blind, and carried in a chariot drawn by
blind horses, she stood upon a globe having the helm of a ship in one hand,
and the horn of plenty in the other, and the heaven on her head.

THE MYSTERIES.
FOrtune is either an unexpected event, or else the hid cause of that event;
the blind Gentiles made her a blind goddess, ruling things by her will,
rather then by counsel; therefore they used to rail at her, because she
favored bad men, rather then good; and called her blind, as not regarding
men's worth; but I think, that the wiser sort, by fortune understood Gods will
or providence; which the Poet Aen. 8. ia omnire dominatur. Salust. (...).
calls omnipotent, and the Historian, the ruler of all things; she may be
called fortuna quasifortisuna, being only that strong ruler of the world; she
had many temples at Rome, and many names; she stood upon a Globe, to show her
dominion of this world, and the heaven on her head, did show that there is her
beginning; the helm and the horn of plenty in her hands, are to show, that the
government of this world, and the plenty we enjoy is from this divine
providence; and though they called her blind, yet we know the contrary, for
she is that eye which sees all things, and a far off, and before they are, as
the word provide^tia signifies; therefore they called her, and her horses
blind, because they were blind themselves, not being able to know the
wonderful ways and secret ends of this providence, why good men should here
live in affliction and misery, and the wicked in honor and prosperity; whereas
they should have known, as some of the wiser men did, that no misery could
befall a good man, Boethius, l. 4. Pros. 6.
because every hard fortune does either exercise, amend, or punish us; he is
miserable, says Seneca, Cur bonis viris mala fiunt.
that never was miserable; they are miserable who are becalmed in the Sea, not
they who are driven forward to their haven by a storm; a surfeit is worse then
hunger; but see himself speaking excellently to this purpose; therefore they had
no reason to rail at Fortune when she crossed them; for to a good man all
things fall out for the best; yet in good sense Gods providence may be called
blind, as Justice is blind; for it respects not the excellency of one
creature above another, but Gods general providence extends it self to all
alike, to the worm as well as the Angel; for as all things are equally subject
to God in respect of casualitie, so are they to his providence; he is the
preserver of man and beast, his Sun shines, and his rain falls upon all
alike; now the 4 horses that draw fortune, are the four branches of providence,
whereby Gods love is communicated to us; to wit, creation, preservation,
gubernation, and ordination of all things to their ends. In that they called
fortune the daughter of the Sea; by this they would show her instabilitie still
ebbing and flowing like the Sea; therefore they made her stand upon a wheel,
and she was called in a common byword fortuna Euripus, Eras. in adag.
because of the often ebbing and flowing thereof, I grant, that as one and the
same effect may be called fortune and providence; fortune in respect of the
particular cause, but providence in regard of the first, and general cause,
which is God; so the same may be called instable in respect of the particular
cause, but most stable in respect of God, with whom there is no variableness,
nor shadow of turning; though contingent causes produce contingent effects, yet
nothing is contingent to God, for all things come to pass which he foreseeth,
and yet his foreknowledge imposes no necessity on contingent things, but
indeed we are instable our selves and evil, and we accuse fortune of
instabilitie and evil; a good man may make his fortune good; quisque suae est
fortunae faber, I have read that in some places fortune was wont to be painted
like an old woman, having fire in one hand and water in the other; which I
think did signify that providence does still presuppose prudence, whereof old
age is the Symbol, and because of the mutable and various effects of fortune,
she was represented by a woman, the Symbol of mutabilitie; but the Romans upon
better consideration, made her both male and female, to show, that though the
particular and secondary causes, of fortunall effects be various and unconstant
like women, yet the supreme cause has the staidness of a man; the fire and
water shows, that our fiery afflictions (which fall not without Gods
providence;) are so tempered with water of mercy, that though they burn good
men, yet they consume them not; as we are taught by Moses fiery bush, and the
furnace of Babylon.

Though fools in their gross ignorance
Style providence
A cruel stepdame, wavering, blind,
Light as the wind,
Which kicks off Princes sacred Crowns,
And makes them objects of her frowns.
And from the dunghill raises drones,
To sit on thrones;
And flings man like a Tennis-ball,
From wall to wall:
And makes a sport, to raise a Clown
To honor, then to kick him down.
Yet we know Providence to be
That piercing eye
Which sees and orders every thing
That has being;
Directing them unto that end
Which God Almighty did intend.
Who blesses wicked men with wealth,
And ease and health,
And lets them swim in wine and oil,
And know no toil;
And sets them on the pinnacle
Of honor, as a spectacle.
What cuts with wing the liquid air,
Is for the fare:
What silver brooks and lakes contain,
Or glassie main:
What hills, and dales, and woods afford,
Meet altogether on their board.
Whereas the just and innocent
Are pinched with want;
With banishment, and have no place
To hide their face;
The Fox has holes, the Bird a nest,
But good men know not where to rest.
Much hunted like the Pelican
By wicked men,
And like the Turtle sit alone,
And make their moan;
And like the Owl with groaning strain,
To God of all their wrongs complain.
But though the good man's portion here,
Be whipping cheer;
Though bad men surfeit with excess,
And all possess
Their hearts can wish; yet we from hence
Must not deny Gods Providence.
For he has placed these men upon,
A slippery stone,
Where they shall quickly slide and fall,
And perish all;
There life shall vanish like a dream,
There glory shall conclude in shame.
There vain imaginary joys,
And fruitless toys,
Like clouds and smoke shall fly away,
And so their day
Shall end in darkness, none shall know
The place where these green bays did grow.
Then why should we our selves displease,
To look on these,
And t'envie such prosperity
Which soon shall dye,
And end in woe, and so be seen
No more then if it had not been.
Then wealth we see, and worldly state
Is but a bait;
The bad man's Table's but a snare,
And all his share
Of earth is but a heap of sand,
On which his building cannot stand.
But as the fire refines the gold,
And as the cold
Revives the fire; and as in frost
The stars shine most:
And as the palm lifts up his crest
The higher that it is oppressed:
So crosses and affliction
Which fall upon
The just, makes not their faith to fail,
Nor courage quail;
Who shine, burn, sparkle, fructify
As gold, fire, stars, and the palm tree.
I Will rather have a blustering gale,
And swelling sail,
Then lie becalmed in the main,
And never attain
My wished port; O let the blast
Of troubles drive me home at last.
That tree is strong and firmly fixed,
Which is perplexed
With frequent storms, which when they blow,
The roots below
Take deeper hold; O if I were
Strong as this tree my storms to bear.
The idle sword breeds rust, the cloth
Begets the moth,
Not worm; the standing water dies,
And putrifies:
We first must tread the Camomell,
Or else it will afford no smell.
The Pilots skill how can we know,
Till Tempests blow?
How is that Soldiers valor seen,
Which never had been
In fight; they scarce stout Soldiers are,
That have no wound to show, nor scar.
Those Soldiers which the General
Culls out of all
His army, to attempt some great
And brave exploit,
Are those sure whom he means to grace
With honor, and some higher place.
Except we fight, there is no crown,
And no renown;
Unless we sweat in the vineyard,
There Is no reward:
Unless we climb Mount Calvary,
Mount Olivet we shall not see.
God loves his sons, and them corrects
Whom he respects,
And whips them when they gad and roame,
And brings them home,
And fits them, that he may advance
Them to their due inheritance.
Sick men, although against their wills,
Take bitter pills,
And in their Fever, think it good
To part with blood;
The fire and lance they can endure,
And all for an uncertain cure.
All whom God means shall bear his blows,
He hardneth those;
He wrestleth with these sons of his,
Whom he will bless:
With Jacob if he make thee lame,
He Will bless thee, and enlarge thy name.
If in the Sea God makes our way,
We must obey,
And follow Moses leading wand
To Jacobs land;
Through seas of blood we must all pass
Unto the land of happiness.
We must drink vinegar and gall,
And tears withal;
With whips, nails, spears we must be torn,
And Crowns of thorn:
All this with Christ we must sustain,
Before that we with Christ can reign.
Lord, if this be thy Providence,
Teach me from hence,
How I may patiently drink up
That deadly cup
Which thy Son drank; help me to bear
His cross, that I his Crown may wear.
When thou correct'st me, quench the fire
Of thy just ire,
With mercies water in thy hand;
And with thy wand
Divide the Sea, that I may go
Where milk and honey still does flow.
If in a flaming chariot I
To heaven must hye;
Lord let that flame refine me, but
Consume me not:
Guide thou the coach through all the nine,
Still rolling arches chrystalline.
CHAP. VII. G
GANIMEDES.
HE was the King of Troys son, who whilst he was hunting, was caught up to
heaven by an Eagle, Jupiters bird; and because of his extraordinary beauty,
Jupiter made him his Cup Bearer.

THE MYSTERIES.
GAnimedes, is one that delights in (...).
divine counsel or wisdom; and wisdom is the true beauty of the mind, wherein
God takes pleasure. 2. Every Eagle is not Jupiters bird, as Aelian observes,
but that only which abstains from flesh, and rapine; and that was the bird
that caught up Ganimedes; so fleshly minds, and thoughts set upon rapine and
carnal pleasures, are not fit to serve God, nor to carry the soul up to
heaven. 3. The quick-sighted Eagle, is divine contemplation or meditation, by
which Ganimedes, the soul is caught up to heaven. 4 When by holy raptures, we
are carried up to heaven, the best Nectar that we can power out to God, is the
tears of repentance, and of a broken heart. 5. Ganimedes was caught up by one
Eagle only; but if we have the true inward beauty of the mind, we shall be
caught up in the air by Legions of Angels, to meet the Lord, and shall for ever
serve him, at his table in the Kingdom of heaven. 6. I wish that the Roman
Eagle would not delight so much in rapine and man's flesh, as he does; but
rather endeavor to be carried up to heaven, that is, o their ancient dignity,
the decayed and ruinated parts of the Empire. 7. As the Eagle caught up
Ganimedes, so the wings of a great Eagle were given to the woman, Revel. 12. to
carry her from the Dragons persecution; the great Eagle was the Roman Empire,
whereof Constantine was the head, by whose power and help the Church was
supported. 8. Our Savior Christ is the true Ganimedes, the son of the great
King, the fairest among the sons of men, the wisdom and counsel of the father,
in whom God delighted, and was well pleased, who by the power, and on the wings
of his Divinity, was caught up to heaven, where he is pouring out his prayers
and merits before God for us; and like Aquarius (to which Ganimedes was
converted) is pouring down the plentiful showers of his grace upon us. 9.
Vespasian set up the image of Jupiter and Ganimedes, caught by the Eagle in the
Temple of peace; so the image of God, and heavenly raptures, are found in that
soul wherein is the peace of conscience. 10. As the Eagle carried Ganimedes, so
Moses compares God to an Eagle, who carried the Israelites on his wings
through the desert; and S. Ambrose says, that Hominem inferni raptum faucibus
portavit ad coelum. Sermon. 62
Christ is the Eagle who has caught man from the jaws of Hell, and has
carried him up to heaven.

God is a substance immateriall,
Whose love is not like ours; we dote upon
The peeling, shell, and outward fashion
Of things, but Gods love is spiritual:
The inward beauty he affects,
And outward vanity rejects;
A pleasing look, a velvet skin,
Are toys he takes no pleasure in.
Did Roses in our cheeks, and Lillies dwell,
And were our dangling tresses gold, our eyes
Like twinkling Tapers in the rolling skies,
And did our breath like fragrant gardens smell;
Yet if we be not fair within,
But if our souls be stained with sin;
For all our outward form, we are
But like the painted Sepulcher.
Although our lips were like a Crystal spring,
From which flow streams of sweetest Eloquence,
Which ravisheth the heart, and charms the sense;
And though our tongues could like a Cymball ring:
Yea, though the richest Magazine
Of graces could in us be seen;
Yet if within we be but fair,
God will not for our outside care.
He is the fairest Ganymede, whose mind
Is pure and fair, whose heart is white as snow,
Whose thoughts in whiteness does the Swans out-go,
Whose life is bright as gold that is refined:
He who has these perfections,
Shall fly on Eagles pinions,
And shall be mounted far above
All earthly things to serve great Jove.
But Christ is he whose beauty far excells
The fading beauty of our humane race,
And from whose lips flow silver streams of grace,
In whom all goodness and perfection dwells;
He was a harmless spotless Dove,
The Center of his Fathers love;
The object of my chief desires,
And he in whom my soul respires.
Who on the wing of his Divinity
Was elevated far above our sight,
And now inhabits that eternal light
Which with our mortal eyes we cannot see;
He Nectar of his merit powers
Before his Father, and down showers
On us his graces from above,
Out of the bottles of his love.
O if some cloud-dividing Eagle would
Under my feet spread forth his airy wings;
And lift my mind from these inferior things,
That I my God in glory might behold:
Lord let my prayer pierce the skies,
And from the bottles of mine eyes
Receive the Nectar of my tears,
And drink them with thy gracious ears.
O if I could with Eagles pinions cleave
The highest clouds, and with their piercing eye
Could my Redeemer in his glory see,
Triumphing over death, and over the grave:
And as the Eagles do repair
To places where dead bodies are;
So where thy flesh is, Lord let me
Resort, that I may feed on thee.
And when my soul shall leave this house of clay,
Command thy winged Messengers (who still
Are ready to obey thy blessed will)
To be my soul-supporters in that day:
And in the Resurrection,
When soul and body meets in one,
Let them uphold me then and there,
Where I shall meet thee in the air.
GENII.
THese were the sons of Jupiter and Terra in shape like men, but of an
uncertain sex, every man had two from his nativitie waiting on him, till his
death; the one whereof was a good Genius, the other a bad; the good ones by
some are called Lares, the bad Lemures; and by Tertullian, and his Commentator
Pamelius they are all one with the Daemones; they were worshipped in the form
of Serpents.

THE MYSTERIES.
Genius a gignendo, for by them we are ingenerated; and so whatsoever is the
cause or help of our generation, may be called Genius; thus the elements, the
heavens, the stars, nature, yea the God of nature in whom we live, move, and
have our being, may be called Genii; in a large sense, and Genii quasi Geruli,
a gerendo vel ingerendo, from supporting us, or from suggesting good and bad
thoughts into the mind; therefore gerulofiguli in Plautus, is a Scaliger in Fest.
suggestor of lies, and so by these Genii may be understood, the good and bad
Angels which still accompany us, and by inward suggestion stir us up to good
or evil actions. The form of Serpents, in which the Pinge duos angues, etc.
Geni were worshipped, does show the wise and vigilant care, which the Angels
have over us; when after this life they punish us for sins, they are called
Quisq suos patimur Manes Virg.
Manes Therefore the Genii were painted with a platter full of flowers and
garlands in one hand, and a whip in the other; to show that they have power
both to reward and punish us. They have oftentimes appeared in the form of
men, therefore they are painted like men, but they have no sex, nor do they
procreate; for which cause perhaps the fruitful Palm tree was dedicated to
them, with which also they were crowned; and because they were held of a middle
kind, between Gods and men, they were called the sons of Jupiter and earth; or
rather in reference to Plato's opinion, which held Angels to be corporeal; our
souls also are Genii, which from our birth to our death, do accompany our
bodies; every man's desire and inclination may be called his Genius, to which it
seems the Poet alluded saying, an sua cuique deus fit dira cupido, and perhaps
Aristotle's intellectus agens, is all one with Plato's Genius, for without this
we have no knowledge; because the passive intellect depends in knowledge, from
the active, in receiving the species from it; which by the active intellect is
abstracted from time, place, and other conditions of singularity; and this is
all one, as if we should say we receive no information of good or evil, but
from our Genius; and as the Gentiles believed the stars to be Genii, so the
Jews thought them to be Angels, and that they were living creatures, therefore
they worshipded them, called them the host of heaven; but indeed Christ is our
true Genius, the great Angel who has preserved and guarded us from our youth,
by whom we are both generated and regenerated, the brazen Serpent; from whom we
have all knowledge, who alone has power to reward and punish us; who appeared
in the form of man; and in respect of his 2 natures was the son of Jupiter and
Terra, of God and earth; and who will never forsake us, as Socrates his Genius
did him at last; who came not to affright us, or to bring us the message of
death, as Brutus his Genius did to him; but to comfort us, and to assure of
eternal life; let us then offer to him the sacrifice not of blood, cruelty,
or oppression; which the Gentiles would not offer to their Genius, thinking it
unfit, to take away the life of any creature that day, in which they had
received life themselves; but let us offer the wine of a good life, and the
sweet fumes of our prayer; Defraudare Genium indulgere genio.
and let us not offend this our Genius, or deprive him of his due; but make
much of him, by a holy life; and though the Gentiles assigned unto every man
his Genius, and Juno to the women; yea we know that Christ is the Savior and
keeper both of men and women, and that with him there is no difference of sex.

To what high dignity and place
Has God advanced our humane race,
To whose beak and command
He did subdue all things that creep,
And fly within the air and deep,
And move upon dry land.
Besides, heavens blessed Harbingers,
Gods nimble-winged Meslengers,
Are with a watchful eye
By his appointment to defend
Us from all hurt, and to attend
On us continually.
Lord send to me these winged Posts,
And guard me with these heavenly hoasts
From Satan's policies:
And let them with their shady wings
Protect me from all hurtful things,
And from mine enemies.
And let this host in squadrons fly
Before me; Lord unclose mine eye,
That I may see my guard:
How with their Tents they me enclose,
And how they fight against my foes,
And keep their watch and ward.
And let these be my Tutors to
Instruct my mind, what it must do,
And how it must obey:
O by these sacred Pursuvants
Show me thy just commandments,
And guide me in my way.
And let these comforters assuage
The pains of this my pilgrimage
In my last agony;
Let these swift-winged Legions,
Through all the starry regions
My soul accompany.
And when the trump Angelical
Shall sound, which must awake us all,
And raise us from our dust;
Let these intelligences bring
Me to the presence of my King,
And place me with the just.
O thou great Angel, who has still
Been my protector from all ill,
Even from mine infancy:
Whom winged Heralds all adore
With covered face, be evermore
A God and guide to me.
Thy help I did depend upon
When I was but an Embryon,
Thou took'st the charge of me,
And when I sucked my mothers breast,
And ever since, thou have professed
That thou my God wilt be.
O let me not go then astray,
Or with my sins drive thee away,
Or misbehaviour;
But as thou have been still to me
A Guardian, so cease not to be
My God and Savior.
Inspire me with thy good motions,
That with my best devotions
I may thee feed and feast:
I have prepared the sweet incense
Of prayers, and wine of innocence;
Come then and be my guest.
GIGANTES.
GIants were hairie, and snakie footed men of a huge stature, begot of the
blood of Caelus, and had earth for their mother; they made war against Jupiter,
but were overcome at last by the help of Pallas, Hercules, Bacchus, and Pan;
and were shot through by Apollo's and Diana's arrows.

THE MYSTERIES.
IF by Giants we understand winds and vapors, they have the Earth for their
mother, and Heaven for their father; they are bred in the belly of the earth,
and are begot of the rain, which may be called the blood of heaven; they may
be said to war against Jupiter; when they trouble the air; and they were shot
with Apollo's and Diana's arrows: when the beams and influence of the Sun and
Moon do appease and exhaust them. 2. Notorious profane men are Giants, and are
begot of blood; to show their cruel dispositions; and of earth because they
are earthly minded: their hairie bodies and snakie feet, do show their rough,
savage, and cunning disposition; they war against Jupiter, when they rebel
against God with their wicked lives; but Hercules and Pallas, strength and
wisdom overcome and subdue such monsters; and oftentimes they are overthrown by
Bacchus and Pan, that is, by wine and music; drunkenness and pleasure, at
last prove the bane of these Giants. 3. Rebellious Catelins, who oppose
authority, are harie snakie footed Giants, of a sanguinarie and cunning
disposition, warring against Magistrates; which are Gods; but at last come to a
fearful end. 4. Arius, and all such as appose the divinity of Christ, are
like these Giants warring against God; but are overthrown with the thunder and
arrows of Gods word. 5. Let us take heed as S. Ambrose Ambros. cap 4. Dearca
and Not: and cap. 34.
exhorts us, that we be not like these Giants, earthly minded, pampering our
flesh, and neglecting the welfare of our souls; and Contumac^ praeliantur
affectu, etc.
so fall into contempt of God and his ordinances; if we dote too much on earth,
we show that she is our mother; and that she is too much predominant in us; if
we think to attain heaven, and yet continue in sin and pleasure; we mount our
selves upon ambitious thoughts, and do with the Giants imponere Pelion Ossae,
climb up on those high conceits, to pull God out of His Throne.

O how the serpent-footed Giants are
Increased every where,
Opposing God, and all his Ordinances,
And on high pitched fancies
Scale heaven, and fain would pull the holy one
Down from his Crystal throne.
They study to entrap and circumvent
The just and innocent;
Their chief delight is in rebellion,
Rapine, oppression;
They hunt, and vex, and persecute the good,
They shed and drink their blood;
They rent the Church of Chtist with Heresies,
They belch out blasphemies
Against the son of that fair mother-maid;
By whom the world was made;
Who lodged within that maiden-cherubin
Nine months to purge our sin;
From whose mouth issues out the two-edged sword
Of his unconquered word,
With which he will cut off, and quite subdue
That proud and barbarous crew;
Great master-Gunner of heavens Ordinance,
Which makes thy lightnings glance,
And shakes earths pillars with loud roaring thunders:
Great Architect of wonders,
Fling down thy thunderbolts, and with thy darts
Pierce all the Giants hearts
Which would subvert our Church, and State, and King
And all to ruin bring;
Which sorrow at the peace and union
Of happy Albion.
Support me that I may not fall from grace,
With that Aetnean race;
And that I may not set my heart upon
Earth and corruption,
And so neglect my soul the better part,
Lord humble so my heart,
That I may not so in my thoughts aspire,
As to incense thine ire;
And keep me from ambitious fantasies,
Proud words, and lofty eyes;
And hold me back, lest I should clamber on
Cloud-neighbouring mountains of Presumption.
GORGONES.
These were the 3 daughters of Phoreus, whose chief was Medusa; she preferring
her fine hairs to Minervas, and profaning her Temple in playing the whore there
with Neptune, had her hair turned into snakes, and her head cut off by Persius,
being armed with Minerva's shield, Mercuri's helmet and wings, and Vulcans
sword; this head Minerva still wore in her shield, and whosoever looked on it
was turned into a stone; these Gorgones had fearful looks; but one eye, and
one tooth amongst them, which continually they used as they had occasion; they
never used their eye at home, but still abroad; when Persius had got this eye,
he quickly overcame them; they had also brazen hands and golden wings.

THE MYSTERIES.
Many men are like the Gorgons, they are quicksighted abroad, but blind at
home; they spy moats in other men's eyes, but not beams in their own. 2. Satan
deals with us, as Persius did with Medusa, he first steals away our knowledge,
then with the more ease he destroys our souls. 3. We see here in Medusa,
that pride, sacrilege, and whordome shall not go unpunished. 4. From whence
let us learn not to be proud of our beauty, for all beauty, like the Gorgons
shall end in deformity, and as Abolous hair and Medusas here, brought
destruction on them; so it may bring upon others; and shall if they dote too
much on it. 5. The sight of these Gorgones, turned men into stones, and so many
men are bereft of their senses and reason, by doting too much on women's
beauty. 6. They that would get the mastery of Satan that terrible Gorgon, must
be armed as Persius was; to wit, with the helmet of Salvation, the shield of
faith, and the sword of the word. 7. Minerva by means of her shield, on which
was fastened Medusas head, turned men to stones; so the nature of wisdom is, to
make men solid, constant unmovable. 8. I wish that among Christians there were
but one eye of faith and religion, and one tooth, one common defense, that so
they might be Gorgons indeed, and terrible to the Turks their enemies; that
with a brazen hand they might crush the Mahumetans, and with the golden wings
of victory, they might fly again over those territories which they have lost.
9. Medusa by seeing her own face in Persius his bright shield, as in a glass,
she fell into a deep sleep, and so became a prey to Persius; so many falling
in love with themselves; grow insolent and careless, and falling into the
sleep of security, become a prey to their spiritual enemy. 10. If a woman
once loose her modesty and honor, be she never so fair, she will seem to
wisemen but an ill-favored Gorgon, he accounts her hair as snakes, her beauty
as deformity. 11. A Captain or whosoever will encounter with a snakiehaired
Gorgon, that is, a subtle headed enemy, stands in need of Minerva for wisdom,
of Mercury for eloquence and expedition, and of Vulcan for courage. 12.
Persius got the victory over Gorgon by covering his face with the helmet; that
he might not be seen of her; the best way to overcome the temptations of lewd
women, is to keep out of their sight, and to make a covenant with our eyes. 13.
The Gorgons are like those that live at home a private life; and so make no use
of their eye of prudence, till they be called abroad to some eminent place and
public office. 14. They that have fascinating and bewitching eyes, by which
many are hurt and infected, especially young children, may be called Gorgons,
and that such are, both ancient records, experience, and reason does teach us,
for from a malignant eye, issues out infections, vapors or spirits, which make
easy impressions on infants and tender natures,; therefore the Gentiles had
the goddess of cradles called Cunina, to guard infants from fascination; and
we read that in Scythia and Pontus, were women whose eyes were double balled,
killing and bewitching with their sight, these were called Bithiae and Thibiae
and they used the word praefiscine, as a charm against fascination, and in
Africa whole familes of these fascinating haggs were wont to be; and

Thy eyes do shine,
And with divine
Nectar thy lips does flow.
If thy teeth orient Pearls were,
And were thy neck white ivory,
If Musk, Perfume, or rosed air,
Or Balm could vaporate from thee:
If heavens best piece thou were,
Whose sweet aspect
Could all subject,
And maze each mortal heart.
Yet shall these rare endowments all
Prove in the end but vanity;
Sweet honey shall conclude in gall,
And beauty in deformity;
See then you be not proud
Of that which must
Be laid in dust,
Which Deaths black rail will shroud.
Take heed likewise you dote not on
Medusa's face and golden locks,
For beauty has killed many a one,
And metamorphos'd men to Rocks:
Then lest it should entice
Thee, guard thy self
From this strange elf,
And hide thy wandering eyes.
Lend me the shield of faith, O Lord,
And helmet of salvation;
And with thy Word that two-edged sword
Cut off all foul infection:
Support me with thy grace,
And hide mine eyes,
Lest sin surprise
Me with her Gorgons face.
O if there were but one fair eye,
Of faith, truth, and religion
Amongst us, O if we could fly
With conquests golden pinion!
And if we could subdue
With brazen hands,
Our captived lands
And circumcised crew.
Lord with thy watchful eye so keep
Thy servant from security,
That he may not be found asleep
By his night-watching enemy:
So with thy grace prevent me,
Lest vanities
My soul entice,
Then in the end torment me.
Great Captain of heavens winged troops,
Redoubted and victorious Knight;
To whose beck man and Angel stoops,
Who puts thy enemies to flight:
Who lets thine arrows fly,
And dies their wings
In blood of Kings
Who will not bow to thee?
Unsheath thy two-edged thundering sword,
Cut off the dreadful Gorgons head
Which has bewitched my soul, O Lord,
And with grim looks has struck me dead:
Then will I sound thy praise,
And magnify
Thy Majesty,
And to thee Trophies raise.
GRATIAE.
THe graces were three sisters, daughters of Jupiter and Euronyme; they were
fair, naked, holding each other by the hand, having winged feet, two of them
are painted looking to wards us, and one from us, they wait upon Venus, and
accompany the Muses.

THE MYSTERIES.
Lib. de benef. c. 3. Phornutus de n^^. deor. Eras. in adag. Tur^eb* ^dver.
not. Comes.
SEneca and the Mythologists by the 3 graces understand 3 sorts of benefits
some given, some received, and some returned back upon the benefactor, two look
toward us, and one has her face from us, because a good turn is oftentimes
double requited. They hold each other by the hand, because in good turns there
should be no interruption, they are naked, or as others write, their garment is
thin and transparent, because bounty should still be joined with sincerity,
their smiling face show that gifts should be given freely; they are still young
because the remembrance of a good turn should never grow old; they have winged
feet, to show that good turns should be done quickly, bis dat qui cito dat.
2. They that will be bountiful, must take heed they exceed not, least they
make themselves as naked, as the graces are painted, there is a mean in all
things; and no man should go beyond his strength; he may be bountiful that
has Euronyme for his wife, that is, large possessions and patrimonies, as the
word signifies. 3. There be many unthankful people who are content still to
receive benefits, but never retnrne any; these are they that strip the Graces
of their garments, and have reduced free-harted men to poverty. 4. The Graces
are called in Greek Charites (...).
from joy, or from health and safety, and they still accompany the Muses,
Mercury and Venus; to show that where learning, eloquence, and love are
conjoined, there will never be wanting true joy, health and contentment. 5. I
think by the three Graces may be meant three sorts of freindship; to wit,
honest, pleasant, and profitable, honest and pleasant freindships, which are
gtounded on virtue and delight look toward us, because they both aim at our
good, but profitable freindship looks from us, as aiming more at her own gain
then our weal, which as Seneca says, is rather traffic then friendshipp, but
all friendshipp should be naked, and without guile and hypocrisy like the
Graces still young and cheerful, and still nimble and quick to help. 6. By
the three graces I suppose also, may be meant the three companious of true
love; of which Ethic. l. 9. c. 5. (...).
Arist. speaks; to wit, 1 good will or benevolence 2 concord or consent of
minds, idem velle et idem nolle; 3 bounty or beneficence, these three like
three graces look on upon another; and hold each other by the hand, these
ought to be naked, pure, still young; and where these three are sound, to wit,
good will, concord, and bounty, there shall not be wanting the three Graces,
that is, (...) floridus; (...) florens vitae status and reru^ affluentia; (...)
ornare seu honorare; (...) laetu^ reddere.
Thalia a flourishing estate. 2. Agliae honor or glory. 3. Euphrosyne true
joy and comfort, for these are the handmaids of love. 7. Faith hope and
charity, are the three divine graces, pure and unspotted Virgins, daughters of
the great God; sincere and naked without guile; looking upon on another, and so
linked together, that here in this life they cannot be separated one from the
other, but there positure is somewhat different from the other Graces; for of
the other, two look on us, the third has her back to us, but in these three
divine sisters, one only looks to us, to wit, charity; the other two, faith
and hope, fix their eyes from us upon God; faith is Aglaia the glory and honor
of a Christian, hope is Euphrosyne, that which makes him joyful, we rejoice in
hope, and charity, that is Thalia, which would make our christian state
flourish and abound with all good things, if we would admit of her company
amongst us; but by reason there is so little charity, I doubt me, there is as
little faith and hope; for reject or admit of one, you reject and admit of all.

O if my mournful eyes
Could from their Crystal casements tears distill!
O if sad Elegies
Dipped in salt fountains could drop from my quill!
O if I could in Seas of tears
Drown all my sorrows and my fears!
2.
For when alas I see
How these three sister-Graces sit and groan,
Faith, Hope, and Charity,
And weep their wrongs, and threaten to be gone
From Christ's poor Church, how can I choose
But mourn with this my mourning Muse.
3.
Faiths cloud-transcending eye,
Thick mists of Verbal combats do so blind,
That scarce can she descry
The light from darkness, and scarce can she find
Her Sun (which makes her so lament)
Shining within his firmament.
4.
She makes a grievous moan,
That she is wronged 'twixt Infidelity
And Superstition,
Against the Laws of Christianity;
The one with false fears makes her cry.
The other would pull out her eye.
5.
The swelling Pharisie
Kicks her with his supposed perfection,
And wrangling Heresy
Would poison her with strong infection;
She is despised of the Jew,
And laughed at by the heathen-crew.
6.
The wanton Libertine
Has stripped her of good works, her ornaments;
And thus the fairest queen
Of graces is abused by miscreants:
Now would not this make hearts of stone
Wring out a tear, and strain a groan.
7.
Her sister Hope also
Complains she is wronged by Desperation,
And by her other foe,
Bold-fac'd, self-willed Presumption;
They pull and hale with violence
The Anchor of her Confidence.
8.
With ghastly looks Despair,
With horrid thoughts, and with blasphemous words,
With uncomposed hair,
Armed with poison, halters, knives and swords,
Does threaten that she will choke the breath
Of Hope with some untimely death.
9.
And fond Presumption
Belyes poor Hope, and says that she is the cause
Of lust, ambition,
Of pride, and of the breach of all Gods Laws:
So the one, Gods Mercy does reject,
The other does his Justice check.
10.
Thus Christian Hope is tossed
Between two rocks, and in the sinking sands,
Her Anchor's almost lost;
Therefore she sighs, and weeps, and wrings her hands:
None but whose eyes are Adamant
Can see this sight, and not lament.
11.
And as for Charity,
How is she hissed at, by a barbarous crowd?
And this her misery
She does lament, wrapped in a sable cloud;
And threatens that she will be gone
With speed out of this freezing Zone.
12.
Where black-mouthed obloquy,
And squinting self-consuming envy reigns:
Where brawling loves to be,
Where murder with gore blood the country stains;
Where Schism with false opinion
Disturbs the Churches union.
13.
Where barbarous Mars resides
Lord of mis-rule and desolation,
And by whose bloody sides,
Burning, rapes, ruin, rage, and oppression,
Ride galloping, and furiously
Tread down Laws, Arts, Civility.
14.
Where discord, pride, scandal,
Teeth-grinding anger, with fierce-glowing eyes,
Where thefts and treasons dwell:
Church-robbing, cheating, self-love, cruelties;
This is that wicked company,
All enemies to Charity.
15.
What wonder is it then,
If Charity be sad, and discontent,
And hides her self from men?
Amongst whom reigns this hellish Regiment?
How can Joves lovely daughter dwell
Amongst such monsters hatched in hell?
16.
O how my heart does burn,
And melt into a tide of tears, mine eyes!
How night and day I mourn
To see such wars, such wrongs, such cruelties,
And love exiled, which was as we
All know, Christ's Will and Legacy?
17.
O Lord confound all those
Who would confound our peace and unity,
And trample on the face
Of thy three daughters, Faith, Hope, Charity,
And let them in thy Church bear sway
So long as evening crowns the day.
18.
Lord give me Faiths clear eye,
And Hopes sure Anchor to rely upon,
And hands of Charity,
That I may work out my salvation;
And with this Anchor, hands and eye,
Let me in peace and comfort dye.
19.
And let the good ship ride
Called Charity, securely on the main;
Be Pilot Lord, and guide
Her to the cape of good Hope; let her gain
The land of promise, with the gale
Of thy good Spirit fill her sail.
20.
And let her Compass be
Thy Word, and with the helm of Discipline
From sinful rocks keep me,
And let the Pole Star of thy truth be seen;
Let Faith the bright eye of my soul
Be always looking on that Pole.
21.
The man of thy right hand
Preserve Lord as the apple of thine eye;
And from this sinful land
Let not true love with her two sisters fly
But as it is name is Albion,
So in it still let all be one.
FINIS.
^mprimatur

April 26. 1642. THO: WYKES.


