Leviathan Drawn out with A HOOK: OR ANIMADVERSIONS UPON Mr HOBBS HIS LEVIATHAN.

Together with some OBSERVATIONS UPON Sr WALTER RALEIGH'S History of the WORLD.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Newcomb, for Richard Royston at the Angel in Ivy-Lane.
1653.

LEVIATHAN drawn out with a HOOK. OR ANIMADVERSIONS UPON Mr HOBBS HIS LEVIATHAN.

By ALEX. ROSSE.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Newcomb, for Richard Royston at the Angel in Ivy-Lane.
1653.

To the Right Worshipful FRANCIS LUCY Esquire
SIR,
THe Giant Goliath so affrighted the whole host of Israel, by the vast bulk of
his body, the weight and large dimensions of his spear and armor, with his
defying and bragging words, that none of all that Army durst encounter him.
Only David a Shepherd by profession, in stature low, in years young, the least
of all his brethren, and of meanest account among the people, took the boldness
to enter the lists with that uncircumcised Philistim. So I a spiritual shepherd
by profession, the least of the Tribe of Levi, little in my own eyes, and of
small account in the world, observing how all the host of learned men in this
Land look upon, but adventure not to buckle with Mr. Hobbs his Leviathan, Nec
quisquam ex agmine tanto audet adire viurm, manibusve inducere caestus. I say,
being animated by some lovers of the truth, have this Summer set aside for a
while my other studies, to peruse this book, and to detect some of his chief
Tenets, which though erroneous and dangerous, are swallowed down by some young
Sciolists without nauseating; which to me is an argument of great distemper in
the minds and affections of men, who with the Israelites loathing the Manna of
true Philosophy and Divinity, covet after the Quails of new errors, or rather
old in a new guise, which in the end will poison them. Me thinks I see Religion
and learning, Divinity and true Philosophy, devotion and piety, for which this
Islaud has been glorious for many generations, saying as the voice that the
Christians heard in Jerusalem immediately before the destruction thereof,
Migremus hinc. These are the Palladia, and as it were the Tutelar gods, by
which this British Empire has so long stood, which if they forsake us, what
are we else but a prey to our enemies: God grant we may not complain of their
departure, as Aenaeas did of his Trojan gods, Excessere omnes aditis, arisque
relictis Dii quibus imperium hoc steterat. For do we not see how Athism strives
to justle out Religion, how ignorance is crawling up into the chair of
learning; how piety is affronted by profaneness; and devotion by irreverance;
how divinity is assaulted by heretical opinions; and solid Philosophy by dreams
and fanatical whimsies. I doubt not but I shall be blamed by some for
encountering this Champion of Malmsbury, as David was for venturing upon that
Champion of Gath; but I will answer them in David's words. 1 Samuel.17. 29. What
have I now done, is there not a cause? Goliath defied the whole host of Israel,
and Mr. Hobbs defyeth the whole host of learned men; esteeming his Leviathan as
formidable and unconquerable, as that in Job 41. 16. of whose Majesty the
mighty are afraid, and for fear they faint in themselves; but this Leviathan is
not so; For a Hook may be cast into his nose, and his jaws may be pierced with
an angle, Job 40. 21.

Sir, this piece (which makes its addresses to you, as to one truly judicious,
pious, and a lover of solid learning) is but small; so was David, who
notwithstanding foiled Goliath; the Ichneumon is but a small rat, yet it can
kill the great Crocodile; in est sua gratia parvis, small things have their
magnitude, though not of bulk, yet of virtue; there is more nourishment in a
small lark, then in a great kite or raven; and so there is more luster in a
small Diamond then a whole quarry of other stones; as in a little Be, so in
this little Book there may be much spirit; ingentes animos angusto in corpore
gestat. But how small soever it be, it has drawn out Leviathan with an Hook,
which it presents to you; and so do I by it, my thankful acknowledgments for
all your favors; praying for an increase of all happiness on your self, your
religious Lady, and your hopeful son my scholar with the rest of your Family:
which is the hearty desire of

Your most humble Servant ALEX: ROSSE.

To the Reader.
GOod Reader,
David encountered with a Lion and a Bear; Daniel conversed among Lions; Paul
fought with Beasts at Ephesus; Hercules skirmished with an Erymanthian Bear, a
Nemaean Lion, a Lernaean Hydra; Aenaeas drew his sword against the shaddows of
Centaures, Harpies, Gorgons, and Chimeras; but I have to do with a strange
monster, called Leviathan, which some out of David, Psa. 104. think to be a
Whale; the Prophet Isaiah calls him a piercing and crooked Serpent; Job says,
[He is a beast with fearful teeth, with scales strong as shields, with a heart
as strong as the neither millstone, out of his mouth leap sparks of fire, and
smoke out of his nostrils.] Lastly, some there are that take him for the devil,
and indeed it may be so^; for he is said in Job, to be [a King over all the
children of pride.] I hope Mr. Hobbs is none of his subjects, and yet his book
is much inflated with pride against learning^ and learned men. But in my
opinion this paper Leviathan is like that beast in the Revelation, [which
opened his mouth into blasphemy against God, and his Tabernacle, and against
them that dwell in heaven.] Rev. ^3. 6. Against God, in saying, [he made the
world by nature, and by consequence of necessity, whereas he made it indeed
voluntarily and freely. 2. In making the three Persons of the Trinity rather
names then substances. 3. In making Christ only to personate God the Son. 4.
In making God the author of sin. 5. In making him coporeal, and part of the the
universe.] Against his Tabernacle, that is, against his Church, [in laboring
to overthrow her faith, knowledge, miracles, and ordinances.] Against them that
dwell in heaven, that is, the Angels and separated souls, [in making the one
but fancies and dreams, and the others mortal, and not capable hereafter of any
other happiness then earthly.] He tells us besides, [that faith is not by
inspiration, or infusion, but by study and industry, that to believe in God, is
not to trust in his Person, but to confess the doctrine. That our belief is in
the Church; that they were not devils, but madmen which confessed Christ; that
covetousness and ambition, and injustice with power are honorable, that tyrants
and good Princes are all one; that a man may sin against his conscience; that
men should not render a reason or account of their faith; that Princes are not
subject to their own laws; that private men have no property in their goods;
that our natural reason is the word of God; that divine dreams cannot win
belief; that it was a wind, not the holy Spirit which in the Creation moved on
the waters; that the dove and fierytongues may be called Angels; that Christ
has no spiritual kingdom here on earth; that he did not cast out devils, but
only cured madness; that Satan did not enter into Judas; that we may dissemble
in matter of religion; that we may disobey Christ and his Apostles without sin]
Such, and much more like stuff and smoke, does this [ Leviathan send out of his
nostrils, as out of a boiling pot or caldron, Job 41. (...). This is the sperma
caete, or spawn which this whale casts out; a whale, I say, that has not
swallowed up Jonah the prophet, but Cerinthus the heretic, and vomited up the
condemned opinions of the old heretics; and chiefly the Anthropomorphits,
Sabellians, Nestorians, Saduceans, Arabeans, Tacians or Eucratits, Manichies,
Mahumetans and others: for in holding life eternal to be only on earth, he is
a Cerinthian and Mahumetan: in giving to God corporiety he is an
Anthropomorphit, Manichean, Tertullianist and Audaean: in holding the three
Persons to be distinct names and essences represented by Moses, Christ, and the
Apostles, he is a Sabellian, Montanist, Aetian, and Priscillianist: in saying,
that Christ personated God the Son, he is a Nestorian giving him two
personalities, for no person can personate himself: ^id denying spirits he is a
Saducean: in making the soul to rest with the body till the resurrection, he is
an Arabian: in making the soul of man corporeal he is a Luciferian: by putting
a period to hell torments he is an Originist: by teaching dissimulation in
religion he is a Tacian or Encratit: in making God the cause of injustice or
sin, he is a Manichee: in slighting Christ's miracles, he is a Jew: and in
making our natural reason the word of God, he is Socinian: In discovering of
these errors, I quarrel not with Mr. Hobbs, but with his book; which not only
I, but many more, who are both learned, and judicious, men, look upon as a
piece dangerous both to Government and Religion. All the hurt I wish him is,
true illumination, a sanctified heart, and Christian sobriety; that he may
retract what is amiss. And so I bid him and thee farewell.

A. R.
In doctissimum marinae belluae domitorem AL. ROSSEUM.
ALcides clava Lernaeum perculit hydram;
Sed tu Ros calamo monstra marina d^mas.
Quantum Leviathan superavit viribus hydram,
Tantum Ros superas Amphytrioniadem.
D. C.
The Preface.
BEing desired by some of my friends a while ago to peruse Mr. Hobbs his
Leviathan, and deliver my opinion of it. I have done accordingly; I find him a
man of excellent parts, and in this book much gold, and withal much dross; he
has mingled his wine with too much water, and imbittered his pottage with too
much Coloquintida: there are some of his positions which may prove of dangerous
consequence, to green heads, and immature judgments, who look no farther then
the superficies, or outside of things, thinking all to be gold that glisters,
and all wholesome food that is pleasing to the taste; under green grass lurch
oftentimes snakes and serpents, such as Euridice perceive not, till they be
stung to death; I have therefore (not to wrong Mr. Hobbs, but to vindicate the
truth, (for in Republica libera oportet linguas esse liberas) adventured upon
his Leviathan; which I do not find so fierce and t^rrible as he in Job, that
people should be cast down at the sight of him; this may be drawn out with a
Hook, and held even with a single bridle: I will only touch such passages,
(and not all, but some) as deserve Animadversions, wherein I will be both brief
and modest, aiming rather at verity, then victory, though he slights all
learned men, as Job's Leviathan does all humane strength, and prideth himself
too much in his scales.

LEVIATHAN Drawn out with an HOOK. OR ANIMADVERSIONS UPON Mr HOBB's Book,
Called LEVIATHAN. By ALEXANDER ROSS.
IN His introduction he calls Nature [ The art whereby God has made and
governs the World.] God made not the world by Nature, for Nature had no being
till God made it; and when he made it, it was neither the exemplary, nor
adjuvant cause of the creation; the world could not be made by that which had
no being till it was made; and when it was made, it was nothing else but the
form and matter of things; the one being the active, the other the passive
nature, and both but parts of the universe; if again by nature (that we may
make a favorable construction of his phrase) he means the ordinary power of
God; the world was not made thus: by his ordinary power he governs it, but by
his extraordinary power he made it, which power is never called natural, but
miraculous; neither again is Nature Art, as he calls it, though both be
principles, because Nature is an internal, Art an external principle; I say
external in respect of essence, though it may be internal in regard of site,
albeit Art, as it is an habit, and in the mind of the Artificer is altogether
external, but take it for the effect of Art, it may be internal in the thing
made by Art; as may be seen in the motions of a watch.

He gives us a bad definition of life, when he says: [ Life is but the motion
of limbs] for life is not motion, but the cause of motion: there may be life in
the limbs when there is no motion, as in sleep, and in histerical women, and
there may be motion in the limbs without life, as when they are moved violently
by some external mover, and there is life where there be no limbs at all, as in
the soul; and there is motion, where there is no life at all, as in a wooden
leg.

In the first chapter Part 1^ cap. 1.
he tells us, [ That the cause of sense is the external object, which presses
the organ either immediately, as in the taste and touch, [or imediately as in
the other senses]. The object indeed is the cause both material and efficient
of sensation, but not of sense; that is, of the act of seeing, but not of the
faculty, the soul is the cause of this; neither does the object press
immediately upon the organ of taste or touch, but ^mediately, for the organ of
taste is the nervous part of the tongue, the medium is the spungy flesh, and
salival humidity, for the dry tongue tastes not: the organ of tact is the
nerve, the medium is the flesh and skin, called Epidemis. But when he says that
[ seeming or fancy is that which men call sense.] He makes deception and sense
one thing, for quod videtur non est; what seems to be has no being; therefore
in Euripides, mad Orestes is counseled by his sister to be quiet; because
says she, (...), thou see none of those things which thou supposes thou
sees or know; sense then is not fancy, for what we fancy we see not, but
seem to see, and what we truly see, we fancy not; this the Desciples of Christ
knew; ( Mat. 14. 26.) when seeing him walk on the water, they said, it is a
fancy, for so it is in the Greek (...); that is a sight not real, but imaginary.

When he speaks of the sensible qualities, he mentions among the rest [ color
figured] but what is that; the thing colored may be figured, but that color
should have any figure passes all understanding: nor speaks he like a
Philosopher, when he says that [ all sensible qualities are but several
motions] Then it must follow, that colors, heat, cold, siccity, humidity, etc.
are motions, but this is to speak against sense as well as reason, which shows
motions and colors to be distinct entities; and when he says that [ motion
produces nothing but motion] He is deceived^ for motion produces heat,
neither is motion produced by motion, but by the mover: the motion of heaven
was produced by God, not by any antecedent motion. [ The appearance (says he)
of the sensible qualities to us is fancy, the same waking that dreaming] this
is to confound the work of imagination, with that of the outward senses,
whereas the outward and inward senses are distinguished both in their organs
and operations: Fancy then is the work of the imagination, not of the eye, ear,
nose, tongue, or tact, neither can I yield that the fancy is the same waking
that dreaming, except he means of madmen and fools; but in those whose brains
are not cracked, the fancy receives its species immediately from the common and
outward senses whilst they are awaked, then it works orderly, and is
regulated by the will; whereas in sleep the fancy receives the remainders, and
as it were the footsteps of the species from the memory, where they are
reserved; so that then the work of imagination is disordred, and no ways
guided by the will.

In his second chapter Part. 1. cap. ^.
he says, [ That the Schools ascribe appetite and knowledge to things
inanimate ab^urdly.] It seems he is not well versed in the Schools; for though
they ascribe a natural appetite, or inbred propensity in things inanimate to
preserve themselves, yet they ascribe no knowledge to them, but in plain terms
affirm, that this appetite is without knowledge: now that there is in things
inanimate a natural appetite or inclination, is so far from being absurd, that
to affirm the contrary were most absurd: for from whence is it that heavy
bodies move downward, light bodies upward, but from this natural appetite and
inclination? There would be no generation, if there were not in the matter an
appetite to the form; neither could there be motion or action, if there were
not an appetite of entities in possibility, to become entities in act. [
Imagination (says he) is nothing but decaying sense, and the sense fading is
called memory, so that imagination and memory are but one thing.] This is a
riddle which Oedipus himself cannot unriddle: does the strength of imagination
consist in decaying of sense? It must follow, that dying men must have
strongest fancies, for then sense decays: but if sense be the generical essence
of imagination; how can the one increase upon the others decay: doubtless they
like Hyppocrate's twins, live and dye together; so that if sense decay,
imagination must needs decay, for as he confesses, cap. 1. [ There is no
conception in the mind, which was not at first begotten upon the organs of
sense] Now that imagination and memory are not the same thing is apparent, by
their different organs and operations, the one is in the fore part, the other
in the back part of the head, and for the most part where the imagination is
strongest, the memory is weakest; and where this is strongest that is weakest.

In his third chapter Part 1. cap. 3.
he says, [ That things to come have no being at all, the future being but a
fiction of the mind] Have future Eclipses no being then? Sure they have as
much being in the intellect, as past Eclipses in the memory; neither are they
mere fictions; for that is properly a fiction which never was, is, nor shall
be, as Centaures, Chimera's, etc. Had the coming of Christ no being in the
mind of Abraham, whereas he saw that day and rejoiced? Was the coming of the
Messiah in the flesh a mere fiction in the minds and hopes of the Patriarchs
and Prophets? Is faith a fiction, or the resurrection of the flesh, which is
the object of a Christian man's belief, the life of his hope, and the supporter
of his soul in affliction; and doubtless in the mind of God all things are
present, and no fiction at all. I like not his phrase, when he calls prophecy,
guessing: for he says, [ That the best prophet naturally, is the best guesser]
guessing is conjecturing, but prophesies are certain: did Isaiah only guess
when he prophesied that a virgin should conceive and bear a Son? Gods people
were in a very sad and uncertain condition, if prophesying were but guessing.

He says, [ That it is an absurd speech, and taken upon credit (without any
signification at all) from deceived Philosophers; to wit, that any thing is all
in this place, and all in another place at the same time.] Whether is it more
absurd to say, that God is all in this great ( All,) and all in every part; or
to say, that he is divided into so many parcels, as there be places in which he
is, so that one part of him is in this place, an other in the other place,
seeing he cannot be all in two places at once: and is it not less absurd to
say, that all the soul is in each member, then to divide the soul into so many
parcels, as there be members.

[ There is no other act (says he) of man's mind naturally planted in him, but
to be born a man, and to live with the use of his five senses.] To be born a
man, is no act, but a passion; neither is it at all the act of the mind, but
of the man: and to live with the use of the five senses, is no more the act of
a man, then of a beast. And whereas he says, that [ all other faculties are
acquired] He must conclude, that the faculties of the understanding and will
are acquired, and consequently the soul it self; for these differ not
essentially from the soul. So when he says, [ There is nothing in the world
universal but names.] He will make all predications of universalities to be
merely nominal, not real: So that Peter is not really a man; nor Bucephalus a
horse; nor the Elm a tree, but only in name, which is as much as nothing: so
all sciences which handle universalities are but nominal, and consequently no
real entities are handled in Metaphysick, Physic, and Mathematick, but bare
names, seeing these sciences have for their objects universalities: So when he
makes. [ Truth the attribute of speech not of things.] He excludes all
entities, for verity and entity are reciprocal; and it is ridiculous to think
there is not truth in things as well as in words, for entity can be no more
without truth, then the fire without heat, or the Sun without light. And when
he says, that [ Geometry is the only science which God has left into man] He
is injurious to Arithmatick, whose principles are no less certain, firm,
indemonstrable, and evident, then those of Geometry.

He enveighs much against book learning, but in this he speaks without book,
Part 1. cap. 3. 4.
for he calls, in derision, school knowledge [ Pedantry.] Pedantry is that
knowledge which is taught to young Scollers; and indeed the best books are read
to them, and they are instructed in the knowledge of the best things, both in
divine and humane litterature: being fit that new vessels be seasoned with the
best liquor. Quo ^emel est imbuta, etc. So the preceps of divinity and
philosophy to this profound Rabbi, whose learning passes all understanding,
are but Pedantry; but in speaking against the Schools, he fouls his own nest:
for whence had he the knowledge which he now rejects, but out of them; as for
his own supposed learning which he has without them, it is such, as will never
be thought worthy to be called Pedantry, nor shall it ever be honored to be
taught in Schools; nor shall Aristotle, Plato, Cicero, Thomas, and other
eminent men need to fear lest Mr. Hobbs's whimsies and dreams, thrust their
solid and grave learning out of doors.

He accounts these subsequent assersions, Part 1. cap. 5.
absurd; namely, [ That faith is infused or inspired, when nothing can be
poured or breathed into any thing but body, and that extention is body, etc.] I
would know how says being a gift from without, and not born with us, should
enter into us? If not by inspiration or infusion? And if nothing can be poured
or breathed but body; then it must follow that Adam's soul was a body, for it
was breathed into Adam; and that the Holy Ghost is a body, for he is said to be
poured upon all flesh by the prophets, Joel and Zachariah: but if by the spirit
be understood spiritual virtues or graces, then in Mr. Hobbs his judgment this
will be counted an absurd assertion; but I hope he has more Religion in him,
then to think the Holy Scripture speaks absurdly; neither is there any
absurdity in calling extension a body, seeing not a substantial, but a
mathematical body is meant, to distinguish it from superficies and line.

He [ will not have color to be in the body, nor sound in the air.] Where then
is color? which is its subject? is it in a spirit? I know no other subject in
which it can be inherent, except one of these two: If there be any there, name
it; and if sound be not in the air, how come we to hear it. He should do well
to prove his new assertions, as well as to deny the old: so he holds it absurd
to say, [ That a living creature is a genus, or general thing] But the contrary
is plain, for this proposition [ man is a living creature] were absurd, because
identical, if living creature were not a general, but a particular thing; it
must also follow that a horse were not a living creature, or that a man and a
horse were the same particular thing, seeing he admits of no general thing: any
one may see here, whether the ancient and wise Philosophers, or this new
Misosopher be most guilty of absurdities; neither is it absurd to say, [ That
the nature of a thing is its definition.] Seeing man, the thing defined, is the
same with rational creature which is his definition. Nor is there absurdity in
this speech, [ Man's command is his will.] seeing there is no other commanding
faculty in man but his will; neither are Metaphors, Tropes, and other
Rhetorical figures absurd speeches; except he will accuse the Holy Ghost of
absurdity, who uses them so frequently in scripture: and if these words, [
Hypostatical, Transubstantiate, etc.] be absurd words, let him impart better,
and more significant terms, and we shall think him, though not a good
Philosopher, yet a good Grammarian.

In his sixth chapter Part 1. cap. 6.
he makes [ animal and voluntary motion the same;] but absurdly, for the motion
of spirits is voluntary, not animal; and the motion of men in their sleep is
animal, not voluntary; for many in their sleep speak those words, and perform
those actions, of which they are both ashamed and afraid when they are
awakened: if to speak were an animal motion, as he says, then beasts could
speak for they are animals. He says [ That which we neither desire nor hate,
we are said to contemn.] But this is not so, for I neither desire nor hate the
Kingdom of Persia, and yet I contemn it not; whatsoever I hate, I contemn, but
I contemn many things which I hare not.

When he distinguishes Religion from Superstition I hear the voice of
Leviathan, not of a Christian; For, says he, [ Fear of power invisible,
feigned by the mind, or from tales publ^ckly allow^ is Religion, not allowed
Superstition, and when the power imagined is truly such as we imagine, true
Religion.] It seems then both Religion and Superstition are grounded upon tales
and imagination, only they differ in this, that tales publicly allowed beget
Religion, not allowed Superstition: but what will he say of the Gentiles, among
them tales were publicly allowed, were they therefore religious, and not
superstitious; and is Religion grounded upon fiction or imagination, even true
Religion? I thought that faith and not imagination had been the substance and
ground of things not seen; that the just live by faith, not by imagination,
that by faith we are saved; by faith we are justified; by faith we overcom the
world; not by fancy, fiction, or imagination: We must mend the Creed, if Mr.
Hobbs his religion be true; and instead of saying I believe in God, we must
say, I imagine, or feign in my mind an invisible power. In this also he
contradicts himself, for if the power be invisible, how can it be imagined,
seeing (as he says before) imagination [ is only of things perceived by the
sense, and it is so called from the image made in seeing.

He will not have the will to be [ a rational appetite, because then there
could be no voluntary acts against reason.] But the School doctrine stands
firm, that the will is a rational appetite, and that there can be no voluntary
acts against reason, because the object of the will is a known good; for we
cannot will or affect what we know not, and knowledge in man is never without
reason, which regulates the will; besides each man in willing, aims at an end
which cannot be attained withous its medium, nor this ordered without reason,
either true or apparent: ( Part 1. cap. 7.) He seems to make faith and opinion
the same thing, when he says, [ That in belief are two opinions, one of the
saying of the man, the other of his vert^e] but in this he makes the Christian
man's happiness very uncertain, and builds it upon a tottering foundation, for
opinion is merely conjectural, and of probabilities only; whereas faith makes
its object certain, end withal he makes these phrases the same; [ To have faith
in, to trust to, and to believe a man] but Saint Austin and the Church ever
since have made these distinct phrases; for credere Deo, is to believe that God
is true; credere Deum, is to believe there is a God, which wicked men and evil
Angels may do; but credere in Deum is to love God, and to rely on him, and to
put our trust in him, which none do but good men; therefore Mr: Hobbs is
injurious to Christianity, when he says, [ That to believe in God, as it is in
the Creed is meant no^ trust in the person, but confession of the doctrine.] If
so, then the Devil may as boldly, and with as great comfort say the Creed, as
any Christian; for he believes and trembles, ^aith Saint James, and we know
these evil spirits confessed Christ to be the Son of God: and he is no less
injurious to God, when he will have us believe in the Church; saying, [ Our
belief, faith, and trust is in the Church, whose words we take, and acqui^sse
therein] but the Apostles in their Creed have taught us otherways; namely,
That we believe the Catholic Church; but we believe in God the Father
Almighty, and in Jesus Christ, and in the H^ly Ghost.

He makes Devils, Demoniacks, and Madmen to signify in Scripture the same
thing; Part 1. cap. 8.
for thus he writes: [ Whereas many of those Devils are said to confess Christ;
Is it not necessary to interpret those places otherwise, then that those
madmen confessed him.] And shortly after. [ I see nothing at all in the
Scripture that requires a belief, that Demoniacks were any other thing but
madmen.] Yes, there be diverse things that make it necessary for him to
believe, that these were distinct. 1. The letter of the text, from which we
should not digress, except we were urged by an inconvenience, which is not
here. 2. The Authority of the Church, in which he says he does believe. Now
the Church always took these for distinct creatures; to wit, Devils,
Demoniacks, and Madmen. 3. The honor of Christ; for wherein was the power of
his Divinity seen, if these were ordinary Madmen, seeing madness is curable by
physic, and every common Physician. It tended more to Christ's honor, that
the Devil, whose Kingdom he came to destroy, should confess, he divinity, then
that madmen should acknowledge it. 4. Christ came to call Jews and Gentiles by
working of miracles; but to cast out Devils, and to cure Demoniacks was a
greater miracle then to cure madmen. 5. The New Testament distinguishes
Demoniacks from madmen; for these are called Demoniacks, not mad, and Saint
Paul is termed mad by the Athenians, and not a Demoniack: so Devils are never
called madmen in Scripture, nor madmen called Devils: besides, as all madmen
are not Demoniacks, so all Demoniacks are not madmen; for the Devil entered
into Judas Iscariot, he became a demoniack, or possessed by the Devil, and yet
he was no madman: but, I doubt me, Mr. Hobbs is mad himself, in thinking all
learned men to be mad except himself; he thinks the Schoolmen mad, because
their terms cannot be translated, or are not intelligible in vulgar languages;
by this he may as well ascribe madness to Lawyers, and Physicians, as to
Divines, for their terms of (...) ^t cannot be well translated, nor can vulgar
capacities easily understand them, nor is it much material whether they do or
not; Church and State can subsist well enough, though the vulgar sort
understand not the terms of School divinity; and if these terms are not
intelligible by dull heads and shallow brains; the fault is in themselves, not
in the terms; for quicquid recipitur ad modum recipientis recipitur, non ad
modum recepti, Blind men must not accuse the Sun of obscurity, because they
cannot see him; neither are the words of Suarez, which he alleges for an
example, so obscure as he would make them, for to an intelligent man the words
are very plain: to wit, [That the first cause has no necessary influence upon
the second, by reason of subordination, which is a help to their working] Here
be two things remarkable. 1. That the second causes work by reason of
subordination to the first cause. ^. That the first cause works not
necessarily upon the second, but voluntarily. If this dish please not Mr. Hobbs
his pallat; he must blame his mouth which is out of taste, and not the meat
which is both wholesome and savory.

In his tenth chapter Part 1. cap. 10.
he utters strange Paradoxes. [1. That to pity is to dishonor. 2. That good
Fortune, if lasting, is a sign of Gods favor. 3. That covetousness of great
riches, and ambition of great honors are honorable. 4. That an unjust action,
so it be joined with power, is honorable, for honor consists only in the
opinion of power; therefore the heathen gods are honored by the Poets for
their thefts and adulteries: and at first among men, piracy and theft were
counted no dishonour] 1. Pity is rather honor then dishonor; for when a
father pittieth his child, a King his subject, or a Master his servant, do they
dishonor them. When we desire God to pity us, do we desire him to dishonor
us? him whom we dishonor we pity not, and whom we pity we dishonor not;
pity proceeds of love dishonor of hatred. 2. If lasting good fortune be a
sign of Gods favor, it seems then that the Turks are highly in Gods favor,
for their good fortune has continued these many hundredth years. Whether was
poor and starved Lazarus, or that rich glutton, who fared dilitiously every
day, highest in Gods favor. 3. Who ever before Mr. Hobbs made ambition
honorable, and covetousness, which Saint Paul calls the root of all evil. Can
sin be honorable, which brought shame and dishonor upon mankind: in respect
of sin, man did not abide in honor, but became like the beasts that perish. If
ambition of great honors be honorable, then were the evil Angels and Adam most
honorable, when they affected to be like God himself, which is the greatest and
highest honor that can be: then were Caligula, Domitian, Heliogabalus, and
others who affected divine honors, most honorable. Midas coveted great riches
when he wished all might be gold he touched, therefore in this he was most
honorable: but if it be honor to offend God, to transgress his law, to incur
his displeasure, and suffer eternal pains; let them who list enjoy this honor,
I will have none of it; non equidem tali me digner honor. 4. He makes [ unjust
actions joined with power, honorable.] Then unjust actions without power
deserve no honor; it is even as Seneca complains in his time, parva furta
puniuntur, magna in triumphis aguntur. Petty thieves are hanged, but great
robberies are honored. He spoke it with grief, when a cruel tyrant ruled, or
rather misruled the Empire. But otherways, where there is government, unjust
actions are punished, not honored; and if it were not so, Kingdoms would be
nothing else but dens of thieves, remota justitia quid aliud sunt regna, quam
magna latrocinia. All principalities would be tyrannies; and indeed where there
is greatest power, there should be most justice; if Princes will be like God,
who is optimus maximus, in whom greatness and goodness have me^ together; to
whom much power is given, of him much justice is required, in maxima fortuna
minima licentia est. It is abominable then to make injustice with power
honorable; for honor is the reward of virtue: was Achab's unjust seasing of
Naboths Vinyard honorable? Or are the actions of highway robbers, armed with
power, to be honored? Sure, not in any Christian Commonwealth where Themis
raigns, and Astrea has not again forsaken the earth; but perhaps injustice may
sit as a Queen, and be honorable in Leviathan's Republic. [ Vbi prosperum ac
felix scelus virtus vocatur, spontibus parent boni. Jus est in armis opprimit
leges timor.] There honor may consist according to Mr. Hobbs his doctrine, in
the opiniou only of power, without respect had to virtue and goodness; and so
because the evil Angels are called principalities and powers, they deserve most
honor. But in other Commonwealths were Leviathan raigns not, I find that
goodness is as much honored as greatness; piety, justice, temperance,
prudence, learning, and other endowments, are had in no less honor then the
greatest power that is. Demetrius Phalereus had more slatues (to wit, 306.) at
Athens erected to him for his eloquence, then ever any of their most powerful
Commanders for theirgreatness: the Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, and other
emient men, are honored at this day for their goodness, not for greatness.
Homer, Aristotle, Virgil, Cicer^, are in esteem for their learning, not for
their power: and with me Diogines in his tub, is in greater honor, then
Alexander in his throne. We honor God not so much for his greatness, (for so
the Devil honors him) as for his goodness; and the child honoreth his parents,
not out of fear of their greatness, as out of love to their goodness. Honor
then does not merely consist in the opinion of power: As for the Poets,
commending their Gods for their thefts and adulteries, and some barbarous
Gentiles honoring theft and piracy: I must confess that Mr. Hobbs is here
reduced to hard shifts, for supporting his irreligious Paradox, or Cacodox
rather; for by the same means he may maintain that honor is due to Garlic,
Onyons, Crocodiles, Dogs, Cats, etc. because the Egyptians worshipped these.
What wonder is it, if thieves and Pirates honor each other; but the civilized
Gentiles were so far from honoring theft and piracy, that they made severe
laws against theft, and inflicted condign punishment upon the guilty: As for
the Poets commending the thefts and adulteries of their gods, they are not to
be understood literally but mystically, as I have showed elsewhere, in
Mystagog. Poetico.

In his eleventh chapter, Part 1. cap. 11.
he tells us, [ That felicity is a continual progress of the desire, from one
object to another] desire is an inclination of the will, to obtain the good
things we want, or to be rid of the evil with which we are oppressed: but in
neither of these consists felicity; for he cannot be happy which wants the
good which should satisfy him, or is possessed of the evil which oppresses
him: in heaven only is true felicity, because as Saint Austin says, we shall
desire nothing that is absent: if desire be happiness, then is the covetous man
most happy, for he is still desiring more wealth. In true happiness, there is
love, but neither faith nor hope, which are the companions of desire: besides,
he makes man in worse condition then the beasts; for he says in his twelfth
chapter, [ That the felicity of beasts consists in the enjoying of their
quotidian food.] And yet man's happiness consists only in desire, which is
against sense and reason, for a hungry man cannot be happy in desiring, but in
enjoying of food: it is not therefore the sight, nor desire but the enjoyment
of the object which will make us happy, Mars videt hanc, vis^^que cupit,
potiturque cupita.

In his twelf chapter Part. 1. cap. 12.
he says, [ That many revolted from the Church of Rome, because the Schoolmen
brought in Philisophy, and Aristotle's doctrine into Religion; whence arose
contradictions and absurdities, as brought the Clergy into a reputation of
ignorance.] It is strange that Philosophy should make the Clergy reputed
ignorant, whereas it contains the knowledge both of divine and humane things:
and it is one of the chief blessing^ of Almighty God, bestowed upon mankind,
by which his image lost in Adam is repaired; for the understanding is
enlightened by the speculative, and the will is regulated by the practical parts
thereof: and Philosophy is so far from causing peoples revolt from that Church;
that on the contrary, it is one of the main supporters and pilla^s thereof: I
am afraid that it was not Philosophy which brought a reputation of ignorance
upon that Church, but rather their want of it, which also will occasion much
ignorance, stupidity, and darkness in our Church: And I pray you good Mr.
Hobbs, what hurt has Divinity received from Philosophy, or Aristotle's
doctrine. Has it caused contradictions, and absurdities; (as you say) sure,
you are wide^ly mistaken: for by Philosophy contradictions and absurdities are
avoided, into which those ignorant souls do fall, who want it, as we find at
this time by woeful experience, there being more absurd and contradictory
opinions among the peo^ple of this Nation, now, in a few years since Aristotle's
doctrine has been discouraged, then were all the time hitherto since
Christianity was embraced. And what wonder is it if they that walk in darkness
stumble: How should we come to know the heavens, the earth, the seas, the fire,
the air, the beasts, fishes, and fowls, the herbs, trees, plants, precious
stones, all which physical bodies, with diverse others are mentioned in
Scripture: besides, Spirits, Angels, and other Metaphysical entities: without
Philosophy, how should we define, divide, dispute, speak or write methodically
or syllogistically without this. I will say nothing of the benefit we receive
by moral, political, and ^^conomical Philosophy: How shall we dispute against
Heretics, and refel their subtle arguments without it. Justin Martyr, and many
other Greek and Latin Fathers, fought against the Gentles, Jews, and Heretics,
with this sword, and beat them with their own weapons; therefore to condemn
Philosophy, is to condemn the minister and handmaid of divinity; between which
there can be no more repugnancy, then there is between the principal and
subordinate cause, between two lights, two truths, or between the body and the
soul.

In his fifteenth chapter, Part. 1. cap. 15.
[He will have all men equal by nature, and that Aristotle was mistaken, in
saying, that wise men were more fit to command, and that others whose bodies
are strong, and judgments weak, fitter to serve: This ( he says) is against
reason and experience; for there are few so foolish, that had not rather govern
themselves, then be governed.

Answ. Though all men be equal by nature, in regard of the essential perfection
of the soul, yet, in respect of accidental perfections, we find the contrary;
for some are by nature blind, some deaf, some dumb, some lame and deformed,
some dull, foolish and stupid. I would know then, whether a fool whose body is
strong and judgment weak be naturally apter to command, or to serve? And
whether he who is of a weak body, and of a strong judgment, is not fitted by
nature rather to command then to serve? Mr. Hobbs says, [ That there are few
so foolish, which had not rather govern themselves, then be governed.] But I
say that whosoever is not fit for government, is a notorious fool, if he will
rather govern then be governed, let him think what he will. Had Phaeton been a
wise man, he would not have affected the government of his fathers chariot:
Magna petis Phaeton, and quae non viribus illis munera convenient. On the
contrary, wise men have chosen rather to be Dgoverned by others, then to govern
others; and Christ, the wisdom of the Father, would rather be a servant then a
King. Doubtless, in the state of innocence, there should have been naturally a
subordination and subjection, as of children to their parents, of wives to
their husbands, and of inferiors to their superiors; for there should have
been no more equality then among men, on earth^ than there was, and is in
heaven among Angels, and in hell among Devils; yea, there is naturally
subjection among beasts, rex unus apibus, dux unus gregibus. To say then that
there is no inequality by nature, is to say, that there is no order in nature
which cannot be without subordination; surely, in the state of corrupted
nature, to say that all are equal, is to say, that none have sinned, for sin
brought in servitude and subjection, so that the effect is no less natural then
the cause. Again, whatsoever is necessary, is also natural; but inequality and
subordination among men, who will live together is necessary, and therefore
natural; we see also, that the body is naturally subject and subordinate to the
soul; animae imperio corporis, servitio utimur. To be brief, seeing among men,
there are many defects and imperfections, wants and infirmities, and that
naturally; there must be also naturally an inequality and subjection, by which
these defects may be supplied; which could not be if all men were equal by
nature: Therefore, not Aristotle, but Mr. Hobbs speaks against reason and
experience.

I like not his phrase, Part. 1. cap. 16.
when he says, [ That God was personated first by Moses, then by Christ the
Son of man.] For they that differ in personality may persononate each other,
but Christ the Son of man differs not in personality from God, seeing in him
the divinity, and humanity make up but one person; and though the Father and
Son in the Trinity are distinct persons; yet the Son cannot personate the
Father; because their nature is numerically one and the same; neither is it
true what he says, concerning covenants, Part 2. cap. 18. [ That they are but
words and breath, and have no force to oblige but from the sword.] For
covenants are real consents of two or more persons, now consent is an act of
the soul, and not a bare word or breath; the words that are uttered, are but
the symbols and signs of the mind: there be also many mental, and employed or
tacit covenants made without words; and many covenants that have no dependence
on the sword; as those that are made between God and man. Abraham and Noah had
been but in a bad condition, if the covenants that God made with them had been
but bare words and breath.

When he says, Part 2. cap. 18.
[ That whatsoever the Prince does, can be no injury to the subject, nor ought
he to be accused by any of them of injustice; for he that does any thing by
authority from another, does therein no injury to him by whose authority he
acts.] This doctrine will hardly down with free born people, who choose to
themselves Princes, not to tyrannise over them, but like good shepherds, or
fathers of their Country, to rule them; the people were not mad to give their
power so to Princes, as to be their slaves; or to think that tyrannical
cruelties and oppressions are not injuries to the subject, or that tyrants must
not be accused of injustice, for although the Prince acts by the peoples
authority in things lawful, yet in his lawless exorbitancies, he acts by his
own tyrannising power, not by the peoples authority; for they be authors of his
lawful power, yet they are no ways authors of his exorbitancies: and it is
ridiculous when he says, [ No man can do injury to himself, and that the
Prince may commit iniquity but not injustice or injury.] For its too apparent,
that most men are too injurious to themselves, nemo laeditur nisi a seipso, O,
Israel, thy destruction is of thy self: And I would fain know what true
difference there is between injustice and iniquity, or injury, for jus and
aequum signify the same thing in latin, whence we borrow the words injustice,
injury, iniquity: I know some put a difference between jus and aequum, but to
little purpose; for doubtless, every injury is unjust, and each unjust act is
an injury, and an iniquity either against God or man; he is also injurious to
good Princes, when he makes no difference between them and tyrants, Part 2.
cap. 20. [ between despotical and paternal dominons, making tyrants and
Sovereigns by institution all one in rights and consequences.] This is to put
no difference between the Father and Butcher of his Country, between the
Shepherd and the woolf, between sharing and fleaing of the sheep. A King
governs, and is governed by laws; a tyrant has no law but his will; jus est in
armis, opprimit leges timor. This his absurd assertion he would patronise by
Scripture, which describes to us, 1 Samuel 8. 11, 12. verses, the manner of
Kings; namely, to take your sons and daughters to drive his chariot, etc. To
take your fields and Vinyards, etc. But in that he mistakes himself; for in
that chapter the Scriptures describes unto us, not the qualities of Kings, but
of tyrants, such as the neighboring Nations had, which dwelt about Judea: but
if he will see the qualities of a good King, and such as the Lord would chose;
let him read the 17. chapter of Deuteronomy, there he shall find a King that
must be regulated by the law of God, and not by his own will.

So in his twenty one chapter, Part 2. cap. 21.
he will make us believe, that David did no injury to Uriah, When he killed
him; [ because the right to do what he pleased, was given him by Uriah himself,
but the injury was done to God, who prohibited all iniquity; which distinction
David confirmed, when he says, to thee only have I sinned.] He may as well
say, that the right to do what David pleased was given him by God, and
therefore no injury in killing Uriah was offered to God, which contradicts his
assertion, but indeed neither assertion is true, for neither God nor Uriah gave
right to David, to do what he pleased, to say that God gives to sinful men
right to act what they please, is to make God the author of sin; and to say
that Uriah gave right to David to kill him, is to make him accessory to his own
murder: And to say, that a Tyrant does not wrong the innocent, when he
murders him causlessly, is to put no difference between an unjust Tyrant, and
a just Judge, when he executes a Malefactor deservingly: now when David says,
To thee only have I sinned: he speaks so, because God only knew his
intention, that he meant to murder Uriah: when he placed him in the forefront
of the army.

He says, [ That whether a Commonwealth be monarchical or popular, Part 2.
cap. 21.
the freedom is still the same] This I deny, for in an absolute monarchy there
is no liberty but mere slavery; such is the condition of those who live under
the Turk, the Muscovit, Prester John: and the Magol; in other governments there
is more or less liberty, according to the condition of the times, and people,
and the disposition of the Governors; for there was more liberty under
Augustus, Titus, Antoninus, Aurelius, and other Monarchs then under many
Popular States; Fallitur egregio quisquis sub principe credit servitum; numquam
libertas gratior extat quam sub rege pio. And under Democracy there is at some
times more liberty then at others; to say then, that the freedom under a
Monarchy and Popular government is the same, is as much, as if I should say, a
child is as free under a rigid and cruel Schoolmaster, as under an indulgent
Mother: Where there is continual fear, there can be no liberty; and such is the
condition of those that live under Tyrants.

He slights Aristotle's opinion concerning Democracy, Part. 1. cap. 21.
for saying there is more liberty there, then in any other government; yet he
refels none of Aristotle's reasons: which are these. 1. In Democracy all the
Citizens have a vote in chosing of their Magistrates. 2: All have a right to
govern as well as to be governed. 3. Magistrates, for the most part, are chosen
by lot, rather then by suffrages. 4. They are not chosen for their wealth. 5.
Nor is the same man chosen often into the Supreme Office. 6. Nor may he stay
too long in his Office. 7. That Judges are chosen out of all degrees and orders
of the people. 8. That the Supreme Senate, which is chosen out of all the
people, has the chief authority over the Commonwealth. 9: That public
officers have their allowance and maintenance. 10. That the meanest trades of
the people are not excluded from public offices and honors. 11. By often
changing of Supreme officers, way is made for the advancing of many, and
occasion of abusing the Supreme power is taken away. For these reasons
Aristotle held there was under Democracy more liberty, then under Monarchy.

In his twenty eight chapter Part 2. cap. 28.
he tells us, [ That the Subject did not give to the Sovereign the right of
punishing, and that this right is not grounded on any concession or gift of the
Subjects.] These words are plainly contradictory to what he said before, cap.
28. Namely, [ That the Subject is the author of all the actions and judgments
of the Soveraign] And again, [ Every particular man is author of all the
Sovereign does; and consequently he that complains of injury from his
Sovereign, complains of that whereof he himself is author; and therefore
David had right to do what he pleased, given him by Uriah; for which cause he
did Uriah no injury to kill him] Here is a plain contradiction. The subject
gives right to the Prince to do what he pleases, even to murder him; and yet
gives no power to punish him. Is it likely that any subject, is so mad, as to
covenant with his Prince, that he shall have right to murder him, without
cause? and yet when he has just cause, he shall have no power to punish him.

Chap. 28. He says, [ That man's pride compelled him to submit himself to
Government] This is a Paradox; for man's pride made him rebel against
Government, but not submit to it. Before man grew proud, he submitted himself
to be governed by God, so did the Apostate Angels; but their pride made them
affect equality with God, and consequently, rebel, and refuse to obey and to be
governed: it is not pride then, but humility, that makes man submit to
government: For pride loves to be still uppermost, as the word shows,
superbire quasi superire, So proud Atraeus in Seneca, ( These. Act. 5.) Equalis
astris gradior and cunctos super, altum superbo vertice attingens polum: so the
proud man, by the Psalmist is compared to a high Cedar in Lebanus, and proud
Nebuchadnezar, in Daniel, to an exceeding tall tree, whose top reached to
Heaven. Lucifer in Isay 14. 14. says, I will assend above the hight of the
clouds, I will be like the most High. We know that pride has been the cause of
so much troubles and wars in the world, because proud men will not submit to
government: nec far potest Caesarve priorem, Pompeiusve parem; Caesar will
not submit to be governed by Pompey, nor Pompey by Caesar: Mr. Hobbs might have
observed this in the naming of Leviathan, which he alleges; for as Job says,
he sees every high thing below him, and is King of all the children of pride:
and so he acknowledges himself, in the beginning of the next chapter, that men
for want of humility will not suffer the rude and combersom points of their
present greatness to be taken off.

In his twenty ninth chapter, Part. 2. cap. 29.
amongst the diseases of a Commonwealth, which he says proceed from the
poison of seditious doctrines, he reckons this for one, [ Th^^ whatsoever a man
does against his conscience is sin.] The Christian schools and pulpits never
held this, for a disease or seditious doctrine till now; I believe Mr. Hobbs
his doctrine is rather seditious, for if it be no sin to act against the
conscience, people may rebel when they please without sin, though they know
that rebellion is against the conscience; for the Apostle tells us, that we must
be subject to the higher powers, not only for wrath, but also for conscience
sake^ Romans 13. 5. It is the curb of conscience tha^ restrains men from
rebellion, there is no outward sorce or law so powerful, as that inward law ^^
the conscience; no castle so inpregnable as this; hic murus ahaencus esto.
There is no Judge so sever^ no Torturer so cruel, as an accusing conscience^
this Saul, Judas, Orestes, and too many more knew, who would rather be their
own executioners, then endure the continual tortures, and be tormented with the
firebrarnds of those snaky hired Furies, whose residence is in an evil
conscience. Hear what a Heathen can say in this case^ Juvenal. Sat. 13. -- cur
ta^^en hos tu
Evasisse putes: quos diri conscia facti,
Men's habet attonilos, and caec^ verbere pulsat
Occultum quatient^ animum t^rtore flagellum?
Paena autem vehemens, ac multo saevior illis
Quas and Ceditius gravis invenit aut Rhadamanthus:
Nocte dieque suum gestare in pectore testem.
To the same purpose, Persius. Pers. Sat. 3. Anne magis Siculi gemuerunt era
juvenci,
Aut magis auratis pendens laquearibus ensis;
Purpureas subter cervices teruit; imus,
Imus praecipites, quam si sibi dicat and intus
Palleat infaelix, quod proxima nesciat uxor.
He then that can act against his conscience without sin, or remorse; is one of
those the Apostle speaks of, whose conscience is seared with a hot iron: and
he must needs be miserable, that despises the testimony of this witness, says
Seneca. The Apostle who was no teacher of sedition, assures us that they shall
not escape the judgment of God, who do the same things they condemn in others,
Romans 2. 3. that is who act against their conscience; and says plainly, that to
him who esteems any thing unclean, to him it is unclean, Romans 14. 14.
Therefore that which is no sin in it self, may be sin to him whose conscience
says it is sin. Hence the Schools teach us, that he who acts against an
erroneous conscience sins, for by this he is convinced that he has a will
to sin, and that he can sin deliberately. Besides, he that acts against his
conscience, acts against the law of God, to which he thinks his conscience
conformable. St. Paul pleads before the Council, Acts 23. 1. That he had
lived in all good conscience; and in this testimony of his conscience was his
rejoicing, 2 Cor. 1. 12. and wishes Timothy to hold says and a good
conscience, which some putting away, that is, acting against it, concerning
faith have made shipwreck. 1 Timothy 1. 19. and in the same chapter shows, that
the end of the commandment is love, out of a pure heart, a good conscience, and
faith unfeigned; for these three are inseparable companions: now whereas Mr.
Hobbs says, [ That this doctrine depends on the presumption of him who makes
himself judge of good and evil.] I say it is no presumption, but a duty imposed
on every man to judge of good and evil, seeing he has both the light of
nature, and of Scripture to direct him; and the Apostle shows, [that the
Gentiles which have not the law, do by nature the things contained in the law,
these having not the law, are a law to themselves, which show the work of the
law written in their hearts, their conscience bearing witness, and their
thoughts excusing or else accusing each other, Romans 2. 14, 15.]

Chapter 29. He will not have faith [ to be attained by inspiration or
infusion, but by study, and reason.] and shortly after he says, [ That faith
is no miracle, but brought to pass by education, discipline, correction, and
other natural ways, etc.] That Peter's says was not revealed to him by flesh
and blood, but by the Father of Christ who is in Heaven is plain by our
Saviors own words, Mat. 16. 16. And he thanks his heavenly Father for hiding
the mysteries of faith from the prudent, and and revealing them to babes, Mat
11. 25. For if faith comes by study, reason, discipline, and education,
doubtless the wise Philosophers, and not the ignorant Fishers had believed in
Christ; but we find it other ways: that not many learned (as the Apostle
says) not many wise, but God has chosen the fools and ignorants of this world
to confound the wise and learned; and so Christ faith, That none can come to
him except the Father draw him, John 16. And St. Paul says, Romans 12. God has
distributed to every man the measure of faith, and confesses that he obtained
this mercy of God, to be faithful, 1 Cor. 7. And he says, that we are saved by
grace through faith, not of our selves; it is the gift of God, Ephesians. 2.

And indeed if faith came by reason or study, we may by study attain salvation,
justification, and life eternal; for the Scripture tells us, That we are saved
by faith, and by faith we are justified, and the just live by faith, and that
this has been the constant doctrine of the Church from the beginning, is plain
to be seen in the writings of the Fathers, general and provincial Councels. Now
whereas he says, [ That faith is no miracle.] I say it is a miracle, in that
it is a supernatural gift, so inconsistent with natural reason, that a holy and
ancient Father said, there were three miracles in Christ's Incarnation; to wit,
the union of the divinity and humanity. 2. Of maternity and virginity. 3. Of
faith and the heart of man; but he cannot see [ Why any man should render a
reason of his faith, or why every Christian should not be also a prophet, or
why any man should take the law of his Country, rather then his own
inspiration, for the rule of his action] None of these inconveniences will
follow, though faith come by inspiration: For 1. why may not any man give a
reason, that is, render an account as well of an inspired, as of an acquired
faith: St. Paul was inspired, and yet he gives an account of his faith to the
Jews, Acts 22. and to Agrippa, Acts 26. 2. What necessity is there, that every
Christian should be a prophet, who has an inspired faith? Is faith and
prophecy one and the same gift, Balaam could prophecy and yet was no
believer; and many in the Primitive Church, believed, and yet could not
prophecy. Nor 3ly, is there any reason why he who is inspired should refuse to
be ruled by the law of his Country, except that law be repugnant to the true
faith with which he is inspired; for Christ and his Apostles rejected not the
civil law of the Romans, but were in outward things ruled by it; though they
were inspired. Hence then it appears that these truths are not pernicious
opinions, nor do they proceed from the tongues and pens of unlearned Divines,^
as Mr. Hobbs says, but they are manifest truths, held by the most learned
Doctors of the Church in all ages.

Chap. 29. He [ will not have the Sovereign to be subject to his own laws,
because then he should be subject to himself, and to set the laws above the
Sovereign, were to set a Judge above him, etc.] If a man can subdue himself, he
must be subject to himself, and as there is no conquest so honorable, so there
is no subjection so profitable as this, Fortior est qui se quam qui fortissima
vincit maenia, Cicero tells Caesar that he had subdued many fierce Nations, and
conquered diverse potent Kingdoms, but in restoring of Marcellus he had overcom
himself, which was a conquest, that made him not like the most excellent men,
but rather like to God himself. Latius regnes avidum d^^ando spiritum quam si
Lybiam remotis Gadibus jungas, etc. What availed it Alexander to conquer the
world and not to conquer himself; to be a slave to his vices, and not subject
to his laws. And I pray, why should not a Prince be as well subject to his own
laws, as to his oaths, covenants, and promises; there is nothing so honorable
for a King, as to keep his word, and to observe the laws, which he not only
made, but by oath and promise tied himself to obey. And surely this is the very
law of nature, which as Mr. Hobbs says, [ is divine, and cannot by any man or
commonwealth be abrogated.] Neither is there any inconvenience to set the law
as a Judge above the Prince; for as Aristotle tells us, Polit. l. 3. c. 11. The
law where it is plain and perspicuous ought to beat rule, because without it no
King nor^ Commonwealth can govern. And secondly, Because the law is just, not
subject to partiality, passion and affection, as Princes and other men are; and
indeed Princes should be so far from disobeying their own laws, that they
should be the life and soul of the law, which of it self is but a dead letter,
therefore the common saying of that good Emperor Aurelius was: Rex viva Lex: No
Commonwealth can be happy or continue long, but where the Prince is as well
subject to the law as the People; his example will move them to obedience; Nec
sic inflectere sensus humanos^ edicta valent, ac vita regentis; therefore the
counsel of Pitta^us was good, Let not them break the law who make the Law;
par^to legi quisquis legem sanxerit.

Cap. 29. He is angry with those who say, [ That every private man has a
property in his goods.] Among the Turks indeed no private man has any property
at all; under Christian Princes private men live more happily, who enjoy a
property, yet not simply absolute, if we consider that the Prince has a right
to our goods in cases of necessity, as in his own, and Countries defense, and
such like cases, in this regard no man is born for himself, nor has any man an
absolute property in his own life, which he ought when occasion urges, lay
down for his Country: Dulce and decorum pro patria mori; therefore Plato says
well, That our Country requires a share in our birth; the property then of the
subject excludes not the Princes right in cases of necessity, but only his
arbitrary power. Hence are these sayings, Omnia rex imperio possidet, singuli
dominio; Again, Ad reges potestas omnium pertinet ad singulos proprietas. The
power here spoke of is meant of his just and lawful, not of his arbitrary and
tyrannical power.

In his thirty one chapter Cap. 31.
he makes a needless distinction between the objects of love, hope, and fear,
showing, [ That love has reference to goodness; hope and fear to power; the
subject of praise is goodness, the subject of magnifying and blessing is
power.] David knows no such distinction, who in the 18. Psalm he loves God
for his strength or power, and in another Psalm, he fears him for his mercy, or
goodness, There is (says he) mercy with thee, therefore shall thou be feared:
So he makes Gods goodness, and not his power the object of his hope or belief;
Psalm. 27. I hoped to see the goodness of God in the land of the living; so
likewise he praises God for his strength or power, as well as for his
goodness: Praise him, says he, for his mighty acts, praise him for his
excellent greatness, Psalm. 150. and in diverse Psalms he magnifyeth God for his
salvation, as well as for his power. Now when he says, that this name ( God) [
is his own name of relation to us,] he is deceived; for this is no name of
relation at all; his names of relation to us, are, Creator, Redeemer, Father,
Lord, King, Master, etc.

In his third Part and Chap. 1. Part 3. cap. 32.
He says, [ That our natural reason is the undoubted word of God.] But I doubt
Leviathan himself for all his great strength and power, cannot make this good;
for Gods word is infallible, so is not our natural reason, which fails in
many things. Gods word says, That a Virgin did conceive and bear a Son; That
God became man; That our bodies shall rise again out of the dust; but our
natural reason says, this is impossible: therefore when St. Paul preached the
resurrection to the Athenians, who wanted not natural reason enough, they
thought he had been mad. How comes it that the Apostle says; The natural man
understands not the things of Gods spirit; And Christ tells Peter, That flesh
and blood, (that is) natural reason had not revealed the mystery of his
Divinity to him, but his Father in Heaven; and St. Paul says, That he received
not the Gospel of man, nor was he taught it but by the revelation of Jesus
Christ, Gal. 1. 12. And that he was not taught by man's wisdom, but by the Holy^
Ghost, 1 Cor. 2. 13. How comes it I say, that the Scripture speaks thus in
villifying natural reason, if it be the infallible word of God; yea, what need
was there of any written word at all if our natural reason be that infallible
word: doubtless Adam by his fall lost much of his knowledge and natural reason;
Peter made use of his natural reason, when he undertook to dissuade Christ from
going up to Jerusalem, and there to suffer and die; but Christ tells him that
he favored the things that be of men, but not of God, Mat. 16. 23. Our natural
reason, says he, cap. 32. [ Is a talent not to be folded up in the napkin of
an implicit faith.] This I grant; but I hope he will permit, that our natural
reason, be subject to an explicit faith, without which it is impossible to
please God; and not only must our reason be subdued to faith; but every
imagination in us must be cast down, and every high thing that exalts it self
against the knowledge of God, and every thought must be brought into captivity,
to the obedience of Christ, 2. Cor: 10. 5. And whereas he says, cap: 32. [
That our reason must be employed in the purchase of justice, peace, and true
religion.] If reason could procure or purchase these blessings, the Gentiles of
old, the Jews and Mahume^ans of latter years might have had them as well as we;
for in natural reason they are not inferior to us; every one of these following
the dictates of reason, think they have the true Religion; as for justice and
peace they can never be purchased by reason, but by ^aith; therefore says the
Apostle: being justified by faith, we have peace with God through Jesus Christ
our Lord, but his reason by which he would prove, that our natural reason is
the undoubted word of God, is very feeble; for says he, [ There is nothing
contrary to it in Gods word.] By the same means he may prove that Aristotle's
Logic, or Hippocrate's Aphorisms are the undoubted word of God; for in them is
nothing contrary to it. But was not Peter's reason contrary to Gods word, when
he would have dissuaded Christ from suffering; whereas all the prophets had
spoken, that Christ ought to have suffered those things, and to enter into his
glory; Luke 24. 26.

And no less weak is his argument ( cap. 32.) by which he will prove, that
divine dreams [ are not of force to win belief from any man, that knows dreams
are for the most part natural, and may proceed from former thoughts, etc.] He
may as well infer, that the penmen of the Holy Scriptures are not of force to
win belief from us, seeing the prophet says, All men are liars: what if it had
said, that men for the most part are liars; there had been less reason to have
inferred that the penmen of Scriptures were such, and yet Mr. Hobbs will
infer, that because dreams are for the most part natural; therefore divine
dreams are of no credit, that such dreams are of force sufficient to win
belief, is plain by the dreams of Joseph; Jacob's son, and Joseph the husband
of Mary: with diverse others in Scripture. ( cap. 33.) He is troubled that Moses
before his death should write that he died, and that his Sepulcher was not
known to this day, but in this he troubles himself needlessly; for he writes of
his death and sepulcher by anticipation, which is an usual way of writing,
amongst some, besides the Jewish tradition is, that Joshua wrote that last
chapter of Deuteronomy, long after the death of Moses. ( Cap. 33.) So he is
troubled about the words of Moses, Genesis 12. 6. which are, And the Canaanite was
then in the land; Hence he infers, that Moses wrote not that book, but one who
wrote when the Canaanite was not in the land, for Moses dyed before he came to
it: but I say, that if the Canaanite was not in the land, when he wrote these
words, The Canaanite was then in the land; he wrote a lie; but indeed Moses wrote
the History, and writes no ways absurdly, in showing that the Canaanite was
then in the land, but purposely to let us see the condition of Gods children in
this life, who though they have right to all they enjoy, yet the wicked keep
them under, and they live in fear still of their enemies, as Abraham did of the
Canaanites, who domineered in that land which Abraham received from God, and at
the same time he received it; such like exceptions he makes against some other
writers of the old Testament, but they are of no moment or validity, therefore
I will spend no paper nor time in their refuration.

In his thirty fourth chapter cap. 34.
he tells us, [ That there is no real part of the universe, which is not also a
body, and that bodies are called substances, because subject to various
accidents, and that an incorporeal substance, is as if a man should say, an
incorporeal body.] If there were no real parts of the universe but bodies, then
the universe were not universe, but an imperfect system, as d^ficien^ in the
most noble of all created entities^ to wit, incorporeal substances; but God
made the world perfect, consisting both of material and immaterial substances;
such are Angels and Men's souls, which are neither corporeal in their being,
nor operation; for if they were corporeal, they must be mortal and corruptible,
and compounded at least of matter and form, they must be also quantitative,
local by circumscription, and movable by physical motion; all which are absurd:
and if a substance be the same that a body is, then he must make God corporeal,
for he is a substance: now to say that a thing is called substance, because
subject to changes, is vain; for substances are so called, because they subsist
by themselves, and not in another entity, as accidents do: besides, accidents
may be called subjects, because one accident may be the subject of another, as
the superficies of a wall is the subject of colors; but accidents can never be
called substances, for they cannot subsist of themselves.

By the spirit of God moving upon the face of the waters, Genesis 1. 2. [ He will
have to be meant a wind, because if God himself were understood, then motion
must be attributed to him and place.] I know in this he follows Tertullian's
opinion; but the Church has constantly held that there is meant, not a wind,
but the spirit of God; by which place they both prove the mystery of the
Trinity; the first person being expressed by the word Elo^^m, the second by the
word Berisheth, or Beginning, and the third by the word Ruah, or Spirit; they
also by the same place prove the dignity and power of baptism, in the waters of
which Sacrament the Spirit moves as in the beginning; and indeed it is
childish to think that a wind should be there meant, for what use could there
be of a wind then, before the creatures were produced. And whereas he is afraid
to ascribe motion and place to God, it seems he has not well observed the
Scripture phrase, which ordinarily speaks of God, Anthropopathos, as if he
were a man; therefore he is said sometimes to speak, to see, to hear, to
descend, to laugh, to be angry, to greet, to rejoice; and in this History of
the Creation, he is said, to speak, to bless, to walk in the Garden, to examine
Adam, to condemn the Serpent, etc. Now whereas Mr. Hobbs says, that the spirit
here mentioned, is the same that is spoken of, Genesis 8. 1. I will bring my
Spirit upon the Earth: He is mistaken, and misalledgeth the words; for thus it
is written, And God made a wind to pass over the Earth; for wind in Scripture
is never called the Spirit of God. The spirit then that dried up the waters of
the flood, was the same that afterward divided the red Sea for Moses and the
Israelites to pass through; to wit, a drying wind which God had raised: He
says, [ The word Ghost signifies nothing but the imaginary inhabitants of the
brain.] But there he is also mistaken, for it signifies a real immaterial
substance, which we call from the Latin word, Spirit; and so it was always
used by the Saxons, and at this day, Gheest and Gheist in low and high Dutch do
signify the same thing or spirit.

Cap. 34. When Christ walked on the waters, the Disciples thought they had seen
a spirit or fantasm, which Mr. Hobbs will have [ to be an aerial body.] But I
wonder who ever saw an aerial body; the two grosser Elements are visible to us,
but not the two superior, by reason of their subtilty and purity. And he is
deceived also in saying, [ That the delusions of the brain are not common to
many at once.] For I have observed that diverse men together have seen imaginary
castles, temples, armed men, and such like apparitions in the clouds. Now
Spirits or Angels have been seen not in their own substances, which are
invisible, but in the bodies of men which they assumed; and to say, as he does,
that because spirits are in no place circumscriptively, therefore they are no
where, is inconsequent; for though they have no dementions answering to the
demensions of place, yet they have their vbi, to which they are consined.

Cap. 34. He says, [ That concerning the creation of Angels, nothing is
delivered in the Scriptures.] What then means the Apostle in his Epistle to the
Collossians by things invisible, thrones, dominations, and powers, which he
says, were created? Were not these Angels? But I wonder not that he denies the
creation of Angels, for he does plainly deny their existence, saying ( cap.
34.) they are [ but visions, apparitions, images in the fancy, accidents of the
brain.] But when the Holy Scripture calls Angels Messengers, watchmen,
ministering spirits, the host of heaven, etc. Does it mean only our fancies
and dreams? Are those celestial servants of God, the comforters and protecters
of good men, the gatherers together of the elect in the last day, but
imaginations? Was that a fancy or an Angel who comforted Hagar in the desert?
Was the Angel Gabriel that appeared to Mary but an accident of her brain? Were
not the Israelites well guarded from their enemies, when they had no Angels,
but fancies to guard them? It seems that Abraham and Lot entertained not
Angels, but dreams and fancies in their houses; and Abraham washed the feet of
fancies, and for them killed his fat calf: and Jacob wrestled all night with a
fancy; as Turnus did, in the Poet, with the shadow of AEnaeas. Were those
fancies or real substances, that St. Jude speaks of, who kept not their first
estate, but left their habitation, and are now reserved in chains under
darkness for the judgment of the great day: and when Christ says we shall be
like the Angels, does he mean that in heaven we shall be like fancies and
dreams? I doubt me, Mr. Hobbs is possessed with too many such Angels: He is
extremely extravagant in his discourse for the Angels, which but now he would
have to be dreams, visions, and fancies, he will have to be God himself. ( cap.
34.) [ Because the same apparition is called, not only an Angel, but God, Genesis
16.] Here is a goodly argument: Angels are sometimes called God, therefore they
are God indeed: by the same reason he may infer, that Judges and earthly
Princes, are gods indeed, because they are called so. The Idols of the Gentiles
are called gods, are they therefore Gods indeed: Angels are sometimes called
Elohim, or gods; not only for the excellency of their nature, but likewise for
their employment, in representing the person and authority of God in their
embassies: that Angel, who Genesis 31. 13. calls himself the God of Bethel is
thought to be our blessed Savior, who appeared sometimes to the Patriarchs and
other holy men, before his incarnation: and it was this Angel that spoke with
Moses in the bush, and in the cloud; and not the cloud it self; as Mr. Hobbs
thinks, for he is deceived in thinking that the cloudy pillar spoke with Moses.
He says, [ It is not the shape, but the use that makes them Angels.] indeed the
shape of men was most usual and most useful in the Angels, for contracting
familiarity with men; for which cause the Angel of the Covenunt in the fullness
of time became man: for what can be so kindly to man, as to be instructed,
directed, and defended by man, or by Angels in man's shape: He says, [ That the
Dove and fiery tongues, in being signs of Gods special presence may be called
Angels.] But I say no; for it is not the signification of Gods presence, but
the delivering by speech Gods will or message, that makes an Angel or
Messenger; for when were dumb Ambassadors ever employed? If every sign of Gods
presence were an Angel, we should have as many Angels, as there be Ceremonies
and Sacraments in the Church: yea, every creature were an Angel, for each
creature testifies and represents to us a Diety, and so every Star, yea,
every Fly, and every Herb should be an Angel, praesentemque docet quae libet
herba Deum: if he can tell us that the fiery tougues, or Dove, did ever deliver
any message in Scripture, (which the Poets fable of Dodonas Doves) then I will
call them Angels. He says again, [ That God needs not to distinguish his
celestial servants by names.] Will he hence infer that therefore they have no
names; he may as well say, that God needs not to distinguish men by names, or
to call the stars by their names, Psalm. 147. Angels are distinguished by names,
not for him, but for our weak memories: God needs no such distinctions, but we
who are of weak apprehensions.

Cap. 34. He faith, [ That fire is no punishment to impatible creatures, such
as are all things incorporeal.] That the Devil shall be punished with eternal
fire and his Angels, is plain by our Saviors words, Mat. 25. It follows
therefore they are patible creatures, though immaterial: that there is a
patability in immaterial substances, is manifest by our own souls, which are
affected with the passions of joy and grief, as the body is in a joyful or in ^
painful condition; there are also some passions which are called immanent, and
immaterial, such is the passion of understanding; for the soul suffers when
it understands. Now how the evil spirits in hell suffer by fire is not known
unto us, but to God; neither is their suffering natural, but altogether
supernatural, and by the power of God, who can as easily make fire work on
spirits, as on the bush which burned, but consumed not: as St. Austin shows,
de civit dei, lib. 21. cap. 10. When Christ says, that in the resurrection we
shall be like the Angels of God which are in heaven. Mr. Hobbs infers, ( cap.
34.) [ That because men then shall be corporeal, therefore the Angels are
such.] This is not to show that we shall be like the Angels, as Christ says,
but that the Angels shall be like us: neither is it Christ's scope to show
there, Mat. 22. 30. that we shall be like the Angels in every thing; but only
in this, that we shall be like them in chastity; for there shall be no
marrying, because no need of posterity, man being then immortal. He confesses
at last, ( cap. 34.) [ That though in the Old Testament Angels were but
fancies; yet some places of the New Testament have extorted from his feeble
reason; a belief that Angels are substantial and permanent.] That faith which
is extorted from a feeble reason must needs be very feeble: but indeed true
faith is strongest, where reason is feeblest, per didi^ti rationem tene fidem,
says St. Austin, He that will lay hold on faith must abandon reason, which is
the son of the bond woman, born after the flesh, but faith is the child of
promise, and true heir of the Kingdom.

In his thirty eighth chapter he says, [ That if Adam had not sinned, he had
had an eternal life on earth.] And hence he infers, [ That life eternal which
Christ has obtained for his Saints shall be: on earth: because the Apostle
says, as in Adam all dye, even so in Christ shall all be made alive, for else
the comparison were not proper.] The comparison is not between the two places
of heaven and earth, but between the two persons of Adam and Christ, and
between the two lives, the one earthly which Adam lost by introducing
mortality, and the other heavenly which Christ has purchased by overcoming
mortality: and as this place fails him, so does that other, Psalm. 133. 3. Upon
Sion God commanded the blessing, even life for evermore. And Rev. 21. 2. I John
saw the holy City, New Jerusalem coming down from God out of heaven. And Acts
1. 11. This same Jesus who is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come as
you have seen him go up into heaven. And Mat. 22. In the resurrection they are
as the Angels of God in heaven, for they neither marry, nor are given in
marriage. What sober minded man will conclude from these places, that our
eternal hapiness shall be on earth, and not in heaven? For when David speaks of
life for evermore in Sion, he means a lasting happiness which accompanies
concord among brethren: for the Hebrew word Holam in Scripture, signifies a
continuance for some time, but not eternity: In Exodus 21. 6. The servant whose
ear was bored, is said to serve his master for ever, that is, so long as he
lives, and not everlastingly. Samuel is said to appear before the Lord, and
there to abide for ever, 1 Samuel 1. 22. Will any infer hence that Samuel was to
continue in his office for all eternity: The Perpetuus Dictator at Rome
continued not for ever, though he is called perpetual: So then life for
evermore in Sion is a long continuing happiness; and yet Sion in Scripture is
diverse times taken for heaven, where is only true and eternal life: As
impertinent is that place which he alleges, Rev. 2. 7. To him that overcomes
I will give to eat of the tree of life, which is in the midst of the Paradise
of God. This says he, [ was the tree of Adams eternal life, but this life was
to have been on earth.] But he is quite out of the way; for the Paradise
mentioned here, is that which Christ speaks of to the good thief, Thou shall be
this day with me in Paradise, that is in heaven: for earthly Paradise was
destroyed by the flood, and so was the tree of Life, which might for some time
have prolonged Adams age, by supplying the decay of the radical moisture, but
could not have continued it for ever: only our blessed Savior the true tree of
life here mentioned can protract our life into eternity: now that Paradise was
destroyed by the flood is plain by Moses, Genesis 6. saying, that the flood rose
higher fifteen cubits, then the highest mountains. Besides, if Paradise had
been to continue what need was there to build an Ark for Noah: and his family,
seeing they could have been saved in Paradise, and so the other creatures
likewise: And whereas he says, [ That the New Jerusalem when Christ comes
again; shall come down to Gods people from heaven, and not they go up to it
from earth.] Is ridiculous; for Rev. 21. 2. by the New Jerusalem coming down
from God, is meant the Church of Christ, whose original calling, protection,
and happiness is from God, so that this is not a proper, but a tropical
descent. The Church is called Jerusalem there, and elsewhere, because she is,
or ought to be the City of Peace, and as Jerusalem of old was the place of Gods
worship, and of his peculiar presence, so is the Church now; which is called
new, as having cast off the old man, and old ceremonies, is renewed in the
spirit of her mind; and is regenerate by water and the spirit So he shows
his vanity, when he proves out of Acts 1. 11. [ That Christ shall come down to
govern his people eternally here, and not take them up to govern them in
heaven.] For in that place there is no mention of his government here on earth,
nor of the eternity thereof; but only that he shall return after the same
manner that he went up, that is to say, gloriously, riding on the clouds, and
attended by Angels: Now if any man would know the reason or end of Christ's
second coming, he shall find in Daniel 2. Mat. 25. and other places of
Scripture; that it is not to erect an earthly Kingdom, which shall continue for
ever, but as the Apostle says, to render vengeance to the wicked, and to us
that are afflicted, peace. Or as it is in our Creed, to judge the quick and the
dead; so then he shall not return as an earthly Prince, to set up his throne
here on earth, which is his footstool, but as a Judge in his circuit, who
having condemned some, and absolved others, returns again to the place of his
residence.

But he says, ( cap. 38.) [ That there is neither Scripture nor Reason to prove
that after the resurrection, men are to live eternally in heaven.] What then
will he say to these passages, Mat. 5. Great is your reward in heaven; Christ
would have said, great is your reward on earth, if he had purposed to erect an
earthly kingdom. So Mat. 6. we are advised to lay up our treasures, not on
earth, but in heaven: this were to no purpose, if we were to live eternally on
earth, not in heaven. So Ioh. 14. I go to prepare a place for you, that where I
am, there you may be. I pray was it not to heaven that Christ went to prepare
that place: is not heaven his Fathers house, where there are many mantions?
Earth is never called his house, nor are the Saints said here to have an house
or habitation, but to sojourn as in Tents: Heaven is the house where we must
dwell, if we will believe St. Paul who was caught up into this house, who
speaks not by hearsay, but by knowledge: [for we know, says he, that if our
earthly house of this Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God, an
house not made with hands eternal in the heavens, 2 Cor. 5. 1.] Why did St.
Paul desire to be dissolved and be with Christ, Phil. 1. if he was to enjoy
Christ upon earth only: he should rather have desired to be dissolved, that
Christ might be with him on earth, then he to be with Christ in heaven: Enoch
was translated, and Elijah was caught up into heaven, to assure us of our right
and habitation there, for this cause our Savior opened heaven at his Baptism,
and after his Resurrection ascended thither, to take possession thereof for us;
and it is fit, that where the Head is, there the body should be; where the King
keeps his residence, thither his servants should repair. Where should the
children dwell, but in their Fathers house: now that is heaven; therefore we
are taught to lift up our eyes thither, and to pray, Our Father which art in
Heaven. Here then Mr. Hobbs has both authority and reason against his earthly
happiness, which ^avours too much of Mabumets earthly Paradise.

It is childish what he says, ( cap. 38.) That the earthly kingdom of the
Saints [ shall be called a new knigdom of heaven, because our King shall then
be God, whose Throne is in heaven.] I would know of Mr. Hobbs; Whether our
King, Christ Jesus be not God now, as well as after the resurrection, and
whether his Throne be not now in heaven, as well as it shall be then. If so,
why may not each earthly kingdom now be called the Kingdom of heaven, seeing
our King is God, and his Throne is in heaven: perhaps he will t^ll us that
Christ is God, but not King as yet; but I say, in that he is God, he is also
King of all the earth, as David witnesses, Psalm. 47. 7. And we find in the
Apocalypse, that the^^ is written upon his garment King of Kings; and therefore
he confesses before his earthly Judge that he was born to be a King. And when
he was hanging on the Cross he was King of the Jews. To no purpose also does he
allege that of St. John, cap. 3. v. 13. [ No man has ascended into heaven,
but he that came down from heaven, even the son of man that is in heaven.] To
prove that man shall ascend to his happiness no higher then Gods footstool,
the earth: because no man has ascended into the highest heaven before Christ,
will it therefore follow, that no man shall ascend after him; or because no man
has ascended by his own power, but Christ only: therefore no man shall ascend
by the power of Christ thither: he were as good infer, that no man before
Christ overcame death by his own power, therefore no man after him shall
overcom death by Christ's power; and consequently there shall be no resurrection.
But if we ascend not higher then the earth, the Apostle has deluded us, in
saying. That we shall be caught up together in the clouds, to meet the Lord in
the air, and so we shall be ever with the Lord: he should have said rather,
that the Lord shall be ever with us. What good will our (...) Burgiship, or
devisation do us in heaven, if we shall never go thither, what comfort can we
take in the society and company of Angels, or they of ours, if we shall never
cohabit together in heaven.

He will not have ( cap. 38.) the resurrection of the body to be proved out of
Christ's words to the S^dduces: I am the God of Abraham, etc. for he is not a
God of the dead, out of the living^ for they all live to him, Luke 20, 37, 38.
His reason is, because the words are to be understood only of the immortality
of the soul: But I say these words prove both the souls immortality and the
bodies resurrection; for if Abraham's soul had been dead, how could God have
been his God: that is, his Protector, Comforter, Savior? Here is the souls
immortality. And if Abraham's body had been eternally dead, how could God have
been the God of Abraham; for Abraham's soul is not Abraham, but a part; now God
is not the God of a part, but of the whole man: therefore St. Luke says, They
all live to God; the departed Saints then are no more dead to God, then our
children when they are asleep, are dead to us: Therefore Christ says of
Lazarus, being four days dead, that he was asleep; so our departed friends are
dead to us, but asleep to God: and indeed the souls immortality, and bodies
resurrection are so linked together, that who denies or affirms the one,
denies or affirms the other; neither had Christ's answer satisfied the
Sadduces, had it not proved as well the resurrection of the body, as the
immortality of the soul; for they denied both.

[ It is not (says he) apparent in Scripture, that man's soul is in his own
nature eternal.] That the soul is immortal, is apparent by these Scriptures,
Eccles. 12. 7. The spirit shall return to God that gave it. If it dies, how
can it return to God? It returns rather to nothing: So Matthew. 10. 28. Fear not
them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul. If the soul cannot
be killed when the body is destroyed, how comes it to dye? So Matthew. 22. 32.
God is the God of Abraham, etc. not of the dead but of the living. So Phil. 1.
23. Paul desires to be dissolved, and to be with Christ. When he is dissolved,
his body could not be with Christ; it is his soul then; which to be with
Christ, is to live with Christ. So 1 Pet. 3. 19. Christ went and preached to
the spirits in prison. What did he preach to dead spirits? So Revel. 6. 9. The
souls cry under the Altar, and 7. 9. They are clothed in white, with palms in
their hands; those phrases do not speak of dead souls. But he would fain prove
out of Job 14. 7. That life immortal begins not in man, till the
resurrection. But this place will advantage him nothing: for we say the same
with Job, That a tree being cast down will bud again, and that man rises not
till the heavens be no more; that is, till the resurrection, when the heavens
shall be dissolved with fire, as St. Peter says; so that life immortal
begins not in man till then; if by man he means the whole man. But hence is
no argument that can be drawn against the immortality of the soul: for though
man dye and consume, yet the soul dies not; no more then the soul eats,
drinks sleeps, walks, etc. for these are the actions of the man, not of
the soul.

Because Mr. Hobbs ( cap. 38.) thinks [ this doctrine will appear to most men a
novelty, he will maintain nothing in it, but attend the end of that dispute of
the sword, by which all sorts of doctrine are to be approved or rejected.] He
need not trouble himself about the novelty of this doctrine; for it is no^ new,
but as old as Cerinthus the heretic, who lived about ninety years after
Christ; he was one of the first that maintained the conceit of Christ's earthly
kingdom; who notwithstanding told Pilate, that, his kingdom was not of this
world. About one hundred forty five years after Christ, the Papuzean her^ticks,
being the spawn of the Cataphrygians, whose father was Montanus, held the town
called Pepuza in upper Phrygia, to be the new Jerusalem, mentioned, Heb. 12.
and Rev. 21. Where Christ was to reign eternally, whereas Cerinthus his reign
was to last but a thousand years; whose Sectaries were a^te wards called
Chiliasts, or Millinaries. As for the other branch of his opinion concerning
the souls sleep or death, and its resurrection or vivification in the last day,
that is also no novelty; but an old heresy maintained by the Arabian heretics
about two hundred and seventeen years after Christ; these were called (...),
that is, mortal souls: The Psychopanvychits of this age, come somewhat near
these Arabians; for though they hold not the death or dissolution of the soul;
yet they say it sleeps with the body in the grave: this error therefore Mr.
Hobbs is no novelty, yet we are beholding to you, that you will maintain
nothing in it, till the sword establish it, and then you will be content to
approve of it; But what if the sword should dethrone Christ and set up Mahumet?
Must that sword be obeyed?

Concerning the place of hell, and the nature of hell fire, cap. 38.
I will not dispute with you, seeing the Scripture does not punctually set
down, and in proper terms either the one or the other; yet we may collect by
some passages of holy writ, that hell is in the lower parts of the world; for
when it speaks of hell, it still names a descent or going down; Core went down
to hell; the rich glutton in hell lifted up his eyes toward Abraham. The ^eart
is said to rise the out of bottomless ^it and yet stands with reason, that the
place of the damned should be as remote from heaven, as may be, which can be no
where, but in the bowels of the earth. The names of (...) in Greek, and
infernus in Lutine intimate so much; the exactest description we have of hell;
is in Isa. 30. 33. Tophet is ordained of old, etc. he has made it deep and
large: the pile thereof is fire, and much wood, the breath of the Lord like a
stream of Brimston does kindle it. The Angels are said to be cast down to hell,
2. Pet. 2. 4. And Christ descended into hell; all which show that it is beneath
us; and this visible world.

Because the Prophets in the old Testament by allegorical terms describe the
happiness of Christ's Church under the Gospel; therefore Mr. Hobbs will needs (
cap. 38.) have these phrases to be understood of an earthly kingdom after the
resurrection; but the Prophets speak of pleasant rivers and fields, of woods
and groves, of horses and charriots, of eating and drinking, and all kind of
earthly delights; which if Mr. Hobbs understand literally, I shall think his
opinion relisheth too much of the Alcoran; and that he reviveth again the
heresy of Cerinthus, which the Fathers of the Church has long since exploded;
as being too gross and carnal, and such as none will believe but carnal men:
Nulla modo ista possunt, nisi a carnalibus credi, as St. Austin says, l. 20.
de civit. c. 7. The kingdom of God consists not in meat and drink, says the
Apostle; the words that they speak are spirit and truth; and are spiritually to
be understood: if we shall be like the Angels after the resurrection, as our
Savior assures us, what other delights can we have then, but such as they
enjoy now; why should not heaven be the place of our abode as well as theirs;
they need not the earth to reside in now, neither shall we then. But he says,
[ That the subjects of God should have any place higher then his footstool,
seems not suitable to the dignity of a King.] It may be so Mr. Hobbs, of you
speak of earthly Kings, who pride themselves in their supposed greatness, and
stand upon punctilios: but it is not so with the King of heaven, who made no
scruple to wash his servants seet; and to tell them, that they should sit with
him upon twelve thrones, to jude the twelve tribes of Israel. And assures us,
that he will grant to him who overcomes, to sit down with him in his throne;
even, as I (says he) also overcame, and am set down with my Father in his
throne, Rev. 1. 21. And St. John tells us, that Christ has made us kings and
priests unto God and his Father, Rev. 1. 6. It will not then be unsuitable to
his dignity, if we ascend higher then his footstool.

In his forty one chapter cap. 41
he tells us, [ That the Kingdom of Christ is not to begin till the general
resurrection.] What has Christ been all this while a King without a Kingdom;
or has his Church been all this time a people without a King; sheep without a
Shepherd, a body without a head? Are Christians in a worse condition then other
people? And is not Christ highly wronged, who having conquered a kingdom with
his blood, and having got the victory over all his enemies; is notwithstanding
now 1652. years without his kingdom; and must be without it till the general
resurrection. How can this stand, that he should so many years since by his
Apostles and their successors subdue so many nations to his obedience, by that
sharp two edged sword of his mouth; and yet all this while have no kingdom;
could Alexander in three years space subdue so many kindoms: and Christ after
so many hundred years be without his kingdom; what is become of his rod of
Iron, by which he was to rule the stubborn Gentiles? How can this stand, that
he ascended up on high, led captivity captive, and gave liberal gifts to men;
yea, likewise has prescribed diverse laws ordinances, has distributed diverse
rewards^ and inflicted diverse punishments, and yet is no King? he confesses to
Pilate, that he was even at that time a King, when he stood before him, ready
to suffer death for his subjects: but withal acknowledges, that his kingdom
was not of this world, and therefore refuses to be an earthly king. When Satan
profferred him all the kingdoms of the world, Matthew. 4. And when the Jews
sought to make him King, he absented himself. If he was a King in his
humiliation, shall he now be no King in his glory and exaltation? Now Mr. Hobbs
gives us a reason ( cap. 41.) why Christ's K^ngdom begins not till the
resurrection, [ Because then he shall reward every man according to his work
and this is to excute the office of a King.] This is a feeble reason, for a
King may be a King, though he differ the rewards or punishments which his
subjects have deserved. Shall we say, that David was not king, because he did
not reward Ioab, Shimei, and the sons of Barzillai according to their works,
but left that to his son Solomon, both to reward Barzillai's sons for their
good service to David in his affliction, and to punish Job with death, for the
murdering of Abner and Amasa; and likewise Shimei, for his railling against
the king. There is a time for all things; even for punishments and rewards; and
if the differing of these do argue no king, he may then as well say, that God
himself is no King, who differred the drowning of the world one thouand six
hundred years. And the punishing of the Amorites four hundred years. And so
does put off the rewarding of men till the world to come. But he tells us, [
That Christ ascribed kingly power to the Scribes and Pharisees, because they
sit in Moses chair.] But then Christ should have wronged the Roman Governors,
in whom he acknowledged kingly power, by paying tribute, and by submitting
himself to be judged by them. Their sitting then in Moses chair does not imply
kingly power; but their power in expounding the law of Moses. And it is as weak
an inference to say, that Christ is not King of his Church, [ Because he would
not divide the inheritance, between the two brethren, or because he came to
save the world, not to judge it;] For dividing of inheritances belonging not to
Christ's spiritual kingdom; neither was it the end of Christ's coming to judge,
that is to condemn the world, for the Greek word signifies both, but to save
it; for his name was Jesus a Savior, because he came to save his people from
their sins. And no less weak is this reason: [ The time of Christ's preaching is
called regeneration, therefore it is no kingdom.] Regeneration is not the time,
but the fruit and effect of Christ's preaching: and so far is regeneration from
being inconsistent with Christ's Kingdom; that our Savior tells us in plain
terms; except we be regenerate we cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, John 3.

In his two and fortty chapter cap. 4^:
he broacheth a strange wheemsie concerning the blessed Trinity, in saying, [
That God who has been represented (that is personated) thrice, to wit, by
Moses, by Christ, and by the Apostles, may properly enough be said to be three
Persons, as represented by the Apostles, the holy Spirit by which they spoke is
God, as represented by Christ, the Son is that God, as represented by Moses and
the high Priests, the Father is that God. Hence the names of Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, in the signification of the Godhead, are never used in the old
Testament; for they are Persons, that is, they have their names from
representing, which could not be, till diverse men had represented Gods Person,
etc.] Here is strange stuff: For first, The word Person in the Trinity, was
never taken by Divines for a Visard, a personating, or representation, but for
a peculiar way of subsisting; therefore by the Greek Church the word (...) was
used, till wanton and idle wits began to ^aise differences about that word; and
then (...) was used answering to the Latin word, Persona, and is defined thus,
(...) by Justin Martyr and Dam^s^en; an eternal or unbeginning manner of an
eternal existing; so that in the same essence there is a threefold way of
subsisting: The Fathers existence is from himself, the Sons from the Father,
the Spirits from both: so in man, there is the soul, the intellect and will;
these three are but one essence, yet differently subsisting; the soul of it
self, the intellect from the soul, and the will from both. Secondly, if
personating, or representing makes the persons in the Trinity, it will follow,
that there have been and are more then three Pesons, nay, I may truly say
innumerable, for God has been represented, not only by Moses, but by Iosuah
also and his successors; by Aaron the high Priest, and all his successors; by
all Judges also and Kings, who are therefore called gods: there must be then as
many persons, as there have been personatings or representations; and in this
respect the Trinity may be called a Legion, or rather innumerable persons.
Thirdly, Why should God be called the Holy Spi^^^, as he was represented by the
Apostles, rather then by being personated by Moses, or by Christ; his reason
is, because the Apostles spoke by the Spirit: I pray, did not Moses and Christ
speak by the same Spirit. St. Peter says, that the holy men of old spoke as
the Spirit moved them. Or why is God by him called Father, as he was
represented by Moses, rather then as he was represented by Christ? Was there
more Paternity in Moses, then in any other man, or in Christ, who by Isaiah is
called the everlasting Father? Or why is he called Father, as personated by the
high Priests. F^u^thly, It is untrue what he says, that the n^^es of Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, are never used in the old Testament. For Psalm. 89. which
contains not only a prophecy of Solom^n, but also of Christ, it is thus
written: He shall cry unto me, thou art my Father, Psalm. 89. 26. and Isa. 9. he
is called the everlasting Father. So Psalm: 2. Christ is called Son. Thou art my
Son, this day have I begotten thee: And Isa. 9. For unto us a Son is given. So
the third Person or Spirit is mentioned; The Spirit of God moved upon the
Waters, Genesis 1. Now that this was no wind, as some have thought, is plain;
because air was created afterward, and this Spirit is said to move, or by
moving to cherish the waters: but the wind is an enemy to the waters; both in
regard of its siccity, and imp^tuosity; neither is the wind ever called the
Spirit of God, as we have showed already. So Joel. ^. I will pour my Spirit
upon all flesh: And Zach, ^^. I will pour upon the house of David and the
Inhabitants of Jerusalem the Spirit of grace and supplication. But he says,
that these names are not used in the signification of the Godhead, but he is
deceived; for when the child Christ is called the everlasting Father by Isaiah,
this cannot be in signification of his humanity; for how can a little child be
an everlasting Father, but in respect of his Godhead.

He says, ( Cap. 42.) [If the Supreme King have not his regal power in this
world, by what authority can obedience be required to his Officers.] This is
not to be doubted, but the Supreme King has his regal power in this world; for
this cause he tells his Apostles after his resurrection, That all power was
given to him in heaven and in earth; therefore he sends them abroad into all
nations of this world, teaching them to observe all things which he had
commanded them, Matthew. 28. If then he has regal power in the world, why should
not his Officers be obeyed. It Is true, Christ's Kingdom is not of this world;
will it therefore follow, that it is not in this world? For if in this world he
subdueth the nations to his Scepter by the sword of his word, if he leads
captivity captive, if he gives gifts unto men, if he prescribe laws, and
punishes the offenders, shall we not say he has Kingly power in this world:
if the Kings and Potentates of the earth, have submitted their scepters to his
Heralds, have received his yoke, and have placed his cross upon their crowns
in sign of subjection, is he not their Supreme King, whose dominion here is
called the Kingdom of grace: his other Kingdom in the next world, shall be the
kingdom of glory, which M. Hobs confounds with this of grace: as for the
coercive or commanding power of Ministers which he speaks against; I must needs
confess, there is not so much, as some could take upon them; yet to deny all
coercive power, is to deny the commission which this great King, Luke 14. gave
to his servants, that they should compel those in the highwaies to come to his
supper. And albeit ministers are called fishermen, and not hunters; yet
fishermen use some force in drawing their fish to the shore: and indeed, none
can come to me, says Christ, except the Father draw him: as for his doctrine
of dissimulation in matters of Religion, both with God and man; I dare not
assent thereto, for God, who is the God of truth, loves truth in the inward
parts, he that is not with him, is against him, who gathers not with him
scatters. Linnin and Woolin in the same garment, different seeds in the same
ground, an ox and an ass at the same plough are not pleasing to him. Pulcra est
concordia cordis and oris. If to think one think and speak another did argue
Catalin to be an evil-man; shall it not argue the like in a Christian. Aliud in
lingua promptum, ali^d in pectore clausum habere.

When he ^ells us ( cap. 42.) [ That Christ's commission to his Disciples and
Apostles, was to proclaim his Kingdom, not present but to come.] He is
mistaken; for the Apostles commission was to proclaim that the Kingdom of
heaven was at hand^ (...), in the perfect tense, shows that it was already
come, or at hand, Mat. 3. and 4. And he shows, Luke 17. 21. That the Kingdom
of God was within them: And Luke 11. 20. That the kingdom of God was come upon
them: If then this kingdom of Christ was not to come till after the
resurrection, how could it be said to be then at hand? Whereas already there
are 1652 years: past, besides, what are to come. When he says, ( cap. 42.)^ [
That the Apostles had no power to make la^s, but to persuade; that they did
counsel and advise, but not command; that their precepts were invitations and
callings; not commands, that they might be without sin dissobeyed:] And much
more to this purpose, he ^peaks absurdly; for how can he make precepts to be
counsels and not commands. Is not praecipio and mando all one. Are not the ten
Commandments ten precepts? Are they to be called counsels? did not the Apostles
make laws, and enjoin them to be observed, Acts 15. St. Paul does not counsel,
but command the Thessalonians to work with their own hands, 1 These. 4. 11. He
hopes they will do the things he commands them, 2 These. 3. 4. Timothy is to
command as well as to teach, 1 Timothy 4. 11. He must command the rich men of this
world, 1 Timothy 6. 17. The Apostle puts a difference between counsel and command;
when he saith^ that concerning virgins he had no command; but gives his counsel
in that case, 1 Cor. 7. 25. Now that Christ and his Apostles may be disobeyed
without sin, is a sinful opinion; for Christ tells us, that if he had not come
and spoken to the Jews, they had not had sin, but now they have no cloak for
their sin, John 15. 24. St John writes to his brethren, that they might not
sin, 1 John 2. 1. to wit. if they obey and observe, what he writes; otherwise,
they must needs sin. Disobedience is not only a sin, but as Samuel says, it
is as heinous as the sin of witchcraft or idolatry.

He makes a needless difference ( cap. 42.) between a minister and a servant, [
That servants are obliged by their condition to what is commanded them, whereas
ministers are obliged only by their undertaking.] But indeed these words,
servant and minister are promiscuously used; for if servants are obliged by
their condition to what is commanded them; then ministers are servants, for
this obligation lies upon them. And if ministers are obliged by their
undertaking, then servants are ministers, for what they undertake they are
obliged to perform. Christ, Mat. 20. 26, and 27. uses the words (...) for the
same thing. And so he is called sometimes (...), and sometimes (...), and this
word Diaconus is given sometimes to the meanest servant, sometimes to the
Magistrate, as Romans 13. sometimes to Preachers, sometimes to Church Officers
called Deacons. Ambassadors are called also by this name, and they are said
(...) to serve or to be Deacons.

He will have ( Chap. 42.) [ Princes to be called Shepherds or Pastors, because
they are to teach the people.] But indeed they are called Pastors from feeding,
not from teaching, neither is it the office of a King to preach or administer
the Sacraments^ No man takes upon him (says the Apostle) this honor, but he
that is called of God, as Aaron was: he should have said, As Moses was, if he
had been called to perform the Pr^ests Office: Therefore Christian Sovereigns
are not instituted to teach by virtue of their Baptism, as he says; for
Baptism is a Sacrament of our regeneration and of our admission to be members
of Christ's body^ by it Princes and Subjects are washed from sin, but not
instituted to preach; the Emperor has no more power to perform the Priests
office^ or to preach by virtue of his Baptism, then his meanest subject, And
if the Kings Baptism does not authorize him to ^ach at all, much less [ to
teach what doctrine he will, and to exercise absolute Power over his subjects]
as Mr. Hobbs says: For absolute power is in God only; they are tyrants, not
lawful Princes, that will claim abs^lute power over their subjects^ And if it
be Baptism that investeth Princes with power over their subjects^ what power
has the Turk the Persian, the Magor, the King of China^ the great Cham over
their Subjects, who were never baptsed: and to allow Princes power to teach
what they will, is to make them absolute lords, not only over our bodies and
goods, but over our souls also, and to en^lave our understandings to their
wills.

When he says, ( cap. 42.) In that Urim and Thummim was given to the high
Priest, it was given to the civil Sovereign; for such next under God was the
high Priest in the Commonwealth of Israel.] He contradicts himself; for this
high Priest to whom Urim and Thummim was given first, was Aaron, whom not long
before he subjected to Moses, cap. 40. where he says, [ That not Aaron; bu^
Moses alone had next under God the Soveraignity over the Israelites, and that
not only in causes of civil policy, but also of religion.] Here we see how he
makes and unmakes the Soveraignity of Princes; and not only does he make
Moses for his time, but also the Scribes and Pharisees who sat in his chair,
(that is to ^ay, expounded his law) supreme civil Sovereigns, whereas the
legislative power, and civil Soveraignity was in the Romans by right of
conquest; which our Savior did acknowledge by paying tribute, and counselling
to give to Caesar, that which were Caesar's.

He ( cap. 42) [ will not have excommunication to be a punishment, but only a
denouncing of punishment, that Christ shall inflict at the day of Judgment.]
But I say that excommunication is not a bare denouncing, but a real suffering
of punishment, and of such a punishment as is most grievous; to wit, a ^
paration from Gods people, and the benefits which they enjoy: for if the
Abstenti in the Prin^itive Church, held it a great punishment to be debarred
from the Sacrament for a while; how much more grievous is it to be cut off from
the mystical body of Christ, and to be excluded from the Communion of the
Saints, and of all the privileges which they do now, and shall hereafter enjoy.

He denies ( cap. 42.) [ that there is any spiritual Commonwealth among men
in this world.] This he gronnds upon two reasons; [1. because it is the same
thing with the Kingdom of Christ, which is not of this world. Secondly, There
are no men on earth whose bodies are spiritual.] These reasons are very weak:
For first, because a spiritual Commonwealth and Christ's Kingdom are the same,
it will follow, that there is a spiritual Commonwealth amongst men, which is
the Kingdom of grace here, where Christ reigns in the hearts of his faithful
people; which though it be not of this world, yet it is in this world; as I
have showed already: And of this Kingdom our Savior speaks, when he says, The
Kingdom of God is within you; Luke, 17. 21 Which consists in righteousness,
peace, and joy in the holy Ghost, Romans 14. 17. Secondly, To say that Christ
has not here a spiritual Commonwealth, because men's bodies are not spiritual,
is ridiculous; for Christ's subjects here are spiritual, though their bodies be
corporeal, because they are animated, regulated, directed by the spirit. They
are regenerated by the spirit, John 3. They walk not after the flesh, but after
the spirit, Romans 8. The spirit helps their in^irmities, and teaches them to
pray, Romans 8. The holy spirit dwells in them, 2 Timothy 1. 14. God has given
them of his spirit, 1 John 4. 13. They are sealed with the spirit of promise,
Ephesians. 1. 13. They have the fruits of the spirit, which are love, joy, peace,
long-suffering, etc. Gal. 5. 22. Therefore Christ's subjects, though they are
here clothed with flesh yet are called spiritual: Gal 6. 1. Yo^ which are
spiritual, restore such a one in the spirit of meekness. These are
distinguished from carnal or natural men. 1 Cor 3. 1. I could not speak to you
brethren as to spiritual men, but as to carnal. So 1 Cor. 2. 14, 15. The
natural man perceives not the things of the spirit of God; but he that is
spiritual discerns all things. So their seed is spiritual, 1. Cor. 9. 11.
Their meat and drink is spiritual, 1 Cor. 10. 3, 4. Their songs are spiritual,
Ephesians. 5. 19. Their house is spiritual, a Pet. 2. 5. And their sacrifice is
spiritual, 1 Pet. 2. 5. Can we say then that Christ's Kingdom or Commonwealth,
as he calls it, is not spiritual?

He ( cap. 42.^) [ will not have the members of a Common-weath to depend one of
another, but to cohere together. They depend only (says he) on the Sovereign,
which is the soul on the Commonwealth.] But there is a dependence, as well as
a coherence; in a dead body there is a coherence of members, but no dependence;
in a living body, there are both: though the body depend on the soul, it will
not therefore follow, that the members do not depend one of another: for the
hands and feet depend on the stomach, to be ^ed by it, and it depends on them,
to be defended, provided, and carried by them; the like may be said of the
other members. So in a Common-wealth^ the Sovereign depends on the people for
assistance, maintenance and defense; they depend on him for counsel,
government, and peace. The members of the Commonwealth depend on the Clothyer
for clothes, on the Husbandman for food, on the Physician for health, on the
Divine for instruction, on the Lawyer for counsel, etc. And these depend on
each other.

Heresy (says he) ( cap. 42.) [ is nothing else but a private opinion;
obstinately maintained, contrary to the opinion which the public person bath
commanded to be taught. Hence an opinion publicly appointed to be taught,
cannot be heresy, nor the Princes that authorize them, heretics.] It seems
then by this definition, that Ariani^m was only an heresy, whil^t it was
maintained by Arius a private person; but when it was anthorised publicly by
the Arian Princes, it was no more an heresy: and so now, not Arius, but
Athanasius that opposed it must be called an heretic, by Mr. Hobbs, contrary
to the judgment of all learned men, and the Church of God hitherto. The great
Turk, and the Mahumetans, who profess at this day the same damnable doctrine of
Arius, are not heretics, but the Christians within his dominions, who are of
another opinion, these are your heretics Mr. Hobbs; by this your definition,
you may call Christ and his Apostles heretics, for they held doctrines contary
to the traditions and opinions of the Scribes and Pharisees, who (as you say)
sat in Moses chair. It is not the person private or public that makes an
heretic, but it is the doctrine, repugnant to Gods word, and the articles of
our faith, maintained obstinately for sini^trous ends, as lucre, honor, etc.
that makes heresy: a private man may maintain an opinion in Philosophy
contrary to the opinion of the Prince, and yet no heretic in this, because he
holds nothing against our Christian faith, his opinion may be erroneous but not
heretical.

In his three and forty chapter he tells us, [ That the faith of Christians ever
since Christ's time, has had for foundation, the reputation of Pastors and
Authority of Christian Sovereigns.] This is to build our faith upon a sandy
foundation, which with every blast will be overt^rned; the authority and
reputation of men are but arms of flesh, and broken reeds to rely upon; these
may be motives to induceus to give our assent, as the testimony of that woman,
John 4. induced many of the Samaritans of that City to believe on Christ? But
the foundation of their faith was Christ himself; who bestowed that gift upon
them, as he does upon us. And how can man's reputation or authority be the
foundation of that which exceeds all humane reason and capacity; but such is
faith: Besides, faith it self is the ground of our justification and salvation;
for we are both justified and saved by faith; but if man be the ground of our
faith, he must also be the ground of our j^stification and salvation; and so
Christ died and rose in vain. But the Apostle shows us the true foundation of
our faith in these words: For other foundation can^no man lay, them that is
laid, which is Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 3. 11. Christ therefore as he is revealed
to us in his word, is the foundation of our faith: besides, By faith we are the
sons of God, says the Apostle, Gal. 3. But we were in a bad condition if
ourfiliation depended on the authority of Princes, or reputation of Pastors.

In his forty fourth chapter Cap. 44.
he expounds these words of Matthew. 9. 34. Beelzebub the Prince of Devils, that
is, [ He has principality over fantasins that appear in the air.] So that he
makes [ Demons fantasms, or spirits of illusion to signify allegorically the
same thing.] But I do not read that Devils in Scripture are called fantasms, or
fantasms named Devils: when the Disciples, Mat. 14. saw Jesus walking on the
sea, they thought they had seen a fantasm; did they mean the devil by this
word? So when Christ, Mat. 4. was tempted of the devil, is it meant that he was
tempted by a fantasm? Devils are spirits and real substancet, and not phantasms
or fictions of the brain, as we showed before of Angels, I deny not but Satan
may represent to the outward sense, as well as to the inward or imagination,
diverse shapes of things to delude men; which shapes may be called fantasms, as
that which Suidas calls a diabolical fantasm (...); which indeed was but a
deluding shadow or fantasm, and not the Devil himself; who is an invisible
spirit: therefore although there be in the heathen Poets fabulous doctrines
concerning Demons, we must not hence infer with Mr. Hobbs, [ That Demons are
but idols or fantasms of the brain, without any real nature of their own,
distinct from human fancy.] For so he may as well infer, that God is but a
fancy; because the Poets have delivered many ^abulous doctrines concerning the
gods. He that afflicted Job, tempted Christ, bu^^etted Paul, and has been from
the beginning an enemy to the woman's seed, is more then a fantasm or idol of
the brain.

Cap. 44. After Mr. Hobbs has toyled himself in vain, to prove that Christ
has no kingdom in this world, at last is content to allow Christ the kingdom
of grace, which is as much as we desire; for we know that the kingdom of glory
is not yet come; Christ then is King of his Church militant here, and reigns
in the hearts of his faithful, and performs all the offices of a King, even in
this world, by prescribing laws, by ruling, defending, rewarding, punishing,
though not in so ample a manner, as hereafter; he also conquereth and subdueth
the enemies of his Church, though not fully till the consummation of the world:
He also enlarges the territories and bounds of his Kingdom, that he might
fulfill the prophesies, and make good his Fathers gift. Psalm. 2. I have given
thee the heathen for thine inheritance, and the ends of the earth for thy
possession. This is that kingdom, which is in the new Testament so often called
the kingdom of God, and of heaven; this is that kingdom which in the
resurrection Christ will deliver up to God his Father, 1 Cor. 15.

He cannot yet digest ( cap. 44^) the souls immortality, for three reasons.
[First, because the tree of life was to preserve man immortal. Secondly, what
needed Christ's sacrifice to recover man's immortality, if he has not lost it:
Thirdly, must the wicked and heathen also enjoy eternal life.] I answer, The
tree of life was to preserve man immortal, but not the soul which is immortal
by nature, as being a spirit, and not subject to corruption, as bodies which
are compounded of corruptible materials, and of contrary elements. Secondly,
Christ's sacrifice was to recover man's immortality, but not the souls which was
not lost; now as a part cannot be the whole, nor the whole a part; so neither
can the soul ^be man, nor man the soul. Thirdly, eternal life which the wicked
enjoy, is a life of misery, and such as they would be willing to exchange for
death, neither is it more strange that wicked men should enjoy eternal life,
then wicked Angels; both enjoying this immortality, as a due punishment for
their sins: now whereas he says, [ That eternal life was not essential to
humane nature, but consequent to the virtue of the tree of life.] I grant, that
man is not naturally immortal, yet the soul of man is; but I deny that life
eternal was a consequent to the virtue of any tree; for no tree can be capable
of such a virtue; neither was the tree of life any other then a Sacrament of
man's immortality, if he had pesevered in his obedience; therefore God debarred
him, because of his transgression, from it; in that he would not have his
Sacraments abused by profane hands. But he tells us, [ That when everlasting
death is called everlasting life in torments, it is a figure never used but in
this very case.] I answer, That this figure is used in other cases; as when
Christ says, Let the dead go bury the dead; there natural life is called
death: So when the Apostle ^aith, We were dead in our sins and trespasses: he
used the same figure in another case; for there the delight we have in sin is
called death; this figure is used in the law in another case, for captives,
slaves, prisoners, and such like miserable men, are said to be civily dead: St.
Paul in another case uses this figure, when he says, I am crucified; that is,
dead to the world; to wit, in his affections; and so they who include
themselves in a monastery, are said to be dead to the world. But he says, that
this doctrine of the souls imnortality [ is founded only on some of the
obscurer places of the new Testament.] I pray, what obscurity is there in this
place, Thou shall be this night with me in Paradise? What was to be with Christ
in Paradise, not the good thiess body, then it must needs be his soul? So when
Christ preached to the spirits in prison, what were these spirits? Shaddows
only, or fancies, such as Virgil speaks of: Umbrae ibant tenues, simulachraque
luce carentum. Bodies they could not be, they must needs then be souls: So when
Christ says, That body and soul shall be cast into hell fire, there cannot be
meant, as Mr. Hobbs expounds it, body and life; for then Christ should speak
nonsense, when he says; Fear not them which kill the body, but are not able
to kill the soul, Mat. 10. 28. That is, fear not them that can take away the
life of the body, but are not able to take away the life of the life. But he
objecteth, [ That the soul in Scripture is taken sometimes for the whosle man,
or living creature.] I grant it is so taken sometimes Synecdochically; will it
therefore ^ollow that it is never taken properly? So this word flesh is
sometimes tropically used for the whole man, is therefore never used properly.

He tells us, ( cap. 44.) [ That this window gives entrance to the dark
doctrine of eternal torments, of purgatory, of walking ghosts, and exorcisms.]
The doctrine of eternal torments is not so dark, as he takes it; it is in plain
terms set down in Scripture, to be an eternal separation from God, everlasting
fire, everlasting shame, and contempt, etc. Neither is it a doctrine either
erroneous or dangerous, that we should for fear of teaching it, deny the souls
immortality; suppose also, that the doctrine of pugatory, walking ghosts and
exorcisms were erroneous, and grounded on the souls immortality; must we deny
this for for fear of these errors? Must we deny the Scriptures, because they
have been windows to give entrance to diverse heresies? What doctrine is so
sound, orthodox, and true, which is not abused by wanton, luxurious and
pernicious wits? As for ghost walking, that has no relation to the souls
immortality; for if by ghost he meant the soul; that walked usually among the
Gentiles, till the body was buried a hundred years, as Vrigil says: Centum
errant annos, and then it rested in the grave with the body, as Mr. Hobbs would
have it; So Virgil speaks of the soul of Polidorus, Aen. 3. Animamque sepulcro
condimus; and of Deiph^bus, magna manes t^r voce vocavi, Aen. 6. His soul was
called upon by Anaeas to come to his grave. Again, this ghost walking was
neither of the soul, nor of the body, but of the shadow, image, fancy, or
similitude of the body. So Aen. 4, Omnibus um^bra locis adero, says Queen
Dido. So on her death bed she speaks, Magna mei sub terras ibit imago So the
shadow and similitude of Creusa appeared to Aenaeas, Infelix simulachrum,
Atque ipsius umbra Creusae, Aen. 2. So Lucretius out of Ennius, who were no
great friends to the souls immortality, held that neither the soul nor the body
went to hell, but only the shaddows or similitudes of men.

Et si preterea tamen esse Acberusia templa
Ennius aeternis exponit versibus, edens,
Quo neque permanent animae, neque corpora nosira:
Sed quaedam simulachra modis pallentia miris.
Lucr. l. 1. When Christ says, Mar. 9. 1. There be some that stand here who
shall not taste of death, till they have seen the Kingdom of God come with
power. This Kingdom Mr. Hobbs [ will have to be spoken of Christ's
transfiguration.] I know some of the Ancients were of this opinion; but it is
very improbable that Christ should call a vision, the Kingdom of God; and a
Kingdom with power: therefore it is more likely, that he meant the kingdom of
grace, or of his Church, which began to spread after his resurrection, with
power, when at the preaching of fishermen the world began to submit to the
scepter of Christ: which some that stood there, that is, the Apostles saw,
before they tasted of death: who are called some, in respect of the people, who
also stood there, as may be seen, Mark 8. 34. Again, whereas Christ's kingdom
began at his resurrection. Mr. Hobbs demands [ a reason, why Christians ever
since pray, thy kingdom come.] The reason is, because that kingdom we pray for,
is not yet come, to wit, the kingdom of Glory; nor is the kingdom of Grace
totally come, or in its full plenitude, because all nations are not as yet
subdued to Christ's Scepter.

He gives us ( cap. 44.) a pretty interpretation of Solomon's words, Eccles. 12.
7. The spirit shall return to God that gave it, [ That is (says he) God only
knows (but not man^) what becomes of man's spirit when he expireth.] This
interpretation is somewhat far fe^ched: which if it be allowed, the word of God
will prove no better then a nose of wax. When Luke 8. 55. the rulers daughter
being dead, it is said, her spirit returned to her again; the meaning must be^
according to Mr. Hobbs his interpretation, that her spirit did not indeed
return, but only she knew (and none but she) what became of it: So Zach. 1.
16. Thus says the Lord, I am returned to Jerusalem with mercies: The meaning
is, that Jerusalem only knew, what was become of God. Besides, when Solomon
says, The dust shall return to the earth, and the spirit shall return unto
God: I would know, whether the dust truly, returns to the earth? if it
returns, why does not the soul truly return to God? Seeing with the same
breath, the same phrase is uttered by Solomon: as for the question Solomon
makes, Eccles. 3. 21. Who knows that the spirit of man goes upward, and that
the spirit of the beast goes downward; does not sound so in the Hebrew; but
thus: Who knows the spirit of man that goes upward: and so both the French
and our last English translations have it, and so have the Latin Geneva
version: The Septuagints read it thus: Who has seen the spirit of man: and the
Geneva translation has; who have observed the spirit. So that Solomon
questioneth not the immortality of the soul, but shows the difficulty of
knowing the nature thereof; or the manner how it leaves the body, and mounteth
upward toward heaven, the place of its original.

He proves ( cap. 44.) [ there is no natural immortality of the soul by
Solomon, Eccles. 3. 19. That which befalls the sons of man, befalls beasts,
as the one dies, so dies the other, they have all one breath, and a man has
no pre-eminence a bove a beast.] In these words Solomon does not speak of the
soul at all; but of the body only, as may be seen in the words immediately
following. All go into one place; all are of the dust, and all turn to dust
again. I hope the believes better of Solomon, then to make him speak so
brutishly, as though man's divine soul were made of dust, and resolved into dust
again: or as if there were no difference between man's soul and the breath of
beasts. In respect then of our animal nature, or corporeal part, we eat, drink,
sleep, breath, and dye like the beasts, but this concerns nothing at all the
reasonable soul of man, by which he is ^ specifically different from beasts. He
says, [ That Enoch's translation makes as much for the immortality of the body
as of the soul.] I deny it not, and therefore infer, That if it makes for the
immortality of the body, much more makes it for the immortality of the soul;
therefore this place of Genesis 5. 24. Enoch walked with God, and he was not; for
God took him; is alleged by Divines, to prove man's immortality after the
resurrection. Again he says, [ That this is a hard saying of Solomon's; Better
is he that has not yet been, then they who have been, if the soul be
immortal.] But I say, that this saying is no ways hard; for better it is to
have no being morally, then to have a miserable being: therefore the
immortality of a wicked man's soul adds to his unhapiness. For this cause Christ
says of Judas, That it had been good for him, if he had never been born.
Besides, when Christ tells us, That God is the God of Abraham, etc. and
therefore Abraham was then alive; Mr. Hobbs says, [ That Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob were then alive by promise, not actually.] but I would fain know when did
God make such a promise to Abraham, that his soul should live immortally, and
that he should be raised to immortality in the last day. Again, how can one be
said to live by promise, who is actually dead; How is God the God of the
living, if they whose God he is be not living, but actually dead; for a dead
man to live by promise is a bull.

Cap. 44. [ He cannot find, that any man shall live in torments
everlastingly.] What does he say to that place, Rev. 20. 10. Where the beast
and false prophet are tormented with the Devil day and night for ever and ever.
Do not they live in torments everlastingly, that live in everlasting shame and
contempt: but such is the condition of the wicked, Dan. 12 2. They shall be
punished with everlasting destruction, or perdition, 2 These. 1. 9. But [ it
seems hard to him, that God the Father of mercies should punish without any end
of time, etc. If God were not the Father of justice, as well as of mercy, it
would go hard with good men; but it is just with God to recompense tribulation
to them that trouble you, says the Apostle: And to you that are troubled,
peace with us, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 6, 7. God who is offended is eternal, the desires of
wicked men to sin are eternal, Voluissent roprobi sine fine vivere, ut possent
sine fine peccare. The reward of the godly is eternal; why then should not the
torments of wicked men be eternal? But I will answer him, as St. Austin
answers the Originists. Tant^ errat perversius quanto videtur de Deo sentire
clementius, Their error must heeds be too pernicious, that makes God too
gracious. Again, to what end did God prepare an everlasting fire, if the wicked
be not everlastingly tormented in it? But to this he answers: [ That there
never may want wicked men to be tormented in them, though not every, nor any
one eternally; for the wicked being left in the estate they were in after
Adam's sin, may at the resurrection live as they did, marry, and give in
marriage and engender perpetually, for there is no place of Scripture to the
contrary.] When the Scripture speaks of wicked men's eternal torments, it never
speaks of any redemption thence, and Mr. Hobbs confesses, that the Reprobates,
who dye in their sins, shall have no redeemer, they must then remain there for
ever; except they had a Redeemer to help them ou^ thence. Besides, I showed
that the false prophet is tormented for ever, and we read, Rev. 4. That if any
one man shall worship the beast, the smoke of his torment shall ascend for
evermore. As for leaving the wicked in the estate they were in after Adams
fall, is a doctrine well beseeming the school of Mahomet, not of Christ: it
seems also by this doctrine, that at the resurrection shall be the revolution
of the Platonic year, when all things shall be acted in this world, as they
were in the beginning: After Adam's fall, men did marry, build, plant, tread,
eat, drink, and solace themselves with diverse delights, if the wicked shall do
the same after the resurrection, they shall be in as good a condition, as the
Musalmans in Mahumets Paradise, or the Gentiles in the Elysian fields.

-- quae gra^^a currum
Armor^^que fuit vivis, quae cura nitentes
Pascere sequos eadem sequitur tellure repostos.
Virg. AEn. 6. If this doctrine of yours be admitted, who will for bear
wickedness and profanness, knowing that he shall be after this life in the same
condition Adam was after his fall, who will not be content rather to embrace
that condition, after the has glutted himself here with the pleasures of sin;
then to endure all miseries and persecution, deny himself, and take up the
cross of Christ, to enjoy unknown happiness which the eye has not seen, nor
the ear heard of: But when you say that there is no Scripture contrary to
marriage after the resurrection; I would know whether there be any Scripture
for it. Why may not Judas Iscariot marry with some Princes daughter, and by
this means obtain a crown, you can allege me no Scripture against it; but I
can allege you Scripture against marriage; In the resurrection, says Christ,
men neither marry, nor are given in marriage; but are like the Angels of God,
that is, without copulation as they are. Now St. Matthew speaks not there of
the resurrection of the just only, but of the resurrection in general; and so
does St. Luke^ though you would have him speak only of the resurrection of
just men: for all men shall rise to life eternal; all men in their celibat
shall be like the Angels: as men shall and may be called the children of the
resurrection, and consequently of God: as all men, even the Devils, are the
sons of God by creation: for as he gave to all men a being in the creation, so
he will give to all men a new being in the resurrection. To be brief, that the
punishment of wicked men shall be eternal, is plain by this argument; they only
are pardoned who repent; the wicked after this life cannot repent, therefore
they cannot be pardoned: besides our Savior tells us, that he who speaks
against the Hol^ Ghost shall not be forgiven, neither in this world, nor in the
world to come: if then there be no remission of sin, there can be no relaxation
of punishment, for the one depends upon the other.

In his 45 Chap. he undertakes to show, That those evil spirits or Devils which
Christ cast outof the possessed, were not such, but diseases. Sure if this
opinion be true, then Christ did no great matter in curing of ordinary
diseases. But the Scripture tells us, that He came to destroy death, and him who
has the power of death, which is the Devil, that the prophecy in Paradise
might be fulfilled, The seed of the woman shall tread down the Serpents head.
These were strange diseases that could speak to, and question Christ, Art thou
come to torment us before our time? and could beseech him to have leave to
enter into the Herd of Swine. Our Savior did not know so much as Mr. Hobbs.
that Devils were but diseases, when he gave commission to his Disciples, Matthew.
10. and Luke 9. not only to cure diseases, but also to cast out Devils. And
Matthew. 4.24. Christ not only cured diverse diseases and torments, and healed
such as were lunatic, and had the palsy, but those also which were possessed
with Devils; by which we see Diseases and Devils are different things. But he
says, That the addressing of Christ's. command to madness or lunacy, is no more
improper then was his rebuking of the Fever, or the wind and Sea. I answer,
It Is true, Christ's speaking to those inanimate things, was only to show the
power and efficacy of his Word; so in the Creation God is introduced by Moses
as if he had spoken to the creatures; but it were very absurd to think that
diseases should speak and discourse with Christ; should question and beseech
him, and acknowledge his Divinity, as these Devils did. But he proceeds and
says, That he has not observed out of Scripture, that any man was ever
possessed with any other corporeal spirit but that of his own. That some men
have been possessed with other spirits besides their own, is plain by many
places of Scripture; but whether these spirits were corporeal or incorporeall,
is not the question, though neither Divinity nor Philosophy does acknowledge
any corporeal spirits properly: The Wind indeed is sometimes called a Spirit,
and so is the Sun, but the word Spirit is there used improperly, and in a large
sense; so are these subtle vapou^s in the Nerves and Arteries called Animal
and Vital Spirits by the Physicians, though indeed they be bodies. Now that
Spirits properly so called^ such as Angels and Men's souls cannot be corporeal,
is plain, because they have not quantity, nor are in a place by
circumscription, nor move Physically. Many Angels may be in the same ub^, a
legion of spirits, that is 6500 may be in the same man; and yet Mr Hobbs cannot
observe, that ever any man has been possessed with any other spirit then that
of his own. Besides, if Spirits were corporeal, their bodies must be either
Homogeniall or Heterogeniall. Not Homogenial; for different operations, such as
are in Angels, require different organs. Not Heterogenial; ^or so we must make
Angels and the souls of men to be composed of different and contrary entities,
and consequently subject to dissolution and corruption. All which are gross
absurdities. Again, Angels can pass through gresse bodies without penetration
of dimensions, which show they have not quantity, and consequently are
immateriall: For the purest body that is cannot pass through another, but the
other body must yield and give place. Lastly, if there were not incorporeall
spirits, the world would be imperfect, as being destitute of Incorporeall
substances, which with the corporcall make up the Universe, and complete it.

He says ( Chap. 45) [ That Christ went himself into the wilderness, and that
this carrying of him up and down from the wilderness to the City, and from
thence into a mountain, was a vision.] I know he went of himself to be tempted,
he being no ways forced, but of his own accord undertook to buckle with Satan
our Arch-enemy, that we might the more boldly enter with him. Yet the Scripture
^aith, That he was led by the spirit; but I cannot admit that this temtation of
Christ was but a vision: for then we shall have small comfort by Christ's
temtation, if it were not real but imaginary, or in a vision; and if we shall
admit this to be a vision, we may suspect the rest of his sufferings to be but
visions, to the great dishonor of our Savior and his Evangelists who wrote his
History, and also to the discomfort of all Gods children. But how came Mr Hobbs
to be so wise as to know this to be a vision, of which the Evangelists make
such an exact historical narration? When in Scripture any thing is done in a
dream or vision, the dream or vision is mentioned; as the Angel appeared to
Joseph in a dream, Matthew. 2. Peter saw a sheet let down from heaven in a
vision, Acts 10. The wise men were warned by the Angel in a dream, Matthew. 2.
Paul saw the man of Macedonia in a vision, Acts 11. The Lord spoke to Paul in a
vision, Acts 18. but in this temtation of Christ there is no mention of any
vision, therefore we conclude it was real; and in saying so, we need not fear
that either Christ was possessed, or carried away violently by the devil, as
Mr. Hobbs would infer; because our Savviour for our comfort and salvation,
suffered himself to be both tempted and carried by the devil, as afterward he
permitted himself to be apprehended, and scourged, and crucified by the devils
Instruments. And albeit Satan could not from that high mountain show to the
Lord all the kingdoms of the world, yet he could point to the understanding
their places and situation.

He is offended ( cap. 45.) [ That the use of exorcism has hitherto so
prevailed in the Church by the doctrine of incorporeal spirits.] Incorporeal
spirits are no more the cause of exorcisms, then corporeal substances are:
(...) is but to adjure, and adjuration is used as well against men as spirits;
the high Priest did not think that Christ when he stood before him was an
incorporeal spirit, yet he adjureth or exorciseth him by the living God, Mat.
26. He tells us, [ That there were many Demoniacks in the Primitive Church, and
few madmen; whereas now there are many madmen, and few Demoniacks, which
proceeds not from the change of nature, but of names.] That the use of exorcism
has so prevailed in the Church, should administer cause of comfort, not of
grief; in that our Savior has not left his Church destitute of helps and arms
against the devil, who takes delight to torment men here, by possessing their
bodies, and to torment them hereafter, by insinuating into their souls,
enticing them to consent to all kind of iniquity, that so he may bring them,
with himself, into eternal misery. Now our Savior was the chief exorcist
himself, for he by his power and word cast ou^ devils, this gift he bestowed on
his Apostles, that they should cast ou^ devils in his name; and therefore the
Disciples after they were sent abroad by Christ, and had returned, rejoiced
that the devils were subject to them: and this gift of exorcism was bestowed
sometimes on wicked men, as we may see Mat. 7. of those, who in the last day
will say to Christ, We have cast out devils in thy name. And we read Acts 19.
of the 7. sons of Scaeva, who took upon them to exorcise evil spirits in the
name of the Lord Jesus, because Paul had practiced exorcism with such good
success. We see how the spirit of divination by Paul's command in the name of
Jesus Christ came out of the damosel, Acts 16. Exorcism then is a gift of God,
not temporary to continue only in the Apostles, but lasting, and to remain in
the Church till the end of the world; otherwise we should be in a sad
condition: if when Satan possesses any of her members, there were no remedy
against him; ^ut we have remedies left us, to wit, ^asting and prayer, for our
Savior tells us, that there is a kind of devil which is not cast out but by
prayer and fasting, Mat. 16. Now that there are some possessed in these latter
days, is apparent by diverse histories, that mention strange effects of people
possessed, which are more then natural, and at which Physicians are amazed; for
as their diseases are preternatural, so be their cures; Melanc^^^ ^n his
Epistles tells us of a woman in his time, who lived in Saxome, she being
possessed by the devil, in her fits would speak Greek and Latin sentences,
which she never before had heard. She foretold the Sa^on war in these words,
(...)^ (...) that is, There will be tribulation upon the earth, and wrath in
this people. He mentions another Demoniack, who by the prayers of the
congregation was freed from the devil, which at certain times used to torment
her; I could allegde many examples of modern Demoniacks out of Del Rio, Wierus,
Bodin, Zacuta, ^^ularts memorable histories, and others, which physic could
not cure, but were cured by Christian exorcisms, that is, by prayers, fastings,
and alms of the Congregation, Demones a nobis adjurantur and t^rquentur:
spiritualibus flagris and orationis flagellis exire coguntu^. We adjure and
torment the devils: our spiritual whips and scourging prayers force them to go
o^t, says Lactantiae. I know some superstitious ceremonies have been and are
still used in exorcisms, which I allow not: but I do not like Mr. Hobbs his
slighting of Christ's miracles, and his Apostles, when he tells us, [ That
Demoniacks were many in the primitive Church, and few madmen, whereas now
there are many madmen and few Demoniacks, which proceed not from the change of
nature. Is not this to extenuate Christ's miracles, who came to destroy the
works of the devil, and to cast out the prince of this world. And is it not
likewise to make the Evangelists imposters, in publishing those cures for
miraculous which were not, and calling ordinary and natural diseases by the
terms of devils and evil spirits?

He will not ( cap. 45.) have it Satan that entered into Judas, though St. Luke
writes so, [ But an hostile and traiterous intention of selling Christ, for as
by the holy Ghost are meant frequently graces and good inclinations, so by
entering of Satan may be understood wicked cogitations.] To Mr. Hobbs Satan is
any thing, so he may not be a spirit or incorporeal substances. Sometimes he is
but a fancy, shadow, dream, or apparition: sometimes is madness, palsy,
lunacy, or any other melady; here he is a traytorous intention; but indeed
there was more then a traiterous intention that entered into Judas at last: the
intention to betray Christ was put into the heart of Judas by Satan, John 13.
2. But when he had received the sop, Satan himself entered into him; and as St.
Austin on that place says, took full possession of him, John 13. 27. And
though I should yield, that sometimes the holy Ghost is put for the graces of
the spirit, yet it will not follow, that Satan is used in Scripture for any
evil suggestion or intention: Again, Satan does not presently intrude himself
into any man, but first prepares his way by his Harbingers, that is,
suggestions and evil thoughts, which having made the soul fit for him, he
enters and takes possession, and thus he dealt with Judas: Again, I would know
of Mr. Hobbs, whether it was Satan in the Serpent, or only a treacherous
intention, that moved him to speak and seduce Eve? Lastly, why should we take
his bare word for Gospel, and prefer this his whimsie to the belief of the
whole Church, and the stream of all interpreters?

In his forty sixth chapter he spurns at all learning except his own, and that
with such a magisterial spirit, and so supercilious scorn, as if Aristotle,
Plato, Zenn, the Peripateticks, Academicks, Stoics, Colleges, Schools,
Universities, Synagogues, and all the wise men of Europe, Asia, and Afric
hitherto, were scarce worthy to carry his books: With him [ Logic is but
captions of words, Aristotle's Metaphisicks are absurd, his politics repugnant
to government his Ethics ignorant, the Natural Philosophy of the Schools is a
dream, rather then a science, set forth in senseless and insignificant
language; Aristotle's Philosophy is vain.] and many such like expressions; which
shows how little he has of the spirit of humility and modesty: I find not too
much learning, but too much pride makes some men mad: true learning is always
joined with humility; the deepest rivers, says Seneca, make the least sound;
the Cypress tree is tall but fruitless; the Apple Tree is low but fruitful; and
the more its laden the more it stoops: that man that slights all but himself,
will be slighted of all but himself; intemperance in words argue impotency of
mind; and as the Court says, He is an unjust man that prefers his own wit to
all others. [ Homine imperito nihil quid quam injustius, qui nisi quod ipse
facit, nil rectum putat.] He cannot but foul his own hands that ca^^eth dirt
in the face of his betters. Every wise man will employ his eyes at home; will
look upon the wallet that hangs at his own back; will descend into himself, and
then he shall see how small cause he has to despise other men's gifts, when he
considers the defects of his own: [ Tecum babita, and disces quam sit tibi
curta supellex.] He that thinks to rear up the imaginary tower of his own fame
upon the ruins of other men's, will find he builds upon a sandy foundation, and
indeed makes castles in the air. St. Austins counsel is good in this case; He
that will build high, must lay his foundation low; [ Si vis magnam fabricam
construere celsitudinis, de fundamento prius incipe humilitatis.] Hercules
cannot be pulled down by pigmies; nor can the rocks be shaken, though the
frothy waves beat against them. Eminent men like solid trees, the more they are
shaken, the stronger they grow, says Seneca, [ Quid miraris bonos viros, ut
confirmentur concuti? Non est arbor solidane^ fortis, nisi in quam frequens
ventus incursat, ipsa enim vexatiene constringitur, and radices certius figit.]
We are bound to acknowledge, with thankfulness, the pains and industry of
those brave men, which have intiched us with such monuments of learning, which
the Universities of the world have received, and do to this day cherish and
maintain with such applause; and not to require them with scorn and contempt:
this is ingratitude in the highest degree: I wish therefore that Mr. Hobbs had
used more solidity in his arguments, and less impotency in his expressions
against those eminent lights of learning, and not with Leviathan [ to cast
against them smoke out of his nostrils, as out of aseething Pot or Caldron.] To
use the word of God in Job; for I doubt me, Mr. Hobbs will never be brought in
competition with Aristotle; but now let us receive his accusation against
Aristotle's Philosophy.

He says, ( cap. 46.) [ That this doctrine of separated essences will fright
men from obeying the laws of their Country.] I should think rather that this
doctrine would fright men from disobeying the laws; for if God commands
obedience to the laws, and subjection to the higher powers, is it likely that
he will permit spirits to walk to dissuade men from obedience? Or will the
spirits of those holy men, who taught subjection to Magistrates whilst they
were alive, teach the contrary when they are dead? Again, wise men have urged
obedience to their laws, upon the doctrine of separated spirits: so did Moses
by showing his laws came from God, who is a separated essence: so did Lyc^rgus,
Solon, Numa, Mohomet and others. But says he, [ Upon this ground, faith,
wisdom, and other virtues are sometimes poured into a man, and blown into him
from heaven, as if the virtuous and their virtues could be asunder.] That
^aith, wisdom, and other graces are sometimes poured into or upon men, is no
paradox in divinity, seeing Gods word which cannot lie assures us thereof; I
will pour my spirit upon all flesh, Joel 2. I will pour upon the house of David
the spirit of grace and supplication. Zech. 12. God poured his gifts upon the
Gentiles, Acts 10. And so the Scripture uses the word, blowing or breathing;
or inspiring, which is all^ one thing: all Scripture is by divine inspiration,
2 Timothy 3. 16. Men spoke in old time, as they were inspired; or blown into by the
holy Ghost, 2. Pet. 1. 21. And I pray, what dangerous or absurd doctrine is it
to say, because men's souls are (...) tal and immat^rial, God inspireth from
heaven^ his gifts into them; but indeed the souls immortality is not the ground
why God inspireth his graces, for then he would inspire the most wicked souls
that are with his graces, for they are also immortal; the ground then of this
inspiration is his own good pleasure, being a free dispenser of his gifts,
neither needs he fear, that we by this doctrine will make the virtuous and
their virtues to be asunder; for the virtues of virtuous men are not theirs
till they be bestowed. Again, he says: [ Who will endeavor to obey the laws,
if he expects obedience to be poured into him.] I reply, who will expect
obedience to be poured into him, if he endeavor to obey the law. Again,
obedience is an act of the will; now acts are not infused but habits. Besides,
I answer him with Thomas; every good man yields obedience to Magistrates,
because he is bound thereto by the law of nature, where we see inferior movers
obey the motion of the superior, and likewise by the law of God, which
teaches him to be subject to principalities and powers, and to obey
magistrates, Tit. 3. 1. To submit himself to every ordinance of man for the
Lords sake, whether it be the King as supreme, or unto Governors, as unto them
that are sent by Him, 1 Pet. 2. 13. A good man has faith and he knows that
faith in Christ includes obedience, for Christ himself taught obedience, both
By precept and practice: he is also a just man, and justice requires that he
should give to every man his due, but obedience is due to superiors; obedience
then needs no inspiration, but such reasons; now if any will maintain erroneous
opinions, as he alleges upon the doctrine of the souls immortality, who can
help it? Men may build stuble and hay upon the best foundation, which is Christ
Jesus as the Apostle shows. Shall we deny the souls immortality, because of
some errors grounded thereon; then by the same reason deny the Scripture, deny
Christ himself.

He laughs ( cap. 45.) at the words circumscriptive and definitive used in the
schools, which he says [ are insignificant words, for the circumscription of
a thing, is nothing else but the defining of its place.] Here he shows his
ignorance in the school terms; for though circumscribing be the defining of a
thing, yet the defining or confining is not the circumscribing thereof; Angels
are in a place or rather space definitive, because they are so confined to one
ubi, that they cannot at the same instant be in another, yet without any
circumscription of parts, to the parts of the superficies in the ambient body
or place; for in a spirit there are no parts, therefore no circumscription,
though there is a confining or definition to the ubi: when we say, that all the
soul is in every part of the body; he asks, [ Whether God is served with such
absurdities.] He should first prove this to be an absurdity, and then inform
us, whether this tenet of the souls indivisibility, be any part of Gods
worship; but indeed it is no more absurd to say, that the soul is all in every
part of the body; then to say, that the Sun or moon is all in every man's eye;
for one part of the Sun is not in my eye, and another part in your eye; but all
the Sun is in my eye, and all the Sun is in millions of eyes at the same
instant of time. He would have us tell him, [ How an incorporeal substance is
capable of torment and pain in hell fire.] The ^^^stion is not how, but whether
or not the soul be cap^ble of pain; if you doubt of this, put your finger in
the fire, and tell me if your soul be not capable of pain or grief, which is a
torment. I showed before out of Austin, that God has a way to torment souls in
fire, though unknown to us; neither can we tell, how the soul goes hence
without the body into heaven; only we can tell him, that when our bodies
return to dust, our souls return to God that gave them, Eccles. 12. As for the
Schoolmen at which he carps, I deny not but there are, in some men's opinions,
many needless questions, and subtilties, so there are likewise among them many
excellent passages, and useful distinctions; in this life there is no
perfection; where gold is there is dross; and the best corn is not without
chaff; he is a fool that will re^use to drink wine, because there be lees in
the barrel.

He says, ( cap. 46.) [ That what is written in the Metaphysics, is for the
most part repugnant to natural reason.] He should have given us some in^^ances
that we might have answered him, but to speak of things in general, is to say
nothing: yet that the Reader may perceive both the use of Metaphysics, and how
consonant that knowledge is to natural reason, I will set down here a few
Metaphysical maxims. 1. One entity has but one specifical essence. 2. The
essence receives not augmentation nor diminution. 3. As every thing desires
to preserve its entity, so it does its unity. 4. Unity is before multitude. 5.
Truth is consonant to truth. 6. Every entity is good. 7. Beauty excites
affection. 8. Evil is not appetible. 9. Every thing compounded is dissoluble.
10. whatsoever is compounded has parts and principles. 11. In an universe is
contained all particulars. 12. The whole is greater then the parts. 13. The
first entity is simply infinite. 14. The abstract is before the concret. 15.
The measure is before the thing measured. 16. The subject is the matter of its
accident. 17. The cause is before the effect. 18. Nothing can be its own cause.
19. As the essence so the knowledge of the effect depends from the cause. 20.
The proximate cause being put, the effect follows. 21. The end moves the
efficient. 22. The end presupposes the means. 23. A voluntary cause is free
and indifferent, so is not the natural cause. 24. The matter is capable of
forms. 25. The The form is the cause of distinction and determination. 26. The
generical unity is less then the specifical, and this then the numerical. 27.
Identity is founded upon unity, etc. Many more I could set down, but these are
sufficient to let us see how much Mr. Hobbs is deceived, in saying, Metaphysick
is repugnant to natural reason.

He tells us, ( cap. 46.) [ That every part of the universe is body, and that
which is not body, is no part of the universe.] If he speaks of integral parts,
I grant what he says; but if he means by parts that which we call essential;
to wit, matter and form, I deny them to be bodies. His drift is to infer that
souls are bodies, because parts; but I deny them to be parts, no more then the
vital and animal spirits are parts of the arteries and nerves that contain
them; or wine a part of the vessel that holds it. Spirits are contained in the
world, but are no parts of it. But when he says, [ That that which is no part
of the universe is nothing, and consequently no where.] He will make God to be
nothing, and no where; for I hope he will not make him a part of the universe,
nor will he make him corporeal. He carps at Aristotle [ for defining heaviness
to be an endeavor to go to the center of the earth.] Aristotle does not make
this a definition, but a description of heaviness; for indeed the essential
forms of inanimate things are not easily to be found by man in this life, in
which our best science is but ignorance; therefore the Phylosopher^ differ so
much in this very thing, of gravity and levity, some holding them to be forms
of the elements, and causes of motion; others hold them to be passive
principles only of motion, and that the mover is the generator, which has
lest an impression in light and heavy bodies to as^end and descend: some hold
gravity and levity to be substances, others but accidents; but however the
peripateticks have gone as far as reason and the light of nature can direct
them. God will not in this world have us to know all things: our cleerest light
here is but a glimmering: but if this description of Aristotle's please not Mr.
Hobbs, he should have done well to have given us a better, and then we will
turn his disciples: but its more easy to carp, then mend or immitate: Carpere
vel noli nostra, vel aede tua^.] So he laughs at Philosophers for saying,
stones or metals have a desire, or can discern the place they would be at, as
man does.] But he laughs at his own shadow, for Philosophers grant, that in
inanimate things, there is a natural appetite to move toward their own place,
which is nothing else but an inclination or disposition, which he cannot deny,
except he will deny nature it self: but that stones can discern as man does, is
his own dream, not the saying of Philosophers, for they teach the contrary; to
wit, that this natural desire or aptitude is without all knowledge or
discerning: by this he shows, how little he is acquainted with their writings.

Philosophers tell us, that in condensed matter, there is less quantity then
before, and rarefied when more. Upon this he asks, ( cap. 46.) [ If there can
be matter that has not some determined quantity, or if a body were made
without any quantity at all.] I answer no; for the quantity is an inseparable
con^ comitant of matter, so that it increases and decreaseth as the matter
does. A body can be no more without quantity, then fire without hea^.
Experience teaches us, that as any thing shrinks, and thickneth, it decreaseth
in quantity, and so it increases as it is extended and rarefied: He carps at
the souls infusion, at the cause of sense, at the cause of willing, at occult
qualities, and at some other peripatetick tenets, at which he only shows his
teeth: not being able to bite them; save only that he calls this vain
Philosophy, affirming the ^ame out of St^ Paul's words; but indeed St. Paul
never called Phylosophical truths v^in, for so he should condemn divinity, to
which Philosophy is subservient: besides, truth cannot be repugnant to truth;
and Philosophy is one of Gods special gifts, by which even the Gentiles were
brought to the knowledge of God, and made inexcusable; there are vain opinions
among some professors of Philosophy, as there are among some Divines: must
therefore Philosophy or Divinity be condemned as vain: he that speaks against
Philosophy does both bewray his ignorance and malice; in disparaging men for
making use of those arms which God has given us to fight withal against the
enemies of truth; and to destroy the field of good corn, because the envious
man has sown some tears among them. To speak against Philosophy, is to speak
against the light of reason, which God has kindled in our minds.

But he calls it ( cap. 42.) [ vain Philosophy to say that God is no cause at
all of injustice.] To free God from injustice, is not vain Philosophy, but true
Divinity; whereas the opinion of Mr. Hobbs is the heresy of the Libertines,
who made God the author of sin; or of the Manichees and Valentimans, who held,
that God made sin. But I would know, how can the fountain of justice be in any
sort the cause of injustice: or can he be the author of sin, that is the
punisher of sin; that makes laws against it, that invites upon promise of
reward all men from it: how can he be free from hypocrisy, that grieves and is
angry for sinful actions, whereof he is the cause himself? How can he hate
injustice, if he be the cause of it; he must needs love his own work, and
consequently sinful actions? How can God deface his own work by sin, or his own
image in man? How can it be otherwise but man must delight in sin without
remorse, when he knows that God is any wise the cause thereof? Therefore to
make God at all the cause of injustice, is in effect to make him no God. It
stands then well with Philosophy and Divinity also to say, God is not at all
the author of sin; he permits it indeed for his glory, for the exercise of his
servants, and the condemnation of the obstinate sinners; but is no more the
cause of it, then the rider is the cause of that lameness in his horse, which
proceeds from his own unruliness; or the Sun the cause of stink, which arises
of putrefaction. Again, this which he calls vain Philosophy, is it which brings
us to the knowledge of divine and humane things, which perfects the will by
uniting it to goodness, and the intellect by uniting it to truth.

It Is ridiculous what he says of Good and Evil, to wit, [ That it is not the
appetite of private men, but the law, which is the will and appetite of the
State, that is the measure of good and evil.] He makes here two different
appetites, the one of the State, which is the Law, and the other of private
men; but I say the appetite both of State and private men, is one and the same:
For if it had not been the appetite of private men to have a Law, how could
there have been any? Can a King make a law by himself without his people which
consists of private men. Again, if not the appetite of private men but the law
of the State is the measure of good, what shall we say of Daniels private
appetite to worship the God of heaven, and the public law of Nebuchadnezzar in
worshipping his Idol? Was that law of the Jewish State which condemned Christ,
the measure of good? Or the Roman law in persecuting the Christians? But he
cannot yet leave barking at Aristotle, saying, [ That men have learned from his
civil Philosophy to call all manner of Commonwealths but the popular,
tyranny; and all Kings they call tyrants.] Either he is very ignorant in
Aristotle's Policicks, or very malicious: For Aristotle both in his Ethi^ks,
lib. 8. cap. 10. and in his Politics, lib. 3. cap. 5. is so far from calling
Kings tyrants, and all Commonwealths but the popular tyranny, that he
distinguishes the Kingly from the Tyrannical government, where in plain terms
he says, That the Kingly is of all governments the best, and the Tyannicall of
all worst, (...), that is the worst, says Aristotle, which is opposite to the
best, therefore tyranny being (...), a trangression from Kingly government, and
opposite to it, must needs be worst; he shows there that Kings aim at the
public good, but Tyrants merely at their own benefit. A King governs according
to the Laws, a Tyrant dominiers according to his will. Neither again does he
call all governments but the popular, tyranny, for he says, that Aristocracie
is one of the good governments because it aims at (...), the common utility If
it does not degenerate into Oligarchy, when a few of the richer sort will
dominier and turn all the public good to their own profit: and so he says
that Politia, or popular government is good if it degenerate not into
Democracie, when the poorer sort (whereof there is the greater number) take
upon them to invade the estates of the richer men, and convert them to their
own use. By this we see how much Aristotle is wronged, and how far he is from
calling any lawful government tyranny, or Kings Tyrants, whereas he shows that
a Tyrant is (...), one that will not be accountable for his government, but
will do what he pleases be it right or wrong, which is far from the
practice of Kingly government, which he compares to the government of a Father
over his children.

He has not yet done with Aristotle, ( Cap. 46.) but accuses him for saying,
That in a well ordered Commonwealth not men should govern, but ^he laws, upon
this he inferres, [ That every man who can write and read, finds himself
governed by them he fears and believes can kill or hurt him when he obeys
not.] I pray what contradiction is there here? In a well governed Commonwealth
men should obey the laws; In an ill governed Commonwealth men are forced out
of fear to obey Tyrants. Aristotle speaks to a^ good not of a bad government,
and shows what should be done, not what is done. Again, Aristotle shows
that we should rather obey good laws then bad governors, and good governors
rather then bad laws, Polit. lib. 3. c. 7. so that he will have us obey all,
but withal tells us, that he who obeys bad laws, or bad governors, may be a
good subject, but not a good man. Besides, his reasons are good why we should
rather obey the law then the man, because the Law is the Rule by which he
should govern. Secondly, because the law is impartial, and not subject to
affections as men are, whom pa^^ions do so carry away, that either they
understand not what is just, or if they do, they follow it not, yet he denies
not but in some cases the man is rather to be obeyed then the law; to wit, when
the law is ob^cure and intricate, or when it is too severe and rigid. In such
cases the governor that can interpret and mitigate the Law, is to be obeyed.

What he speaks ( cap. 46.) against private spirits, and forcing of men's
consciences, I am not against, but his quarrel against the Schoolmen for
their barbarous terms, is needless and witless; for Philosophers have
liberty to use such terms as may make them intelligible: And it is usual in
all Arts and professions both Liberal and Mechanical: consult with
Physi^ians, Chemists, and Mathematicians, and you will find it so. For
fictitious miracles I approve them not; but who can tell what is fictitious
what not, of things done many hundred years ago. As for the Antipodes, which
some of the Fathers denied, I have in that point cleared them elsewhere; as
likewise, I showed the vanity of that whimzicall opinion of the earths motion,
at large in that book called, The new Planet no Planet, and in that I writ in
Latin against Lanberg^s concerning his Pythagorical Chymera. If any would have
further satisfaction in that point, let them read what is written there; for I
purpose not to boil Coleworts twice. And whereas Mr. Hobbs says, That it
appears every day more and more, that years and days are determined by motions
of the earth.] It may be so in his fancy; but in the judgment of wise men it
appeas less and l^sse, and that it is the Sun, not the Earth, who like a
Giant rejoices to run his course.

In his 47. chapter he goes about to overthrow Christ's Kingdom in this world,
as being an invention of the Romanists and Presbyterians to uphold their own
greatn^^s. To this purpose he brings in many controverted doctrines of the
Church of Rome, as the Popes power, succession and infallibility, the Clergies
privileges, their single life, auricular confessions, Purgatory, Canonization,
Transubstantiation, etc. which have been ventilated and canvased pro and con by
many learned men, and therefore I need not spend more paper about them. But
whatever the benefit or pretense was which the Church of Rome had by
maintaining that Christ had a Kingdom in this world, Mr Hobbs must be forced to
acknowledge that Christ has a Kingdom here already on earth, which began after
his resurrection, or else he must deny Gods word: and his own too; for he
confessed before that Christ's Kingdom here was the Kingdom of grace. But to
say that any, either Romanist or Presbyterian, does hold Christ's Kingdom here
to be the Kingdom of glory, as Mr Hobs seemed in the beginning of this chapter
to intimate, is to me altogether unknown, and I believe to him also. For he
will find in their Writings, that the kingdom of glory is to be in Heaven after
the general Resurrection. Again, I would know how Christ's kingdom on earth can
be a Roman invention to uphold their greatness, whereas this doctrine was
preached by Christ himself, by the Apostles and their suceessors, when they
were under persecution, and had no greatness to uphold but their greatness in
afflictions; then did they find that they were Kings and Priests to God, or as
St. Peter calls them, a Royal Priesthood. But by the way I must let him see
his error in saying, [That Pontifex maximus was an Officer subject to the
Civil State.] This is not so, but the Civil State was subject to him, as
Festus shows in these words, Pontifex maximus Iudex and Arbiter rerum
divinarun atque humanarum est. He is Judge and Arbitrator both of Divine and
Human things. So Tully confirms the same in his oration he made to the
Pontifices for his house. Majores nostri vos and religionibus deorum
immortalium and reipublicae summae praeesse voluerunt. They had, says he, not
only the chief charge of Religion, but also of the State. And shortly after,
Omnis Reipub. dignitas, omnium salus, vita, l^bertas, arae, foci, Dii penates,
bona fortunae, domicilia, vestrae sapientiae, fidei, potestatique commissa and
credita esse videntur. To their trust and power was committed not only
Religion, but also all things that concerned the Commonwealth. So Dionysius,
lib. 2. shewech that those Pontifices were nullius potestati obnoxii, subject
to no power, nor were they to give an account of their actions either to the
Senate or the People. They had the same honors which they were wont to give to
their Kings, and more, for no man had the honor to be carried in a Chariot to
the Capitol, but only the Pontifex; therefore this office and honor was so
great, that N^^a himself would be Pontifex, and so were diverse Consuls. Julius
Caesar, and the Emperors after him, discharged that Office themselves, as
holding it unfit that it should be subject to any Civil power, but that it
should be incorporated in the supreme civil office.

Lastly he tells us ( Chap. 47.) [ That Aristotle's Metaphysics, Ethics, and
Politics, the ^rivolous distinctio^s, barbarious terms and ^bsoure, language
of the Schoolmen, serve to keep these errors from being detected^] But in this
he is as much deceived, as in his other Tenets; for next to the Scripture,
Aristotle's Philosophy and School Divinity have been the grearest helps our men
have had to detect those errors of our Adversaries which he has mentioned. Our
Modern Divines have made great use of these in handling their controversies, as
may be seen easily by those that read them. As for School Divines, which he so
much slights; because, it seems, he is little acquainted with them; we have
reason to es^eem well of their pains who with such dexterity and method have
gathered together into brief sums and systems, the vast scattered and dispersed
body of Divinity; and by that, short and witty distinctions in very significant
and fit terms, though not Ciceronian, have dissolved many hard and knotty
doubts. If the Civilians think themselves bound to Justinian, who reduced the
vast and disordered volumes of the Law into short Institutions, Digests, and
the Code; why should not Divines thank Lumbard, Aquin^^, and other Schoolmen
^o^ their pains in contracting the voluminous works of the Greek and Latin
Fathers into short and compendious methodical disputations.

In his Review he pleads for this discourse [ As not being contrary either to
the word of God, or good manners, or to the disturbance of the public
Trunquillity] How far this plea of his will extend and hold good, may be seen in
the particulars of this my Answer. But I findnow the reason why he has so much
inveighed against Aristotle, it seems he stands in his way, and keeps him back
from attaining the honor of being read in the Universities; he ^old us before
( Chap. 46)^ [ That seeing Aristotl^ is only read there, that therefore this
study is not to be called Philosophy, but Aristotelity.] Now he says. [ That
this his discourse may be profitably printed, and more profitably taught in the
Universities.] Can you blame him now for grumbling at Aristotle, whose
brightness does so much dazzle his weak light, that he cannot be seen in the
Colleges [ Suum cuique pulchrum.] I know Apes and Crows think their own brood
^airest; who then can blame Mr. Hobbs for having so good a conceit of his
Leviathan, who perhaps thinks [ That by his neesings a light does shine, and
his eyes are like the eyelids of the morning; that out of his mouth go
burning lamps, and sparks of fire leap out.] Job 41. But I doubt me for all
this he will come short of his expectation, and miss of his mark; it will not
be an easy matter for Mr. Hobbs to just^e Aristotle out of the Universities,
nor to make Malmsbury so famous as Stagira, though his Leviathan were as strong
as Jobs, [ who esteems Iron as straw, and brass as rotten wood.] What is a
Pigmy to encounter with Hercules? Shall the Beetle thrust the Eagle out of his
Nest? There is no wise man will exchange the light of the Sun with that of a
Candle. The Jews have a fabulous Tradition, that Leviathan is of so vast a
body, that he encompasseth the whole earth, and pursues the Sun in his course,
laboring to put out his light; de te fabula narretur, I think Mr. Hobbs has
the like conceit of his Leviathan, that it shall be dispersed over all the
world, and shall extinguish Aristotle the light of learning: But I think the
Fable of one Elias a Jew will be fitter for him, he writes that Leviathan is a
great Fish, laid up long since in Pickle, to be food for the just in the
kingdom of the Messia here on earth. Mr. Hobbs expects such a kingdom,
therefore I think he cannot employ his Leviathan better then to salt it against
that day, that he with the other subjects of that imaginary kingdom may feast
and make good cheer therewith. But in good earnest I wish Mr. Hobbs had been
more modest then to ^light so scornfully Aristotle and so many other eminent
lights of learning; this was not the way to get reputation to his book among
wise men. I will let him see the judgment not of all, but of a few, and those
the primest men of this Age for learning and understanding concerning Aristotle
and his obtrectators. Aristotelem nonnulli mures e pistrina vexare ado^ti sunt
a^ios omittam nugaces, quorum exclamationes vide^s in libellis Scaliger
Exercit, 307. Barbara ingenia levissim^s momentis impelluntu^ ad divini and
incomparabilis herois obtrectationem; du^ namque sunt aquilae solae in natura
rerum: altera bellics laudis, altera literariae, illa potentiae, haec
sapientiae, Caesar and Aristoteles; unicus Poeticae Syrenophaenix V^gilius,
quibus obstr^punt and obclangunt inepti milvi, corvi, vultures etiam noctuae
atque vespertilliones, Scal. Exe^c. 194. Aristo^eles res naturales ac divin^s
dialecticamque mirum in modum excoluit, ammaliumque vitam, mores ac structuram
incredibili sagacitate persecutiss est, qui cum in singulis disciplinis
scripserit quod probaretur, error tamen conspicuus in tot saeculis in illius
scriptis deprehendi non potuit. Cardan. de Subtle. l. 16. Plurimum interest
reipub. ut Aristoteles conservetur, and extet in Scholis, ac versetur in
manibus discentium; nam profecto sine hoc authore non solum non retineri pur^
philosophia, sed ne quidem justa docendi aut discendi ratio ulla poterit.
Melancthon Epist. ad Eccium Cancellarium Bavaricum. Aristotelis oration propria
and pura est, it a abundat quibusdam suis luminibus, ut Cicero eam dixerit,
similem esse flumini aurum vehenti, and interdum ita dulcis est ut nihil possit
cogitari dulcius, Melancthon in responsi^ne pro Hermolao. Aristoteles
philosophorum, ne Platone quidem juxta, M. Tullum excepto, citra controversiam
omnium doctissimus. Erasmus in Epistola Johanni Maro. Visum est Aristotelem
totius philosophiae principem and consummatorem tibi dicare ut in hujus
penetralibus assidue versans, si quid deest orbi disciplinarum absolvas, etc.
non injuria M. Tullius haudquaquam stupidus ing^niorum astimator hunc unum
appellat aureum flumen, aptius mea sententia dicturus, totius sapientiae
ditissimum quendam mundum, etc. tam opulentus tam inestimabilis thesaurus urbis
in totum perierat, nisi per Lucium Syllam fuisset ab orco reductus quo vel
unico beneficio ^ir ille semet ab invidioso convicio vindicare paterat, quo
contumeliosis versibus sibi foelix dictus est, non reipublicae. N^m Aristotelis
lucubrationibus in lucem revocatis, non uni tantum urbi, sed universo orbi
foelix dici promeruit. Idem ibid.

Quae Plato and al^i confuse, imperfecte, per fabularum in volucra and
metaphorarum ^losculos tradidissent, ea Aristoteles naturae miraculum primus
humano generi tradidit sub forma methodi dextrae regulatae, and plenae, etc.
Praecepta in plenum co^pus and s^stema methodice, pul^hre, ^om^gence
conformavit, qu^t Dei do^um in h^mine isto ^gnoscendum grato a^imo fuerat non
li^idis affectibus arridendum, etc. Keckermanus praecog. Logic. Tract, 2. ut
formam ita etiam materiam rerum Philosophicarum Aristoteli singulari Dei organo
acceptam feremus. Ex hoc enim uberrimo font hauserunt philosophi reliqui
qui^quid posteris tradiderunt, etc. u^ merito ingratissimi dicendi sunt, qui
hunc authorem vel petulanter insectantur, vel juventuti odiosum reddere
con^ntur. Idem l. 2. Praecog. Philos. Aristoteles dictus est (...), quod
perfectionem boni notat, nullam enim philosophiae partem attigit, quam, non
perfect tractarit. Idem.

Quis dicat Aristotelem inutiliter laborasse, cum tanto artificio traderet
rationem syllogismi demonstrativi, etc. atqui Aristoteles optimam navavit
operam: suis enim illis praeclarissimis regulis ostendit, sal^em quo esset
collimandum, si quis aliquid constanter probare vellet and f^miter. Petr.
Martyr de justificatione.

Methodus Aristotelis omnium philosophorum exce^sentissuni, pulcherrima sanae
and naturae consentanea est, artiumque omnium quae ratione and via tractantur
ordini persimilis. A communibus enim rerum initiis, ad proximas cujusque causas
progreditur, etc. Zanchius l. 1. c. 1. de Operibus Dei.

Quidam sunt qui vaesana amentia, philosophiae, ejusque authoribus bellum
indicere ausi; sunt illos intelligo qui cum ali^s veteres plerosque omnes, tum
Aristotelem, maxim, summum, bone Deus, virum, and unicam philosophiae aquilam,
omni calumn^arum genere vexare, odiumque illi and invidiam apud minus catos
cautosque homines conflare conati sunt, etc. Ingens est quae ingentem hunc
errorem fovet turba: turba tamen profecto est tantum, and (...), qui nec
Sophiae, nec Gratiis litarunt, (...), quas qu^dem vel melior institutio
defecit, vel spes meliora consequendi, etc. Licentia est haec ab animi
impotentia summa profecta, qua isti calumniatores Aristotelis passim usi sunt:
quorum libri si non famosi libelli potius sunt appellandi vel eo nomine
dignissimi me judice sunt qui fiant (...), quid quaeso aliud aut sentire aut
dicere possis de iis quos effrenata maledicendi libido eo evexiit ut summo and
facundissimo philosopho cujus oratioadeo pura, casta, elegans ac saepe etiam
venustai^^ Atticarum plena est, ut facile quemvis e Graecis oratoribus possit
provocare ignorationem, etc. objicere sustinuerint o insignem prodigorum
nominis sui confidentiam! itane in tam erudito saeculo talia monstra reperiri
potuerunt. Quid est tam sanctum quod audaculis isti contaminare non ausint,
tanta est vanorum hominum vanitas and (...) judicium meum est, nullam esse
pestem humano g^neri perniciosiorem, etc. Casaubonus Praesat. in Aristotelem.

If I should allege all that has been said by the great lights^ of learning
in all ages since Aristotle, in his commendations, I should make a large book;
but these few will suffice, to let Mr Hobbs see, how he does struggle not only
against Aristotle, but against the most eminent men of all times; and withal,
that it is not the Church of, Romo alone, that makes use of Aristotle's works,
but likewise the Protestant Church: Therefore I have alleged the chief learned
of the Protestants to justify the Prince of Philosophers; whose testimonies I
need not turn into English, for Mr. Hobbs understands well enough the language
they write in: only they that understand not the latin may take notice, that
Scaliger calls Aristotle, the incomparable Hero of learning, and the divine
Eagle of knowledge. Cardan says, That he excelled in all learning with
incredible sagacity, without any conspicuous error. Melanctho^ says, that
Aristotle is so needful for a Commonwealth, that he should be carefully
preserved and read in the schools and universities, for without him no
learning or method can be had; he says, his language is so sweet, that nothing
is sweeter. Erasmus acknowledges him to be the Prince and Perfecter of
Philosophy, and the golden River, or rather a world of Wisdom; and that his
works are a rich inestimable treasure; and laments, that the greatest parts of
his books are lost, and praises L. Sylla for preserving these few we now
enjoy. Keckerman calls him, the miracle of nature, his works the gift of God,
and a principal organ of God for enriching the world with so much excellent
learning, and that they are ungrate wretches who do not acknowledge it, but
will rail against him ^or it. P. Martyr shows that Aristotle's pains were
profitable, his artisice great, his industry excellent, and his rules most
notable. Zanchie says, that he is of all Philosophers the most excellent, and
that his method is most clear. (...) calls him with admiration, a man of men
the only Eagle of Philosophy, whose style is fraughted with Attick eloquence;
and that they who write or speak against him are dunces, silly people, and such
whose books are fit for nothing, but for the fire: Scaliger calls such,
barbarous wits, Rats, Kites, Crows, Ravens, Owls, and Bats:

To conclude. I would have Mr. Hobbs take notice, that I have no quarrel
against him, but against his tenets; I honor his worth and learning, but
dislike his opinions; I know not his person, but I know and respect his parts;
if there be any thing amiss in these my Animadversions; (for we are all apt to
mistake) I shall thank him if he will set me right, and inform me better: for I
never had so great an opinion of my self, as not to yield to reason, and such
as are able to convince my understanding: The God of truth direct us all into
the way of truth.

Amen.
FINIS
The Contents of each Chapter controverted.
INTRODUCTION.
THe world was not made by art or nature. Life^ is not the motion of the limbs.
Chap. 1. The object causes sensation, not sense. Fancy and sense different.
Color figured nothing. Sensible qualities are not motions. Motion produces
not motion. Outward and inward senses distinct. Fancy not the same in waking
and dreaming men. Chap. 2. A natural appetite in things inanimate, but without
knowledge. Imagination is not decaying sense. Memory and imagination different.
Chap. 3. Things future have a being. Prophecy is not guessing. No absurdity to
say the soul is all in all, and all in every part. To be born, no act of the
mind. Some faculties are not acquired. Universalities are not names. Truth in
things, as well as in names. Geometry not the o^nely Science. Chap. 3, 4.
Philosophy how Pedantry. Chap. 5. Many things infused besides bodies. Extension
how a body. Color is in bodies, and sound in the air. A living creature is
generical. The nature of a thing is its definition. Tropes and figures are not
absurd speeches. Chap. 6. Animal and voluntary not the same. Contempt and
hatred not the same. Superstition and Religion not the same. Faith and
Imagination not the same. The will is a rational appetite. Chap. 7. Belief is
not opinion. To have faith in, to trust to, and to believe a man, not the same.
What is to believe in God. Our belief is not in the Church. Chap. 8. Devils,
Demoniacks and madmen not the same. School terms and Suarez intelligible.
Chap. 10. Pity is not dishonor. Lasting good fortune is no sign of Gods
favor. Ambition is not honorable, nor covetousness. Injustice with power is
not honorable: Goodness no less honorable then greatness. Chap. 11. Felicity
consists not in desire Chap. 12. Felicity is in enjoying. Philosophy a
supporter of the Church. The want of it the cause of confusion and
contradictions. Chap. 15. All men are not equal by nature: Some are naturally
fit for service; Some for Dominion: Inequality necessary. Chap. 16. Christ did
not personate God. Chap. 18. Covenants are not bare words, nor do all depend on
the sword. Princes may, but should not be injurious to their subjects. Men indy
injure themselves. Injury, Iniquity and Injustice the same thing. Chap. 20.
Kings and Tyrants different, how. Samuel describes a King; Moses a Tyrant.
Chap. 21. David did injury to Uriah. How he offended against God only. Freedom
is not the same under a Monarchy and Democracy. Aristotle's reason, why under
Democracy, there is more liberty, then under a Monarchy. Chap. 28. Mr. Hobbs
contradicts himself, concerning the power which Subjects give to their
Sovereigns. Pride is no cause of submission to government, but of Rebellion
rather. Chap. 49. The danger of acting against conscience is no presumption,
but a duty to judge of good and evil. Faith is not attained by reason and
study, but by infusion and inspiration. Faith is a miracle. An account may be
given of inspired faith. Prophecy and Faith not the same. Faith may stand with
civil obedience. Princes are subject to their own laws. How every private man
has a property in his good. Chap. 31. The subjects of hope, love, and fear
often confounded. God is not a name of relation. Natural reason, and the word
of God different. Reason must be subject to faith. Our natural reason cannot
purchase justice, peace, and religion. Natural reason is sometimes contrary to
Gods word. Divine dreams are of force to win belief. Chap. 33. How Moses's
words are to be understood, concerning his own Sepulcher; And the Canaanite in
Abraham's time being in the land, Genesis 12. Chap. 34. Spirits are real parts of
the universe, though not corporeal. Why substances are so called, The spirit
that moved on the waters was not a wind. The word Ghost, what it signifies.
Aerial bodies not visible delusions, may be seen by many at once. How spirits
are in a place. Angels are not fancies or dreams. Why called gods. Why they
appeared in man's shape. The Dove and fiery tongues were not Angels. Why Angels
are distinguished by names. How evil Angels suffer by fire. How we shall be
like the Angels in the resurrection. Faith excludes reason. Chap. 31. Diverse
places of Scripture mis-alleadged by Mr. Hobbs for his earthly kingdom, and
refuted. What Holam is, and Paradise, and the new Jerusalem. There is reason
and authority to prove our happiness in heaven. Diverse places of Scripture
expounded to this purpose, and Mr. Hobbs his texts brought to the contrary,
refuted. The souls immortality proved by Scripture. Chap. 38. Christ proves as
well the souls immortality, as the resurrection of the body to the Saduces. The
souls immortality proved by Scripoure. A place in Job explained. The opinion of
Christ's earthly kingdom, and the souls sleep are old heresies. Hell is in the
lower parts of the earth. How the Prophetical speeches concerning Christ's
Kingdom are to be understood. We shall ascend higher then Gods footstool. Chap
41. Christ has not been all this while since his resurrection without a
Kingdom. Differring of punishments and rewards here, no argument that Christ
has no Kingdom. What it is to sit in Moses's chair. Other places of Scripture
expounded. Chap. 42. The blessed Trinity vindicated, and proved out of the old
Testament. Christ's Kingdom is in this world, though not of this world.
Dissimulation in religion condemned. The Apostles made laws, and had power to
command. Disobedience a great sin. Minister and servant the same thing Princes
why shepherds; their baptism does not authorize them to preach. Urim and
Thum^im given to Aaron, not to Moses. The Romans had the legislative power over
the Jews. Excommunication a punishment. Christ's Kingdom is spiritual, though
the subjects are clothed with flesh. In Commonwealths there is a dependence,
as well as a coherence. Heresy, what it is, and who be Heretics. Chap. 45.
Our faith depends not upon man's reputation and authority. Chap. 44. Devils and
Fantasims, or Idols are not the same. Christ's Kingdom here is the Kingdom of
Grace. The soul how immortal. The wicked live eternally. The tree of life. Life
sometimes called death. The soul how taken in Scripture. The Scripture is plain
for the souls immortality. Ghost-walking what it is. Eternal torments no dark
doctrine. Christ's Transfiguration was not the Kingdom of God. Solomon's words
Eccles. 12. 7. and Eccles. 3. 21. concerning the soul, expounded. And Eccles.
3. 19. Enoch's translation. Better be dead, then live in misery. Abraham's soul
is alive actually. That the torments of the wicked are eternal, proved. Man
shall not be in the same condition after the resurrection, that Adam was after
his fall. Chap. 45. Devils which Christ cast out were not diseases. Angels and
Men's souls are not corporeal spirits. Christ's temptation in the desert was
real, and no vision. Exorcisms useful in the Church how. Many possessed in
these latter times. It was Satan, and not a treacherous intention that entered
into Judas. Chap. 46. Mr. Hobbs taxed for his exorbitant speeches against
Aristotle and the other Philosophers. Men are not frighted from obedience by
separated essences. Graces are inspired or poured into us. Inspiration
excludes not obedience to the laws. The terms definitive and circumscriptive
distinguished. The soul is all in every part of the body. Incorporeal
substances capable of torment. Metaphysick not repugnant to natural reason,
proved by diverse maxims. Quantity increases and decreaseth with the matter.
What St. Paul means by vain Philosophy. God is no wales the author of
injustice, or sin. The appetite of the State and of private men is not the
same. Aristotle vindicated from calling kingly, or any other government, but
popular tyrannical. How these words of Aristotle are to be understood, Men
should not govern, but the laws. Mr. Hobbs his new Tenent rejected. Chap. 47.
Romanists and Presbyterians do not hold that the Kingdom of glory is in this
world. Pontifex Maximus at Rome above the civil State. Aristotle, Philosophy,
and School Divinity vindicated. Mr. Hobbs is censured for slighting Aristotle,
who is highly commended, and his obtrectators reproved by diverse eminent
Protestant writers.
FINIS

