APOCALYPSIS: OR, THE REVELATION Of certain notorious Advancers OF HERESY:
Wherein their Visions and private Revelations by Dreams, are discovered to be
most incredible blasphemies, and enthusiastical dotages: Together with an
account of their Lives, Actions, and Ends. Whereunto are added the effigies of
seventeen (who excelled the rest in rashness, impudence and lying,) done in
Copper Plates.

Faithfully and impartially translated out of the Latin by J. D. The Second
Edition.



Printed for John Saywell, and are to be sold at his shop, at the sign of the
Greyhound in Little Britain, and at the Pile of Bibles in the Stocks
Fish-market, looking into Lombard Street, over against the Post House, London,
1658.

TO THE Excellently Learned, EDWARD BENLOWES OF Brenthall in Essex Esquire, etc.
Worthy Sir,
I Have here presumed to present you with a strange and bloody Tragedy of
Heretics and Enthusiasts, written in Latin by a most elegant pen, by one who
has concealed his name, as I conceive out of this reason, that, living near
the times and places of this representation, it might have proved dangerous to
him to have published it. Here you have Religion brought upon the stage in very
strange disguises, nay they make her act parts the most contrary to her nature,
imbruing her white and innocent hands in blood, and Massacres. But as she has
met with Wolves to destroy and tear in pieces, so has she also met with
Shepherds to heal and protect, and among those the most laborious Author of
(...) AN^EBEIA has not bin the least considerable. His severe and most
indefatigable labors in most parts of Learning, are consummated in this piece
of Religion, wherein like an experienced Anatomist, he has left no vein un-cut
up. To fall into excessive commendations of him, were to commit a moral
absurdity, by praising one whom the general Trumpet of Fame has blazed abroad
for so great an advancer of Virtue and Learning; But to trouble you with them,
were yet to be so much the more importunate, whose conversation with him was so
great, that whatsoever I may say of him, I shall not acquaint you with so much
as your self know. Nor did the influence of your Patronage raise and animate
only him, but there are so many other monuments of your great encouragements
to learning, that it will be thought modesty in me not to mention all. But your
excessive Benefactorship to the Library of S. John's College at Cambridge
(whereof I have sometimes had the honor to be an unworthy member) I cannot
pass over, as a thing, which will stand upon the file of memory, as long as
learning shall find professors or Children. And that which increases the glory
of your munisicence, is, that that Library may boast that it is furnished with
the works of its own sons, which, being the greatest act of retribution and
gratitude that may be, must be accordingly acknowledged by all that shall come
after. But that which has the most engaged and satisfied the English world,
is, that your endeavors have displayed themselves in their clearest light, in
that one thing that is necessary, that is to say, Religion, not only by being a
constant assertor of her purity here in England, but in that, after more then
Ulyssean Travels throughout most parts of Europe, you have returned to your
former enjoyments of that chaste Penelope, when others either out of weakness
or surprise, are ensnared and besotted with the Tenets of other Countries,
whereby they are both ungrateful and injurious to their own, by preferring the
prudence and policy of another before hers. Religion certainly, if well
improved, is the Talent, that felicifies the improver, if not, coademnes him.
It is that universal Patrimony, which entitles us to be the sons of God, and
by which we are adopted into the assured hope of eternal happiness. It is the
Loadctone wherewith when our souls are once touched, they are directed to the
right pole of the eternally beatificall vision; and without which, we must
infallibly expect to split against the rocks and shelves of perdition. It is
the consummation of heavens indulgence to Mankind, that which does familiarize
us, and makes good our Interest in the great being and cause of all things. It
is the perfection of nature, since that whatsoever we know of the divinity by
her comes only by the assistance and mediation of our senses, but the other
furnishes us with a more evident assurance, (and that, in things, which can be
neither seen, heard nor conceived), by the more particular providence of Grace
and Faith, whereby he is pleased to how down the heavens, and descend unto a
familiar conversation with our very spirits.

But that which ought further to endear all men to Religion, is, that she only
next to God may pretend Ubiquity, as being a thing written in such indelible
characters in the hearts of all men, that even the most barbarous nations, and
the greatest strangers to civility and policy have acknowledged some divine
worship, though their pravity or want of instruction, may have blinded them
from the true, but yet that eclipse of the true God has not been total,
insomuch, as they have still retained a sense and veneration of Religion, so
that to the best of their imaginations, they have created something like God to
themselves. To make this yet more evident, we are to note, that most people,
though they had not so clear apprehensions of the immortality of the soul, as
we have; yet were they not only persuaded of the impossibility of its
annihilation, but have also acknowledged rewards and punishments to be expected
after this life.

To ascend yet a little higher; the divinity and pre-eminence of Religion is
demonstrated, in that it exercises that Empire and Sovereignty over the mind
of man, that no blandishments of the flesh, no temptations, no torments have
been able to dispossess it. It has triumphed in the midst of its
persecutions; and by her sufferings has conquered her persecutors. Her
pleasing Ravishments can stifle for a time all sense of humanity, elude flames,
and racks, and so arm the delicacie and tenderness of virgin purity, as to
overcome the hardiest Tyrants. It is she that raises our souls to a holy
boldness and intimacy in our addresses to heaven, being indeed rapt into the
heavens of divine contemplation, by her ecstasies and illuminations. It was her
inspiring communication, that elevated your pious soul, when you described the
divine perfections of the incomparable THEOPHILA. These things can she do and
greater, when there is but one grain of true Faith; but when she is defiled and
adulterated with humane ceremonies and inventions, she is deformed, and looses
all her grace and beauty. And among these has she met with two most
importunate pretenders, Atheism and Superstition; the one strips her stark
naked, the other meritriciously prostitutes her in the disguises of humane
Inventions. And that she has been thus evil entreated, in all places and
times, this book gives but too great testimony, whether you look on the (...)
or this small appendix, treating for the most, of what happened in High and Low
Germany. I would not draw any excuse for our own gyrations of Religion here,
from their madness; but rather condemn them as things that would have out-vy'd
the extravagance of the former. But to draw any argument against Religion from
either were impious; for if we did, we must in consequence, deny all, both
particular and universal providence of Almighty God; we must deny the
Scriptures, the heavenly Legacy of eternal salvation; we must deny Heaven,
Hell, Eternity, nay take away the Cement of all humane society, and expect to
see the order and beauty of the universe hurried into darkness and confusion,
since it ought not to out-last man, for whom it was created. Nay; but let us
rather profess humanity, and make this use of the failings and extravagance of
others in matters of Religion; To humble our selves to a relyance on that
immense Being, who has thought fit to plant Religion in the heart of man, to
direct him in his voyage to eternal happiness, wherein that every man might
take the right way, is the earnest prayer of

Worthy SIR, Your most devoted, and most humble servant. JO. DAVIES.

These Books printed for John Saywell, are to be sold at the sign of the
Greyhound in Little Britain, and at the Pile of Bibles in the Stocks
Fish-market, looking into Lombard Street, over against the Post House, London.
That in^^^ming piece and Catechistical Foundation, Entitled, viz. WOll^bius,
his Abridgment of Christian Divinity; Englished, cleared, and enlarged, by
Alexander Ross, Author of that curious piece, entitled, viz. (...), or a view
of all Religions and Church-Governments in the world, with a discovery of
Heresies, in all Agos and places; etc. whereunto this Apocalypsis is usually
adjoined. That practical piece, entitled, viz. The Returning Backslider, (and
the Saints Privilege etc.) or a Commentary on the whole 14 Chap. of Hosea, the
third time reprinted, being one of the legitimate pieces of that truly pious
Author, Dr. Richard Sibbs. For the use of pious families, there is lately
reprinted, Mr Henry Smith's Sermons, with Gods Arrow against Atheists, etc. To
which are now added, The Life of Mr. Henry Smith, by Tho. Fuller, B. D. and
Alphabetical Tables very advantageous to the Reader; which Additions aforesaid,
contain three sheets at the beginning of the Book, and five sheets at the end
of the Book, viz. eight in all, and distinguishes them from all other
^^rreptitious and imperfect Copy. Three select and profitable Sermons,
Entitled, viz. I. Pre^^^ and lachryma. II. The Christians desire. III. The
example of Humility, by William Houghton. The way to the Highest Honor,
presented in a Sermon before the House of Peers, Feb. 24. 1646. by W. Strong.
That judicious piece, entitled, The Practice of Quietness: directing a a
Christian how to live quietly in this troublesome world. By the late reverend
Bishop Web. The History of the World, the second part, being a continuation
of the famous History of Sir W^ R^^l^igh, Knight. beginning where he left, and
continued to the year 1640. With a large Chronology of those times, by
Alexander Ross once Chaplain in Ordinary to his late Majesty King Charles, the
first. The true Copy whereof (by the Authors Appointment and Approbation) is
distinguished by the Gray hound in the Front-^p^ece from any other however
colored by a p^^tended (though abusive) representation of the Reverend Author
in the Title page, or the delusive Vision of ^irds, etc. of the pretender
thereto. An exact Collection of the choicest Secrets in Physic and Chyrurgery
(both Chymick and Galenick) by Leonard Phi^ravant, Knight, Dr. Edwards and and
others. A New Primer, entitled, Mr. H^^l's Primer; mo^e easy and delightsome
for the learner than any yet extant, having 24 several representations of
Persons, Beasts, Birds, etc. answering the several letters of the Alphabet, in
a Copper plate, laying also the surest foundation for true spelling; the defect
whereof (in the ordinary teaching) is very much complained of. Mr. ^^^l's
Rud^ments of Latin Grammar usually taught in all Schools; delivered in a very
plain method for young beginners, containing 1. The common Accidents, examined
and explained, called his Posing Book. 2. The Terminations and Examples of
Declensions and Conjugations. 3. Propria quae Maribus, Qua Genus, and As in
Prasenti, Englished and explained, for the use of young Grammarians, with a
necessary Index to each part, called his ^arsing book: by help whereof (in want
of an able Schoolmaster) Gentlemen may teach their children themselves with
much ease and delight Also Mr. H^^l's Grammar in Latin and English, the
shortest, order^^est, and plainest both for Master and Scholar, of any yet
exstant. At his Shop also Gentlemen, Country-book sellers, and Chapmen may be
furnished or provided with all sorts of English and Latin books, and of other
foreign Languages as they please.
The Authors Preface TO THE READER.
THE doctrine of the ANABAPTISTS, Courteous Reader, to give it thee in a single
expression, is nothing but lying and deceit. Thou happily think them a sort of
people divinely inspired, and Prophets: Thou art deceived. They are false
Prophets and false teachers, as being a contagion, than which hell it self has
not vomited up a more dangerous since the beginning of the world. For I do not
think it can be easily demonstrated, what other mischief could have reduced
not only the Netherlands, but almost all Germany, into so great calamity and
devastation. When I more narrowly look into the Heresy of these men, I confess
I am puzzel'd to find a name for the Monster, but what its aims are, I may
happily guess.

Its first part speaks a Lion, its last a Dragon, the middle a pure Chimaera.

I call it a Monster, and I may add the most monstrous that ever was, as having
in it the Ingredients of all formerly condemned Sects. Which when I consider,
me thinks all the ancient Heretics, such as Nicholas Anteochenus, the
Gnostics, the Valentinians, Noetians, Sabellians, Patropassions, Parmenians,
present themselves anew out of Hell to me. So that I can make no other judgment
of THOMAS MUNTZER, that Author and raiser of a most pernicious Sect, then that
he has re-erected the Standards of all former heresies. But that it may not be
said, as in the Proverb, that Afric always furnishes us with Novelties, he
also with his desperate disciples, has sacrilegiously attempted to advance
some altogether new and unheard of opinions, whereof who shall say that which
is MADE is GOOD, must be very extravagant. Out of these, have they resolved and
decreed, that children till they come to age, are only Catech^ni, and ought
not to be clad with the robe of holy Baptism. Out of these, have they declared
a community of all things. Out of these, teach to dishonor and discard
Magistrates, who are the living ectypes of God, while in the mean time they
themselves aspire to Sovereignty, and would be accounted Potentates, when they
are indeed the wickedst among men; Dissemblers, Cheats, Hypocrites, Novators,
or Advancers of Novelties, and the subtle generation of the old Viper Novatu.
Which said Novatus, if I display in the colors wherein the holy Father and
Martyr Cyprian sets him forth, discreet men shall be my Judges, whether I have
not hit the mark, and the same description most sitly suits the greatest part
of the Proselytes of Muntzer. As concerning Novatus (says that Ornament of his
Carthage, lib. 11. Epist. 8. to Cornelius then Bishop of Rome) We needed not
any relations to be sent to us of him, since that from us you were to expect a
more particular account of Novatus, a man that is a constant Advancer of
novelties, of an insatiable avarice, furious in his rapines, blown up with
arrogancy and pride, even to astonishment; a man not admitting any good
understanding with the Bishops: the end of his curiosity is to betray, of his
flattery to surprise, his love is dogged by his infidelity, he is the fuel and
firebrand that heightens the combustions of sedition, and the hurrican and
tempest which causes the shipwreck of Faith, an opposer of Tranquillity, and an
enemy to peace. These were his thoughts of Novatus, which what wise man but
will allow us to attribute to our Novators? Certainly, if John that Botcher of
Leiden, the ulcer and deformity of that gallant City, were to be drawn in his
own colors, we need borrow them no where else. You therefore, Orthodox
Doctors, reduce those erroneous and miserably seduced men, which yet are so,
into the way of Truth, Deliver them, I beseech you out of this phrensy, and
omit no opportunities which may help to recover them out of this imaginary
disease to which they are so accustomed. This shall be your reward, this is the
prize you shall obtain. Him that overcomes, will I make a Pillar in the Temple
of my God, and I will write upon him the name of my God, etc. Revel. 3. 12.

1 THOMAS MUNTZER. His OPINIONS, ACTIONS, and END. The Contents.
MUntzers Doctrine spreads, his aims high, his affirmations destructive; He
asserts Anabaptisme, rests not there, but grows worse and worse in his opinions
and practices; his large promises to his party and the common people: he
endeavored to set up himself, pretending to restore the Kingdom of Christ;
being opposed by the Landgrave, his delusive Animation of his followers, their
overthrow; his escape; he is found, but dissembles him self; is taken, but yet
obstinate; the Landgrave convinces him by Scripture, when being racked, he
laugheth, afterward relenteth; his last words; is deservedly beheaded, and made
an example.

2 JOHN MATHIAS. The Contents.
JOhn Mathias repairs to Munster, his severe edicts, he becoms a malicious
executioner of Hubert Trutiling, for contumelious expressions touching him, his
own desperate end.

3. JOHN BUCKHOLD, or JOHN of LEYDEN. The Contents.
JOhn Buckhold his character, his disputing and contention with the
Ecclesciasticks concerning Paedobaptism; he succeeds John Mathias, he comforts
the people with a pretended revelation; he makes Bernard Knipperdoling of a
Consul, to become common executioner, Buckhold feigneth himself dumb, he
assumes the Magistracy, he allows Polygamy, he takes to himself three wives; he
is made King, and appoints Officers under him; his sumptuous apparel; his
Titles were King of Justice, King of the new Jerusalem; his throne, his Coin
and motto thereon; The King, Queen, and Courtiers wait on the people at a
Feast: with other d^gressions. The King endeavors to raise commotions abroad,
is happily prevented. He suspects his own safety; his large promises to his
Captains, himself executes one of his wives, he feigns himself sick, and
deludes the people with an expectation of deliverance; in the time of famine,
forgets community; he is betrayed by his Confident, is brought prisoner before
the Bishop, who checks him; his jesting answer and proposal, he is put to a
Nonplus, is convinced of his offenses; his deserved and severe execution.

4. HERMANNUS SUITOR. The Contents.
HErman the Cobbler professes himself a Prophet, etc. he is noted for
drunkenness; The ceremonies he used in Anabaptisme, Eppo his Host discovers him
and his followers to be cheats; Hermans wicked blasphemies, and his inconstancy
in his opinions, his mothers temerity; his Sect convinced, and fall off from
him; by one Drewjis of his Sect he is handled roughly; Herman is taken by
Charles Lord of Gelderland, etc. and is brought prisoner to Groningen; when
questioned in his torments, he hardened himself, and died miserably.

5. THEODORUS SARTOR. The Contents.
THeodor the Botcher turns Adamite, he affirms strange things, his blasphemy in
forgiving of sins, he burns his clothes, etc. and causes his companions to do
the like. He and his rabble go naked ihrough Amsterdam, in the dead of night,
denouncing their woes, etc. and terrify the people. They are taken and
imprisoned by the Burghers, but continue shameless. May 5. 1535. they are put
to death; some of their last words.

6. DAVID GEORGE. The Contents.
DAvid George, the miracle of the Anabaptists. At Basil he pretends to have
been banished his Country for the Gospels-sake; with his specious pretenses he
gains the freedom of the City for him and his. His Character. His riches. He
with his Sect enact three things. His Son in Law doubting his new Religion, is
by him questioned; and upon his answer excommunicated. His wifes death. He had
formerly voted himself immortal, yet Aug. 2. 1556 he died, etc. His death
troubled his disciples, His doctrine questioned by the Magistates, eleven of
the Sectaries secured. Eleven Articles extracted out of the writings of David
George, Some of the imprisoned Sectaries acknowledged David George to have been
the cause of the tumults in the lower parts of Germany, but dis owned his
doctrine.

Conditions whereupon the imprisoned are set at liberty: The Senate vote the
doctrine of D. G. impious, and declare him unworthy of Christian burial, and
that his body and books should be burned, which was accordingly effected.

7. MICHAEL SERVETUS. The Contents.
SErvetus his converse with Mahumetans and Jews. He disguiseth his monstrous
opinions with the Name of Christian Reformation. The place of his birth. At the
24. year of his age, he boasted himself the only Teacher and Seer of the
world, He inveighed against the Deity of Christ. Oecalampadius confutes his
blasphemies, and causes him to be thrust out of the Church of Basil. Servetus
held but one person in the Godhead to be worshipped, etc. He held the holy
Ghost to be Nature. His horrid blasphemy. He would reconcile the Turkish
Alcoran to Christian Religion. He declares himself Prince of the Anabaptists.
At Geneva Calvin faithfully reproves Servetus, but he continues obstinate. Anno
1553. by the decrees of several Senates, He was burned.

8. ARRIUS. THE CONTENTS.
Arrianisme its increase, Anno 323.
THe General Council at Nice, Anno 325. called as a Remedy against it, but
without success. The Arrians misinterpret that place, Joh. 10. 30. concerning
the Father and the Son. They acknowledged one only God in a Judaeical sense.
They deny the Trinity. Arrius his wretched death, Anno 336.

9. MAHOMET. The Contents.
MAhomet characterised. He made a laughing stock of the Trinity. He agreed with
Carpocrates, and other heretics. He renewed Circumcision, and to indulge his
disciples, he allowed them Polygamy, etc. His Iron Tomb at Mecca.

10. BALTHAZAR HUBMOR.
The Contents.
HUbmor a Patron of Anabaptisme. He damned usury. He brought in a worship to
the Virgin Mary, etc. The Senate of Suring by a Council reduced him. He
renounced the heads of his former doctrine. Himself or Sect still active. He is
taken and imprisoned at Vienna in Austria. He and his wife both burned.

11. JOHN HUT. The Contents.
JOhn Hut the prop and pillar of Anabaptisme. His credulity in dreams and
visions. He is accounted a true Prophet by his Proselytes. At Merhern, his
Fraternity became as it were a Monastery.

12. LODOWICK HETZER. The Contents.
LOdowick Hetzer a famous Heretic. He gaint Proselytes in Austria and
Switzerland. Anno 1527, at a public disputation Oecolampadius puts Hetzers
emissaries to their shifts. Hetzer denied Christ to be coessentiall with the
Father. His farewell to his Disciples. He is put to death for Adultery.

13. MELCHIOR HOFMAN. The Contents.
HOfman a Skinner, an Anabaptist; Anno 1528, seduced 300. men and women at
Embda in West-Friesland. His followers accounted him a Prophet. At Strasburg,
he challenged the Ministers to dispute, which was agreed upon Jan. 11. 1532.
where being mildely dealt with, he is nevertheless obstinate. Other Prophets
and Prophetesses deluded him. He deiuded himself, and volunt arily pi^^ed
himself to death.

14. MELCHIOR RINCK. The Contents.
MElchion Rinck, an Anabaptist. He is accounted a not able interpreter of
dreams and visions. His disciple Thomas Scucker in a waking-dream cut off his
brother Leonards head; pretending for his murder obedience to the decree of God.

15. ADAM PASTOR. The Contents.
ADam Pastor a derider of Paedobaptisme. He revived the Arrian heresy. His
foolish interpretation of that place, Genesis 217. so often confu^ed.

16. HENRY NICHOLAS. The Contents.
HEnry Nicholas, Father of the Family of Love. He is against Infant Baptism.
His divellish Logic.

The End of the Contents.
THOMAS MUNTZER. His OPINIONS, ACTIONS, And END. Hei mihi quot sacras iterans
Baptismatis undas Muntzerus Stygijs millin tinxit aquis!
THE CONTENTS.
MUntzer's Doctrine spreads, his aim's high, his affirmations destructive; He
asserts Anabaptisme, rests not there, but grows worse and worse in his opinions
and practices; his large promises to his party and the common people: he
endeavors to set up himself, pretending to restore the Kingdom of Christ;
being opposed by the Landgrave, his delusive animation of his followers; their
overthrow; his escape; he is found, but dissembles himself; is taken, but yet
obstinate; the Landgrave convinces him by Scripture, when being racked, he
laugheth, afterward relenteth; his last words; is deservedly beheaded, and made
an example.

ABout the year of our Redemption. Anno 1521, 1522.
M. D. XXI. and M. D. XXII. there rise up in Saxony near the River Sales, a
most insolent Sect of certain Enthusiasts, among whom Nicholas Storkius was no
ordinary person. These presumptuously boasting that their Dreams, Visions and
Revelations, were inspired Heretics their usual pretense.
into them from heaven, had s^ily scattered it among other seditious persons of
the same kidney; That the world was to be reformed by their means, which done,
and the wicked utterly cut off from the face of the earth, it should be
governed by Justice it self. All that gave not up their names, and embraced
their Sect, they branded with the name of ungodly. One of this Sodomitical lake
sprung THOMAS MUNTZER, Muntzer a quick Scholar in a bad school.
one that boasted that he had had communication with God. This man's doctrine
incredibly spread, as being in the first place levelled at the holy Doctors of
the Reformed Religion; And from thence discharged at the Magistrates
themselves; for the His Doctrine spreads,
Christian flock being once deprived of these two constitutions of men, there
were nothing to hinder the greedy Wolves to break out into all rapine His aim's
high.
and oppression. And this is the reason why the Wolves, The end that Heretics
propou^d to themselves, in opposing the Ministry and Magistracy.
that is to say, the false Teachers, have ever most violently opposed the the
Ministry and the Magistracy, in hopes, if possible, to draw these from the care
and charge of their flocks, or at least to bring them into contempt with their
sheep, which by that means should stray into their parties. This Muntzer did
both by his teachings and writings publicly affirm, that the Preachers of that
time that contributed their endeavors to the His affirmations des^^ullive.
advancement of the Gospel, were not sent by God, but were mere Scribes, and
impertinent interpreters of the Scriptures; That the Scriptures and the written
Word, were not the pure word of God, but only a bare Testimony of the ^^e
wo^d; that the true real word was something that were intrinsecall and
heavenly, and immediately proceeding out of the mouth of God, and consequently
to be learned intrinsecally, and not out of the Scriptures, or by any humane
suggestion. With the same breath he brought Anabaptists their leading principle.
Baptism into contempt, most inconvincibly affirming that there was no warrant
from God for Paedobaptisme, or baptism of children, and that they ought to be
baptized after a spiritual and more excellent dispensation. Seldom rest
there, but grow worse and worse.
He further endeavored to teach that Christ's satisfaction for us was
unnecessary, whatever honest and weak understanding men could urge to the
contrary; That matrimony in the unfaithful and incontinent, was a pollution,
meretricious and diabolical; That God discovered his will by dreams (whence it
was that he was mightily infatuated with them) holding that those were (as it
were) communicated by the holy Ghost. Hereupon was he acknowledged by his
followers for some heavenly and spiritual Sectaries like tinder, are soon on
fire.
Prophet, and it was believed that he was thus taught by the spirit of God,
without any humane assistance. This doctrine did he disperse throughou^ all
Germany by printed books and Epistles, which the tinder-brain'd disciples of
his seditious sect were soon fired with, read, approved, and propogated. The
same man in the years M. D. XXIII. and M. D. XXIV. Anno 1523. 1524.
taught at A^sted which is a City in Saxony, near Thu^ingia; and when not only
the Ministers, but also the Magistrates lay under the lash of his calumny,
insomuch that his Sermons were stuffed with most seditious and bitter
invectives against them, and pretending to groan for the return of lost
liberty, and for the insufferable pressures An usual pretense to raise sedition.
of the people under Tyranny, he complained of it as a great grievance, that
their wealth and estates were the prey of the Magistrate, and therefore would
peswade them that a remedy was timely to be applied to these things. Being for
this doctrine dispatched out Heretics restless.
of Alsted, he comes to Norimberg, and thence without discontinuing his journey
into Basil, and thence into Switzerand, from whence at length he came to
Cracovia, where at a certain town called Griess^n, he continued some weeks. In
the mean time he was no less idle then ever, and that especially in the County
of Stuling, where he sowed so much of his contagious seed among his factious
disciples, as afterward thrived into an extraordinary harvest. At the same
time he publicly scattered abroad his doctrine of Baptism, and the word of
God, in such sort as we have touched before. Departing out of his Country, and
wandering up and down Mulhusium in the Country of During, he w^it letters to
some of the most confident to his Religion; by whose countenance and assistance
factious spirits were sometimes more and more exasperated against the
Magistrate. Some small time before the Counntrey people took up arms, he sent
up and down certain Briefes by Messengers, wherein were diverse things, and
among the rest was represented the greatness of those warlike instrments which
were cast at Mulhusium upon occasion of this sedition, so to encourage and
inflame the fiery followers of his faction. For having stayed two months at
G^lessen, and that he thought he could not so much advance his designs if he
returned into Saxony because his affairs prospered not according to his
desires in those places, he returns back to the people of During and Mulhusium.
But before he was arrived thither, LUTHER had by letters forew^ed the reverend
Luther advises the Senate to beware of Muntzer, and his opinions.
Senate of Mulhusium concerning him, that they should beware of him as of a
destroying wolf, and fitte^ to be s^unned then Serpents, or whatever Mankind
bears any antipathy to, for that both at Swickaw, and not long before at
Alsted, he was accounted a tree sufficiently evil and corrupt, which bore no
other fruit but Tumult and inevitable destruction; and one, who, no more then
his Comerades, could ever be brought to make any defense of their opinions,
among which was, That they all were Gods el^ct and that all the children of
their Religion were to be called the children of God; and that all others were
ungodly, and designed to damnation. And diverse other things to the same purpose
were contained in the foresaid letter, which was dated from ^^imaria, on
Sunday, being the day of the Assumption of Mary, in the year M. D. XXIV.
Muntzer in the mean time with words plausibly sweetened, drew away Muntzers
large promises to his party, and the common people.
she minds of all he could to savor his party, and by promising mountains of
gold to the common people, to the end they should cry him up with the general
acclamations of being a true Prophet, it came to pass that a very great
concourse of the dregs of the people repaired to him from Mulhusium and other
places; nay, by his subtilty and the authority he had gotten, he perverted the
very Magistrate of Mulhusium, and made him a Magistrates seduced, most ominous.
new abettor of his opinion. And this was the first original of the mischief;
and thence diverse other Hydra's of seditions like so many excrescencies took a
sudden growth from this. For all men's goods became common, and he taught that
no man had any propriety in what he enjoied. To which he added, that it was
revealed to him from God, that the Empire and Principalitities Muntzer
endeavors to set up himself, pretending to restore the Kingdom of Christ.
of this world were to be extirpated, and that the sword of Gideon was put into
his hands to be employed against all Tyrants, for the assertion of true
liberty, and the restoration of the Kingdom of Christ: and at this time he
gave orders for the preparing of certain warlike engines. While he was wholly
taken up about these things, that is, in the following year MD. XXV. the
country people throughout Swedland and F^anconia, and diverse other places,
rise up against their Magistrates, An ill president soon followed.
forced away a great part of the Nobility, plundered Towns and Castles, to be
short, made an absolute devastation by fire and sword. The Landgrave Henry
being The Landgrave raises a war, and fights Muntzer and his party.
moved at these things raises a wa^r, and fought the country people, the first
time near Frankenhusium, the fourteenth day of May, which done, he prepared
himself for a second fight to be fought the next day, which Muntzer having
intelligence of, said by way of animation to his followers, What are those
Cannon-bullets? Muntzers delusive animation of his followers. Their overthrow.
I will receive them in my gloves, and they shall not hurt me, whereby the
country people being encouraged, were the next day beaten by the Landgrave,
five thousand slain, and three hundred taken, who had all their heads cut off,
so that, while they were ambitious of Liberty, they lost even the liberty of
life it self. And herein was the ancient Proverb verified, War^ is most
delightful to those that had never experienced it. The discreeter part of the
country peop'e, having laid down their arms, put their hands to the golden
plough, to hold which they had been designed, rather than to manage Lances and
Pole-axes. Mantzer escapes to Frankenhusium, and hid himself in a house near
the Gate, where Muntzers escap^.
a certain Nobleman had taken up his quarters. This man's servant going up into
the upper rooms of the house to see how they were accommodated, finds one
lying upon a bed, of whom he enquired, whether he were of those who had
escaped the fight, which he denied, averring that he had lain some time sick
of a fever: whereupon looking about, he perceives a little bag lying Is found
out but dissembles himself.
carelessly near the bed side; he opens it and finds letters from Albert Count
of Man's field, wherein he dehor^ed Muntzer from his wicked purpose, and from
promoting the tumult already raised. Having read them, he asked him whether
they were directed to him, who denying he threatens to kill him; whereupon he
cried quarter, and confessed himself to be Muntzer. He is taken, and Muntzer
taken, yet obstinate.
brought before George Duke of Saxony and the Landgrave, whereupon they having
made him confess that he was the cause of the popular insurrection, and
sedition; he answered that he had done but his duty, and that the Magistrates
who were opposers of his Evangelical doct iac, were by such means to be
chastised. To which the Landgrave made answer, and proved it by several
testimouies The Langrave convinces him by Scripture.
of Scripture, that all honor is to given to the Magistrate; and that all
tumult raised in order to a man's particular revenge, was by God forbidden
Christians. Here Muntzer being convinced, held his peace. Being laid upon the
rack, while he cried out aloud and wept, the Duke of Saxony spoke to him to
this purpose; Now thou art punished, Muntzer, consider with thy self by what
unspeakable ways thou have seduced and brought so many to destruction! whereat
Muntzer broke out into a great laughter, saying, This is the judgment of the
country people. But when being brought Muntzer when racked, laugheth, but
afterward relenteth.
to his death, he was thrust into close prison, it is wonderful how
faint-hearted he was, and stood extremely troubled in mind, not being able to
give any account of his Faith, but as the Duke of Saxony pronounced before him,
and which he told him, he was to make a confession of before God: Being
surrounded with soldiers, he openly acknowledged his wickedness, and withal
addressed these words to the Princes that were present; show mercy and
compassion, ye Princes, lest hereafter, you incur by my example the punishment
I now suffer; His last words.
Read and attentively consider the holy Books of the Kings. Having said this,
his head was struck off, and fastened to a stake, for a monument and example to
Is deservedly beheaded.
others.

JOHN MATHIAS. Primus hic e Batavis Muntzeri dogma sequutus Turbavit miris
Westphala regna modis.
THE CONTENTS.
JOHN MATHIAS repairs to Munster, his severe edi^^s, he becomes a malicious
executioner of Hubert Trutiling, for contumelious expressions touching him; his
own desperate end.

IN the year of our Lord God, M. D. XXXII. at Munster (which is the Metropolis
of Westphalia) a Anno 1532.
certain Priest called Bernardus Rotmannus undertook to preach the Gospel of
Christ; which being done with great success, certain messengers were sent to
Marpyrgum, a place in Hassia, whose business was to bring along with them some
men of learning and good conversation, who should be helpful in the
propagation of the Gospel. From Marpyrgum were there some dispatched, who
arriving at Munster, reduced the principal heads of Christian Religion into
thirty nine Articles, which they proposed to the Magistrate, being ready, (as
they pretended) to make good and prove the said heads, by places of the holy
Scriptures; which was effected. The Religious, and (as they Pretenders to
Religion, prove usually the disturbers thereof.
are called) the spiritual who were possessed of the chiefest Church, could by
no means digest this, so that departing the City, they caused much trouble to
the Citizens. Upon this weighty business, the Magistrates and Citizens sat in
long and prudent consultations. At length there was a certain agreement, upon
these terms, viz. That all injuries committed in those Tumults should be
pardoned, and that the Gospel should be freely preached in six Parish Churches,
and that the Church of our Lord only should be absolutely reserved to them.
These conditions were readily subscribed to by both sides, and thereupon all
things laid asleep in peace. But this peace was not long undisturbed by the
Devil, The devil an enemy of peace.
(that irreconcilable enemy of peace and virtue) and therefore by doing at
Munster what he had done at other places, that is, by raising up out of the
jaws of Hell, the seditious and pestiferous Anabaptists, those importunate
disturbers and turn-pikes of the Gospel; his design was not only to discourage
the good and godly, but withal, shamefully to destroy the Gospel it self. For
in the same year there rise up at Harlem a Baker called John John Mathias a
Baker at Harlem.
Mathias, a man utterly unlearned, yet crafty and boldly eloquent. This man
being excessively lecherous, neglected and slighted his own wife, who being
somewhat well stricken in years, was so much the less fit for the His lechery
notorious.
exercises of Venus. Being therefore over head and ears in love with a certain
Vi^age who was an Alehousekeepers daughter, he could not resolve of any way
more advantageous to seduce, then by an Angelical carriage, and a counterfeit
sanctity. He made frequent visits to her, and entertaining her with his visions
and revelations, he thereby drew her to his opinion, and conveyed her into a
secret place in Amsterdam, where he professed At Amsterdam he professes
himself a Doctor, and a Preacher.
himself a Doctor and a Preacher, affirming that God had revealed certain
secrets unto him, not yet revealed to others, and that he was Enoch the second
high Priest of God. Upon some he laid hands and sent them two by two as
Apostles and messengers of Christ, dispatching to Munster one Gerard a
Bookseller, and John Buckhold the Botcher of Leyden, others into other places.
These emissary messengers of Christ, or rather of Satan, boiled over with their
various opinions, held marriages of no account, and dreamed diverse other
things. Some taught by parables, and their own illusive dreams; others
acknowledged not him a Brother who desiled his Baptism with sins; others
preferred the Baptism of John before that of Christ; others taught that all
Magistrates, A murtherous opinion.
and whoever were unsatisfied with their Religion, ought to be destroyed root
and branch; some would acknowledge nothing but their own visions and
prophecies; others, that all the Prophets and Teachers that were departed this
life, should shortly rise again, and should reign with Christ upon earth a
thousand years, and should receive a hundred fold for what ever they had left
behind them. Some of these men affirmed that they had communication with God,
some with Angels; but the more discreet and wiser sort of men conceived that
their conferences had been with the Devil. Here upon the great Prophet John
Mathias (upon whose account his most vain Apostles already proclaimed a Peace)
perceiving an occasion by this means of domineering in this world, consecrated
in his stead his disciple James Campensis, a Sawyer, Bishop at Amsterdam.
committing unto his charge the people, to be seduced with the same zeal, as he
had begun. These things being thus fairly carried, he repaired to Munster to
his John Mathias repairs to Munster.
Apostle and Ambassador John Buckhold, whom he made Governor of the City,
who presently published these severe edicts. That every man should bring his
gold His severe edicts
and silver, and whatever were of greater importance, into the common heap, and
that no man should detain any thing at his house; for the receiving of which
things so collected a place was appointed. Though the people were not a little
astonished at the rigor and severity of the edict, yet did they submit
thereto. Moreover he forbad the reading of all books but the Bible, all which
that they ought to be burnt, the divine authority had by him, its witness
commanded.

At this very time a certain Tradesman, whose name was Hubert Trutiling, had
scattered some contumelious expressions concerning this great Prophet; where at
he being immeasurably incensed, even to the loss of all compassion, caused the
foresaid Trutiling to be brought into the Market place, where he is accused and
sentenced. Whereupon he himself laying his violent hands upon this innocent
man, lays him along upon the ground; in that posture he runs him through with a
spear; but finding He becomes a malicious executioner of Hubert Trutiling, for
not siding with him.
by the palpitation, that there was some remainder of life, he made him to be
conveyed thence, and taking a musket from one that stood by, which was
charged, killed him, intimating that he was commanded by God, that is to say,
his own, (who was a murderer from the beginning) to do what he had done. This
noble exploit performed, he took a long lance in his hand, and hastily ^an
about the City, crying out that he was commanded by God the Father to put to
flight the enemy, which at that time had closely besieged Munster. Having taken
the said weapon, and running like a mad man upon His desperate end.
the enemy, he himself was run through by a soldier of Misna.

JOHN BUCKHOLD, or, JOHN of LEYDEN. Agres^^^ssque nefas magnum et memorabile,
Regem Somniat, abje^ta forfiee sceptra gerens.
THE CONTENTS.
JOHN BUCKHOLD his character, his disputing and contention with the
Ecclesiastics concerning Paedobaptisme; he succeeds John Mathias, he comforts
the people with a pretended revelation; he makes Bernard Knipperdoling of a
Consul, to become common executioner. Buckhold feigneth himself dumb, he
assumes the Magistracy, he allows Polygamy, he takes to himself three wives;
he is made King, and appoints Officers under him; his sumptuous apparel; his
Titles were, King of Justice, King of the new Jerusalem; his throne, his Coin
and motto thereon; The King, Queen, and Courtiers wait on the people at a
Feast, with other digressions. The King endeavors to raise commotions abroad,
is happily prevented. He suspects his own safety, his large promises to his
Captains, himself executes one of his wives, he feignes himself sick, and
deludes the people with an expectation of deliverance, in the time of famine,
forgets community; he is betrayed by his confident, is brought prisoner before
the Bishop, who checks him; his jesting answer and proposal; he is put to a
Non plus, is convinced of his offenses; his deserved and severe execution.

JOHN BUCKHOLD was a Botcher of John Buckhold his character.
Leyden, a crafty fellow, eloquent, very perfect in the Scriptures; subtle,
confident, more changeable then Proteus, a serious student of sedition,
briefly, a most servent Anabaptist. This man being sent by John Mathias to
Munster was a perpetual thorn in the sides of the Ecclesiastics, craftily
sisting them about His disputing and contention with the Ecclesiastics
concerning Paedobaptisme.
the business of Paedobaptisme, in which employment he spent nine whole
months, and most commonly making his party good with them, both as to
disputation and litigious contention, while in the mean time he secretly
spawned and scattered the doctrine of Anabaptisme, as much as lay in his power.
About that time a certain unknown Preacher of the word of God, one Hermanus
Stapreda of Meurs came to Munster, who supplying the place of Rotmannus in
preaching, seduced him, and leavened him with Anabaptisme, and he also
publicly anathematized Pedobaptisme. This gave occasion of raising tumults
among the people; they who besore were only secretly instructed by John
Buckhold, discover themselves Conventicles usually the nurseries of Tumults.
openly to the world, and lay aside all disguises of their intentions; in most
parts of the City, they have their frequent meetings; in diverse houses, but all
in the night time, whereat the Magnistrates being incensed, and offended,
prohibited their Conventicles, and some they banished; But they weigh not this
any thing, and being sent out at one gate, they came in at another, and lay
concealed among those that were the favorers of their Sect. Hereupon the
Senate caused all the Ecclesiastics to assemble at the Palace, to dispute the
business of Paedobaptisme. In this Assembly, Rotmannus stood tooth and nail
for the Anabaptists, but those of the Reformation fully refuted their errors,
as the public acts concerning that business do abundantly testify. At this
very time the Minsters of the Church of Argentoratum signed and set out an
account of their Faith in a printed Book. Hereupon the Senate of Munster by a
public edict banished the Anabaptists, out of the City; which edict, they,
persisting in contention, opposed, being now arrived to that rashness and
impudence, that they thrust a reformed Preacher, one Peter Werthemius out of
the Church. Yea, some of them rioting about the City,) whereof the Ringleader
was Henry Rollius) cried out as they went, Repent and be rebaptized, otherwise
will the heavy wrath of God fall upon you! These things happened about the end of
the year M. D. XXXIII. and the beginning of M. D. XXXIV. Some honesthearted
Anno 1533. etc.
and harmless men, partly out of an apprehension of divine wrath (as they made
them believe) partly for fear of men, suffered themselves to be washed in the
laver of Anabaptisme. For, the Anabaptists leaving Anabaptists their bold
attempt.
their dens, broke into the City without any control, and with an unanimous
violence assaulting the Market place, they soon possessed themselves of the
Palace and the Magazine, sentencing with loud conclamations and such as
required a greater voice then that of Stentor, that all were to be destroyed as
so many Heathens and Reprobates, that did not embrace Anabaptisme. In this
tumult, a certain young man of Burchstenford was killed. This gave occasion
both to the Papists, and to those of the Reformation to provide for their
safety. The chiefest Patrons of the Anabaptistical Heresy were, Bernard Rotman,
John Buckhold, Bernard Knipperdoling, Gerard Knippenburch, Bernard Krachting,
etc. These two parties having skirmished with as great eagerness and animosity
as greater armies exasperated one against another, for some days, there
followed a Truce, whereby it was agreed that every one should quietly enjoy,
and persever in his own Religion. However the surges of Anabaptisme were not
yet laid, till they had entered into a conspiracy to drive those of the
Reformation out of the City. The most eminent of the Conclave writ to the
Anabaptists of the Cities adjoining, viz. to these of Dulmen, Coesvelt, Soyst
Warendorp, and Osenburg, that leaving all things behind them, they should
repair with all speed to Munster, promising they should have ten-fold what ever
they left. Being enticed by these propositions, husbands and wives leaving all
behind them, came in swarms to Munster. A great number of the more religious
Inhabitants looking on that strange rabble as an insufferable grievance to
their City, left it to the disposal of the Anabaptists, who being by this means
increased in number, became also more extravagant, degraded the Senate, and
chose another out of themselves, wherein were Consuls, Gerard Knippenburg, and
Bernard Knipperdoling, whose Effiges is the ensuing.

BERNARD KNIPPERDOLING. Quo non fastus abit? quid non Rex impius audet?
Carnificem fecit, qui modo Consulerat.

BEing now become Lords and Masters, they in the first place seized on Maurice
Church, and burnt it, and the houses all about it, thence falling forcibly upon
Anabaptists where Masters, most insolent.
other holy places and Monasteries, they carried away Gold, Silver, Ornaments
and Utensils, and whatsoever else was of any consequence. Upon the fourth day
after those rapines, trudging up and down the streets and highways, they with
a horrible howling, uttered, Repent, Repent! to which is added, Depart, depart,
be gone ye wicked, otherwise woe be to you! This done, they immediately went
armed in multitudes, and with unspeakable barbarism and cruelty, turned out
their miserable fellow-citizens, as enemies to their Religion, out of their
houses and possessions, and thrust them out of the City without any
consideration of age or sex, so that many women with child had this misfortune
seconded with that of dangerous abortions. The Anabaptists presently by what
right they please, seize to themselves the possessions of the banished: so that
the honest and godly party being cast out of the City, fell into the hands of
the soldiers, who had blocked up the City and all the avenues, as among
enemies, by whom some were taken, others unadvisedly killed; at which entreaty
the other honester part of citizens being discouraged, and seeing, that guilty
and not guilty fared alike, would not stir a loot out of the City; which
being closely besieged by the Bishops Army, all places were filled with blood,
sighs, tears. Now do the mad men of Munster, and such as no Hellebore can have
any effect on, grow insufferably insolent, and above all, that great Prophet
John Matthias, of whom we have spoken before: But that sally of his out of the
City, those of Munster looked on as a great Omen of their destruction, and
thought that the unexpected death of that most holy man did signify, that some
great calamity did hang over their heads. But John Buckhold John Buckhold
successor of John Mathias.
must be his successor, a lid fit for the other pot; who addressing himself to
the people, comforted them, persuading them that they ought not to mourn for
that unlooked for miscarriage of the Prophet, for that it had long before been
revealed to him, and withal, that he should marry his widow. Upon Easter Eve
they fell upon all the Churches and places of devotion about the City, He
comforts the people with a pretended revelation.
and pulled down all the brass works. Some few days after, Bernard
Knipperdoling prophesied that all the chiefest men ought to be disqualified and
degraded, and that the poor and the humble were to be exalted. He also
declared, that it was the command of the divine Oracle, that all Churches
should be demolished, which indeed was sufficiently performed. The very same
day John Buckhold putting into the hands of Bernard Knipperdo ling, the
Executioners sword, conferred on him withal He makes Knipperdoling common
executioner.
his employment, and that according to Gods command; so that he who had
discharged the office of a Consul, was now to execute that most dishonorable
employment of a common executioner. This most excellent condition he cheerfully
accepted. By this time had the City been besieged some months by the Bishops
forces when resolving to storm it, they lost both Gentlemen, Commission
Officers and others, to the number of about About 4000. men lost at the siege,
of Munster.
four thousand, upon which they quitted all hope of taking it by force. Some
few days after Whitsuntide, the City being notwithstanding the dis-excecution
of that assault still besieged, was wholly taken up to rest and imaginary
dreams, wherein there were spent three whole days; which done, THE ANABAPTIST
being awaken, acted the part of Zacharias, John Baptist's father; for,
pretending to Buckhold seigneth himself dumb.
be dumb, he desired to have a Table Book; wherein he wrote down the names of
twelve men, who should be as it were the twelve Elders of Israel, and should
administer all thing, at Munster, as if it were the New Jerusalem, and this he
affirmed that he was commanded to do from heaven. By this broke^y d^d this
crafty knave chalk out his way to that sovereign dignity whereof he was so
ambitious. But in the mean time, consider by what a strange Stich this
excellently wicked Botcher did utterly dis-repute that Magistrate whom God had
ordained, and by the assistance of most illusive dreams and his own excellency
He assumes the Magistracy.
of playing the impostor, he possessed himself of that dignity. A while after
our Prophet advanced certain conclusions tending to the allowance of Polygamy,
whereat He allows Polygamy.
the Ecclesiastics made some opposition, but afterward were content of fit
still. So that, not long after the Prophet at one bout took to him three wives,
whereof the most He takes to himself ^pee wives.
eminent was the widow of the deceased Prophet Jo. Mathias, and whom he
afterward dignified with the title of Queen. This example of Kingship, some
other knaves like himself did without any difficulty admit; but diverse of the A
bad example soon followed.
more godly citizens, looking on this thing with the greatest indignation that
might be, repairing to the Market Godly and loyal citizens hate usurpation.
place laid hands on the Prophet Knipperdoling, which occasioning the people to
take up arms, they set upon those Citizens in the palace, and having taken
them, they delivered Loyalty not always succes^
the Prophet and the Ecclesiastics out of their hands. Nine and forty of the
said Citizens were after a most barbarous manner put to death. Hereupon the
Prophet cried our, that all those who should do any violence to those enemies
of God, should do God a very high piece of service, whence it came to pass,
that some Heretics; their cruelty.
were torn in pieces with Hooks; and not a few killed by Knipperdoling himself.
Upon the four and twentieth of June, which is the day of the Nativity of John
Baptist, ANNO 1534.
in the year one thousand five hundred thirty four, at Munster or rather
Monster; (for so may that place be called from the monstrous and portentous
pullulation of Anabaptists) there sprung from Hell another new Prophet, one
John Tuysentschreuer, a Goldsmith of Wa John Tuysentschreuer an upstart, and
abettor of John Buckhold.
rendorp. The people being generally summoned to the Market place, this man
acquainted them, that the most holy Prophet John Buckhold of Leyden was to be
exalted to Kingly Dignity, and that he should inherit the eternal seat of his
Father David, and should possess it with far greater Majesty. Having
prophesied John Buckhold com^s his delusi ^prophecies
these things, Buckhold kneeling down confirmed all, saying, that so much had
been revealed to him from God the Father ten days before; though it was against
his inclination to undertake the difficulties of Government. The common people
being astonished at this extravagant piece of villainy, tore their hair as they
went; yet however some might smell out the cheat, fear was able to stifle all
muttering. For, this Beast fatten'd for destruction, having been very
successeful in some encounters, had now assumed what Authority he pleased.
Behold, he that at Leyden was but a Botcher, is made King He is made King.
at Munster; John Buckhold is invested with all the Regalia of supreme
Authority. Having hereupon immediately degraded the twelve Counselors of
State, according He appoints officers under him
to the wonted manner, he constitutes a viceroy, a Controller of his household,
four Huissers or common criers, a Noble man, a Chancellor, Cup bearers,
Carvers, and Tasters, and Master Builders, and disposed of all other officers
as Princes use to do. The Kingly robes were some made of watered stuffs, some
made of silk, some His sumptuous apparel.
of pure silk, some scarlet, some made more sumptuous with the Gold of the
Ornaments which the sacrilege had furnished him with, so that it can hardly be
expressed how artificially, how gallantly, how indeed Emperor-like they were
interwoven, being embroidered with gold, edged, scollop'd; and disposed into
diverse colors, His spurs were gilt with gold, and he had two Crowns of solid
gold, and a golden scabbard. The King walking in these ornaments, two young men
in a Courtly and magnisicent habit, one of each side of him accompanied him,
whereof one carried a naked sword, the handle whereof glister'd with gold and
precious stones; the other held up the Holy Bible, together with a golden Crown
shining with most excellent pearls. A certain jewel dazeling the beholders with
the bright sparkling of a Diamond, and whereat was hanged a golden apple (to
repesent as it were the world) wounded through with two swords a cross, hanged
at his neck. His Scepter was set forth with three golden incirculations. His
Nobles, who were eight and twenty in number, clad in green and ashie colored
garments, and having on white Turbants, accompain'd him. The Kings title was,
THE KING OF JUSTICE, THE KING OF His Titles were King of Justice, King of the
new Jerusalem.
THE NEW JERUSALEM. In the Market place there was erected a Throne for him of
three steps high, which, when the King sat in it, was adorned with ornaments
of more then Attalick sumpruousnesse. Some His Throne.
money he caused to be coined, whereon was this Latin Inscription, VERBUM CARO
FACTUM His Coin and Motto thereon.
QUOD HABITAT IN NOBIS, that is, The word made flesh, which dwells in us. The
City being all this while besieged, the Prophets and the Doctors published the
book callid THE RESTITUTIONS, wherein they endeavored to defend that monstrous
(I would say Munstrous) and seditious tumult, and all those almost infinite
inconveniences that were consequent to it: but to prevent that poisonous Hydra,
a Gospel antidote was prescribed. In the month of August, about S.
Bartholomew's day, John Tuysentschreuer went sounding a Trumpet through all the
streets, thereby inviting all to the Lords Palace, where there being a
sumptuous feast prepared, he magnificently entertained all that came. The King
himself, the Queen, and all the Courtiers waited on them. At the last course he
gave to every one a loaf of unleavened The King, Queen, and Courtiers wait on
the people at a Feast.
bread, saying, Take ^at, and celebrate the Lords death; which done, the Queen
in like manner carried about the Cup, by which ceremony, the Supper of the
Lord, or rather that Scean of pleasure, wantonness, and temerity, was certainly
very frolickly celebrated. Hunger being banished sa^e enough by this seast, the
Prophet Tuysentschreuer goes up to preach, requiring of them obedience and
compliance with the word of God, whereunto, (with one head and as with one eye)
A mock Sacrament.
they unanimously consented. This obtained; he acquaints them, that it was
revealed from the heavenly A seditious Sermon.
Father, that eight and twenty Ecclesiastics should depart out of this City,
that should preach our doctrine throughout the world, whose names he
recommended, and designed the way they were to take their journey, that is to
say, six for Osenburg, as many for Warendorp, eight for Soyst, (for which
quarter he himself was one) and the rest for Coesveld. These exercises
performed, the King went to Supper, and at the second watch of the night caused
the forementioned Apostles to take their journey, giving unto each of them a
piece of gold, with this charge, that neglecting their own safety, they should
deposit it for a note and testimony of consequent condemnation wherever they
bestowed it. They went their ways, and never returned again, all having
(except Sedition goes not always unpunished.
one who escaped the Gallows) met with punishments corespondent to their
sedition. For, being entered the fore-recommended Cities, they in a direful
manner howled out their, Kepent, repent, the axe is laid to the roat of the
Tree; if you repent not and be rebaptised, woe be to you, ye are undone. But
the several Senates of the said Cities caused them to be apprehended, and
brought before them to give an account of themselves; who answered, That they
were divine Preachers of the Gospel, called and sent by God, and that all those
who would receive their doctrine must be baptized, and that all things were to
be made common; but to those that should neglect Anabaptists of a levelling
principle.
these things, they were to leave the golden coin of eternal damnation. Nay
further, That the Gospel had not been preached as it should have been, since
the times of Christ and the Apostles, but that there were two Prophets, the
Progeny of truth it self, slipped down as it were from heaven, viz John of
Leyden, and David George born at Delph in the Low Countries, that there were
many false Prophets, that is to say, the Pope of Rome, and Martin Luther, of
^ittemburg, who was worse then the Pope. Being taken and cast into Irons, they
were asked, by what right or privilege they had thrust out of the City so many
godly people, together with their wives and children, not granting them any
toleration for their Religion, and had disinherited them of all they had?
Anabaptists as the Devil, pretend Scripture for their base actions.
To which they replied, That the time was now drawing nigh, wherein the meek
and the humble should inherit the earth, and that they followed the example of
the Israelites, who with Gods approbation ^ook away from the Egyptians their
fewels and earrings. Moreover they hoasted that Munster was well furnished
with provisions, ammunition, and all things requisite to war, and that the King
did daily expect great recruits out of Holland, Zealand and other places, by
the means and assistance They ^^m atuniversal Monarchy.
whereof, he should bring the whole world under subjection; and all wicked and
refractory Princes being subdued, should establish the peaceful reign of
Justice. About the same time another Prophet fell down from heaven, one Henry
Hilverse, a notable knave. This man acquainted the King that it was revealed to
him from heaven, that God was pleased to bestow on him three most rich Cities,
Amste^dam, Daventry, and res^l, near Lippa. Upon this Divine message, he
advises with his Counselors, whom he were best to send ^^ither to baptize
them with his baptism. In the first place he sends John Campensis to
Amsterdam, to be the chiefest man in that City, to whom he assigned for
companion and co-Apostle John Matthias of Mtellburg. These being sent into
Holland, issuing out of their holes, kept themselves among those of their own
tribe, and infected most Cities with the mortal infection of their doctrines.
For at Leyden about January in the year following, viz. one thousand ANNO 1535.
five hundred thirty and five, very many by the persuasion of Anabaptisme, and
by the means of its contagious Conventicles, were baptized into the baptism of
death. About the end of the year one thousand five hundred thirty and five,
this Kingly Botcher sent into Friezland a most subtle fellow, and one very well
experienced Kingly Botcher endeavors to raise commotions abroad.
in warlike affairs, whom he furnished with very great sums of money which had
been raised out of the sacrileges, wherewith he should raise soldiers in
Zealand, and should raise the close siege which was then before the City. He
being departed, managed his affairs very secretly with the assistance of those
of his way, and at length, upon the last of March one thousand five hundred
thirty and five, having gotten together some hundreds of soldiers he setupon
the Monastery, which also was called old Munster, drove away the Monks, and
having plundered all, he there pitched his tents, out of hope thereby to
strengthen his party by the accession of any that should come in. But George
Sckenck the then Governor of Friesland, having with as much expedition He is
happily prevented.
as could be got together certain expeditionary forces, besieges these
tumultuary Rioters, and gave an assault to the place, which though they avoided
as much as might be by a gallant defense, yet had they their belly^ull of
murder, blood, and dry blows, so that they were all destroyed, save
threescore and two, who being brought to Leoward were paid for their audacious
folly with the wages of death. The Ringleader of this business, who was also
the Camp-m^ster, John Geel escaping at this fight, flies to Amsterdam, to prove
the occasion of a greater slaughter. For many Anabaptists being found in that
place, whom John Campensis had strangely fascinated, to engage them the more,
they made promises to them of golden mountains, and talked highly of the
Magnificence and Liberty of the Anabaptists of Munster, and cried up the new
kingdom of Justice upon earth; for the report of the siege and defense of
Munster had smitten, and raised up the minds of a many; in regard the City
being closely besieged by a potent Army, yet performed religious duties without
any disturbance. Hence came it to pass, that the Liberty and Liberality of the
City was celebrated beyond all truth and belief, and there wanted not a many
who desired to be embarked in the same Fortune. There was therefore at
Amsterdam a Burgher called Henry Gotbelit, a strong man and warlikely given,
who being bathed in the waters of Anabaptisme, joined his endeavors with those
of John Geel. For by diverse pretenses and crafty shifts (which it is not worth
our labor to repeat in this place) they drew together six hundred Anahaptists,
with Anabaptists, their design upon Amsterdam.
whose assistance their intention was to have possessed themselves of
Amsterdam, to enrich themselves, and to introduce the Religion of those of
Munster. Whereupon, upon the tenth day of May, the chiefest that were engaged
in this conspiracy, having their Rendezvous at the house of Peter Gael, broke
out in the night time They break out in the night time.
to the Market place, wherein being more and more seconded by some of their own,
they killed some of the Watch, and some they kept prisoners. But the Burghers
making head, discharged some Muskets at the Anabaptists, who most unworthily,
when their Consuls were cruelly killed, entrusted their safety to their heels;
so that the others courages being heightened by this, they violently ran upon
the Deuterobaptists, and after a most bloody They are worsted.
engagement put them to the worst, wherein John Geel and Gothe it were slain,
James Campensis was taken and put to death. Now other Tumults had already
forced others from those places, the prevention whereof could not be possibly
without the infinite inconveniences which fell upon the lionester sort. There
wanted not also some clandestine vipers, who diguisedly waited for the
restoration of the kingdom of Israel (as they called it) whereof one being
apprehended at Leyden, and upon examination put to the question, confessed,
That the King of the Anabaptists, who was a Hollander, sojourned then at
Utricht, and had not yet began his reign, but that according to the good hope
they had conceived of him, and the confidence placed in him, they doubted not
but he would undertake i^. Having with what is above, gotten out of this fellow,
that some gold and silver vessels and other ornaments had by a most wicked
surprise, been taken out of their Churches by the means of their King, and who
with his followers had attempted some most detestable villainies, it was
dicover'd that there could no other be meant then David George. I crave thy
pardon, courteous Reader, if I acquaint thee, that it is not any thing the
less for thy advantage, if, in the description of these rotten and
contemptible rags and menstruous clouts of humanity, I have woven a longer web
of discourse then thou did expect. Although John Buckhold, and the other
Prophets had entertained the ignorant greedy vulgar with hopes of more then
Arabian wealth; yet the citizens being daily more and more straightened by the
siege, were accordingly brought into greater perplexities, and being brought
low by the famine, which is the consummation of all misery, began, as it for
the most part happens, Famine the consummation of all misery.
upon the barking of the stomach, to snarle at one another, to grumble and
complain, and to hold private consultations about the taking of their King, and
by delivering him to the enemies, to better the terms of their composition. But
the King, the stitcher and botcher of all deceit, being afraid of himself,
chose out The King suspects his own safety:
of all the people twelve men in whom he could place most confidence, and these
he called his Captains, assigning to them their several guards and posts in
the City, which they were to make good. This done, he promised the Citizens
that the close siege should be raised before Easter, for he was confident that
a certain emissary, whom he had sent into Zeland, Holland and Friezland should
return with such supplies, as by a furious and desperate assault made upon the
besiegers should deliver the City: But hope it self was to him become
hopeless, nor could safety it self save him. To his Captains as he His large
promises to his Captains, both of moneys and preferments, the usual bai^^ of
sedition.
called them, it is incredible what wealth he promised, such as the fabulous
riches of Pactolus and the treasures of Midas should not make good, with oceans
of goods (which happly must be paid them out of his dreams) and that after the
City were relieved, they should be Dukes and Governors of Provinces, and
particularly that John Denker should be Elector of Saxony? But behold, in the
month of February, a sad face of things appeared, many being merely starved to
death, which occasioned, that one of his Queens (for he had gotten a many) Elza
or Elisabeth, who was distinguished by the name of the Glove maker, had bin
often heard to say, that the most cruel sword of Famine came not from God,
which though he had not heard himself, having caused her to be He becomes
executioner to one of his wives
brought with his other wives into the Market place, he struck of her head,
kneeling in the midst of them, which done; insulting ^er her, he affirmed that
she had carried her self as a common prostituted whore, and had been
disobedient to him, while in the mean time her fellow Queens sung this hymn,
Glory be to God on high, etc. Easter day being now dawning: and no hope of
deliverance shining on them, the common people with just reason were extremely
astonished; nor, confide^ing how things were carried, could they have any
longer patience. In this conjuncture of affairs, to elude the people, according
to his wonted insinuations, he feigns himself He feigns himself sick, and
deludes the people with an expectation of deliverance.
to be sick, and that after six days, he would appear publicly in the
Marketplace, but that as to the deliverance which they were to expect
according to his intimation, it was to be understood after a spiritual manner,
and so it should certainly come to pass For he affirmed for a most certain
truth, that in a divine dream he saw himself riding on an Ass, and bearing the
unspeakable weight of fin, and that all that had followed him were freed from
their sins. But indeed they may be fitly said to be like Asses that rub one
another; or to the Blind leading about the Blind. It is a great affliction,
it is a penance to repeat the miseries and the woeful consequences of Famine
and want. There were a Famine, it is character, and miseries.
many who being impatient of so long hunger, revolted to the enemy, not so much
out of hope of compassion, as to accelerate their own deaths; not a few
creeping upon all four, endeavored to get away; for being weak and
strengthlesse, they could hardly fasten their feet on the ground; some falling
down were content to give up the ghost in the place where they lay. There you
might see a sad spectacle of foreheads and cheeks pale as ashes, temples
fallen, eyes sunk into hollownesse, sharp noses, ears shrivel'd, lips black and
blew, throats slender as those of Spiders; to be short, Hippocratical faces,
living carcases, and excellent shadows of men. They had sown certain kinds of
seeds and pulses in the City which for a time served for high delicacies to the
grumbling stomach; but these being soon devoured by the hungry belly; Cats,
Dormice, and Rats, which themselves were almost starved to anatomy, became
(doubtful) entertainments. Some were reduced to that inhumane necessity, that
they fed on the flesh of the buried carcasses; some dressed the feet of sweaty
woollen socks, some cut to pieces the parings of tanned leather, and mincing
them with some other things, baked them and made them serve for bread. To this
we may add, that the most wickedly obstinate citizens were not yet convinced,
that by crafty infinuations and specious suggestions they were brought into the
noose, whom therefore he still entertained with considerations of Magnanimity,
and the deliverance they were yet constantly to expect from God, but as for
those who admitted any thoughts of running away, and endeavored to avoid their
miseries, he peremptorily sends for, and like a public Robber taking away all
that their industry had furnished them with, depart, says he, and be gone to
the Heretics, and bid sarewel to this place. The King, though he He forgets
community.
had gotten at his house sufficient provision for two months, yet was he
willing to embrace all occasions whereby he might keep up the heart of the City
which now continually barked for sustenance. To which end, behold a certain man
named John Longstrat, being a Nobleman and privy Counselor to the King, and
one of whom he John Longstrat his consident betrays him by stratagem.
was very confident, boasted that he would within fourteen days reliev this
hunger-starved City, both with provisions and supplies of men, to the number of
three hundred. By this pretense he flies to the enemy, and betrays the City to
the Bishop, for a certain sum of money with his life included. The Eve of
Saint John was appointed for the execution of this design, about ten of the
clock, at which time he had obliged himself by oath to cause the gate called
the Crosse-gate to be opened. This Commissary for provisions returning at
length to the City, assured the King upon his says and reputation, that the
said recruits of provision and forces, should be ready within the time
appointed. The day assigned being come, he acquaints the Guards that the
promised forces, were to come in in the night (which would be starr-light
enough) that so they might receive them as friends. The gates are hereupon set
open, and the enemies being admitted into the City as into another Troy, upon
the Watchword given, soon dispatched the Guards and others that were near. Now
could be nothing heard for the cry of Arms; Arms. The King and his Courtiers
being gotten into a body, drove back the enemy to the Gates, which the
citizens had by that time shut again: whereupon the rest of them that were
without: were forced to set Engines to force open the Gates, which being once
broken open, they flourished and set up their Colors. The citizens stiffely
resisted the first assault, and made a strong body in the Market place, where
the fight became very hot and bloody. The King himself, Knipperdoling and
Krachting fell into the enemies hands; but Rotman seeing there was no
possibility of safety, rushing where the enemy was thickest, was trod to
pieces; he it seems placing all hopes of life in death. The Anabaptists upon
the taking of their King being quite cast down and discouraged, went and hid
themselves in Larders, Kitchins, and other lurking holes. The City was most The
City of Munster unmercifully plundered.
unmercifully plundered; and to make a full search of it, there were ten days
allotted. There was found by those of the Kings Guard at the Royal Palace as
much provision as would maintain two hundred for two mouths. O Goodman King,
where is now the Community of goods and provisions which your Religion holds
forth? This sad fate did that City suffer in the year one thousand five hundred
thirty and five. The third day after this sacking of the City, the King was
carried to the The King is brought prisoner before the Bishop.
Castle of Dulmen, three miles off. The Bishop having caused the King to be
brought with all speed before him, said to him, O thou cast away of Mankind, by
what deplorable means have thou corrupted and destroyed my people! To which the
King, with an undisturbed and Who (deservedly) checks him.
proud deportment made answer thus; O thou Pope, have we done thee any injury,
by delivering into thy hands a most well-fortified and invincible City? But if
thou His jesting answer and proposal.
think thy self any way injured or endammag'd by us, if thou will but
hearken to our advice, thou shall be easily enriched. The Bishop hardly
abstaining from laughing, desired him to discover that secret, to which he
replied. Cause an Iron Cage or Basket to be made, and cover it with leather,
and carry me into all the parts of thy Country to be seen for a show, and if
thou take but a penny of every one for the sight, assure thy self it will
amount to more then all the charges of the war. The more eminent Anabaptists
wore about their necks a certain medall wherein was the effiges of their King,
to which were added these ietters, D. W. F. whereby was signified, that the
word was made flesh. But the King being carried up and down as a captive with
his two associates, was shown to diverse Captains and Ecclesiastics of the
Landgrave, which gave occasion of dispatation between them about some things,
as of the Kingdom of Christ, and of Magistracy, of Justification, and of
Baptism, of the Lords Supper, and of the Incarnation of Christ, as also of
Matrimony: in which disputation, they prevailed so far by the divine
testimonies of holy writ, that they brought the King of the Anabaptists,
(though not acknowledging the least satisfaction) to King of the Anabaptists
put to a Nonplus.
a Nonplus, who to obtain another disputation out of hopes of life (as was
said) promised, that he would reduce the Anabap^ists which swarmed in Holland,
Braband, England, and Friezland; and that he would do all honor to the
Magistrate. Upon the twentieth of January one thousand five hund^ed thirty and
six, he is brought with his companions to Munster, where they were secured in
Anno 15^6.
several prisons; two days were spent in weeding and rooting up their errors.
The King indeed confessed his offenses, and cast himself wholly upon Christ;
but his He is convinced of his offenses.
companions discovered a vain obstinacy in the defense of their cause. The next
day the King is brought to the place of execution, fastened to a stake, and is
pulled piecemeal His deserved, and severe execution.
by two executioners, with pincers red hot out of the fire. The first pains he
felt, he suppressed, at the second he implored Gods mercy. For a whole hour
was he pulled and delacerated with those instruments, and at length, to hasten
somewhat his death, run through with a sword. His companions were dipped with
the baptism of the same punishment, which they suffered courageously; all
whose carcasses put into Iron baskets; as anathema's of eternal example hang
out of the tower ^f S. Lambert. And this was the retiring room of the Tragedy
of Munster.

HERMANNUS SUITOR, Hic qui se Christum, et qui se Jactarat IESUM, SERVASSE haud
potuit seque suisque fidem.
THE CONTENTS.
HERMAN the Cobbler professes himself a Prophet, etc. He is noted for
drunkenness; The ceremonies he used in Anabaptisme, Eppo his Host discovers
him and his followers to be cheats; Hermans wicked blasphemies, and his
inconstancy in his opinions, his mothers temerity; his Sect convinced, and fall
off from him; by one Drewjis of his Sect he is handled roughly; Herman is taken
by Charles Lord of Golderland, etc. and is brought prisoner to Groeninghen;
when questioned in his torments, he hardened himself; and died miserably.

THat there were diverse Emissaries and Ambassadors sent by the King of the
Anabaptists into Holland, Friezland, and other places to raise soldiers, you
have understood out of the History of Munster; which soldiers having raised a
Tumult, caused the Bishop to discamp from before Munster; and of this Heard was
there one Nicholas Alcmariensis, a worthy disciple of John Mathias, who being
dispatched into Friezland for the foresaid negotiation, got together a
promiscuous crew of Anabaptists for^ the relief of Munster: but that it might
appear how real and effectual he was in the business, they sent two of their
fellow-soulders, Antony Cistarius, and a tradesman whose name was James, to
Munster. These two with some others having compassed their desires at a Town
called Opt'zant, having shuffled together from all parts into a kind of a
Troop, made their rendezvous at the house of one Eppo, about the twilight out
of a pretense that they there should meet with some Success in bad
enterprises. causes evil men to oejoyce.
later intelligence, which they receiving from their Ambassadors, out of very
joy for those good tidings, absolutely broke forth into Tumults. The
Bell-weather of these, was one Herman [an excellent vamper of all abomination]
a Cobbler of Opt'zant, who professed himself Herman ^he Cobbler prosessed himself
a Prophet, etc.
a true Prophet, and that he was the true Messiah, the Redeemer and Savior of
the world, nay, (which causes horror to me in the relation) that he was God the
Father. This fellow lay naked in his bed from the privy parts downward, and
caused to be laid near him a hogs-head of strong beer, which he desired to
drink in Healths, which required no small draughts; for he had gotten an
excessive thirst, greater than that of any dog; or that which the Serpent
Dipsas causes in those that are stung by it; and all through his extraordinary
bellowing and bawling. For, having for some days led a life like one of
Epicurus's herd; that is to say, being drunk even to extravagance, he with a
Stentors voice, and a horrid howling, He is noted for drunkenness.
among other things often repeated this; Kill, cu^ the throats without any
quarter, of all these Monks, all these Popes, and all, especially our own
Magistrate; Repent, Repent, for your deliverance is at hand, etc. In the mean
time, he, with the assistance of his fellow soldiers, denounced to certain
Proselytes of another Religion, His design to invoigle others.
that Piece was not to be rejected without incurring the dreadful effects of
the last judgment, which was now at hand, and these were such as both by
solicitations and promises, his main design was to inveigle into his deceit.
Moreover he sent to redeem some of his followers out of a prison belonging to
a certain Nobleman called John of Holten, with this charge, that they should
kill with swords and pistols, whosoever should either by words or blows any way
oppose them. When they returned with their delivered captives, they had
dispatched a man (it is thought he was Priest) looking out at his door, with a
Musket, had he not turned his back and shut the door against them. The very
same night, which was to be the last, or wherein the world being to be turned
to deceitful ashes, they expected it should by the means of this Mediator and
Intercessor (as was thought) presently be restored to liberty, there were a
great many that embraced him where ever they could, with those complements
which they should use to one, as without the earnest of whose Baptism, they
were to expect the reward of disobedience, and eternal destruction to be
trrasured up for them. The Sacrament of Anabaptisme The ceremonies he used in
Anabaptisme.
being according to these cerremonies celebrated, the fore-commended Parent
exhorted his children to prayer in these words, Pray, pray, pray, pray,
mouthing it out with an agitation of his lips, like that of our Sto^ks; which
done, falling on their knees, they disgorged, a strange vicissitude of prayers
and songs. The owner of that house, who was an Innkeeper, Eppo his Host,
discovered him and his followers to be cheats.
and withal lame, sat near this great Father, toward whom the Father
turning, said unto him, Arise and walk. But Eppo being still lame, and seeing
that they were all deceived, and that by a sort of cheats wickedly stitched
together, withdrew from them, and hid himself for fear in another man's house
far from thence. These things being thus past, there rises up another, one
Cornelius Supposed to be a digger of graves.
Coemiteriensis; who ran about after a most strange manner, and when the Father
[of all execrable temerity] lay sick in his bed, tormented with an imaginary,
or at least such a disease as puzzelled the Physicians to find any name for;
this man for an hour together uttered these and such expressions: O FATHER,
look upon thy people; have mercy upon thy people: O let thy bowels, O Father,
be moved to compassion: etc. At which addresses the Father being moved, he
commanded a tankard of beer to be drawn out of the hogshead, which was now
almost at the bottom, which he drinking to his son, drank till it came to the
Lees, which presenting to his son, he said to him, Drink Hermans wicked
blasphemy.
up the holy Ghost. The son like his father, and following his example, having
taken it off, he flings out of bed, and falls upon those that stood by, and
tossing the tankard from one hand to the other, ran up and down like a drunken
man, and at length joined with the father [who was sick of an imaginary
extravagance, wherein he was much given to laugh] in roaring out these word;
Mortify the flesh, mortify the flesh; the flesh is a Devil, the flesh is a
Devil, mortify the flesh; etc. Upon this there immediately starts Heresy, a
catching, or mad disease:
up another, pursued (as he thought) by an extraordinary vision, and after
their example, roared it out most furiously, which fellow (as was reported) was
really advanced to some degrees (if not the supreme) of madness. A certain
woman better than middle-aged, being frighted almost out of her wits, by the
bawling and howling of th^s son, entreated that they would keep in the
lunatic and possessed person, and that he might be carried to Bedlam. The
common people being astonished at this impious, hellish crew; were forced to
pin their faith upon their sleeves, as a truth confirmed by the lying of those
prophetical mouths. These ^elapses of fury and madness, having their
intervalls of calmnesse and ^erenity, he admonished them, that all arms and
weapons were to be laid aside, and that they should put off their guarded,
edged and scolloped garments, and their wrought smocks and petticoats, nay that
women ought to abstain wearing their neck-laces, and all things that were
burdensome, intimating the manner wherein God that needs no arms, would fight
their battles for them, and should discomfit all their enemies. The cowardly
and inconstant vulgar being moved at the madness of this Doctrine,
disburthened their bodies of all manner of clothing. A certain harmless man
having cast away his knife, takes it up again, which his daughter looking
asquint upon, rebuked her father; to which he answered, Be patient, be patient,
daughter, we shall have emploiment hereafter for this to cut bread withal. O
how was this girl once a child, but how was the old man twice! When the
student of Bedlam, the Son, with his yelling, was exhorting the bewitched
people to singing and prayer, and to resist the Devil, the Father presently
with his own son, in whom he was well pleased, Heretics inconstant in their
opinions.
taught them, that the time of prayer being done, and that the time of war
coming on, they must take up the instruments of war; whereupon he gets up into
a Pulpit, and declared himself to the people who stood all about him, with a
loud voice, that he was the Son of God, and cried out that he was born a true
Mediator unto them, etc. His mother being there Herman blasphemes again.
present, they asked her whether she was the mother of the Son of God? To which
between force and fear, she at length answered, though innocently, that she
was. His mothers teme^i^y.
This gave occasion to many to be diffident, and to waver in the faith
received; insomuch that a certain man discovering his dissatisfaction, and
speaking ill of the son, the said son taking hold of him, flings him into a
common shore, saying unto him, now art thou deservedly cast into Hell: from
whence the said man coming out all dirt, diverse others unanimously
acknowledged that they were defiled and bespattered with the same filthiness
and abomination. And hence rise up that impious report of the Son of God,
that he was thrust out of doors, which that Ambassador Antony, being returned
from Munster, having heard took it in mighty indignation, and by force breaking
into the house, would have vindicated those holy expressions. The Father and
Son, were much against it that any should come in; yet he, though the people
flocking about him made some opposition, bitterly rebuking that blasphemous
wretch, broke forth into these words, Thou villainous and contagious burden of
the earth; What madness, what extravagance has bes^tted thee without The
Proverb verified. vice corrects sin.
fear of divine judgment, to assume to thy self the title of the Son of God?
which spoken, swelling up with the leaven of wrath, he ca^^s himself upon the
ground, whereupon the people ran violently upon him, knocking, beating, and
kicking him like a football; at last being well laden with blows he rises,
and breaking through the press of the people, he got away and escaped. In his
way he comes to a hole in the ice broken for the cattle to drink, twenty foot
over, which he made a shift to get over, as is said, with the help of the
Devil; for many that would have found him out, Hermans party are convinced,
and fall off from him.
lost their labor. All being now convinced that they were abused, for fear of
the most noble Charles Lord of Gelderland, the Viceroy of Groningen (called
also King of Gelderland) who was sent to appease that tumult, got secretly
away. But before they were all departed, one of them called Drewjis (whom they
called Doctor Nucius) out of pure spite, laying hold of the Father, being One
Drewjis of his party handles him roughly.
sick in his bed, thundered to him in these words; Thou villain, thou fruit and
groanings of the Gallows, where, where is now your governing, and authority?
now the time of prayers is past, etc. Having dragged him out of bed by head and
shoulders, they with some assistance, bound him with cords; and delivered him
to the custody of the Mistress of the house to be safely kept till night. In
the mean time the valiant Charles Lord of Gelderland; etc. with his men
surrounds the house where Herman is.
Charles surrounds the house with his men, and besieged it, which the woman
seeing, cut the co^ds. Being loose, he takes a trident fork wherewith
assaulting them as with a sword, he put to flight forty men through other
houses, whom he hastily pursuing, was unawares surprised by others, and brought
to Groningen. But behold the miracle! to that very place, where this naked
Herman is taken and brought prisoner to Groningen:
[of all truth] Messiah with his fork^ Scepter, and this Shoemaker of Cobbler
beyond his Last, had with his Trident put so many to flight, did the
water-dreading Anabaptists resort and ^ender unto God infinite thanks for the
(...) us privilages thereof. Of this lewd Messiah, who was ^ow well acquainted
with the fetters of Groningen, it was asked in his torments, whether those
routs (of whom he was ringleader) were out of He is questioned in his torments.
pretense of sanctity raised to rob the public treasuries, (as many thought)
which yet (as some say) was denied. For, he hardening himself against even the
most He is hardened.
cruel torments could be inflicted on him, still cried out; Destroy, destroy,
destroy Monks, Fo^^s, kill all the Magistrates, and particularly our own. In
the midst of these bawlings being miserably worried ou^, he gave up the He
dies miserably.
ghost.

THEODORUS SARTOR. Quis qu^^^o hic Sartor nudus qui deperit? ille Qui rogo
^^ruentis nomine dignus ^^at?
THE CONTENTS.
THEODOR the Botcher turns Adamite, he affirms strange things, his blasphemy
i^ forgiving of sins, he burns his clothes, etc. and causes his, companions to
do the like. He and his rabble go naked through Amsterdam in the dead of night,
denouncing their woes, etc. and terrify the people. They are taken and
imprisoned by the Burghers, but continue shameless. May 5. 1535. they are put
to death; some of their last words.

IN the year of our Lord one thousand five hundred thirty and five, upon the
third of Februay at Amsterdam, Anno 1535.
in a street called Salar street, at the house of John Si^^id a cloth worker,
who at that time was gone into Austria about some business, there met seven
men Anabaptists, and five women of the same persuasion, of which flock, the
Bell-weather was Theodorus Theodorus Sartor an Adamite.
Sartor, who rapt into a strange enthusiasme and ecstasy, stretching himself
upon the ground stark-naked upon his back before his brethren and sisters,
seemed to pray unto God with a certain religious dread and horror. Having
ended his prayers, he affirmed that he had beheld God with his eyes in the
excessive and ineffable He affirms strange things
riches of his glory, and that he had had communication with him, both in
heaven and in hell, and that the day of his judgment was at hand. After which
he said to one of his companions, Thou art decreed to eternal damnation, and
shall be cast into the bottomless pit; at which the other crying out, The Lord
God of Mercy have compassion on me; the Prophet said to him, be of good cheer,
now art thou the son of God, thy His blasphemy in forgiving of sins.
sins are forgiven thee. Upon the eleventh day of February, the foresaid year,
the persons aforementioned, unknown to their husbands, repaired to the same
Aug^^^'s stable. This Prophet, or Seer, having entertained them with a Sermon
of three or four hours long, casts a helmet, a breast plate, a sword, and other
arms, together with all his clothes into the fire, Being thus stark naked, He
burns his clothes, etc. and causeto his companions to do the like.
and his companions who yet had their clothes, being uncovered, he peremptorily
commanded them to do the like, as being such as must be as safe as himself. He
further affirmed, that the children of God ought to look upon all things of
this world with contempt and indignation. And since Truth, which is most
glorious in her nakedness, will not admit the deformity of any earthly
disguise whatsoever, he affirmed that they ought in all things to conform
themselves to that example of Truth and Justice. A great many hearing these
things having quite cashiered all shame, offered up their shirts, smocks, and
petricoats, and whatsoever favored of earth, as a burnt-offering unto God. The
Mistress of the house being awaken by the stink which these clothes made in
burning, and going up into the upper chambers, she finds this deplorable
representation of immodesty and impudence; but the power and influence of
prophetical integrity brought the woman to that pass, that she was drawn in
to wallow in the same mire of unshamefac'dnesse, whom therefore he advised to
continue always a constant adherer to the unblameable truth. Going out of the
house in this posture, He and his rabble go naked through Amsterdam in the dead
of night, denouncing their woes, etc. and terrify the people.
about three of the clock, the other men and women marched barefoot after him,
crying out with a horrid voice, Woe, woe, woe, the heavy wrath of God, the
heavy wrath of God, etc. In this fanatic error did this hypocondriack rabble
run about the streets, making such a horrid noise, that all Amsterdam seemed to
shake and tremble at it, as if it had been assaulted by a public enemy. The
Burghers not having the least hint of such a strange and unlooked for Accident,
(for this furious action happened in the dead of night) took up arms; and
getting these people (lost to all shame and modesty) They are taken and
imprisoned by the Burghers, but continue shameless.
up to the Palace, ^^apt them into prison. Being so disposed of, they would
own no thoughts of shame or chastity, but would justify their most white and
naked Truth. In the mean time the fire being smelt, they broke into the house
where it was, and wondering at their casting off their clothes into the fire,
which had since reached the bed, they made a shift to quench it. But the other
distracted and mad people, such as deserved to be sent to their kindred, the
Savages and Heathens, inconvincibly persisted in their pestiferous opinion, and
so upon the fifth of May the same year, they expiated May the fifth 1535. they
are put to death Some of their last words.
their wicked impieties by their death. Ones farewell saying, was, Praise the
Lord incessantly! Another was, O God revenge thou these our sufferings! Others
cried out, Woe, woe, shut thine eyes!

DAVID GEORE. Hereti^^ plures visi hic, cui visus ego, illi Pluribus in
visusque Haeresiarcha fui.
THE CONTENTS.
DAVID GEORGE, the miracle of the Anabaptists. At Basil he pretends to have
been banished his Country for the Gospels sake; with his specious pretenses he
gains the freedom of the City for him and his. His Character. His Riches. He
with his Sect enact three things. His Son in Law, doubting his new Riligion,
is by him questioned; and upon his answer excommunicated. His wifes death. He
had formerly voted himself immortal, yet Aug. 2. 1556. he died etc. His death
troubled his disciples. His doctrine questioned by the Magistrates, eleven of
the Sectaries secured. XI. Articles extracted out of the writings of David
George. Some of the imprisoned Sectaries acknowledged David George to have been
the cause of the tumults in the lower parts of Germany, but dis-owned his
doctrine.

Conditions whereupon the imprisoned are set at liberty.

The Senate vote the doctrine of D. G. impious, and declare him unworthy of
Christian burial, and that his body and books should be burned, which was
accordingly affected.

DAVID GEORGE, a man born at David George the miracle of the Anabapitsts Anno
1544.
Delph in Holland, the miracle of the Anabaptisticall Religion, having lived in
the lower Provinces forty years, did in the year one thousand five hundred
forty and four, with some of his kindred and companions, in the beginning of
April, begin his journey for Basil, in the state and condition of which
place, he had before very diligently enquired. Whereof having sufficiently
informed himself, he pretended that he had been driven out of his Country for
the Gospels sake, and that he At Basil he pretends to have been banished his
Country for the Gospels sake.
had been hitherto tossed both on the land and sea of the miseries of this world;
and therefore he humbly entreated, that now at length he might be received into
some place of Rest. Some being by the representation of his misfortunes and his
tears, melted into compassion toward him, he presumed to entreat the
Magistrate, that in tenderness to Christ and his holy Gospel, he might be made
capable of the privileges of the City, which if it were granted, he bid them
be confident of Gods most particular protection toward their City, and that
for the preservation of it, he engaged for him and his, that they should be
ready to lay down their lives. The Magistrates being moved with these just
remonstrances and desires received the viper as a Citizen, With his specious
pretenses he gains the freedom of the City for him and his.
gave him the right hand of welcome and fellowship, and made him and his free
of the City. What should the Magistrate do? Behold, he has to do with a man of
a grave countenance, free in his behavior, having a very long beard and that
yellowish, sky-colored and sparkling eyes, mild and affable in the midst of
his gravity, neat in his apparel; Finally one that seemed to His Character.
have in him all the ingredients of honesty, modesty and truth; to be short,
one, if you examine his countenance, carriage, discourse, and the cause he is
embarked in, all things without him are within the limits of mediocrity and
modesty; if you look within him, he is nothing but deceit, fraud, and
dissimulation; in a word, an ingenuous Anabaptist. Having already felt the
pulses of the Senate and diverse of the Citizens, coming with his whole family
to Basil, he and his are entertained by a certain Citizen. Having nested a
while in Basil, he purchased certain houses in the City, as also a Farm in the
Country and some other things thereto appertenant, married his children, and
by his good offices procured to himself many friends. For, as long as he
remained at Basil, he so much studied Religion, was so great an Alms-giver,
and gave himself so much to other exercises of devotion, that suspicion it self
had not what to say against him. By these cunning insinuations (this is beyond
a young fox, and smells more of the Lybian wild beast) many being surprised,
came easily over to his party, so that he arrived to that esteem and reputation
in matters of Religion, he pleased himself. This persuasion thus craftily
gotten, was heightened by his great wealth (and his riches in jewels, whereof
he His riches
brought some with him, some were daily brought from other places in the
Low Countries) and was yet further increased, by his sumptuous and rich plate
and housholdstuffe, which though they were gorgeous and majestical, yet were
they not made to look beyond sobriety, cleanliness and mediocrity. These
people sojourning thus in common houses, desiring as yet to suppress the
pernicious infection of their sect, very religiously enacted He, with his Sect,
enact three things.
three things: First, that no man should profane or speak idly of the name of
David George. Secondly, that no man should rashly or unadvisedly divulge any
thing concerning his country, or manner of life; whence it was that some
thought him to be a person of some quality; some, that he was some very rich
Factor or Merchant, whence it came that he was so excessively rich; others had
other imaginary opinions and conceits of him, for as much as they themselves
being strangers, lived in a Country where they could not be ascertained of any
thing: Thirdly, he was very cautious that none of the Basileans should be
carelessly admitted into his acquaintance, society or correspondence, imitating
therein the policy of the Ferrets and Weesels, which (as is reported) never
assault any bird of supremacy, in the places where they frequent. And thus did
he by letters, writings and emissaries, plant and water the venomous seed of
his sect through the lower Provinces, yet kept the ways by which he wrought
unsuspected and undiscovered. For, although he had lived two years among them,
there was not so much as one man infected; or had privately caught the itch of
his Religion. What transcendent Mysteries are these! This man, though he feared
neither deceit nor treachery from strangers, yet the fire kindled out of the
deceitful embers of his own household. For, behold; one of his own Retinue
doubting of the certainty of the New Religion, he caused him to be His son in
Law doubting his new Religion, is by him questioned, and upon his answer
excommunicated.
brought before him, and asked him whether he did not acknowledge him to be the
true David sent from heaven upon earth, and to be the Horn, Redeemer, and
Builder up of the Tabernacle of Israel? to which the other answered roundly and
peremptorily, that the restoration of the kingdom of Israel and other things
foretold by the Prophets were fulfilled in Christ, the true Messiah, and that
consequently there was no other to be exspected. Which he hearing, not without
great astonishment, did with much commotion of mind and bitter menaces thrust
him, though his son in Law, out of doors, and [which is heavy to think on]
excommunicated him. These things being thus managed, David's wife fell sick of
a disease (which afterward visited him and many more) that dispatched her into
the His wifes death.
other world. What a miracle is this! He that declared himself to be greater
than Christ, and voted himself immortal (upon the second of August, one
thousand five He had formerly voted himself immortal, yet Aug. 2. 1556. he
died, etc.
hundred fifty and six) did die the death, and was honorably buried according
to the ceremonies of the Parish Church, and his funerals were celebrated in the
sight of his sons and daughters, sons in law and daughters in law,
servant-men and maids, and a great conflux of Citizens. This sad calamity of
his death extremely troubled His death troubled his disciples
and tormented the minds of his diciples, as a thing that very much thwarted
their hopes of his promised immortality, although he had foretold that he would
rise again in three years, and would bring all those things to pass which he
had promised while he was alive. Upon the death of this man, a great many with
resolute minds made it their business not only to bring his doctrine into
suspicion, but into utter disesteem, unanimously resolving to embrace whatever
was good, sound, A good resolution.
and consonant to Christian doctrine, and reject the rest as heretical. In the
mean time, the report beat up and down, both among the people, and the more
learned, that this man of ingenuity, and author of private doctrines, this
very David George, was a contagion and a destructive pestilence, a devoted
incendiary of a most dangerous Sect, that (though most falsely) he was born a
King, and that he accounted himself the true Messiah. The Magistrate being
extremely moved at these things, not deferring A pattern for good Migistrates.
his zeal any longer when the glory of God and his Son Jesus Christ was so
much concerned, caused all those who were conceived to be infected with the
pestilence of that Religion to be brought to the Palace, to whom he rubbed
over what things had been transacted some years before; that is to say,
acquainted them, how that they had been banished their Country upon the
account of the Gospel, and upon their humble addresses received into the
protection, and made capable of the privileges of the City, etc. But that it
had appeared since, that they had fled for refuge to Basil, not for the
propagation of the Gospel, but for that of the leaven of the sacrilegious
David, though by all outward appearance, they had hitherto been accounted
favorers and professors of the true Religion In the first place therefore the
Senate being desirous to know the truth, required The Senates enquiry.
to have his true proper name; for, some have thought (as some authors
deliver), that his name was John Burges. Secondly, whether he had privately or
publicly dispersed his Religion, and what Tenets he held. To which some made
answer unanimously, that they had left their country for the true Religions
sake, nor did they acknowledge themselves any other than the professors and
practisers of the lawful Religion. That for his name, he had not called
himself by any other than his own proper name; and for his doctrine, they had
acknowledged none either privately or publicly, save what he had privately
sometimes suggested, which was not disconsonant to the public. The Magistrate
perceiving this obstinacy of mind caused eleven of them, the better to discover
the real truth, to be Eleven of the Sectaries secured.
secured, and more narrowly looked to. In the mean time, the Senate leaving no
stone unmoved in this business, appointed some to bring forth into public
view some books and writings of David, which should give no small light in the
business, and these the Magistrate recommended to men of the greatest learning
to be read over and In such cases the learned to be consulted with.
examined with the greatest care possible, that so whatsoever they should meet
with repugnant to the Truth, they should extract, and give him an account
thereof. Those who had this charge put upon them, presented the Senate with
this extract of Articles out of his Writings.

1. THat all the Doctrine delivered by Moses, the Prophets, or by Jesus Christ
himself and his Apostles, Articles extracted out of the writings of David
George.
was not sufficient to salvation, but dressed up and set forth for young men,
and children, to keep them within decency and duty; but that the doctrine of
David George was perfect, entire, and most sufficient for the o^taining of
salvation.

2. He affirmed that he was Christ and the Messiah, the well-beloved Son of the
Father in whom he was well pleased, not born of blood, nor of the flesh, nor of
the lust of man, but of the holy Ghost and the spirit of Christ, who vanishing
hence long since according to the flesh, and deposited hitherto in some place
unknown to the Saints; was now at length reinsused from heaven into David
George.

3. He held that he only was to be worshipped, as who should bring out the
house of Israel, and the true (that is, the professors of his doctrine) tribe
of Levi, and the Tabernacle of the Lord, not through miseries, sufferings,
crosses, as the Messiah of the Jews did, but with all meekness, love, and mercy
in the spirit of Christ granted unto him from the Father which is in heaven.

4. He approved himself to be invosted with the authority of Saving, or
condemning, binding, and loosing, and that at the last day he should judge the
twelve tribes of Israel.

5. He further maintained, that Jesus Christ was sent from the Father to take
flesh upon him; for this reason at least, that by his doctrine and the use of
his Sacraments, men, being as it were no better then children, and incapable of
receiving the true doctrine, might be kept within duty till the coming of David
George, who should advance a Doctrine that should be most perfect and most
effectual, should smooth out mankind, and should consummate the knowledge of
God and of his Son, and what ever has been said of him.

6. But he further affirmed, That these things should not come to pass
according to humane ceremonies, but after a spiritual dispensation, and after
such a manner as had not (...) ^eard of, which yet none should be able to
discern or comprehend, but such as were worthy disciples of David George.

7. To make good and prove all th^se things, he wrested and mis-interpreted
many places of the holy Scripture, as if Christ and the Apostles, whom he
commends, had intimated not themselves, nor any other Ecclesiastical times,
save only the coming of David George.

8. And thence it was that he argued thus: If the Doctrine of Christ and his
Apostles be most true and most effectual for the obtaining of salvation; the
Church which they had by their doctrine built up and confirmed, ^ould not
possibly have been broken to pieces, for (as Christ himself testisieth) against
the true Church, the gates of Hell shall not be able to prevail: But that
building of Christ and his Apostles is overturned and pulled down to the very
foundation by Antichrist, as may be evidently seen in the Papacy, according to
the Testimony of the same Christ; It therefore necessarily follows, that the
Doctrine of the Apostles is imperfect and interrupted: whence he concluded his
own doctrine and says to be the only solid and sufficient doctrine.

9. Moreover he maintained himself to be greater than John Baptist, yea then
all the Saints that had gone before him, for that the least in the Kingdom of
God (according to the suffrage of Truth it self) is greater than John. But he
said David George was one whose kingdom was heavenly and most perfect; whence
he makes himself not only greater than John, but also sets himself above
Christ, since that he was born of flesh, and that himself was born of the
spirit according to a heavenly manner.

10. He further allowed with Christ, that all sins committed against God the
Father, and against the Son may be forgiven, but those that are committed
against the Holy Ghost, that is to say against David George, shall be forgiven
neither in this world, nor in the world to come; by which means it is apparent
that he conceived himself greater and higher than Christ, admitting Christ's own
Testimony.

11. He declared Polygamy to be free and lawful for all, even for those that
are regenerated by the spirit of David George.

These hends [without any brains] did the Magistrate Some of the imprisoned
Sectaries acknowledged David George to have been the cause of the tumults in
the lower parts of Germany, but disowned his doctrine.
deliver to be carried to some that were in the prison, to fish out what
confession they would make, who besides these, being provoked and challenged by
a number of Questions, answered at last, That this (Davus) I would say David
George, was the same who had embroyled the lower parts of Germany with so many
tumults and sedition, but as that to that doctrine and the fore-recited
Articles, they unanimously affirmed that they had never heard nor read of any
such things. Nevertheless they were to acknowledge the doctrine expressed in
those Articles, to be pestiferous, execrable, and derived not from heaven, but
from Hell, and that it was heretical, and to be banished with an eternal
Anathe^a; and withal, as men miserably seduced, yet desiring for the time to
come, to be reduced into the right way, they were, with good reason, to implore
forgiveness. Among those that were in close prison, there was one formerly of
David's greatest confidents, who confessed, that indeed An ingenuous confession
and resolution.
he had been infected with that Religion, but that since by the illumination of
the grace of God, he discovered and detested the errors springing from it, and
avoided them as he would do a cockatrice. But there were others who were
civilly acquainted with this man, who denied that they had known any such thing
by him, and cried out against the forementioned Articles as impious and
blasphemous. These passages, the Judges appointed by the Magistrate, gave him
an account of, who perceiving that some that were in custody were not so
extravagant, but that they had some remainders of discretion left, he sent to
them some learned and able Preachers of the Word, who, having diligently weeded
out the tares of their errors, should sow into their hearts the saving seed A
pious act.
of true faith. Those who were sent, ^i^ting them with all the humanity,
mildness, meekness and charity possible, could scrue nothing out of them,
more than what the Judges who had been employed before, had done. In the mean
time a report was spread about the City, that A lying report raised.
it was not David George, not any eminent person of any other name that had
been buried, but that a mere swine, calf, hee-goat (happily an Ass) had been
carried out and buried, and that the dead carcass embalmed with the strongest
spices, was worshipped and adored with great devotion and religion. But this
was but a report, and was not true. Those that were in custody abhorring that
doctrine, as unheard of, and such as deserved to be anathematized, and desiring
to renew their acquaintance with discretion and their senses, are delivered out
of those habitations of Iron which they had kept possession of for two months,
upon these conditions, That none should make any purchases Conditions whereupon
the imprisoned are set at liberty.
either within or near the City, without the knowledge and consent of the
Magistrate: That they shall not entertain any coming out of the lower
Provinces, though of their kindred, but at public houses or Inns. That the
printed books and writings that were translated into the Dutch language, shall
be brought into the Palace. That there should be nothing published that were
disconsonant to Christian Doctrine. That children should be educated according
to incorrupt manners. That they should not make such promiscuous marriages
among themselves as they did. That they should take no Dutch into their
families. That they should submit to amercements and pecuniary mulcts [if any
were inflicted on them] as Citizens ought to do. That upon a day assigned, they
should in the Parish Church, in the presence of the whole congregation, make a
public abjuration of the said Religion, and condemn and anathematize the whole
sect of it. That they should hold no friendship or correspondence with any that
shall persist in that Religion. To these conditions did they promise to
subscribe, with all the reverence and gratitude they could possibly express.
These things being thus managed, the most renowned Senate, returning afresh to
the business of the Arch Heretic, passed these votes. viz. That the doctrine
of David George, upon The votes of the renowned Senate.
mature examination thereof, was found impious and derogatory to the divine
Majesty; That the printed books, and whatsoever may have seen the light,
should have the second light of the fire; That he as the most The doctrine of
D. G. declared impious.
infamous promoter of that execrable Sect, and a most horrid blasphemer against
God and Christ, should not be accounted worthy Christian burial. That he should
be taken up out of his grave by the common Hangman, He is declared unworthy of
Christian Burial.
and together with his books and all his writings, and his manuscripts should,
according to the Ecclefiastical Canons, be burnt in a solemn place. According
to the said judgment, the carcass being dug up, was, And that his body and
books should be burned.
with all his writings, whereof the greatest part was that (truly) miraculous
book, together with his effigies brought by the Hangman to the place of
execution, where having opened the dire^ul Coffin, he being found not much
disfigured, nay so little, that he was known by diverse (he being covered
with a watered garment, having about him a most white sheet, a very clean
pillow under his he^d, his yellowish Beard rendering him yet graceful; to be
short, having a silk Cap on, under which was a piece of red cloth, and adorned
with a garland of Rosemary) A fit punishment for perverse Heretics
was set up publicly to be seen, and in the third year after his death, was
with his writings consecrated to Vulcan, that is to say, burned.

MICHAEL SERVETUS. Omnia quum portenta voces hominemque Deumque Infandi SERVES
nominis opprobium!
THE CONTENTS.
SERVETUS his converse with Mahumetans and Jews. He disguiseth his monstrous
opinions with the Name of Christian Reformation. The place of his birth. At the
24 year of his age, he boasted himself the only Teacher and Seer of the world.
He in^eighed against the Deity of Christ. Oecolampadius confutes his
blasphemies, and causes him to be thrust out of the Church of Basil. Servetus
held but one person in the Godhead to be worshipped, etc. He held the Holy
Ghost to be Nature. His horrid blasphemy. He would reconcile the Turkish
Alcoran to. Christian Religion. He declares himself Prince of the Anabaptists.
At Geneva, Calvin faithfully reproves Servetus, but he continues obstinate.
Anno 1553, by the decrees of several Senates, he was burned.

MICHAEL SERVETUS, like another Simon Magus, having conversed long Servetus his
converse with Mahumetans and Jews.
among the Mahumetans and the Jews, and being excellently well furnished with
their imaginous opinions, begat both out of Divinity; and the general treasury
of Christian Religion, a monstrous issue of opinions, with the coition of what
He disguiseth his monstrous opinions, with the name of Christian Reformation.
he had received from the extravagant Mahumelans, and Thalmudists, upon which
b^at this instrument of Satan, must needs bestow the disguised name of
Christian Reformation. From this Cocks egg were bred these Cockatrices,
Gonesus, Gribaldus, Blandratta, Gentilis, Alciatus, Simanus, Casanovius, Menno,
and diverse other Anabaptistical Vipers, who extremely increased the restless
waves of Sects and opinions. We, recommending the rest to their proper place,
Hell, will take a more particular survey of one Religion, and by the The place
of his birth. His arrogant Boast. He inveighs against the Deity of Christ.
horridness of that guess at the others. This Servetus was a Spaniard, born
in the Kingdom of Arragon, most unworthy both of his Name and Nation. Being
wrapped into a most incredible Enthusiasme, he boldly lays his unwash'd hands
upon holy divinity; and at the four and twentieth year of his age, boasted
himself to be the only Teacher and Seer of the world, making it his main
design, and that by his impious and worthless writings, Oecolampadius confutes
his blasphemies, and causes him to ^e thrust out of the Church of Basil.
to inveigh against the Deity of the Son of God; with which writings being
sufficiently furnished, and withal enflamed with hopes of raising no ordinary
tumults, he bestirrs himself wind and tide for Basil; but Occolampadius, an
Ecclesiastical Doctor, learnedly* before a full Senate confuted the blasphemies
of this man, and by the public Authority he had, caused him as a poisonous
blasphemer to be thrust out of the Church of Basil. From thence he went to
Venice, where, in regard the Venetians had been timely forewarned of him by the
wise and learned Melancthon, he made no harvest of his incredible blasphemies,
nor indeed was he permitted seed-time for them. Religion is no where safe! But
having consulted with the Arch-hereticks his Predecessors, and being
bird-lim'd, he held that there was but Servetus held but one person in the
Godhead to be worshipped, etc.
one person in the Godhead to be worshipped and acknowledged, which was
revealed to mankind sometimes under one notion, sometimes under another, and
that it was thus, that those notions of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, were to be
understood in the Scriptures. Nay, with the same line of his blasphemous mouth,
he affirmed that our Savior Jesus Christ according to his humane nature, was
not the Son of God; nor coeternall with the Father. The Holy Ghost he granted
to be nothing but that influence by which all things are moved, He held the
holy Ghost to be Naure.
which is called nature. He most impiously Ironicall, affirmed that to
understand the word Person, we must refer our selves to Comedies. But the
most horrid His horrid blasphemy.
blasphemy of all, was, when by the suggestion of Satan, he imagined, that the
most glorious and ever to be worshipped and adored Trinity (who does not
tremble at it?) was most fitly compared to Cerberus the Porter of Hell-gate.
But he stayed not here; no, he thought it should be accounted nothing but a
diabolical phantasme, the laughing stock of Satan, and the monsterous ^eryon,
whom the Poets by some strange mystery of Philosophy feigned to have three
bodies. O incredible, and unheard of subtilty of blasphemy! The most glorious
name of the most blessed Trinity is grown so odious to this man, that he would
personate (being the greatest that ever was) all the Atheists that have
quarrelled with that name. Moreover he maintained, that taking but away the
only Article of the Trinity, the Turkish Alcoran might be easily reconciled to
the Christian Religion; and that by the joining together of He would reconcile
the Alcoran to Christian Religion.
these two, a great impediment would be removed; yea, that the pertinacious
asserting of that Article had enraged to madness whole Countries and
Provinces. This abomination of God and men* held that the Prophet Moses, that
great servant of God, and faithful ^ard of the Lords house, that Prince and
Captain General of the people of Israel, one so much in favor with God that
he was admitted to speak to him face to face, was to be accounted no other than
an Imposter. He accounted the Patriarch Abraham and his seed, too much given to
Revenge, and that he was most unjust and most malicious to his enemy. The most
glorious Church of Israel, ('it is the swine that loves the mire) he esteemed no
better than a Hogge-Sty; and declared himself a He declares himself Prince of
the Anabaptists.
sworn Prince of the Anabaptistical generation. But, keep o^^, and approach
not, O all ye other Heresies and Hydra's of opinions of this one man, furies
not capable of expiation! Being arrived at Geneva, and being forbidden to spue
out and spatter his pestiferous blasphemies, he continued in hostility against
all sharp, but wholesome admonitions: which Calvin, that At Geneva, Calvin
reproves Servetus.
famous Minister of the Church perceiving, being desirous to discharge the duty
of a soul saving Pastor, went friendly to Servetus, in hopes to deliver him out
of his most impious errors and horrible Heresy, and so to redeem him out of
the jaws of Hell, and faithfully reproved him. But he being dazzled with the
brightness of Truth, and overcome, returned nothing to Calvin (so well
deserving of him) but an intolerable obstinacy, and Serve^^^ his obstinacy.
inconvincible recapitulation of his blasphemies, whence it came to pass, that
by the just and prudent Decree of the Senates of Bernen, Zuring, Basil, and
Scasfuse, and by the righteous condemnation of the eternal God, in the month
of December in the year one thousand five hundred Anno 1553. By the Decree of
several Senates he was burned.
fifty and three, (or as Sleidan has it, in October) he was (how great is the
obstinacy of blasphemy!) being at that time ecstarically hardened and
intoxicated, consecrated to the avenging flames.

ARRIUS. Divisit Trini qui form^^ ^uminis ecce! Dividitur membris,
Visceribusque suis
THE CONTENTS.
Arrianisme its increase, An^^ 323.

THe General Council at Nice, Anno 325. called as a remedy against it, but
without success. The Arrians mis-interpret that place, John 10. 30. concerning
the Father and the Son. They acknowledged one only God in a Jud^icall sense.
They deny the Trinity Arrius his wretched death, Anno 336.

ABout the year of the Incarnation of the Son of God, three hundred twenty and
three, Arrianisme, its increase. Anno 323.
Hell was delivered of a certain Priest at Alexandria named Arrius, a man
subtle beyond expression, the trumpet of eloquence, one that seemed to have
been cut out for all honesty and elegance, who yet, with the poison of his
Herefie, and the (...) cups of his distructive doctrine, did in the time of
Silvester Bishop of Rome, and the Emperor Constantine, draw in a manner all
Christendom to his opinion, and so corrupted some, even great nations in the
East, that except a few Bishops who stood to the true doctrine, none appeared
against him. To remedy this disease, at Nice in Bithynia, in the year three
hundred The General Council at Nice. Anno 325. called as a remedy against
Arrianisme, but without success.
twenty and five, a general Council was called; but to no purpose; for the
contagious stocks of Arrianisme were deeply rooted, so that they were become
such ravening wolves among the flock of Christ, that all that would not embrace
their belief, were to expect banishment or death. These imagined that the
Son was not of an equal nature and coeternall with the Father, but that he
was only agreeing and concurring with his Father; to confirm which, they
alleged that place of John 10. 30. The Arrians misinterpret that place, Joh.
10. 30 concerning the Father and the Son.
which says, I and the Father are one; and though they called the Son a
great God, yet they denied, that he was a living and true God, and co-essential
with the Father. They boasted that they were ready to answer all objections,
and acknowledged one only God, in a Judaical sense. To that, I and the Father
are one, they were used to retort thus, Does the unity in this place denote
co-essencie? It most therefore follow, that it is as much, They acknowledged
one only God in a Judaicall sense. They deny the Trinity.
where the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 3. 8. He that planteth and he that waters,
are one. They accounted the word Trinity a laughing stock and a Fiction; that
the Son of God was a Creature, and that the Holy Ghost, was both born of
Christ, and conceived and begotten of the Virgin Mary. All that were baptized
in the name of the blessed Trinity, they baptized again. They denied that
Christ was the Son of God according to the Spirit and the Godhead; they
denied God his own Son.

While Arrius was disburthening himself of the necessities Arrius his wretched
death, Anno 336.
of Nature, his bowels came forth, and with them his life. And so he who was
the successor of those Arch-Hereticks, Artemon (who lived about the year of our
Lord two hundred) and Paulus Samosatenus (who lived about two hundred forty
one) came to a miserable death, in the year three hundred thirty six. See
Athanasius, Epiphanius, Hilarious, Hierom, Augustine, Ambrose, Basil,
Theoderet, Eusebius, Socrates, Nicephorus, Sozomen, and other Ecclesiastical
writers, who have treated of these things more at large.

MAMOMET. Adsum Ingens Mahometes ^go, lachrymabile mundi Prodigium, omnigeni
dux, et origo mali.
THE CONTENTS.
MAMOMET characterized. He made a laughing stock of the Trinity. He agreed with
Carpocrates, and other Heretics. He renewed Circumcision, and to indulge his
disciples, he allowed them Polygamy, etc. His Iron Tomb at Mecca.

IN the year six hundred twenty two, Honorius the Anno 622.
fifth being Bishop of Rome, and Heraclius Caesar Emperor of the East, a
transcendent Arch-heretick called Mahomet, exchanged Hell for earth; a Prephet,
Mahomet characterized.
by Nation an Arabian, but most depraved and corrupt. He had sometimes been a
Merchant extremely rich, and withal very subtle; to be short, he was a serious
professor of diabolical Arts, a most ungodly instrument of Satan, the Viceroy
of Antichrist, or his sworn forerunner. This man endeavored to exoll his
brother Arrius, with such praises as are correspondent to his Heaven. He also
with Sabellio renewed He made a laughing stock of the Trinity:
the laughing stock of the Trinity. He with Arrius and Eunomius, most fervently
and contumeliously held that Christ, was only a Man, and that he was only
called God, secundum dici, that is to say, according to a certain manner of
speaking. He He agreed with Carpocrates, and other heretics.
agrees with Carpocrates who denied that Christ was a God and a Prophet. This
is also he that shakes hands with Cerdonus who utterly abjured the Godhead of
the Son, or that he was co-substantial with Father. He imagined with the
Manichees, that it was not Christ, but some other that was sastened to the
Cross. With the Donatists, he contemned the purest Sacraments of the Church.
With the most impure Origin he affirms that the devils shall be eternally
saved according to an humane, yet an invisible manner. He with Cerinthus placed
eternal Felicity in the lust of the flesh. Circumcision, that was long since
abolished and antiquated, He renewed circumcision, and to indulge his
disciples, he allowed them Polygamy, etc.
he renewed. Upon his dicisiples he bestowed the privileges, of Polygamy,
Concu^ines and Divorce, as Moses had done; and with such dreams and an
imaginary Phrenly was the miserable wretch ever troubled. This man when he dyed
was put into an iron Tomb at Mecca, which by the strength of L^adstones, being
as it were in the middle and center of an arched edifice, His Iron Tomb at Mecca
hangs up to the astonishment of the beholders, by which means the miraculous
sanctity of this Prophet is greatly celebrated. All the dominions of the Creat
Turk, profess this man's says, whom they acquiesce in as a miracle.

BALTHAZAR HUBMOR. Ille ego qui Vndarum mysteriasacra negavi Igne cremor^fato
disce cavere meo.
THE CONTENTS.
HUBMOR a Patron of Anabaptisme. He damned usury. He brought in a worship to
the Virgin MARY, etc. The Senate of Suring by a Council reduced him. He
renounced the heads of his former doctrine. Himself or Sect still active. He
is taken and imprisoned at Vienna in Austria. He and his Wise both burned.

DOctor Balthazar Hubmor of Friburg, a man excellently well learned, another
Roscius in Hubmor Patron of Anabaptisme.
his affairs, a Clergy man at Ingolstade, was the third eminent Patron of
Anabaptisme, and a sworn promoter of that worthy Sect. This man in his Sermons
at Regenburgh, inveighed so bitterly He damned usury.
and so implacably against the usury of the Jews, that he banished it even to
eternal damnation; he brought in a certain religious worship to be done to the
Virgin He brought in a worship to the Virgin Mary, etc.
Mary, and some superstitious vows, and was the cause of great tumults and
insurrections, and had built up his doctrine upon very firm and solid
foundations, until the most wise Senate of Suring applied the universal
medicine of a Council to these things, and assigned a day The Senate of Suring
by a Council reduced him.
to reduce and root out that Sect, which was the seventeenth of January, in the
year one thousand five hundred twenty five, wherein the Senate being present,
and (...) great presence of people, the most learned Zwin^lius, and other sonns
of learning, opposed this our Doctor, by whom, and the strength of truth, after
most ^ot and serious debating on both sides, he ingenuously consessed himself
to be overcome. The heads of the He renounced the heads of his former doctrine.
Doctrine, which he before defended, and whereof he afterward made his
abrenunciation, were these: That (...) detested the cheat, and humane invention
of Ana^aptisme; He affirmed that the spirit both before ^he fall and after was
incorrupt and unblameable, and that it never dies in sin; whence it should
follow, that not it, but the flesh, is deprived of liberty; he also
acknowledged that the spirit overcomes and triumphs over the flesh. Though his
Recantation was made, and Himself, or Sect, still active.
diverse rebaptized into their better senses, yet the Torrents of this sect
neither stood still, nor were dried up, but increased in Switzerland into a
deluge, which overturned almost all. This man escaping the endeavors of spies,
and shunning the Halter, was at length taken He is taken and imprisoned at
Vienna in Austria.
with the figtree leaf of divine vengeance, and cast into prison at Vienna in
Austria. Being afterward put much to the question, it being the design of
vengeance, the reveuging fire soon turned him to ashes. His wife being also
baptized into the same whirle-pool of Baptism; He and his wife both burned.
they both, with minds hardened to their own persuasions, were not disengaged
of their faith, but with the departure of their lives.

JOHN HUT. Huttus ab Hubmoro excrescit; cervice resecta Sic vna in geminum
pullulat Hydra caput.
THE CONTENTS.
JOHN HUT the prop and pillar of Anabaptism^. His credulity in dreams and
visions. He is accounted a true Prophet by his Proselytes. At Merhem, his
Fraternity became as is were a Monastery.

IN the times of the forementioned Balthazar rise John Hut the prop and pillar
of Anabaptisme
up John Hut, a learned man, the prop and pillar of Anabaptisme, an eminent
despiser of Paedobaptisme, which kind of Baptism he accounted the execrable
fiction of the Schoolmen; whence it came, that he persuaded men, that if they
were not baptized by him and his, they must necessarily incur great danger to
their souls. To which he added, that, those who were honored with the
prerogative of his Baptism, Anabaptists aim at the advancement of thmselves,
but destruction of others.
should be the restored people of Israel, and that the wicked Canaanites should
be destroyed by their swords, and that God himself should reveal from heaven
the times wherein these things should be fulfilled. To visions and horrible
dreams, (which he thought proceeded to him from God) he gave great credit, and
he affirmed that Hut his credulity in dreams. and visions.
he saw the preparations of the last day, and the Angel going to blow the
Trumpet, by an indisputable revelation from Gold Upon the account of which
dreams, his Disciples as credulous as their Master, spent and destroyed all
they had, fearing the difficulties of the times, wherein they should spend
them; all which being scattered and consumed before the day came, they suffered
a punishment, and inconveniences befitting their folly, having the lash of
poverty perpetually at their backs. However they, a generation on whom the
greatest quantity Hut accounted a true Prophet by his Proselytes.
of black Hellebore would not be much effectual, did still adore this
miraculous piece of madness as a true Prophet, even to admiration; of which
men, some not worthy the face or name of mankind, do at this day in great
numbers live at Merhern in Palaces and Covents upon their accidental
contributions, and where they get their livelihood with their hands, and apply
themselves to any handy-craft, whereof they are the Masters and At Merhern the
Hutfian Fraternity became as it were a Monastery.
Governors, who by the commodities gained by them increase the common stock:
They have at home with them their Cooks, their Scullions, their Errand-boies,
and their Butlers, who have a care and dispose all things as they do in
Monasteries and Hospitah; They study to maint^in mu^^al peace and concord,
being all equal. These even to this day are commonly known by the name of the
Hutsian Fraternity.

LODOWICK HETZER. Polluit ut mentem Sectis deformibus error, Corpore sic Hetzer
foedus adulter erat.
THE CONTENTS.
LOdowick Hetzer a famous Heretic. He gains Proselites in Austria and
Switzerland. Anno 1527. At a public disputation Oecolampadius puts Hetzers
Emissaries to their shifts. Hetzer denied Christ to be co-essentiall with the
Father. His farewell to his Dis^iples. He is put to death for Adultery.

LOdowick Hetzer, famous for his Heresy and Learning, was first very
intimately acquainted Lodowick Hetzer a famous heretic.
with Nicholas Stork, and then with Thomas Muntzer, yet he agreed not with
these in some things, as in that opinion of theirs of the overturning and
destroying of all the powers of this world, which opinion he looking on as An
item to the Hot-spurs of our times.
malicious and barbaro^s, forsook them, and joining with John Denk, they by
their mutual endeavors, sent some Prophets into Germany. But di^^enting also
from him in some things, he propagated his own Sect in Austria, and He^zer
gains Proselytes in Austria, and Switzerland.
made many Pros^lites at Bern in Switzerland. Which gave oc^a^ion that the
Reve^end Senate appointed a public disputation at Soning, and caused letters
of safe conduct to be sent to Hetzer and his followers, for which bickering was
set apart the first day of February, in the Anno 1527, at a public
disp^tation, Oecolampadius puts Hetzers Emissaries to their shi^ts.
year one thousand five hundred twenty seven, where he appeared not himself,
but his Emissa^ies came, who were by the most learned (but withal stinging,)
Oecolampadius driven unto their shifts, and enforced to acknowledge conviction.
Hetzer was a considerable part, and the firebrand of the Anabaptistical sect,
but he stiffely denied Christ to be co-essential with the Father, which Hetzer
denied Christ to be co-essential with the Father.
the verses made by him upon the carrying of the Cross, do more than hint.

Ipse ego qui propria cuncta baec vi^tute creabam
Quaeris quot simus? Frustra, ego solus eram.
Hic n^n tres numero, verum sum solus, at i^^i
Hand numero t^es sunt, nam qui ego, solus eram.
N^scio Per, onam, solus sum ^ivus ego, and sons,
Qui me nescit, eum nescio, solus ero.
I who at first did make all things alone,
Am vainly asked my number; as being one.
These three did not the work, but only I
That in these three made this great Syzygie.
I know no Person, I Am the only Main,
And, though they know me not, will one remain.
He was excellent at three tongues, he undertook to translate the book of
Ecclesiasticus out of the Hebrew into High-Du^ch. Plauterus has testified for
him in writing, that he very honestly and unblameably bid farewell to his
Disciples, and with most devout prayers commended His farewell to his Disciples.
himself to God, even to the astonishment of the beholders. He having been kept
long in close prison, was on the fourth day of February, in the year one
thousand five hundred twenty nine, sentenced to die: and thinking himself
unworthy of the City, was led without the walls, where he was put to death, not
for sedition He is put to death for Adultery.
or baptism (as Plauterus says) but for Adultery, which act he endeavored to
defend by some arguments fetched from the holy Scriptures.

MELCHIOR HOFMAN. Pellibus a teneris suetus, doctissime, nosti Ho^manni teneras
excoriare Greges.
THE CONTENTS.
HOFMAN a Skinner, and Anabaptist, Anno 1528, seduced 300 men and women at
Embda in West-Friesland. His ^ollowers accounted ^im a Prophet. At Strasburg,
he challenged the Ministe^s t^ dis^ute, which was agreed upon Jan. 11. 1532.
where ^e^ng mildely dealt with, he is nevertheless obstinat^* Other Prophets
and Prophetesses d^luded him. He deluded himself, and volu^tarily pined himself
to death.

IN the year one thousand five hundred twenty Anno 1528.
eight, Melchior Ho^man a Skinner of Strasburg, a most eloquent and most cra^ty
man, at Embda in Hofman a Skinner, and Anabaptist, seduced 300. men and women
at Embda in West-Friesland.
West Friezland, ensnared 300. men and women into his doctrine, where he
conjured up Anabaptisme out of hell upon pain of damnation, whereupon being
^eturned to the lower Provinces, who ever addressed themselves to him, he
entertained them with water, baptizing all promiscuously. This man upon the
prophecy of a certain decrepid old man went to Strasburg, it having been
foretold him, that he should be cast into prison, A delusive prophecy.
and remain there six months, at which time being set at liberty, he should,
with his fellow laborers, disperse the harvest of the Gospel through all the
world, He was by his followers acknowledged and honored as His followers
accounted him a great Prophet.
a great Prophet. This was the great prop and pillar of the re^gn of Mu^ster.
Having therefore made what have he could pos^ible to St^asburg in order to the
fulfi^ling of the phophecy, he there challenges the Ministers of the Word to
dispute, which offerture the Senate engaged At Strasburg he challenged the
Ministers to dispute, which was agreed upon, Jan. 11. 1532.
with, upon the eleventh of January one thousand five hundred thirty and two;
at which time, the mists and clouds of errors and blindness, were quite
dispersed by the Sun of the Gospel. However, Ho^man stiffely adhered to the
foresaid prophecy, as also to his own dreams and visions; nor would he
acknowledge himself overcome; but, their mildness having somewhat appeased
him, he was thence dismissed, as one judged w^rthy of such a place where Lepers
are shut up, lest others be infected. But it is incredible how joyful he was at
Being mildely dealt with, he is ^^verthelesse obstinate.
that news, out of an excessive thanksgiving to God, putting o^^* his shoes,
and casting his hat into the air, and calling the living God to witness, that
he would live upon bread and water, before he would discover and brand the
author of that opinion. In the mean Other Prophet (...) delude hi^.
time some Prophets began to rise and keep a stir, hinting, that he should be
secured for that half year, and that afterward he should go abroad with one
hundred forty and four thousand Prophets, who should, without any resistance.
Yet it is like, to back their prophecies, they pretended liberty of conscience.
reduce and bring the whole world under the subjection of their doctrine? There
was also a certain Prophetess who should prophecy, that, this Hosman was
Elias, that Cornelius Polterman was Eno^^, and that Strasburg was the new
Jerusalem, and she had also dreamed, that she had been in a great spacious
Hall, A Prophetess deludes him.
wherein were many brethren and sisters sitting together, whereinto a certain
young man in ^ing apparel should enter, having in his hand a golden Boul of
rich Nectar, which he going about should taste to every one; to whom having
drunk it to the dregs, there was none Pretended to compare with him, but only
Polterman. Alas poor Melchior! He having nothing, yet made Master He deluded
himself.
of a strong Tower, did after the example of Esdras, signify by Letters that
his Baptism should, be put off for two years longer, until Africa should bring
forth another monster, that should carry hay in its horns. There were many
other dreams, and some nocturnal pollutions, which they attributed to heaven,
and thought such as should have been written in Cedar. But it was Melchior's
pleasure to think it a miserably happy kind of He voluntarily pined himself to
death.
death, o die voluntarily, by pining and consuming away with hunger, thirst,
and cold.

MELCHIOR RINCK. Discipulos sic Rincke doce^ Baptisma negare, Sanguine
carnifices et scelerure manus!
THE CONTENTS.
MElchior Rinck, an Anabaptist. He is accounted (...) notable interpreter of
dreains and visions. His ^isciple Thomas Scucker, in a waking dream cut off his
brother Leonard's head; pretending for his mi^rther obedience to the decree of
God.

MELCHIOR RINCK, a most wonderful Enthufiast, was also a Melchior Rinck, an
Anabaptist.
most extraordinary promoter of Anabaptisme, and among his followers celebrated
the festivals of it, He made it his business to extol Anabaptisme above all
others, with those commendations (which certainly it wanted not) Besides he was
accounted no ordinary promoter and interpreter of dreams He is accounted a
notable Interpreter of dreams and visions.
and visions, which it was thought, he could not perform without the special
indulgence of God the Father; nay, he arrived to that esteem among the chiefest
of his opinion, and became so absolutely possessed of their minds, that his
followers interpreted whatever was scattered abroad concerning dreams and
visions, to have proceeded from heavenly inspirations from God the Father.
Accordingly in Switzerland (to omit other particulars) at Sangall, even at a
full Council, his disciple Thomas Scucker, being rapt into an Enthusiasme, (his
Father His disciple Thomas Scucker, in a waking dream cut off his Brother
Leonards head.
and Mother then present, and his Brother Leonard, having by his command, cast
himself at his knees before him) calls for a sword, whereupon the parents and
diverse others running to know what was the cause and meaning of such an
extravagant action, he bid them not to be troubled at all, for that there
should happen nothing but what should be according to the will of God; Of this
waking dream did they all unanimously expect the interpretation. The foresaid
Thomas [guilty alas of too much credulity] did, in the presence of all those
sleeping-waking spectators cut off his own Brothers head, and having forgotten
the use of water, baptized him with his own blood. But what followed? The
Magistrate having sudden notice of it, and the offense being fresh and horrid,
the Malefactor is dragged to prison by He pretends (for his murder) obedience
to the decree of God.
head and shoulders, where he, having long considered his action with himself,
professed he had therein obeyed the decrees of the Divine power. These things,
did the unfortunate year one thousand Anno 1527.
five hundred twenty and seven see. Here men may perceive, in a most wicked and
unjustifiable action, the eminent tracts of an implacable fury and madness;
which God of his infinite goodness and mercy avert from these times.

ADAM PASTOR. Nomine qui Pastor tu Impostor moribus audis, Qui a recto teneras
Tramite ducis oues.
THE CONTENTS.
ADam Pastor a derider of Paedobaptisme. He revived the Arrian heresy. His
foolish interpretation of that place, Genesis 2. 17. so often consuted.

ADAM PASTOR, a man born at a village in Westphalia, was one of those, who with
Adam Pastor a derider of Paedobaptisme.
the middle finger pointed at Paedobaptisme; that is to say, looked upon it
with indignation, as a thing ridiculous, being of the same opinion in that
business, as Menno and Theodorus Philip, but as to the incarnation of God, he
was of a quite contrary judgment. For Menno held, that Christ was something
more worthy and more divine then the seed of a woman, but (our) Adam stood upon
it, that he was less worthy then that of God, so that he rowsed up the Arrian
heresy, He revived the Arrian heresy.
which had lain so long asleep, as having been but too famous in the year three
hundred twenty five. For in a certain book of his, whose title was, OF GOD'S
MERCY, he writ thus, The most divine word, which is the main considerable in
our business, is written in the second of Genesis v. 17. The day that ye shall
eat of the fruit, ye shall die the death; This is that word, which is made
flesh. Joh. 1. Yea that God which is incapable of His foolish interpretation of
that place, Genesis 2 17.
suffering and impassible, is made passible, and he that was immortal, is made
mortal; for he was crucisied, and died for our advantage. To be brief, he held,
that Christ was not to be accounted any thing but the hand, the finger, or the
voice of God. But although the opinion or Religion of this (third, but most
unfaithful) Pastor Adam wander out of the limits of divinity, and that it seem
to be an ancient heresy, containing nothing in it but what is childish,
trifling, and mere foppery, and has been confuted and brought to nothing by
the most religious preachers of the word His opinion has been sufficiently
resuted.
of God, notwithstanding the barking of the viperous progeny of Arrius and
Servetus; yet he has this in particular, that he would have us look narrowly
to his explication of the second of Genesis, which he so commends, where he
foolishly and vainly endeavors to prove that the prohibition there, is the
word made flesh. This monster did not only beget this sect, but nursed it;
here are baits, allurements, and all the poisonable charms imaginable that
may cunningly seduce the best and most innocent of men. But alas! where is the
free and indulgent promise of God of the seed of the woman, which cuts the very
throat of the Devil, and ties him in the strictest chains? where are his often
promises to Abraham? to Isaac? to Israel and to his old people, confirmed by a
league so solemnly made? In thy seed all the earth shall be blessed. And thou
shall be a blessing unto me. This seed, witness the Apostle, is none other
than Christ himself, whom God without question meant. The desperate contagion
of this man's Religion did Servetus and his adherents profess, embrace, and
celebrate.

HENRY NICHOLAS. Vestra Domus Nicholae cadat, quae exrudore versoe Futile
fundamen Religionis habet.
THE CONTENTS.
HENRY NICHOLAS, Father of the Family of Love. He is against Infant Baptism.
His divelish Logic.

THere was also ore Henry Nicholas the Father Henry Nicholas Father of the
Family of Love.
of the Family of Love, (as he called himself) and not the meanest man of all
his Gang, one who by many means endeavored to cripple the Baptism of
Children, as is too known and apparent out of his writings, which at a third
hand, he with all He is against Infant Baptism
freedom, earnestness and kindness, endeavored to communicate to David George
and the other of his fellow laborers, and his new Jerusalem friends. This man
in a Pamphlet of his, wherein he notably described himself, and which he
dedicated to an intimate friend of his under the name of L. W. maintaining that
the As to that minute (if he confine not God) we may believe him.
minute of the last Trumpet was coming, that should unfold all the Books of
unquiet consciences, hell, and eternal Judgment, which should be found to have
been only things grounded upon mere lies, and as all wicked and high misdeeds
were hateful and detestable to God, so also were glorious and plausible lies no
less odious to him. The same man endeavored to persuade people, that he was a
partaker of God, and the humanity of his Son. He further affirmed, that at the
last day God should bring all men, nay the Devils themselves into His blasphemy.
perfect happiness. All the things that were said of Doubtless he hugged
himself in this opinion.
Devils, of Hell or Angels, and eternal Judgment, and the pains of Damnation;
he said, were only told by the Scripture to cause fear of civil punishments,
and to His divellish Logic.
establish right Policy.

FINIS.
The Conclusion.
These few things we have brought to light, were not invented by us, but were
extorted out of their own Disciples, with abundance of discourse, not without
the presence of many men of godliness and excellent understanding, Heretics
allow not of the Scriptures.
they admitting not the universal rule of the Scriptures. But alas! take these
away, where is Faith? fear of God? eternal happiness? But let us believe them,
let us believe them, and we shall be saved.

Oh! that to Heresies I could say

An Alphabetical TABLE to the Revelation of Heretics.
A.
APious Act. 48. Adam Pastor, a derider of Paedobaptisme, 7^. etc. Anabaptists
their leading principle, 3. usually they grow worse and worse, ibid. their bold
attempt, 14. etc. where Masters most insolent, 10. of a levelling principle,
21. they, as the Devil, pretend Scripture for their base actions, 2^ they aim
at universal Monarchy, ibid. their de^ign upon Amsterdam, 24. they aim at the
advancement of themselves, but destruction of others, 64 they would enforce
others to their opinions; yet: pretend liberty of conscience as to themselves.
70. Arrius, his character, and wretched death, 55. etc. Arrianisine, its
increase. 56.
B.
JOhn Buckhold, or John of Leyden, His actions and end. 1^. etc.
C.
CAlvin's reproof of Servetus, 54 Godly and loyal Citizen^ hate usurpation. 18
Conventicles usually the nurseries of Tumults. 13
D.
THe Devil an enemy of peace. 9
E.
A Bad Example soon followed. 18
F.
FAmine the consummation of all misery. 25 its character, etc. 26
G.
DAvid George, an Anabaptist, his character doctrine, actions, and death. 40,
etc.
H.
Heresy a catching, or mad disease. 33 Heretics, their usual prerence, 2. the
end that they propose to themselves in opposing the Ministry and Magistracy, 2.
they are restless. 3. their cruelty, 19. they are inconstant in their opinions,
34. they allow not of the Scriptures. 78 Hermannus Suitor, or Herman the Cobbler,
his blasphemies, opinions and end. 30. etc. Lodowick Hetzer, a famous Heretic,
65, etc. his end, 67. Melchior Hosman an Anabaptist, 68. pined himself to
death. 69 Balthazar Hubmor an Anabaptist, 60, etc. he and his wife burned, 62
John Hut an Anabaptist, 63, etc.
I
JOhn of Leyden, vide Buckhold. An item to the Hotspurs of our times, 66
K.
BErnard Knipperdoling, 16
L.
THe Learned to be consulted with, in detection of Sectaries and Heretics, 45
Loyalty not always successeful 19 Luther's advice to the Senate concerning
Muntzer, 4
M.
MAgistrates seduced, most ominous 5 A pattern for good Magistrates. 44 Mabomet
characterized, 58 etc. his iron Tomb, 59 John Mathias a Baker at Harlem, his
actions and end, 8, etc. Moneys and preferments, the usual baits of sedition,
25 Thomas Muntzer, His Opinions, actions, and end. 1. etc.
N.
HEnry Nicholas Father of the Family of Love, he is against Insant-Baptisme,
his blasphemy, and divellish Logic, 77, etc. OEcolampadius puts Hetzer's
Emissaries to their shifts. 66
P.
AN ill President soon followed, ^ Pretenders to Religion, prove usually the
disturbers thereof 9
R.
A Good Resolution, 44, 48 Melchior Rinck, an Anabaptist, 71, etc. his disciple
Thomas Scucker cut off his or others head, 72
S.
SEctaries like ^inder, are soon on fire, 3. their usual pretense to raise
sedition, ibid. Sedi^ion goes not always unpunished, 21 Michael Servetus an
Anabaptist, his blasphemous opinions and end, 51, etc. Success in bad
enterprises causes evil men to rejoice 31
T.
THeodorus Sartor, or Theodor the Botcher, an Adamite, his blasphemy, actions,
and end, 37, etc. John Tuysentschreuer, an abettor of John Buckhold, 19, etc.
his seditious Sermon, 21
V.
Vice corrects sin, 3^.
FINIS.

