INFANT BAPTISM; OR, Infant-Sprinkling; (As the Anabaptists Ironically term
it,) Asserted and maintained by the Scriptures, and Authorities of the
Primitive Fathers.

Together with a REPLY to a pretended ANSWER.

To which is added, A SERMON PREACHED On Occasion of the Author's baptizing an
Adult Person. With some Enlargements.

By J. R. Rector of Lezant in Cornwall.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be Sold by J. Tailor, at the Ship in St. Paul's
Churchyard; Philip Bishop at Exon, and Benjamin Smithurst at Lanceston in
Cornwall, 1700.

To the Worshipful Sir Joseph Tredenham, Knight.
IT IS not unknown, how you have vouchsafed to espouse my Cause in many
difficulties I have strugled with. Which is very much my Glory, that so
eminently worthy and accomplished a Person, and so great a Votary of the Church
of England as Your Self, has not only judged favorably, but on many occasions
actually interested your self on my behalf. It therefore behooves me to lay hold
on any opportunity to demonstrate a grateful Mind, though it be accompanied with
a new Address for further Favor, as this at present is, to countenance a small
Polemical Discourse; for I cannot but call to mind, having so well experienced
its truth in you, that known Aphorism, which a Reverend Prelate lays down in
the close of his Parable of the Pilgrim: Those will be our best Friends, not to
whom we have done good, but who have done good to us; which speaks the
abounding goodness of a Benefactor. Upon this ground I take the confidence of
making this Dedication. 'Twould be tedious to recount to you the various
Motives that have induced me thus to engage in this Controversy, when so many
Tracts have been already set forth of this Nature; it may suffice to clear me
from all aspersions, that I can justly say from the Observation of others, as
well as my own, that it is, like the Quakers, a growing Sect with whom I
contend; and that they have lately, in my Parish of Up-Ottery, built them a
Synagogue of such a Structure, as if they meant it should out-vy the Parochial
Church there. These things, I humbly conceive render it necessary, and make it
my more peculiar Province, to endeavor with others to stop the growth of the
Faction, that so my own Flock may not be worried and miss-led; but that I may
be assisting to them in my necessary absence, as well as when I am present
amongst them; and by any means reduce some, and prevent others from going
astray from the holy Communion of our Church, whose Peace and Prosperity all
its true Members, especially the Clergy, ought to Consult and Promote. Sir, my
Prayers and Endeavors are intent upon these Things, and as far as I continue
steadfast in such labors, I am secure of your good Opinion,

Your most Obliged and most devoted humble Servant, James Rossington.

INFANT BAPTISM; OR, Infant Sprinkling, etc.
INfant Baptism, or, Cornwal's Vindication of the Royal Commission of King
Jesus. Dedicated to the House of Commons, about the Year 1645 and A. R. in his
Vanity of Childish Baptism.
as the Anabaptists sometimes call it, Infant Sprinkling, is no Popish
Tradition, much less is it, as they pretend, brought into the Church by
Innocent the Third, yea so far is it from being any corrupt Innovation crept
into the Church, that it agrees with the mind of God in the holy Scriptures;
and consequently we need not question its agreeableness to the practice of the
Church of Christ even in the first Ages of Christianity; though it should be
supposed we have no express Records of matter of Fact, which yet we have, and
the same authentic and undeniable. Neither is our way of administering Baptism,
by pouring on of Water novel, or to be disliked.

To demonstrate the agreeableness of this Doctrine to the revealed Will of God,
I shall take my rise from the Covenant God made with Abraham Genesis 12.3.17.8.
, being by the Apostle's computation Gal. 3.17.
430 years before the giving of the Law. And to this he elsewhere refers Gal.
3.8.
, where he signifies that the Gospel was before preached to him, that is to say
in the words of the Promise, as containing in them a Breviary thereof, being an
Evangelical and not a legal Promise, viz. That all Nations of the World, and
not only the Jews, should be justified by Faith, and consequently the Gentiles
now; and that without legal Mosaical performances; for after this manner, and
in these express words, did the Promise run: In thee shall all the nations of
the earth be blessed, and again, I will establish my Covenant to be a God unto
thee, and to thy seed after thee Genesis 17.8, 9.
. And when God had thus enacted and established his Covenant with that holy
Patriarch and his Seed; he immediately thereupon, as you will find ver. 10.
, commanded them to keep that his Covenant, Vid. Dr. Burthog's Argument for
Infant Baptism, Printed Anno 84. and Whiston's Infant Baptism plainly proved,
Printed Anno 78.
not only in the substance, but in the sign and token of it, as it is
immediately in one continued Speech exegetically added, this is my Covenant, or
token of my Covenant, so that the sense and meaning of the Phrase in either
Verse, is clearly the meaning of both, and Circumcision is specified to be the
Covenant at that time to be kept, though not the only Covenant to be kept.

The Obligation imposed upon Abraham and his Seed was, as you may note in the
first Place, to keep the sign or token of the Covenant, or the Covenant in the
sign of it; and then to observe Circumcision as that sign or token. The former
is of perpetual Obligation; the latter is more positive and secondary. Though
then there be an alteration in the second Injunction; it will not therefore
follow, there must be in the first; or that the Covenant ought not to be
observed in the sign of it; if for certain reasons Circumcision be no longer,
but something else be that sign. So in the fourth Commandment, Remember the
Sabbath Day to keep it Holy, that is the first thing which is principally
Commanded; but the other the seventh Day, that is the last Day of the Week, is
the Sabbath, that is but secondary, so that the Obligation to the first, and
that which is primary in the Command does not cease, because there is an
alteration in the second, and that not the seventh, but the first is now the
Sabbath of the Lord.

For a further explanation of this Truth, you may observe, that the Command in
the 9th verse requires the keeping of the Covenant in general, but don't
determine what the token of the Covenant should be, but obliges to whatsoever
token God should institute; it is not said, Thou shall be circumcised, or be
baptized, but thou shall keep my Covenant; that is, as before, the token of the
Covenant; consequently when Circumcision was appointed, it obliged to that; but
Circumcision being laid aside, and another sign instituted, which is Baptism,
it now obliges to this; since the Command in general is not revoked, but only
the sign is altered. Wherefore the Command at first not determining the sign
what it should be, but only enjoining the keeping of it, whatsoever it should
be, and being applicable to Baptism, as well as to Circumcision, and extending
and reaching to all Abraham's Seed, to believing Gentiles as well as to the
Jews, it is all one, as if God had said: Thou shall Circumcise under the first
Testament, and Baptize under the second. These being Tokens of the Covenant
successively to be kept the one after the other.

And this Covenant being renewed to the Children of Israel in the Land of Moab,
(besides the Covenant which Moses made with them in Horeb Deuteronomy. 29.1.
) the command runs in these Terms: That they should all, even their little
ones, enter into this Covenant, that is explicitly by some Rite or other; not
that the little ones could then personally and expressly indent with God, or
that a personal or express Stipulation was a Condition prerequisite to their
Initiation; but only an implicit, or vicarious, or an imputative sort of
Stipulation by Sureties or Witnesses, as the old Testament word is Isa. 8.2.
vid. Jun. and Trem. on the place.
; which at Years of understanding they were bound to own by the restipulation
of a good Conscience, or by an open Profession of the Jewish Religion.

The manner then of entering into Covenant with God, or keeping the Covenant in
the sign or token of it, was by receiving of Circumcision. Accordingly in the
17th of Genesis aforesaid, Abraham and the rest were circumcised in the Capacities
they were in, Abraham at 99 Years old, and Ismael at 13, and the Children, as
they were commanded. Neither did this Law concern only such as belonged unto
Abraham for the present, and his Posterity, but also Proselytes that in future
times were to be received or adopted into his Family; even to the time of John
the Baptist and Christ, who were both circumcised the 8th Day, that is during
the first Administration, so long, says God, it shall be for a sign between me
and you, Genesis 17.11.
viz. Those that belong to thee, with thy self for the present, and those that
shall descend from thee according to the Flesh, or be adjoined unto thee; he
adds not and thy Seed after thee; which hints that Circumcision was no longer
to be the sign, but till the Seed should come. Whereas speaking of the Covenant
without limiting it particularly to Circumeision, he says, Thou shall keep my
Covenant, thou and thy seed after thee, in their generations; and again, This
is my Covenant which ye shall keep between me and you, and thy seed after thee.
Nevertheless the Seed Christ mystical, the believing Gentiles in after Ages,
are as absolutely enjoined to keep the Covenant in the sign of it, as the
others. Thou shall keep my Covenant Ibid. v. 9.
; Q. d. thou and all that thou ownest, and thy Seed and all that they own,
shall by way of Stipulation be dedicated unto me; and that in token of being
so, both you shall observe the Covenant, by wearing the Initiating sign thereof
your self in your own Person; and by putit on all yours as far as they are
capable of receiving it, which shall be virtually and interpretatively the
putting it on all thy Seed, The whole Nation of the Jews are called the
Circumcision, the Women being reckoned to be circumcised in the Men, and were
permitted to partake of the Passover of which no uncircumcised Person could
eat, Exodus 12.47, 48.
all such as have the benefit or advantage of the Covenant shall keep it in
like manner, causing their Children and such as they adopt to wear the like
Badge and Cognizance, the initiating Sign and Seal. And as it cannot be
supposed, but that the believing Gentiles do retain a propriety and right for
their Children, and that under the Gospel they are as much theirs, and in the
same right, as the natural and adopted Children (together with the Servants and
Slaves) of Abraham were his; so neither is it to be denied, but that as
Circumcision was the initiating Rite and Sign before the coming of Christ; so
Baptism is after it: And that now to dedicate and give up a Person unto God
visibly and solemnly, is by that Sign or Rite to enter him into the Church; and
that the command of keeping the Covenant in the sign of it, or of entering into
Covenant, according to the Rite that ought to accompany it, is still necessary,
and lays an Obligation upon all to whom the Covenant extends.

Now how far the Covenant reaches, the Apostle declares at large, Act. 2.39.
where he infers the same Conclusion, and on the like Premises, as I have done,
viz. The Right of such Persons, and consequently their Children's right to
Baptism; and the Obligation that is incumbent on Parents to have it
administered; because the Promise of the Covenant extends to posterity, without
limiting it to those who were immediately and personally called, as the
Anabaptists would have it, but it belongs to them, and in them to their
Children; without any Condition or Qualification on their part, save only their
being Children of such Parents. Nor can we interpret the Apostle, by reason of
that last Clause in the verse, even as many as the Lord our God shall call, to
have meant or intended any personal Call required, as to Children in order to
Baptism; unless we make him in effect guilty of very gross Tautologies: for
should that be necessarily implied, with respect to the several particulars
aforegoing, it would make the Apostle speak to this Purpose; The Promise is to
you that is, to as many of you as God has called, and to your Children, even
to as many of them as God has called; and to all afar off which God shall
call, even as many as the Lord our God shall call; the imposing such a sense, I
say, on the Apostle's words, would render him very vain and Tautological; much
less is there an inward Call absolutely necessary for every particular Person,
in order to his susception of Baptism, or indeed for any, but only an outward
Call of the Parents suffices; not only in reference to themselves, but to
those Minors likewise who are under their Power; for it is not necessarily
requisite, that the party to be baptized, must be supposed to have an absolute
Right to the Rem foederis, to what is promised in the Covenant, but only to the
conditional Grant or Covenant, as that speaks a mutual Engagement each to
other. There being no such thing as a right in foro Ecclesiae, contradistinct
to the right in foro dei; no one having a right to Sacraments in the judgment
of Charity, who has none in the sight of God. If it be otherwise, how shall we
have the Church's judgment, concerning the Individuals that are to be admitted
unto Baptism, or the Lord's Supper? I hope they will not send us to Rome for
it; and there is not any general Council in being to decide the particular
Cases, or any Court where the whole do send in their Votes. And the like may be
said of a National Church; if it be meant of a Congregational Church, or rather
particular Congregation, then this must be of the whole Body too, or the
judgment of the Ruler or Rulers; if the whole Body, we know there are many in
most Congregations, that never troubled their Heads about it; and scarce know
their own Minds, what they would or should judge in such matters; and few of
those that use this distinction, did ever take their judgment in it; if it be
meant of the Pastors and Rulers, then it seems the Pope is not very much out of
the way, to count himself, at least with his Cardinals, to be the Church; if a
single Presbyter or Deacon with the ruling Elders may be the Church. Surely
they come nearer to him, than they are aware of, who account the judgment of a
particular Congregation, or Pastor, the judgment of the Church; and plead that
a Man has a right to the Sacrament, if that Congregation or Minister judge so;
though he has none in the sight of God. But here is the Mischief of it, by this
reckoning a Man may have a right in the judgment of the Church, and yet have no
right in the judgment of the Church; for he may have a right in the judgment of
one Minister or Congregation, and yet another may at the same time judge, that
he has no right at all. But which shall be the Church of the two? Why
certainly the one has as good right to claim the Title, as the other; except
one of them rob the Pope, and claim the Chair, and condemn all other Churches
and their judgment, to set up their own. The Eastern Churches were so wary to
prevent all Thoughts that one's right to the Sacrament should in any wise
depend on the Minister, that they say not baptizo, but baptizetur N. in nomine
Patris, etc. Thus the Apostles baptising is said to be Christ's Baptism. It Is
true, the Minister in saying I Baptize thee, speaks right; but still he
baptizeth as a Minister, and cannot call that his Baptism; but if the
Minister's Act be all that such Professors have right to, then he might say
they have no other but my Baptism, and that the party has right to his
Baptism, and not Christ's. Wherefore the better to understand any one's
fundamental Right in this Point, we must distinguish between the Grant or
Promise, and the mutual Engagement which is in Covenants, and so must allow
that the natural Seed of Abraham, by virtue of God's gracious Promise, were in
some sense to be reputed a spiritual Seed likewise; though not so strictly, as to
create to them an absolute right to the benefits of the Covenant, the blessing
of Abraham; yet enough to give them the Prerogative of being in Covenant, and
the Privileges of being under such an Administration; whereof the Apostle
reckons eight which belonged to the Jews Romans 9.4, 5.
; And who will say, that Christians have fewer and of less Consequence? Don't
we find those very Persons whom the Baptist (upbraiding them for coming so far
short of Abraham's Faith and Works) calls a Generation of Vipers, admitted by
him to Baptism, and enstated in the aforesaid privileges? Luke 3.7. and v. 16.


From these premises, it apparently follows, that not only believers, but
professors of Christianity and their Children are proper Subjects of Baptism;
yea such also as are born of professed Infidels, when they become Converts, and
belong to such as are Members of the visible Church, for so runs the primitive
Grant; and to these does the Covenant extend, Genesis 17. And if professing Jews,
and such Servants and Slaves as are mentioned, v. 13. have a right to enter
into the Covenant, and to be circumcised; it follows, a fortiori, that the
Children of professing Christians, and such as they have a propriety in, have a
true right to the like privilege, and are now to be baptized, otherwise the
Gospel does not, nor must Christians show so much favor to the Children of the
Jews, as the Covenant under the Law did, and as the Jews were to show to the
Children of the Gentiles, while they were strangers in the general to the
Common Wealth of Israel. And if when they were in the Scripture account
strangers to the Covenant, yet such Children of theirs might enjoy it, how much
more now since the Partition Wall is taken down, and the enmity is done away?

Nor is this true only in the Theory, and according to the Commandment, as it
may be thus fairly construed; but the Practice of the Church, Age after Age,
speaks this to be the intent of the Law, and Lex currit cum praxi. So that for
Men to exclude them now, as if they were greater Aliens and Forreingers than
they were at that time; to shut them out from the Covenant and Seal more than
when they were under the Law, and to make a greater Partition Wall between
Gentiles and Gentiles, than there was then between Jews and Gentiles, (as those
must do that debar them of their Right to Baptism) this must needs be contrary
to the Gospel; and does in effect make void the Cross of Christ for though upon
the coming in of the Gospel the sign be changed, and Circumcision, which was at
first the sign and token of that Covenant, be taken away; it does not follow,
that the Obligation to observe and keep the Covenant in any other Sign and
Token does cease with it, for the reason and equity of the Command does hold in
Baptism, as well as in Circumcision, and Ratio legis and nexus conscientiae are
reciprocal, and do mutually suppose one the other. And this is the Topic that
St. Paul uses, 1 Cor. 9.8.
arguing for the maintenance of the Evangelical Ministry, from the Analogy of
Faith, and reasonableness of the thing.

We are therefore to distinguish between the Obligation to keep the Covenant in
the Sign and Token of it, which is of perpetual Obligation and Existence, as
the Covenant it self is; and to keep it in the particular sign and token of
Circumcision, which being secondary and changeable, for certain Reasons was to
be no longer, but something else became that Sign and Token.

For the further explanation of this, it is to be noted that Circumcision was
not abolished in the Gospel, as 'twas of the Fathers, but as it was of Moses;
(a distinction that Christ himself makes Joh. 7.22
) not as it had relation to the Covenant of Promise, and the Sign of it, as if
in that respect, it was a weak and carnal Thing; for so it was a Bond to
Evangelical Obedience Genesis 17.1. that is be upright and sincere, so the Margin,
Romans 2.25. Gal. 5.3.
; but as it was adopted by the legal Mediator, and made a sign of that
Administration and Covenant in which he had to do. Wherefore if the Law ceased,
Circumcision could not continue; seeing whosoever was circumcised became a
Debtor to keep the whole Law; and so it would infer, as if Christ were not come
in the Flesh.

Nor can the abrogation or cessation of Circumcision be understood to be any
diminution to the Promises; forasmuch as it was applied to the Legal Covenant
out of a gracious Consideration, (as Doctor Burthog well observes) not in the
derogation of the Promises, or of any Privileges or Duties arising from
thence; but in confirmation of them; God taking the token of the Covenant of
Promise, and putting it upon the Legal Covenant, shows he had the Covenant of
Promise still in remembrance; for doing so he could never look on, or so much
as think on the Law, but he must also remember the Promise, the sign and
memorial of the Promise being thus annexed and put to the Law. So that here is
an express command for baptizing Infants or little ones; though not in the very
term Baptism, yet under this general Notion, as it is now the oken of the
Covenant, for God's Covenant with Abraham still continues, it is an everlasting
Covenant, Genesis 17.7.
in which blessedness was promised in and through Christ the promised Seed; and
by virtue, whereof the blessing of Abraham, or the Promise made to that
Patriarch, in like manner came on the Gentiles, as the Apostle asserts, Gal.
3.14. therefore it is said, the Gospel was preached to Abraham Ib. v. 8.
; and as it was long before the Law, and not disannulled by the coming of the
Law; so 'twas to endure till the Seed should come, to whom the Promise was
made; and consequently to the end of the World; because Christ came to
establish the Covenant made to the Fathers Romans 15.8.
.

Now if the Covenant be the same, the Promises of it must needs be continued in
the same Tenure in which they were at first made, and run in the same latitude
and extent, taking in Children with their Parents; unless God himself had made
any alteration or restriction, or passed any Act of Exclusion. But it is
remarkable, the Apostle does not say the Promise was, but is Act. 2.39.
: And the Grace of the Gospel is now more ample than before under the Law;
being then in its ordinary Dispensation appropriated to the Jews; they were
God's Favorites to whom his Grace in Christ was manifested; but now it
reaches to the Gentiles also, having appeared to all Men, to all sorts and
ages. Surely therefore Infants being in Covenant then are not to be excluded
now, which if they be, let it be showed how and when they were ejected? How
this Magna Charta came to be forfeited? How they, who were once Members of the
mystical Body, came to be cut off? The Common Wealth indeed of Israel is at an
End, and the Scepter is departed from Judah, but the Olive Tree the Church
continues, though under a different Administration; the Partition Wall is broken
down, but the very Church is not destroyed. And for this see and consult Romans
11. where the Apostle compares the Jews to an Olive Tree, and the rejecting of
them for a season, to the lopping off its natural Branches, as Branches which
bore no Fruit; and the calling of the Gentiles he resembles to the grafting
upon that old Stock; which growing again a-fresh makes up one entire
Olive Tree, whose Root and Branches are nourished by the same Sap; which
Similitude plainly intimates, that Jews and Christians make up but one
Universal Church, of which our Lord Jesus is the Head; and that Faith in him is
the Sap, which gives Life and Nourishment to it; the consequence whereof is
this, that the same Spiritual Privileges, which belonged to the Children of
the Jews, do belong to the Children of Christians; and that if the former were
to be initiated into the Church by Circumcision, so are the latter by Baptism;
for being of the same Church, and within the same Covenant, they should receive
a-like the Seal thereof, which though now changed from Circumcision to Baptism,
yet the Church and Covenant is the same still; and therefore Church Membership
is as extensive, and comprehends Infants under the Gospel, as it did once under
the Law; and unless a Law can be showed, which confines Infants
Church Membership to the Jewish-State, and excludes them the Christian; there
is no reason why we should be frightened from our laudable Practice of
initiating Infants into the Christian Church.

What says our Savior, Joh. 3.5. If one be not Born again of Water and the
holy Ghost, he cannot inherit the Kingdom of God: Where we see not only the
unregenerate are excluded Heaven, but as the Text is interpreted Nisi enim
renatus fuerit ex aqua and spiritu Sancto non potest introire in regnum dei
utique nullum excipit non Infantem non aliqua praeventum necessitate. D. Abros.
de Abrah. Patriarch. l. 2. c. 11. vid. etiam de voc. Gent. l. 2. c. 8. and D.
Aug. l. 10. de Genesis ad literam, c. 14. We hold, says Bishop Andrews, the same
necessity of Baptism, that the Fathers did hold, which is Via ordinaria, yet
non alligando gratiam dei ad media, no more than the Schoolmen do. Bishop
Andrew 's Answer to Peron, p. 12.
by some, even the unbaptized, with respect to the ordinary means of Salvation,
and so far forth as the omission of an instituted Rite, or positive Duty may be
said to do so; now forasmuch as we cannot be too sure, but that this may be the
true sense of the Place, and the mind of our blessed Savior; and seeing he
speaks it indefinitely, we cannot know for certain but he had reference to
unbaptized Infants, as well as others; therefore unless God had plainly
declared his Mind against the baptizing of such, and expressly excluded them
from that Ordinance; how can we choose, out of mere compassion and zeal for
their Salvation, but administer it to them? Though then there be some so
prepossest with prejudice, that they cannot so earnestly believe with our
Church, the interest Children have in Baptism, yet since their not so believing
cannot alter the Infant's Case, neither can they be so sure, but, as it has
been said, they may be comprehended in that of St. John, according to the
aforesaid Interpretation; therefore upon that other principle expressed by our
Church, in the same Paragraph Vid. Office for public Baptism, in the
exposition upon the Gospel.
, they should look upon it as a charitable Work to bring such to Baptism.

But to return to the Argument, and to illustrate it, and render it more
convincing; suppose there were an Act of Parliament, wherein certain civil
Privileges are granted to all English Subjects, and their Children, without
any limitation of time for their continuance, and afterward there comes a New
Act of Parliament, wherein more and greater Privileges are granted to all
English Subjects, without mentioning the former, or their Children; those
former Privileges are held by all Lawyers to belong still to all English
Subjects, and their Children, because all such Acts, and the beneficial Clauses
thereof, are still in Force, 'till they are repealed by the same Authority and
Power that made them; neither will it suffice to say, that the Privilege here
granted is in a Testamentary way, and the making a New Testament is a vertual
repealing any former Will or Testament, so that supposing this was a Legacy
bequeathed to the Jewish Church by Christ's Testament, yet forasmuch as it is
not granted by Christ's last Will and Testament, which we call the Gospel, or
the New Testament, the Privilege cease of it self. But this Comparison is
faulty, and will not hold: For the Old Testament, or (as it is by way of
distinction, with reference to that Ministration sometimes called) the Law and
the Gospel, though they differ in Circumstantials, yet are not two Wills of
Christ, but for substance one and the same Will and Testament, even the same
Covenant of Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ; or if you will, the Gospel in
respect of the Law, is like a Schedule or Codicil to a Will, the adding some
further Legacies not already given, and no Legacies that were bequeathed in the
foregoing Will can be cut off, except they be particularly recalled in the
Codicil; in like manner Infants Church Membership must remain in force under
the Gospel, except it be the Will of Christ it should cease, and he had
declared as much in the Codicil of the New Testament; but no such thing
appearing there, proves it still in force.

It Is not denied but that the Collective Body of the Jews were broken off from
the Church through unbelief Romans 11.20.
, that is by reason of their positive infidelity; whereby they did directly and
openly disown and reject the true Messiah; yet all of them were not, there were
many thousands, or as the word is, Myriads of the Jews, that believed; as the
Scripture witnesses Act. 21.20.
: Neither were the rest broken off, but the believing Gentiles were inoculated
in amongst them Grotius on Romans 1.17.
, till they professedly rejected Christ, and were become open Enemies to his
Gospel; now it would be unreasonable to infer, that all the Infants were broken
off, for the infidelity of some of the Parents. The elect Jews, which obtained
Mercy, kept their Station, and so must needs be conceived to retain their
Privileges for themselves and theirs; otherwise they would become losers, to
what they were before the exhibition of Christ, in respect of their Infant
Seed; for they who were before within and wore the Badge of the Covenant,
should afterward be without, and deprived of that Dignity, and it is the
general received opinion and even of some Anabaptists, This is granted by
Harrison, in his Paedo Baptism oppugn'd, as he is cited by Geree in his
Vindiciae Vindiciarum, page 20.
that what Privileges the Nation of the Jews had before their Rejection, the
same shall they recover with an advantage at their Restoration, Hos. 2.23. Romans
11.25, 26.
and to say the Geniles shall not have the same Covenant-Priviledges with them,
is to make a difference, and so set up a Partition Wall, when as the Apostle
asserts Gal. 3.28.
both Jew and Grecian, Male and Female are all one in Christ Act. 8.12. which
shows the Apostle's Practice in the Case. And the reason on which it was
grounded, you have, Gal. 3.28. fore-quoted.
.

Summarily and briefly excluding Children out of the Covenant, and debarring
them of the Sign, put a sacrilegious restraint thereon, and excludes them from
the ordinary way of Salvation; for if they have no visible interest in the
Covenant, in regard of God's visible dispensation, then they have no visible
interest in Christ, they are no way related to him, who is the Mediator of the
Covenant; we conclude therefore, that the aforesaid Law of keeping the
Covenant, and of entering into the Covenant, is as much in force as ever; and
we are still bound to observe the Covenant and the token of it, that is after
the manner of its Administration, for the time being; if the Sign be changed,
the Case is not altered, our Obligation continues the same: Now Baptism is the
initiating Ordinance, as before, when Circumcision was the Token.

Not but that there is a difference in the Administration, viz. That whereas
the Females are as susceptive of the Rite of Baptism as the Males, therefore
it is equally and as distinctly to be administered unto them See our warrant for
this, Gal. 4.9, 10.
. Neither has God taken any order in that Case of Infants, to tie us to
administer it, precisely on the 8th Day; no more then he has done in the Case
of the adult or actual Believers; whether immediately upon their believing, or
the next Day, or the Day after; but the Gospel indulging a discretionary
Latitude, in both Cases it may be done sooner or later, provided we do not out
of a profane or careless humor procrastinate it; as St. Cyprian argues in his
Epistle to Fidus Epist. 58 the query was about baptizing Infants before the 8th
Day, Fidus did not deny Infant Baptism, but only denied the baptizing of them
till then, to which the Father returns this Answer, that both himself and the
Council with him, which consisted of 66 Bishops, unanimously determined, that a
Child might be baptized as soon as he was Born, whereupon St. Austin speaks to
this effect that St. Cypr. did not make any new Decree, but observing the faith
and practice of the Church, judged with his own fellow Bishops, that as soon as
one was Born, he might be lawfully baptized.

Ut parvuli si infirmari contingat eodem die quo nati sunt bpatizentur. Council.
Gerund. Can. 4. yea in danger of Death, in ipsa hora, says Greg. l. 12. Epist.
10. apud Magdeb. Cent. 6. c. 6. Col. 367. and Ina King of the West Saxons made
a Law that Infants should be baptized within thirty Days after their Birth,
under the penalty of thirty shillings, a great sum in those Days, Leg. Inae, c.
2. apud Spelm. Council. Ang. Tom. 1. p. 183. Quicunque parvulos recentes ab
uteris Matrum baptizandos negat Anath. sit Council. Milevit. Can. 2. apud
Magdeb. Cent. 5. c. 9. col. 835. and Caranz. fol. 123 being the 11 Conc. in the
African Code, confirmed by the 4th and 6th general Council.


, there being no necessity why we should delay their Baptism, but rather that
we should hasten it all we can; so long as I may add, we become not alike
Superstitious with the Church of Rome, who in danger of Death, do it e're the
child is fully Born into the World Si timeatur de morte Infantis antequam
nascatur and caput ejusd. appareat extra uterum infundat aquam quae adfuerit
super caput nascentis, dicens, Ego te bapt. Synod. Colon sub Rudolpho Imper.
apud Magd. Cent. 13.
. And consequently with so much precipitancy, as speaks their laying too much
stress (as their manner is) upon the Opus operatum, and as if God ties himself
to means as well as us.

Agreeable hereto, Christ's Commission is as full for baptizing Infants, as any
others; for if they be the natural or adopted Children of Believers, or such as
are proselyted; they are Abraham's Seed; and so are interested in the Covenant,
and belong to Christ, which in Christ's own Dialect is the same thing with
being his Disciples Compare Matt. 10.42. with Mark 9.41.
. Yea they are called so by the Holy Ghost Act. 15.10. with v. 1.
. And the Commission runs to Baptize all Disciples Matt. 28.19. (...).
. Go Disciple all Nations, baptizing them -- if then Infants be or are made
Disciples, together with their Parents or Proparents; so as the Promise of
Abraham reaches to them, they are to be baptized; for there is nothing to
interpose between discipling and baptizing. Yea such is the near conjunction of
the Commands, that they seem to be coincident. q. d. Whosoever are my Disciples
or Relatives, Partners of the Covenant, or are in the Church's Power to
stipulate for their Religious Education; let them be consigned thereunto by
this Sacrament of Baptism; let this be the Rite of their Admission; let this be
the Badge and Cognizance of their Discipleship; and who are we, that dare, in
contradiction to this express order of our Savior, hinder any such out of our
own Imaginations from entering in at this ordinary Gate or Door of Grace, who
do not exclude themselves?

Ananias finding Saul in the state of a Disciple baptized him Act. 9.18.
though neither, he nor any Minister else had made him so. Infants are Disciples,
not so much of Man's as of God's making, vouchsafing graciously in their
believing Parents, to accept them also into his Covenant Romans 11.16. 1 Cor.
7.14.
, and so into the State of Disciples.

The Apostle also plainly declares, that interest in the Promise is alone by it
self, a sufficient ground for the application of Baptism, in that he exhorts
those awakened Jews to be baptized upon this Ground, or for this reason, that
the Promise did belong to them Act. 2.38, 39.
. It Is true, he exhorts them to Repentance, to which Faith must be conjoined,
as necessary to their interest in the Promise, but 'twas their interest in the
Promise, on which he Grounds his Exhortation to them to be baptized. Hence
however Persons come to have an interest in the Promise, whether it be by
descent, or adoption, or by their own personal Faith and Repentance, it is all
one to our present purpose. And this is agreeable to the first Command to keep
the Covenant, that is the token of the Covenant; the Command is grounded upon
interest in the Promise, Genesis 17.9. Thou shall keep my Covenant therefore,
(that is, upon this Ground) because the Promise is unto thee, and having the
Promise, thou shall wear the Sign and Seal thereof; for it follows, a majori ad
minus, that the Children being in Covenant should not want the Sign and Seal
that ensures the Benefits and Privileges of the same. Who then can forbid
Water? It Is the Apostle's Argument Act. 10.47.
to those that have received the Grace of God, the Promise, by Virtue whereof
they are in Covenant with God as well as we.

Now what have the Anabaptists to Object against what is here alleged for the
putting on Infants the present Sign or Token of the Covenant? Why nothing in
effect, but what they are beholden to the Papists for, viz. That Circumcision
was the Token only of a Carnal Legal Covenant, and that such was the Covenant
which God made with Abraham and his Seed; and renewed by Moses to the Children
of Israel; and that its being a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith was peculiar
only to that Patriarch, and that there is no such thing now as foederal
holiness, or any Right or Privilege accruing by virtue of any Promise or
Covenant from Birth, or by being of such a Lineage, or Descent, but that the
Children of Believers in their Infant Estate, are in no better Condition than
those of Heathens.

It Is strange that they, who in show are so much against Popery, should broach
so much of it, speaking the Language of Rome, against the Protestant Doctrine,
maintained in the Church of England. Is this to come out of Babylon, thus to
side with the Papists, and Bellarmine De Sacr. effectu. l. 2. c. 13. and alibi.
in particular? Mr. Blake Answer to Tombs, p. 61. Printed Anno 46.
declares, that their Arguments against foederal Holiness are borrowed from
them; and that he has not met with any, either in Mr. Tombs or Blackwood,
which may not be found in Stapleton, Cornelius a Lapide, the Rhemists, or some
of that Party; and that the Jesuits were the first Opposers of it.

It Is likewise a great and much agitated Controversy, between the Papists and
those of the Reformed Religion concerning the Identity and Efficacy of John's
Baptism compared with Christ; the Papists thundering Anathema's against them,
who shall affirm the Baptism of John to have the same virtue and power with
that of Christ: Those of the Reformed, on the other side are generally of
Opinion, that John's Ministry was the same that was afterward delegated to the
Apostles. And his Baptism the same, which was afterward ministered by them.
This the Anabaptists deny, to take occasion therefrom to Ground their dipping
again, or Rebaptization; and to this purpose draw most of their best Shafts out
of the Popish Quiver, and form most of their choicest Weapons on their Anvil;
yea in the whole conflict they have been necessitated to borrow help from these
Philistine Artists. But let them, if they can, produce any thing in the whole
Bible, to overthrow what is here laid down; otherwise what I have retorted on
them must be acknowledged to be very just.

Neither is there any doubt, but that the Practice of Christ's Church has been
answerable to the Doctrine here represented.

They say there is not any express Instance of any Infant baptized in the whole
History of the Gospel; but is there any instance of any Infant of a Christian
believer left unbaptized? Are there not strong Presumptions that upon coming
over of any to the Faith, their Children together with themselves, were
received and baptized; it is said only of Lydia that she believed, but of her
and her Household that they were baptized Act. 1^.15.
; yea our Savior himself, upon Zaccheus's receiving of him, says, to Day is
Salvation come to thy House, forasmuch as thou also art the Son of Abraham Luke
19.9.
. So St. Peter told Cornelius words, by which he and his House should be saved
Act. 11.14.
. Thus it was promised to the Jailer, that on his Faith not only himself should
be saved but his House, and upon his Profession he was baptized, and all that
were his, or all that belonged to him (...), Act. 16.31, 33.
; therefore not only the major Part of his Family, according to the false and
corrupt Gloss of the Anabaptists, but simply and absolutely all that lived
under his Roof.

Moreover how reasonable is it to believe that there were Children in those
Families, as part of the Household, for the word House or Household in Scripture,
signifies Children eminently, being the principal Materials, Ben a Son, and
Bath a Daughter, do both come from the Root (...) Filius, (...) Filia a radice
(...) edificavit Metaphor. de liberorum procreatione, Deuteronomy. 25.9. Buxt. So Genesis
16.2. Margin, be built by her; Sept. (...).
Banah which signify to build, and figuratively to procreate Children, and so
to build an House or Family. Thus God promising to give Children unto David, is
pleased to express himhimself in this Phrase, I will build thee an House,
because Children under God do build up the House, and keep up the name of their
Father's Family, and so to build an House or Family, being the ordinary
Instruments as to perpetuate and continue, and hold up the House in Natural and
Civil, so in Religious and Ecclesiastical Respects likewise; accordingly the
Apostle directing a Bishop to rule his House well, presently names Children 1 Timothy 3.4.
as the most considerable part of his Charge and Care. Wherefore, as it often
falls out, when some parts of the Family are expressly instanced in, and the
nomination of Children omitted, they are nevertheless intended and included, as
Genesis 14.16.

Neither do we read of any laid aside or excluded from Baptism upon the account
of their Nonage, yea it is highly probable that those Children, yea sucklings,
as the original Word imports, which were brought to Christ with a desire in
them that brought them, that he should lay his hands on them, had been already
baptized; now it is said expressly that he laid his Hands on them Luke 18.15.
(...), in a former Translation Babes.
, but we rever read in the N. T. of the laying on of Hands on any unbaptized
Persons, unless perhaps it were in order to the working some miraculous Cure
Mark 10.16.
; In all other Cases, imposition of Hands was practiced on baptized Persons See
Mark 8.23.16.18. Luke 4.40.13.13. Act. 9.17.28.8.
only, and the reason given by Christ to his Disciples, why they should
countenance and further rather then restrain their Access to him sufficiently
evinceth, that they were brought upon a spiritual Account rather than for any
bodily Cure.

And as a further Argument to show, that the practice was Apostolical, I may
add hereto the Testimonies and Suffrages of the Ancient Fathers Vid. Cassander
de bapt. of the Eastern and Western Churches.
, both of the Greek and Latin Church. Origin affirms in express Terms, that
the Church from the Apostles days, received a Tradition to Baptize Children In
his Comment on the Epist. to the Romans c. 6. l. 5.
, and that Baptism is to be given unto Infants, according to the Tradition of
the Church In his 8 Homil. on Levit.
; who yet was contemporary (according to Osiander and Funesius account) with
Tertullian, neither could Tertullian himself be so sottish, as to oppose an
imaginary abusive practice of having Sureties, or Hyginus Bishop of Rome before
him, to order as he did about the Guardianship of Infants, in appointing such
who should promise for their religious Education in that Faith whereinto they
were batized See Platina in the life of Hyginus the 8th Pope from St. Peter
according to Caran.
, if the baptizing of them was not a thing in use before, and so an Apostolical
ordination derived down to them, and from them transmitted to the Church, where
the practice of it has been uninteruptedly continued ever since. Why should
Tertullian, I say, affright Persons from being Susceptors to Infants in their
Baptism, by the Hazard they ran in their Childrens liableness to Death and to
Distempers, if no such thing were in his time? It had been dangerous to start
such a Novellism if never before practiced. St. Austin writ a Tract of Infant
Baptism De Bapt. parvulorum.
, and says the Church always had it, always held it Semper. habuit, semper
tenet, in his 5 Sermon. de verb. Apost.
. Justin Martyr, who lived as they calculate in St. John's Days, in his
unquestionable Works gives several hints for Infant Baptism As in his Dialogue
with Triphon, part 2. prop. 3.
. Irenaeus speaks of Infants being Born again, that is by the Laver of
Regeneration, viz. Baptism as Dr. Hammond understands it Irenaeus l. 2. c. 29.
Dr. Ham. resolution, Sect. 4. page 212.
. Nazianz. is for it not only in danger of Death, but simply and absolutely,
expressing himself to this purpose, Have thou a Child, let it be baptized from
an Infant, let it be early consecrated to the Spirit Orat. 3. and 40. in S.
Lavacr.
. St. Basil gives Testimony to it, answering the Question, whether Infants may
be baptized, in the Affirmative; for so, says he, we are by the Circumcision of
Children instructed, there being a parity of reason as for the circumcising of
Children l. 3. contra Eunomium. 58.
. Vossius makes the Testimony of St. Cyprian, in his Epistle Epist.
to Fidus, (which for its authenticalness is quoted by Nazianzen, Chrysostom,
Ambrose, Jerome, Austin, and others Vid. Naz. Orat. 3. in S. Lavacr. Chrysostom.
Homil. ad Neoph. Ambr. in Luc. Hieron. l. 3. Dialog. contr. Pelag. Aust. in his
28 Epist. to St. Jerome, in his 14 Sermon. de verb. Apost. in his Book, de peccat.
merit. and remiss. and in his 3 Book, c. 5.
) beyond all exception, and Grotius says it makes the matter plain that there
was then no doubt of Infant Baptism; accordingly the Magdeb. bring in Origin,
Cypr. and other Fathers to avouch the Practice, to have been even in the time
of the Apostles Cent. 3. c. 4. page 57.
. Now what says St. Austin, touching such immemorial usages, as the Catholic
Church holds, and ever has held, and have not come into use by the Institution
of any Council, that they are such as are rightly believed, to have been
delivered down to us, by no less than Apostolical Authority In Donat. l. 4. c.
23. calling it an Eccles. Custom or as he explains himself, an Apostol.
Tradition, se de Genesi ad literam, l. 10. c. 23. and his 3 Epist. to Volusiam.
, and lest there should be any wresting of his words, viz. Traditum ab
Apostolis, or Apostolical Tradition, he peremptorily affirms, (speaking of the
Church's Authority in this Case of Paedobaptism) that it was without all
question delivered by the Lord and his Apostles l. 1. De peccat. merit. and
remiss. c. 16. Proculdubio per Dominum and Apostolos traditum.
.

The word Tradition, the Fathers understood not in the Popish Sense, for that
which has been delivered in Doctrine from Age to Age, above what is written,
to supply the supposed defect of the Scripture, but for the very written word
it self, by which they delivered the truth, and for their examples and report
thereof, tending to the explication of their Doctrine, and not to the adding
any new Doctrine.

Calvin affirms the baptizing of Infants to be a holy Institution observed in
Christ's Church Instit. 4. c. 16. Sect. 6.
. All the Reformed Churches, use it, as you may see by the Harmony of their
Confessions Th. a Jesu de Convers. omnium Gentium, l. 7. page 506.
. The Greek Church, (who yearly excommunicate the Pope,) Baptize their Infants
Pagit of Heresies, page 17.
; so the Cophti or native Christians of Egypt who have no Communion with the
Roman Church. And the practice being so general and Primitive; Erasmus wondered
what evil Devil entered them, who denied the Baptism of Children used in the
Catholic Church above 1400 Years, and he might the rather for that it has
been the general Consent, and almost universal Practice, not only of all
Christendom, but of all the World; Jews, Gentiles, Mahometans, Christians of
all Sects; Protestants, Papists, Greeks, Armenians, Muscovites, Mengrelians,
Indians of St. Thomas, Abyssines, etc. as a modern Author observes, to use some
solemn initiating Ceremony to admit their Children, not yet adult, into the
Society and Communion of their Religion.

These Authorities, (with others cited in the Margin Constit. Clementis, there
it is (...) Baptize your Infants, l. 6. c. 19. Council. Melevit. can. 2. apud
Magdeb. Cent. 5. cap. 9. col. 835. and Caranz. fol. 123. Ambros. l. de Ahrah.
Patriarch. Hier. contra Pelag. lib. 3. Ut Christus Infantes ad se venire
jussit, ita nec Apostoli eos excluserunt a Baptismo and quidem dum baptismus
Circumcisioni aequiparat. Paulus Col. 2. aperte indicat etiam Infantes per
baptismum Ecclesiae dei esse inferendos, etc. Magdeb. Cent. l. 2. c. 4. Magdeb.
Cent. 2. it is said, nec usquam legitur Infantes hoc seculo a Baptismo remotos
esse. We don't read they were then excluded Baptism, c. 4. p. 48. de Baptismo;
nor as it is said, until the 6th Cent. when 'twas excepted against by one
Adrianus. That Terull. himself was for Infant Baptism appears, in that in his
Book De anima cap. 39. He presses it when the Child is in danger of Death, and
gives his reason, lib. de Bapt. cap. 12. praescribitur nemini sine Baptismo
competere salutem. Council of Trullo, Can. 48. requires that all the Grecian
little ones, without delay should be baptized. One of the 8 Cannons in the
Council of Carthage concluding against Pelagius decreed, that whosoever denied
Baptism for the remission of sins to a new Born Infant, should be
anathematized, see Craggs Arraigment and Conviction of Anabaptism against
Tombs, page 85. Photius, a learned Greek, produces an Imperial Constitution,
wherein it was decreed that all baptized Samarit. and Grecians should be
punished, who brought not their Children to holy Baptism, apud Craggs, ibid.
) I lay down as I might have done many more, not to tie the Baptism of Children
to the Testimony of Men; but as a Martyr for the Protestant Religion did, to
show how Men's Testimonies do agree with God's Word In a Letter that Mr. Philpot
writ, whilst he was in Prison.
, and that Antiquity is on our side, and that the Anabaptists have nothing but
false and new Imaginations, who feign the Baptism of Children to be the Pope's
Commandment, or any late Invention or Innovation.

Nor is our manner of administering this sacred Rite, by sprinkling or pouring
on of Water novel, as I said, or unjustifiable; for the word to Baptize usually
signifies as much, which as Dr. Featly Dipper dipped, page 33. See Wells also in
his Answer to Danvers, page 242. Printed, Anno 74. and Walker's Discourse of
dipping and sprinkling, wherein is shown the lawfulness of other ways of
Baptization besides that of total Immersion. Printed Anno, 78.
says Hesychius, Stephanus, Scapula and Budaeus, those great Masters of the
Greek Tongue, makes good by many Instances and Allegations out of Classick
Writers.

And in this sense is it used in Scripture. So the Fathers were baptized in the
Clould, not dipped therein, for they were under the Cloud 1 Cor. 10.2.
, but were wet or sprinkled therewith. So Nebuchadnezzar, was wet or sprinkled,
or (...), as the Septuag. has it, baptized with the Dew of Heaven. Hence we
read of diverse washings or Baptisms, as the word is. And what were those but
sprinklings? Sometimes Blood was sprinkled Hebr. 9.10.
; sometimes Water was poured forth; No Person was dipped or plunged in Blood; yet
those sprinklings were called Baptisms. So Mark 7.4. except they wash, the
Original is, except they be baptized; and the manner of their washings before
Meat, was not by dipping but by pouring on of Water 2 Kings 3.11.
: We read also of washing or baptizing Tables Mark 7.4. in the Margin, beds.
vid Lightfoot, vol. 2. p. 345.
and other things many times a Day, which if done by dipping would make the
labor of the Jews intolerable, besides many other inconveniences. And it is but
reasonable that the outward Baptism should have allusion to and an Analogy with
the inward. We are said to be baptized with the Holy Ghost, but not dipped into
the Holy Ghost or his Graces; but to be sprinkled therewith, as with clean
Ezekiel. 36.25.
Water (in our Baptism) and to have the Holy Spirit poured on us Isaiah 44.3.
. And it had been more properly translated, baptized in Water, if it had been
done only by dipping, rather than baptized with Water.

Again, if we take a Survey of the several Instances and Examples of Persons
baptized in Scripture, we shall find that 'twas probably done by sprinkling, or
pouring on of Water, rather than by dipping. St. Paul was baptized by Ananias
when Sick and Weak, having fasted three Days and was not strengthened till he
received Meat, which was after he was baptized Act. 9.18, 19.
, and according to all Circumstances, it was done in his Lodgings. So when the
Jailer and those that belonged unto him were baptized, it was at a time and
place, that there could be no accommodation for Water and other Conveniences
for plunging and dipping, as the manner of some is; for it is not likely that
the Apostle should carry the Jailer, and all his in the dead of the Night to a
River or Pond to Baptize them. It Is said, Phillip and the Eunuch went down into
the Water, or to Act. 8.38. (...).
the Water, but it is not said after what manner he was baptized, and a Man may
go down into the Water, and come up out of it too, and not be covered all over
with it; if he wet but his Feet or Ankles, or wade but Knee deep, he goes down
into the Water, and so may come up out of it, and our Lord and the Eunuch might
do no more, and then have their Faces washed or sprinkled only in Baptism; and
if St. Bernard may be believed, this way was Christ baptized, and as for the
Eunuch, if we'll believe St. Jerome Sermon. de St. Joh. B. p. 1303.
and Sir Geo. Sandys De locis Hebr. in voce Beths. p. 500. Trav. l. 3. p. 142.
vid Fullers Miscel. l. 2. c. 8. p. 220. Fons ad radices Montis ebulliens ab
eadem in qua gignitur sorbetur humo and Apostolorum Acta referunt Eunuchum
Candacis Reginae in hoc Baptizatum fuisse. vid. Zanch. de cultu dei externo, l.
1. col. 494. Linwood, l. 3. de bapt. and other learned Men.
, he could not be dipped, because the Fountain in which he was baptized, (which
retains the name of the Ethiopian Fountain to this Day) is immediately drunk
up by the Earth out of which it Springs, and so not likely to be deep enough to
dip the Ethiopian Treasurer in it. Moreover who can say, that he stripped
himself, or that he was dipped in his wearing Clothes, much less that he had any
convenience for shifting for such a purpose; for the meeting we find was very
accidental, and the Eunuch presently, as soon as the solemnity was over, went
on his way, nor do we read that he made any stay, but went immediately down
from his Chariot to the Water.

Estius on Act. 2.41. judges it most rational to conceive, that the Apostles
did Baptize by washing or Sprinkling, for says he, it is altogether incredible,
that they dipped 3000 in one Day, and 5000 at another time, and it is most likely
that the 3000 were baptized in the same Place where they heard St. Peter's
Sermon which converted them; where it is not likely that such quantities of
Water, as Bonavent. notes In l. 4. sent. did 3. Artic. 3. q. 2.
could be found to serve for the decent dipping of so many. Whereas to suppose,
that after St. Peter had ended his Sermon, those thousands took a Progress out
of the City in order to the celebration of that Ordinance; as if dipping and
plunging the whole Body under Water, were so essential to Baptism, that it
could not be rightly performed without it, don't so well agree with Christ's
Commission. For comparing Matt. 28.19. with Mark 16.15. the instruction or
order that is given, is to this purpose; that preaching the Gospel to all
Nations, they should Disciple and Baptize them; not that they should Preach in
this or that Place, and then take them forth, that they may descend to some
River to Baptize them; for to have the Ordinance of Baptism administered apart
from the meeting Place of the Assembly, for all other Duties, would look
somewhat like the Popish Pilgrimage, or at least like their going a
Processioning, especially in some Countries and Places, where there is not a
River in many Miles compass.

I may further add, the consideration of the danger of plunging and dipping
over Head and Ears. Our Savior, who prefers Mercy before Sacrifice, will have
the administration of the Ordinace, in such a way as is most consistent with
his Peoples lives; even of those of the weakest Constitution; which must in
some Countries, especially at some Seasons of the Year, be in extreme danger by
dipping.

And there is no dispensation in Scripture, for procastinating Baptism; yea in
some short process of time, we find the Church expressly against some Men's
taking liberty of putting off their Baptism, and giving public Testimony of
her dislike; insomuch that the Clinicks, if any of them recovered, were
adjudged unworthy to be admitted into any Office of the Ministry, not only by
the Council of Neocesaria Can. 12. Caranz. giving this for a Reason, non enim
fides illius voluntaria sed ex necessitate est.
, but by earlier Rules of more ancient Observation; which were urged by
Cornelius Apud Eusebius. l. 6. c. 33. prope finem.
against Novatus, and as Surius remarketh Tom. 1. page 223. declaring Novatus
's Ordination to be contra Canones.
, the Ordination of such Persons to the Priesthood was prohibited by those
Ancients, not for that they thought them not sufficiently baptized, but because
they judged it unfit, that ever they should be Priests, who deferred so long
before they would declare themselves to be Christians. The truth is,
notwithstanding this Procastination of Baptism in Novatus, and though too he had
upon his recovery, neglected to have the Confirmation of the Bishop (according
to the custom of the Church) which Cornelius In his Letter to Fabian, apud
Eusebius. Harm. E. l. 6. c. 43. vid. Niceph. l. 6. c. 3. Chemnit. Exam. par. 1. p.
84.
accounts as another just exception against him, yet Fabian finding some
relaxation allowable by Law upon some weighty Reasons, did by his Mediation and
importunity prevail to have him ordained, giving assurance that he would ordain
no more such; which could in no wise be granted him, if Novatus's Baptism had
been Null, and the manner of its Administration unlawful, which as Cornelius
writes was by sprinkling. An unanswerable proof and instance, of administering
Baptism, by way of sprinkling so early in the Church, as in the time of
Novatus, of whom the story is, and who no doubt was not the first Man that was
so baptized, seeing 'twas pleaded in Bar to admission into Orders, as being
against Law.

Mr. Cradock a great Independent, in his Treatise of Gospel liberty, says, that
the practice of dipping is to be restrained by the chief Magistrate, for the
preservation of the lives of his Subjects. And in the Senate of Zurick in
Switzerland there was an Act made, that if an Anabaptist dipped any of their
People, he was to be punished with drowning. St. Cyprian does not only allow of
pouring on of Water or sprinkling in Baptism, but pleads for it in certain
Cases, and acquaints us, that 'twas usual in those Days to Baptize sick Persons
in their Beds, and proves that such Persons were rightly baptized, though only
sprinkled from Ezekiel. 36.25. and says, that sprinkling, holds forth the Mystery
as well as dipping See his Discourse on Purpose, when the question concerning
it was put to him by one Magnus. Epist. 76. ad Magnum.
. Upon this custom of the Clinicks, the learned Vossius makes this remark, that
those that were thus baptized were not plunged or dipped under Water, but only
sprinkled.

But it is urged from John 3.23. that John was baptizing in Aenon near Salim,
because there was much Water, a Reason given by the Holy Ghost himself, why he
chose that Place for the Country to come in, and be baptized, because they
might go many Miles in those hot Countries, and not meet with a drop of Water,
and it was a great Privilege to those Places that banked on Jordan, that they
had much Water, but it is no Argument to prove that John plunged all that he
baptized, or dipped them over Head and Ears. Beside the Original is not (...),
but (...) many Waters, viz. Streams or Rivulets; and History informs us, that
they were so shallow as not to reach above the Ankles and so unapt for dipping
as their way is Non interest quanto quisque abluatur, quomodo in Eucharistia
non quantum quisque comedat. Chamier. l. 5. de bapt. c. 1. p. 1404.
. The Eunuch, as has it has been well observed, does not say here is a River,
here is a Pool, here is Water enough for me to be dipped into; the quantity of
the Water is not insisted on; which fairly intimates to us, that where there is
Water, be it much or little, nothing hinders but one may be baptized therewith.
I had need now to crave Pardon, for being so very Prolix on this Head, but I
hope St. Austin's Ad Hilar. Epist. 89.
Apology in the like Case, may pass for mine: Tanto magis pro Infantibus loqui
debemus, quanto minus, pro se loqui possunt.

THE REPLY To a pretended ANSWER To the foregoing Discourse.
IT will not be unnecessary to premise, that this foregoing Discourse in
opposition to the Anabaptists, contained at first only eleven Pages in close
writing, a Copy of which was transcribed and communicated to a particular
Friend; who shortly after upon their confident Boasting, that they would get it
answered, did by my Permission, deliver it into their Hands, from whom after
almost a Years time, and through frequent importunities; I received an Answer
in Manuscript, such as it is, consisting of 27 Pages. I think it needful also
to premise, that I have somewhat enlarged my Discourse, but not so as to cause
the least difference in my ensuing Reply, nor shall I make the least advantage
upon any Improvement or Addition I have made, nor is there in truth any
occasion for it. For I do solemnly, and with all sincerity protest, that I
don't find I had need to have had any word, Syllable, or Letter added, left
out, or altered in my Papers, by reason of any thing in the pretended Answer.

My Argument in short is this: That as Circumcision was the initiating Sign and
Token of the Covenant to the Jews: So is Baptism to the Christians, and that
the Command to keep the Covenant in the Sign of it, whatever the Sign be, was
and is always Obligatory; and that the practice from Age to Age answers it.

In the Prosecution whereof I obviated many Objections, now made use of by the
Answerer (which takes up above half of the aforesaid 11 Pages) whereto there is
no manner of Reply, save only somewhat about the Sabbath or Lord's Day, but not
to the purpose, as will afterward appear; and at that rate too, that he dares
not condemn the Sabbatarians. This with the Preface takes up 3 Pages of the
Answer. Nevertheless that he may seem to say somewhat he turns Opponent.

First, He endeavors to prove, that the Covenant, whereof Circumcision was the
sign, was not the Covenant of Grace, as having relation only to temporal
Promises, taking a Branch for the whole; and reckoning that God made two
distinct Covenants with Abraham. And this takes up 2 Pages more.

Secondly, He labors to prove that Circumcision can give no ground for Infant
Baptism, nor bear a suitable Parallel with it; using Arguments which have been
answered over and over, and in a great Part obviated by me, though he takes no
notice of it. This reaches to his 10th Page.

Then he takes notice of my citing Act. 2.39. running out into a large Ramble,
which will not bear any Test; and as introductory thereto, he begins thus: You
say the Promise in the 39. v. is spoken to those in the 36. v. even the House
of Israel, who had crucified the Lord Jesus Christ, and their Children; of
which I had not said a word. And adds, that by Children he does not understand
them as they are in a state of Infancy. But how does he illustrate it? Why very
profoundly and unanswearably with five or six Arguments, which to give them
their full force, amounts to this: That there were none such then present, as
he takes for granted; neither could any of them be Children to whom St. Peter
Preached, and said, Repent and be baptized every one of you. For were this
true, would it follow as he would sillily infer; that St. Peter neither did nor
could speak of or concerning Children to them? May it not then be as well
argued, that the Promise did not belong to those afar off, that should
hereafter be called? Unless we understand thereby such of them as were then
present, and had been St. Peter's Auditors? Which would be a contradiction in
terminis. Now this, with some gross impertinence and senseless Stuff which
immediately follows, comes home to the 14th Page of the Reply. So that there is
above half of mine, and within a few Lines half of his past over, and hitherto
it cannot be pretented there is any kind of Answer.

As to what follows, he says himself, Page 15. that what is written in my 8, 9,
10, 11 Pages, (and I don't remember there were any more in the Transcript-Copy
they had) concerning the Covenant and Infants right to Baptism, he supposes to
be answered in what he had written aforegoing. He means, he had framed
Arguments, which was not his Province. Moreover in these Pages he omits several
Things, which must needs be reckoned very material, whereto he answers nothing.
I Will instance in some particulars.

First, That in Christ's Dialect, to belong to him, and to be his Disciple: Is
all one.

Secondly, That Infants are called Disciples by the Holy Ghost.

Thirdly, That they are made so by God himself, vouchsafing graciously in their
believing Parents to accept them also into his Covenant, and so into the state
of Disciples.

Fourthly, That the Apostle shows that interest in the Promise, is alone of it
self a sufficient ground for the application of Baptism.

Fifthly, That the Suffrages and Authorities of the Primitive Fathers are on
our side, which he overlooks as insignificant, though they are only produced to
show what was their judgment in the Case, and the practice in their time.

Sixthly, That sprinkling or pouring on of Water, does as well express the
Mystery as dipping, and better alludes to the inward Baptism of the Spirit.

And that it is very improbable that the 3000 baptized in one Day, and in all
likelihood where they heard St. Peter's Sermon, were dipped.

Again he neither denies, nor vindicates their concurrence with the Papists,
though I had represented it in so many Instances; and whereas I said expressly,
that the Fathers in avouching Infant Baptism to be an Apostolical Tradition,
did not understand the word Tradition in the Popish sense, to supply the
supposed defect of the Scripture. Yet he positively affirms it is to be
believed to do so, and so he runs on for above 2 Pages, proving the Perfection
of the Scripture, that is fighting with his own Shadow, for who denied it?

Once more I said, we don't read in the New Testament of laying on of Hands on
any unbaptized Person, except in order to a bodily Cure. But the Answerer,
passes by the exception, and then doubtless he confuted his Adversary,
speaking so home to the matter. What has been hitherto observed, chiefly
refers to the Method and Composure of the Answer, and discovers in it so much
of weakness and insufficiency, that no judicious Person can well allow it that
denomination. But taking liberty further to display its imbecility, I shall
offer somewhat by way of Reply, to the matter and contents of the pretended
Answer, that (if possible) I may provoke him or some one for him to make a
Rejoinder, that the point in Controversy may be thoroughly sifted, and the truth
cleared, or left to the World to judge how unable that Party is to maintain
their way, or make any tolerable defense.

He says, Page the first, that he cannot understand that the weight of the
Arguments for Infant-sprinkling, but rather thinks that the want of weight in
them, is the Cause an Answer has been so long neglected. It seems he is unfit
to answer Arguments though they want weight, and others perhaps may think it was
very meet and fit he should have let them alone, rather than prejudice his
Cause by an unfit Answer, and should not have put himself upon this Trial of
his Skill, unless he could have managed it better. But first an Answer as he
says is expected, that is something must be done toward the giving an Answer,
for the amusing the expecting People, who otherwise ('it is likely) would have
been more apt to have mistrusted the weakness of their Cause. Secondly, It Is
presumed that after the perusal of my Discourse, by some of the more learned
and wiser Heads, 'twas thought more eligible to leave it to one that is unfit
for it, to give an Answer; that the defect thereof may not reflect on any of
the Grandees, or rather it is suspected that some Chief undertook it, but under
the mask of one unfit, that the lameness of the Answer, (of which the Preface
seems conscious) may by those that peruse it, be imputed to the Author; and the
strength thereof, which their own Party will suppose, may be ascribed to the
presumed goodness of the Cause they have espoused, however though he be unfit he
will make an Essay. Yea he will (which is more) give an Answer to such things
as he thinks may have any thing in them that calls for an Answer.

Now he who will discharge the Office of a Respondent, ought fairly to repeat
his Adversaries Words, and then to apply his Answer, either by denying or
distinguishing, or both; but how this has been observed by the Answerer, you
will see in the first Paragraph.

The first thing, says he, that I take notice of is in Page 1. where you
endeavor to prove that Infant Baptism came in the room of Circumcision,
although no positive Prescript for it, bringing the change of the Sabbath Day
from the seventh to the first, without prescript.

Reply, These are so far from being my words, that they contain not the sense
of them. For (1.) neither I, nor I think any Body else ever endeavored to
prove, either that Baptism came in the room of Circumcision, without a positive
prescript, or that Infant Baptism came in the room of Circumcision, but that
Baptism did, which none can justly deny. St. Paul, Coloss. 2.12. affirms as
much, viz. That Baptism in the New Testament succeeded Circumcision, the
initiating Sacrament of the Old Testament, and that as plainly, as in 1 Cor.
5.7, 8. he has affirmed the Lords Supper to come in the room of the Passover;
for the Apostle having told his Colossians, that they had the Circumcision made
without Hands, the Circumcision of the Heart; he further signifies by way of
implication, that they had as good as the outward Circumcision too, by being
baptized, or he could have no occasion to add, [being buried with him in
Baptism] and his Argument had been nothing at all, a mere non sequitur, unless
he gives them to understand thereby, that Baptism succeeded and came in place
of Circumcision. To evidence this to be the genuine sense and intention of the
Apostle; know that he was here dissuading the believing Christians from the
Rudiments of the World and Jewish Ceremonies, particularly from Circumcision,
upon this very ground, that they were complete in Christ; but lest the Jewish
Teachers should suggest, that the receiving the inward Grace of Circumcision,
does not make them so complete as the Jews were, because they had also an
outward visible sign. As Abraham, for instance, had the inward Grace, and yet
he received the outward Sign; and consequently, though Christians be made
partakers of this great Benefit by Christ, yet they may stand in need of an
outward Seal, to assure them of their partaking herein; he would have them know
that neither is this Privilege wanting to Christians, who have as excellent
and express a Sacrament of it; and that Christ has not left his People under
the New Testament destitute of such an outward Sign and Seal; for however
Circumcision be taken away, yet there is another Sacrament substituted and
appointed, a more excellent and lively one than ever Circumcision was, a
Sacrament resembling it, and answering to it [ buried with him in Baptism;
wherein, etc.] that is sacramentally signifying and sealing up both our
mortification and our vivification. But if they had espoused Antipedo-Baptism,
they might have urged their dissatisfaction, and have again Replied, that though
they needed not to be circumcised themselves, seeing Baptism is so happily come
in the room of it, yet they would still Circumcise their Children, because
according to their Doctrine, Baptism is not to be applied to them.

In the second Place, the Words have no positive Prescript for it, and without
a Prescript, do show either that he did not understand my Argument, (though easy
to be understood) or else that he wilfully altered and perverted my sense, that
he might serve some other Design, than the finding out the Truth, His own
Conscience must tell him, he has fathered on me what I said not. This Addition
of his, without Prescript, insinuates as if I had there argued, that the want
of a Precept for the change from Circumcision to Baptism, is no more a reason
to deny Baptism to Infants, than the want of a Precept for the change from the
seventh Day to the first, is a reason for the rejecting of the Lord's Day. That
the Answerer did thus intend to represent me, seems plain; because after he had
showed Reasons for the first Day, he concludes, so we have a plain Precedent,
though not positive Prescript for the first Day, but you want not only Precept
but Precedent for Infant Baptism. [Page 3.] Now the obvious meaning of my
Discourse there, is, that the general Command of keeping God's Covenant in its
Sign, as also the general Command of observing the Day of the Sabbath, one Day
in seven is obligatory to Christians, as well as it was to Abraham and his
Seed. The consideration what is the particular Sign, or whether it be altered
from what was first specified; or whether with or without a Prescript, being
not there any part of the Argument; its main strength depending on the general
and primary Part of the Precepts; the substance therefore of what I said is,
that the general and primary Command to Abraham, (thou and thy seed shall keep
my Covenant in the sign of it) is of perpetual Obligation; as in the fourth
Commandment, the general and primary Command for sanctifying the Sabbath, or
keeping Holy one Day in seven, obliges now as well as then; and that if
Christians be discharged from observing Circumcision as the Sign, and the last
of seven, which was appointed to be the Sabbath at first, (which are secondary
positive Commands,) yet they are bound to observe a seventh Day, and to keep
God's Covenant in its Sign, (these things being of Primary obligation.) And now
what is said to all this? Why truly as to the general Command to Abraham above
mentioned, he passes it over at least for the present, and says nothing about
it, but as to the Sabbath, does he deny that the general Command of keeping one
Day in seven Holy continues obligatory? Not at all; which he should have done,
if he would have opposed the force of my Argument. What does he then do? Why he
gravely says, (1.) He knows no positive Command for the change of the seventh
Day to the first. (2.) He knows one Day of seven was commanded. (3.) He gives
some account what we have to say for the change of the seventh Day to the
first. Lastly, That he dares not blame the Sabbatarians. By all this he
confirms my Argument; and that too more than it required. And yet he has so
managed the matter, blind-folding his ignorant followers, that those who heard
only his Papers when they were read apart in their Congregation, doubtless
thought that he answered what may be reasonably thought to call for an Answer.

He proceeds, (Page 3.) to observe concerning the Covenant, which he says, I
have written several Pages about, supposing that as Abraham's natural Seed were
in Covenant, and had right to Circumcision, so the Seed of Believers are in
Covenant, and ought to be baptized.

Reply, The word Natural is not in the Text; neither was it put in by me: It Is
rather their way to add to the Word, the better to gloss over their Error.
Provided nevertheless, it be not understood qua tale, as natural, I do admit
it, and own the whole; it being that which I have fully demonstrated. But so it
is to be accounted for my Conclusion, rather than for my Hypothesis. However it
be, he makes two exceptions against it; though it be very illogical to nibble as
it were at the Conclusion, whilst he tacitly grants the premises. But it must
be considered, that he has ingeniously acknowledged how unmeet and unfit he is
to be a Respondent; and he does but go on to prove it.

The first Exception that he makes is: That the Covenant in the 17 of Genesis is
not a Covenant of Grace: This indeed would overthrow the very foundation of my
Discourse, could it be proved, and duly applied. Nei-of which, though he Acts
here the Part of an Opponent, is done by the pretended Answerer; whereof he is
so Conscious, that he dares not depend upon it, fearing he should be driven to
his Shifts, should we put the matter in Controversy to this issue. And
therefore that he may have a Loop-hole to escape, he says (Page 8.) neither
indeed were it that Covenant, meaning the Covenant of Grace, would it as to
that help you: And he is not without a pretended Reason, to help himself in it;
because forsooth Grace does not go, says he, in Generation from Parent to
Child. Wisely argued! it is as much as to say, speaking to the Point, God is not
a God to Abraham and his Seed too, his Promise in that respect went beyond his
Performance. Grace cannot go by Covenant from Parent to Child. And who are
those that found descent of Grace in natural Generation, or say that Believers
Children are in this gracious state, because they are believers Children, that
is by virtue of natural Generation. We only say, it is by virtue of the
Covenant, the Promise that is made to the faithful and their Seed; whereupon
are grounded such gracious Privileges and Perogatives descending from Parent
to Child. So that the Root being Holy, the Branches are so too Romans 11.16.
, yea if but one of the Parents be a Believer 1 Cor. 7.14.
, the Children are in a Holy Separate-State; not common and unclean with the
rest of the World; but in such a State at least, as puts them into a more
advantageous and fairer Prospect of Heaven, and greater probability of
obtaining saving Grace, than if they had been out of the Covenant, that Holy
State, so as the Promise did not reach them. Hence Christ speaking of the Jews
Collectively, calls them the Children of the Kingdom Matt. 8.12.
, the Apostle the Children of the Covenant Act. 3.25.
, the Margin referring it to that of Genesis 12.3. which himself says, (Page 5.)
respects the Covenant of Grace.

But to Reply to his Exception, as he goes on to demonstrate it here, as his
manner is, he Acts the Opponent rather than the Respondent, and therefore
thinks himself not concerned to meddle with the Arguments produced by me, though
he pretended otherwise in his Preface, and seemed to Promise to give Answer to
such things as call for an Answer, but since it is not his mind, I am content to
answer his Allegations; and moreover do purpose to take occasion from thence,
further to demonstrate the Identity of the Abrahamical and Evangelical
Covenant, that the Covenant, Genesis 17. is a Covenant of Grace; the more firmly
to establish the Scripture Foundation touching God's Covenant with Abraham, on
which, as himself says truly, (Page 3.) I found the stress of my Discourse.

He says, (Page 4.) that he looks upon this Covenant, in the 17th of Genesis not
to be the Covenant of Grace, but a Covenant God made with Abraham, respecting
some temporal Blessings that God was pleased to bestow upon him, and his
natural Seed, and the same with, Deuteronomy. 29.1. and onward to the 9th but adds,
that he understands the Covenant in Genesis 12.3. and 18.18. to have a respect to
the Covenant of Grace. Now suppose the Land of Canaan be the main matter
Promised to Abraham in the said Covenant, it may not follow, that it is only a
temporal Blessing; because under temporal Promises, Spiritual Blessings were
veild and consigned, by a temporal Possession of the promised Land, an eternal
Inheritance in the heavenly Canaan, was assured to them. Besides you take a
part for the whole, that which is but an Adjunct, or an appendix, for an entire
Covenant; as if God made two distinct Covenants with Abraham, when as there is
not the least hint for it in the whole Bible, which speaks only of one Covenant
made with that Holy Patriarch, even that which Circumcision did consign, which
was a Spiritual Covenant under a Veil, but now it is one and the same without a
Veil, as Doctor Tailor, who is so often quoted by them, expresses it Discourse
of Baptism. p. 37.
, and so could not respect only, as the Answerer says, God's blessing him with
a numerous Issue, and them with the Land of Canaan; there being in that no
sensible Blessing to Abraham, seeing neither he nor his Posterity enjoyed the
Promise as a mere earthly Blessing for near 500 Years after, doubtless
therefore this must be made good to him, as before premised, or there was a
Blessing for him, which was concealed under the leaves of a temporal Promise.
Besides there were others than Abraham's Seed, and Ismael who were to be
circumcised Genesis 17.11, 12.
, to whom the Land of Canaan did not belong.

The Mysteriousness of this Transaction, we are further instructed in by St.
Paul, Heb. 11.13. They all dyed in the faith, having not received the Promises,
as he observes, viz. of a Temporal Possession in Canaan. They saw the Promises,
that is the Spiritual Part, afar off: they embraced them, and looked through
the Cloud and temporal Veil, and desired a better Country, that is an heavenly;
or the same in an heavenly State. This was the Object of their desires, and the
secret of their Promise: And therefore Circumcision was a Seal of the
Righteousness of the Faith, which he had before Romans 4.11.
, and so must relate principally to an Effect and Blessing greater than the
generality of the Jews apprehended, or was expressed in the surface of the
Temporal Promise. Wherefore when God promised pardon and forgiveness of Sins, he
promised to remember this Covenant Levit. 26.42.
, what stay could it be to Moses's Faith, when God appeared to him in the Bush,
in saying I am the God of thy Fathers of Abraham, etc. Exodus 3.6.
, if it only concerned temporals. Agnoscatur, says Chamier Lib. 5. de bapt.
; let it be granted that the Promise of the Land of Canaan, together with the
Multiplication of Abraham's Posterity is annexed to this Covenant, yet says he,
this is not the Covenant but an appendage to it, as to Godliness the promises
of this Life are annexed, Earthly things were indeed under that dispensation
promised more fully and distinctly; suitable to the Jewish Pedagogical Estate,
to allure them to the service of God; and heavenly things more generally and
sparingly: On the contrary, spiritual Blessings are more fully and clearly, and
earthly Things more generally and sparingly held forth, and promised to us
under the Gospel Administration: And the Land of Canaan was more particularly
insisted on in the first Dispensation; being designed for the Type of Heaven,
and an explanation of the Primary grand Promise to be their God: Denoting, that
he would as certainly bring them to the Celestial Canaan, and to the spiritual
and glorious Rest there; as to that temporal and corporeal Rest from their
servitude and captivity in Egypt. Hence it was that Jacob gave such a solemn
Charge to Joseph, and Joseph to his Brethren, the one to Bury his dead Body in
Canaan, the other for the Transportation of his Bones thither, which they would
never have done for an earthly Inheritance, but to nourish in the Hearts of
their Posterity Faith and Desire of rest in Heaven, in the Communion of Saints,
whereof Canaan's rest was a Type, into which, not Moses the Lawgiver, but
Joshua or Jesus the Type of Christ was to bring them. So that the whole Tenor
of the Ahrahamical Covenant, speaks it a Covenant of Grace; and the Apostle
giving us the substance of it in the Gospel, does it in these Words Heb. 8.10.
, I will be to them a God, and they shall be my People.

But such is this Man's Confidence, that he prays me to take notice, whether
there be any thing else in the 17th of Genesis but temporal Blessings. But what
says he to v. 4. as the Apostle applies it, Romans 4.27. whereto it is referred
in the Margin? Or to v. 7. denoting the quality of the Covenant, that it is not
temporary but everlasting, respecting spiritual good Things? Or to the
following Words: To be a God to thee and thy seed after thee? Bellarmine indeed
says, that God when he enjoined Circumcision to Abraham, did Promise only
earthly Things, i. e. the Propagation of his Posterity and the Land of
Palestine, as this Answerer does; and again, I will be a God to thee and thy
seed, holds forth, says Bellarmine, only a Promise of a peculiar protection.
But Amesius well observes, in his Answer to him, that our Savior gathered from
thence a Resurrection to Bliss; or his Argument against the Sadducees Matt.
22.32.
had not been Conclusive.

In short this Covenant is so much the Covenant of Grace, that it contains in
it the great Mystery of Man's Redemption, as is plain from the Comment of
Zachary upon it Luke 1.71.
, the belief whereof was the justification of Abraham Genesis 15.5, 6. Romans 4.3.
, wherefore it is expressly said, that when God enacted this Covenant with
Abraham, he preached the Gospel unto him Gal. 3.8.
, that is, he made a Covenant with him, concerning Christ and Salvation by him;
and he says further, that it was preached to the Jews as it is to us Heb. 4.2.
.

Thus we see, what that Covenant with Abraham was, that it is substantially the
same that we are now under, or by what means else did any of the Jews before
Christ came, obtain Grace or Glory? It was before Christ's coming into the
Flesh clothed with many Shadows of now abolished Ceremonies, Types and
Sacrifices, in its Administration, having upon Mount Sinai the Covenant of
works adjoined to it, or the first Covenant; so termed, for that in the
substance thereof it represented the first Covenant. So that by Reason of these
adjuncts, it is sometimes distinguished from its very self, as it was
administered by Christ after his Incarnation. But if not the same, how are the
Gentiles said to be grafted in amongst them Romans 11.17.
, as Grotius has it, or according to Beza and Piscator, pro ipsis instead of
them, or in their Place; or how does the same Olive Tree continue still? It
remains then, that there are not two Covenants of Grace, differing in
substance, but one and the same under various Administrations.

Camero These. 7.
makes three Covenants, one of Nature, one of Grace, and one subservient to
that of Grace. But ubi unum propter aliud, ibi unum tantum: But lest I be
thought too general in my Procedure, I shall further demonstrate that God's
Covenant with Abraham, consists of those very substantial Parts which are
assigned to the Evangelical, as it is in this 17th of Genesis and elsewhere more
fully expressed by Moses, interpreted by the Prophets, and applied by the
Apostles.

In Genesis 17.1. he tells Abraham what a God he will be unto him, viz. A God
all-sufficient. Which Promise you have Genesis 15.1. divided into two Parts; and
in other Places among the Prophets, into these Three; first, All-sufficient to
pardon the Penitent; secondly, To give his Holy Spirit; thirdly, To give
eternal Life. In each of these respects, was God looked upon as all-sufficient
in the Old Testament. In Isaiah 55.7. God says, I will forgive and multiply my
pardons. Hence the Jews are exhorted to repent Act. 2.39. Ezekiel. 36.25.
, for that the Promise of the Pardon of Sins by the Blood of Christ belongs to
them, and he promises further to put his Spirit within them; and to cause them
to walk in his Statutes Ezekiel. 36 27.
, and as it is in Deuteronomy. 30.6.
to Circumcise the Heart. So Zachary, speaking of God's Covenant, and his Oath
to Abraham Luke 1.71, 74.
, makes mention of this twofold Mercy, which accrues to us by virtue thereof,
viz. First, Deliverance from the Power of our Enemies, Sin and Satan. Secondly,
Grace and Strength to serve him, that he would grant, or as the Word is
rendered Rev. 11.3.
give Power, to wit his Grace and Holy Spirit, for the amending of our Lives.
See also Psalm. 103.3. and Esa. 44.3. And that these Places refer to God's
Covenant with Abraham, is yet more evident from Gal. 3.16. where the Promise of
the Spirit is called the blessing of Abraham. And though the Promise of eternal
Life is not any where in the Old Testament plainly expressed, yet it was
concealed under the leaves of a temporal Promise, wherein all the Prophets do
unanimously declare, there was an excellency of Blessing, far exceeding what
Believers outwardly enjoyed in their Peace, Prosperity, Kingdom and
Temple-Worship, which could be no other than the spiritual and eternal
Deliverance of their Persons from Sin and its curse, with the enjoyment of the
Favor of God here, and eternal Life in the World to come, as it is observed by
St. Paul in the eleventh Chapter to the Hebrews. In like manner the Condition
on Abraham's Part, is the same that is required of us Christians, i. e. to
observe the Evangelical Precepts; to believe and obey that Gospel which was
preached to him; as much as to say Faith and Obedience. Not that Righteousness
which is of the Law, exact legal Obedience, but that which is of Faith, that
which is truly Evangelical; as is evident by comparing Deuteronomy. 3.11. with Romans
10.6. and of the same nature with that of a Christian. How otherwise could
Abraham be the Father of them that believe, and his Faith the pattern of Faith
to others, and we be admonished to walk in the steps of his Faith, and to do
his works?

Neither do the Prescript Rules, given to the one or the other, make any
alteration therein, so long as they are all of the same Nature and Kind. Now
that they are so, appears from the fore-quoted Places; where it is said, that
the Commandment is not hid, in the Hebrew and Septuagint not too heavy; but as
Christ's Yoke and Burden light and easy. Neither is it in Heaven or beyond
the Seas, it will cost no great Pains to come to the knowing and practicing of
it, very agreeable and consentaneous to every one's Nature, very nigh and in
the Heart, very easy to Learn and Practice; and what this is, is punctually
set down Romans 10.9.
, to be confessing of Christ, and a Cordial belief of his Resurrection, shown
forth in the Practice of those Rules that he has left us, and God had before
Prescribed.

And for that Commandment which Christ calls New, 'twas from the beginning, but
being buried as it were in a Law of Ceremonies, it seemed wholly laid aside and
neglected, insomuch that few attained to so right a meaning of the Commandment,
as that Scribe Matt. 12.
, who our Savior says, was not far from the Kingdom of Heaven.

But suppose the Divine Precepts are found to vary in number and perspicuity,
or the like, in respect of Abraham and us, yet that puts no distinction betwixt
his Faith and Obedience and ours; for so the Faith and Obedience of one
Christian would not be the same with that of another, when in different
Circumstances. We conclude therefore, that Abraham's Faith and so his Obedience
is of the same Nature with ours. Accordingly runs the Precept, Genesis 17.1. Walk
before me and be thou perfect, that is upright or sincere as the Margin shows;
which implies that though he should be subject to infirmities, yet so long as he
has a single upright Heart, there is no more required than such an Evangelical
Obedience, the Righteousness of Faith. Hence the Apostle discoursing of
justification by Faith Gal. 3. v. 5.
, instanceth in Abraham, and argues that we are justified on the same Terms
with him; and that neither Jews nor Christians are otherwise justified than he
was, who was justified or accounted Righteous, not only for that particular Act
of Faith by which he believed that he should have a Son which should be his
immediate Heir Genesis 15.6.
, but that habit, that Grace of Faith, (that is chiefly and primarily) whereby
he was able to believe that Promise with the same Faith he believed the Promise
of the Messiah, that a certain Seed should be given to him, In whom all the
Nations of the Earth shall be blessed. And it is the same Faith to believe that
God would send such a Messiah before the Law, as that he has exhibited and
sent him since; and consequently what is now required of us, as the Condition
of the Covenant on our part is the same, and no more in effect than what was
required by God of Abraham, as the Condition on his Part. Forasmuch then as
has been shown, that God's Covenant with Abraham has the same mercies on
God's Part made over to Man; and the same Conditions, on Man's Part required of
God with those of the New Covenant, the Abrahamical Covenant cannot be denied
to be the Covenant of Grace, and so my Foundation stands sure and unshaken, and
beyond all doubt will so remain, notwithstanding the utmost efforts of such
Assailants.

His other exception touches Circumcision: Which, he says, to repeat his very
words, can give no grounds for Infant Baptism, nor bear suitable Parallel with
it. And thereupon he gives several Instances wherein they differ. But what
would he infer hence? That the one succeeds not the other. And so there can be
no Argumentum a pari. That therefore Infants should be baptized; because such
were circumcised. I answer, the Lord's Supper succeeded the Passover; and yet
they differ in many Punctilio's and Circumstances: It suffices to make the
Parallel suitable, that Baptism is a Sacrament of initiation into the Covenant
of Grace, and the Seal of the Righteousness of Faith under the Gospel, as
Circumcision was before under the Law, Genesis 17.11. Act. 7.8. Romans 4.11.
compared with 1 Cor. 12.13. 1 Pet. 3.21.
and does as properly and effectually confirm and establish the Covenant
betwixt God and us now, as Circumcision did then; Baptism being the only
ordinary way of adding to the Church in the time of the Gospel, on which score
'twas instituted. And it is as requisite that we should in some such manner seal
to the Covenant now as Abraham before, we being as much unable to give an
answerable assurance to Almighty God for our selves and Children, as ever
Abraham was for himself and Posterity; or if you will, may it not be thought as
highly necessary that we should be by some Rite matriculated members of the
Christian, as they were solemnly initiated into the Jewish Church? Now what
other way is prescribed to us of Matriculation, than Baptism; the only most
proper Rite for this purpose, as it has been in all Ages accounted; insomuch
that all the several Baptisms that were before Christ, were all meant for
initiating forms. So the Jews had a Custom long before the coming of Christ, to
make proselytes or converts to their Religion, not only by Circumcision but by
baptizing, or washing them with Water. The same was the meaning of John's
Baptism to make Men Disciples under his Administration. And the same was the
meaning of Christ's Baptism, to initiate Men into the Christian Religion, and
make them Disciples of Christ. Hence baptizing and making Disciples, means the
same thing, John 4.1. John made and baptized more Disciples, that is baptized
them Disciples, which was the form of making them such. All the instances of
Baptism in the New Testament were used as initiating Forms; and to no other
Purpose, being therefore never repeated; no more than men were twice
circumcised or admitted into the Church before Christ. Nor do we find since the
coming in of the Gospel, any other Rite or Ceremony of initiation permitted,
much less enjoined. Sure I am, there was at first no framing of distinct
Covenants for each Congregation, according to the fancy and humor of the
respective Teacher, a mode which some of our late upstart Sects have boldly
introduced without any Divine Authority, or Foundation in the Word of God. And
as there is no mention in the Gospel of any Covenant, but one, of Grace, so
neither of any other Sign or Token thereof, or any other form of entering into
the said Covenant, than Baptism; but as Circumcision was heretofore, so Baptism
is now the initiating Rite.

But to Reply to his Instances, whereby he would prove the Parallel not
suitable: His first Instance or Reason is, because the natural Seed of Abraham,
without any token of a work of Grace on them, ought to be circumcised; but the
natural Seed of Believers, without some token of a work of Grace upon them,
ought not to be baptized. For which he cites Matt. 3.6. to v. 10. That some had
a sense of their Sins, and were brought to a confession is plain, v. 6. But
what token was there of a work of Grace on them, whom the Baptist calls there a
Generation of Vipers? And yet of them he says, Matt. 3.7. v. 11. Mark. 1.5.
Luke 7.30.
I indeed Baptize you. And St. Mark says, they were all baptized of him; he
refused none of them. So that they were only the Pharisees and Lawyers, that
were not baptized of him, who exempted themselves. Or what token of a work of
Grace appeared on those that were baptized of Lydia's Household; besides what
was observed on her self? Act. 16.15. Domus autem nomine ipsam intelligimus
familiam; imprimis vero Liberos and nepotes, says Marl. on the Place. See Mons.
le Clerc's, Supplement to Dr. Hammond on the Place.
And yet not she only was baptized, but her Household upon her Conversion. And
if others of the House were thereupon baptized, much rather her
Infant-Children, if she had any such. This is certain, she had a Household, a
Family, and they were baptized as well as her self. To allege that some had
such a work of God wrought upon their Souls, before they were baptized, proves
nothing; for so doubtless had some Jews, and Abraham in particular, before they
were circumcised. That interrogative, Mat. 3.7. having there the force of a
Negation, implies that they had no manner of Conviction, nor could any have
taught them, that they should merely by St. John's Baptism avoid the
destruction that hung over their Heads, and therefore he bids them to repent.
He must prove, if he can, that none else ought to be baptized; for as yet we
have only his bare Ipse dixit, his own say so, he may pass for a Magisterial
Dictator to his own ignorant Party, who can follow him with an implicit Faith;
but his Authority will not sway with any others of sober sense.

(2.) He says the natural Seed of Abraham were commanded to be circumcised, but
the Children of Believers are no where, in the word of God, commanded to be
baptized. This is that we call a begging of the question. Is not Baptism as
expressly commanded now, as Circumcision was then? But Infant Baptism he will
say is not. Neither need there to be a new or distinct Command for it: Because
their right to be within the Church or Covenant, together with their Parents,
is not a new Institution; but as old as Adam, for ought I know, says Dr. Wallis
Defense of Infant Baptism, page 14. Printed Anno 97.
; but the solemn Rite of admission into this Church, (to which the Children of
Believers have a right to be admitted) is a new Institution. Then by
Circumcision appointed to Abraham: And Now by Baptism upon a new Institution,
appointed by Christ, as the same Author expresses it.

Another Reason that he gives (which is the only one more that I need consider
here) is, because there is a sore Punishment threatened on the Man-Child that
is not circumcised Genesis 17.14.
, but no Punishment threatened in the whole Word of God, on an Infant for not
being baptized. Answer, This Argument, were it of any force, does militate
against the Lord's Day succeeding the Sabbath Exodus 31.14.
, which nevertheless he himself has granted, and in some measure made good.
Moreover the Punishment threatened, does not affect Infants wanting
Circumcision, but Persons neglecting or contemning that Ordinance. The words in
the Original import no more, Praeputiatus Mas, the uncircumcised Male, (so
Junius conceives the word to be there taken, with reference only to the Sex,
not to the Age) shall be cut off, not in his Infancy, but afterward when he
comes to Years of Discretion; if then he approves his Fathers or Guardians
neglect, and neglect Circumcision himself. Which Junius makes good by two
Arguments. First, From the Original which may be rendered as well, and rather
actively than passively, according to the different Radix it may be derived
from, thus, who shall not circumcise his foreskin. Secondly, From the Reason
that God himself there gives; for he has broken my Covenant. Which is not
incident unto Children, and therefore the threatened Punishment was very
unlikely to be inflicted on them, who could not commit the Offense: We read
that Moses was in danger of being slain by the Angel, for neglecting to
circumcise his Son Exodus 4.24.
, but nothing is said of the excision of his Son, but that afterward he was
circumcised though the eighth Day was past.

I have already observed in the beginning of this Reply, how absurdly he has
gone about to prove, that by Children, in Act. 2.39. are not meant Children as
they are in a state of Infancy, making no difference between the Persons the
Apostle spoke to, and those he spoke of, but implying that all those whom the
Apostle asserted to have an interest in the Promise, must necessarily be only
the very same Persons he was discoursing to, and therefore the Children, as the
Answerer explains himself, must be such as should be able to embrace the
precept to repent. A Conclusion that can in no wise follow from his premises,
and it is impossible it should from any other, since it would argue the Apostle
himself to be guilty of vain tautology and impertinence, if no more were meant
of their Children than of all the World. Besides there was no occasion for
naming Children at all, but the sense had been as full without it. But this
Answerer, not contenting himself with such absurd Arguing, as I have already
noted, begets here a superfetation of absurdities, and further to show his
excellent faculty of quidlibet ex quolibet, closes as it were every Paragraph
of this long Ramble, of almost three Pages with this fancied Inference: So from
this, Infants ought not to be baptized, repeating it no less than six times,
without hardly varying one Word; not weighing how it is reduced, or brought in
Head and Shoulders, so long as it may serve any way to amuse that poor ignorant
misguided Sect. There is a parcel more of the like impertinent Stuff, for
almost a Page and half immediately following; which seeing it don't so nearly
touch the main matter in controversy, that I may not be too tedious, I will
pass over in silence, though he has deserved other Returns for his groundless
Censures and Upbraidings, which he is forced to make use of for want of Reason.

In the next Words, Page 14. he brings me in saying, so that excluding Children
from the Covenant, and debarring them of the Sign, puts a sacrilegious
restraint thereon, and excludes them from the ordinary way of Salvation.
Whereto he returns this Answer, You put more stress upon it, than it will bear;
but what does he mean by that? Does he deny the Proposition? That it does not
put a sacrilegious restraint upon the Covenant? No such thing. Or does he deny
the Consequence that it excludes them from the ordinary way of Salvation? Not
at all. What then! Does he instance in any ordinary means, whereof they are
capable? Not so neither. He mentions that of Romans 10.14, 15. but himself has
observed, Page 11. that that goes beyond their capacity to make use of. And
it is yet he says to prove that Baptism is an Ordinance of Christ for Infants.
What then? Why he even makes the matter of no consequence at all, whether there
be allowed them any ordinary means or no; though at the same time they allow them
to have original Sin. There is then, according to him, no ordinary way left for
the Salvation of Children. For as he intimates, in the beginning of this Page,
a believers Child has no Privilege more then the unbelievers to any Ordinance
of Christ: But how contrary is this Doctrine to that of our Savior Mark 10.14?
Where he says, of such is the Kingdom of God; which signifies their having an
interest in Heaven hereafter, and consequently must imply their capacity of
being of the visible Church here. And it must be primarily meant of Children,
and not such only as are humble and innocent like them; otherwise the sense
cannot be coherent: For what is the innocence and humility of such to Children,
that they should be suffered more than Lambs, or the like humble and innocent
Creatures to be brought to Christ, to be received into his Arms? Who might
better have been propounded, as patterns of more perfect Innocence, having no
original Guilt; unless Christ had meant to be thus understood, Bring little
Children to me, for to them, and such as are like them, belongs the Kingdom of
Heaven Talium dicit non horum, quia comprehendit tam puellos quam eorum
similes, says Musculus, hac ergo voce Christus parvulos and horum similes ad
se pertinere testatur. So Calvin giving for a Reason, which St. Mark and St.
Luke add, verily I say unto you, whosoever shall not receive the Kingdom of
God, as a little Child, etc. insulse enim, as Marlor, sets down further.
Anabap. pueros excludunt a quibus initium fieri debebat. And elsewhere, piorum
liberos dicimus Ecclesiae filios nasci and ab utero reputari in Christi
membris, quia hac lege deus nos adoptat ut sit etiam seminis nostri pater.
.

Again what ground of comfort can such as he give to their Parents, in case of
their Death, that they sorrow not as Men without hope? Seeing they don't appear
to such to belong to Christ. And if withal they have no means to bring them to
Christ, they may well be thought to be in a desperate Estate, while in their
Infancy. Certainly it has been looked upon as a great advantage, to be in God's
ordinary way of Salvation. In the time of the Jews, before and under the Law,
'twas a great preference to be of the number of God's People, members of the
visible Church, Branches of the Olive Tree; and is it not now as great a
Privilege and Advantage to be in a like Covenant Relation, grafted into the
same Olive Tree? Or can it be reasonably supposed that God would so often, and
so emphatically make Promises to the Righteous and their Seed, to be a God to
them and theirs, if there was not somewhat of peculier preference intended them
beyond those of the Wicked, or those that are out of God's visible Church? But
if no more be intended, but upon condition of Faith and Repentance; this is
equally true of the Children of the most profligate, and of Heathens, as of
Jews and Christians: And Christ's coming must have rendered the condition of
Children worse than before. Whatever then be the Privileges of being within
the Pale, and the Promise of the visible Church, they must belong to the
Children of Believers now, as they did to the Seed of Abraham heretofore: By
being such, they have jus ad rem, a right thereunto; and by being baptized,
they have jus in re, and are as it were put into the possession of the same. So
that denying them Baptism, we do as much as lies in us debar them of the
outward means, the enjoyment of the Privilege of being in the Church, and the
benefits thereunto appertaining.

Should a like Question be put concerning a baptized Christian, a member of
Christ's Church, with that which the Apostle proposes, Romans 3.1. touching a
circumcised Jew, What advantage -- the Answer may be the same with his. v. 2.
Much every way: And in Romans 9.4, 5. are reckoned up no fewer then eight
Privileges or Prerogatives belonging to a Jew upon the score of that Relation.
The same advantage that there was then to the Jews, (as God's visible Church)
is now common to the Gentiles also; and if Children were sharers therein with
their Parents, during the former Administration, how are they excluded now?
Those Children more particularly, whose Parents kept their Station Romans 11.5,
17.
; and if some Children continued within, because their Parents so continued;
what hinders but others should be admitted, whose Parents are re-instated, or
have gained a like Privilege with those that are?

The Prophet Elisha wept when he looked upon Hazael; because he foresaw he
would dash the Infants of Israel against the Wall; and even Hazael thought
himself worthy to be esteemed a Dog, if ever he should do such a thing. But
certainly to dash all the Infant Children of Believers out of the Covenant of
Grace (as much as in them lies) and to deprive them of the Seal of it, is in a
spiritual Sense far more heavy; and I dare appeal to the tender Bowels of any
believing Parents, whether it were not easier for them to think that their
Children should be dashed against the Stones, and yet in the mean time to die
under Christ's Wing, as visible members of his Kingdom; rather than to have
them live, and behold them to have a visible standing only in the Kingdom of
the Devil. We read of Herod the Tyrant, that he destroyed all the Children in
Bethlehem and the Coasts thereof, from two Years old and under: But is it not a
far more cruel sentence, to set these in no better state than Pagans and
Infidels, without Christ, Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, strangers
from the Covenant of Promise, having no hope, and without God in the World? How
far Heaven extends its mercy to those that are without means, and cannot use
them, is a Mystery hid from us, and known only unto God. It Is our Happiness,
that he has not left us destitute of the ordinary means of Salvation, with
respect to our Children as well as to our selves; and therefore whatsoever
means of Grace God has appointed, as Instrumental to that end that they are
capable of, are to be afforded them; unless God has made any particular
exception in the Case. And Baptism being appointed by God as such a means, we
cannot well Administer it too early to our Children; for though it does not
confer Grace, ex opere operato, yet it always does so, when God is pleased to
vouchsafe the concurrence and cooperation of his Holy Spirit with it. And we
know not how soon the operation may be, how soon God may by his Grace
pre-dispose their Souls to an aptness for good through the means; it may be
long before they are in a capacity to Act any, and therefore the Ordinance
ought by no means to be withheld from them or neglected.

Page 16. He questions what a Disciple is, whether he be not a Scholar or one
taught, and whether Infants can be said to be Disciples, till they are taught?
To this I Answer, That a Disciple in the New Testament is the same with
Christian Act. 11.26.
, any one that has a Relation unto Christ, and so of as large an extent as the
word Israel in the Old Testament. Infants therefore having a Relation unto
Christ are of his Body, not Heathens but Christians, and so consequently
Disciples infieri; not for that they are actually taught of God, but because
they are, as I may say, retainers to Christ, and designed for his School; into
which when they are admitted or initiated by Baptism, they are more completely
Disciples, Disciples in facto esse, having then not only a right to, but are
invested with the Privilege of those that are properly and actually Scholars
or Disciples, not as being personally instructed, but as consecrated and set
apart for the service of Heaven; placed so, as to be reckoned Scholars of
Christ, being entered into his School, though they be no Proficients. And thus,
they are commonly reputed of the number of the Scholars or Disciples, who are
admitted into a School, and only entered there to learn, though they have not
learnt a Lesson or a Letter. As John the Baptist baptized to Repentance, or in
order to it. Who should limit God? May not he make Disciples several Ways? By
the Administration of the Ordinance of Baptism, and so by putting on them his
Livery; or by teaching them by his Spirit from the greatest to the least; by
writing his Laws in their Hearts; or by graciously accepting them into his
Covenant with their Parents; or bringing them under a Religious Government?

Page 18. He would know, whether I can tell Lydia was a Maid, Wife, or Widow,
or whether there were any Infants in her House? I answer, It Is plain she had a
Family, and that upon her Faith alone they were brought into God's ordinary way
of Salvation, and were forthwith baptized Act. 16.15.
; unless they will understand by her House the Stone-Walls.

By Salvation coming to Zacheus's House, he understands (Page 19.) the Messiah.
Answer, Christ would have rather said I am the Messiah, which had been true,
whether Zacheus was the Son of Abraham or no, and so there had been no occasion
of giving that Reason, that the Covenant of Abraham reached him: But why does
he so perversely understand by Salvation, the Person only of the Messiah, but
purposely to avoid the Argument; which yet is no other but what the whole
Current of the Scripture holds forth, viz. That the blessing of Abraham
immediately descends to an House or Family, upon the Conversion of the Head or
Chief thereof. But none are more blind than they that will not see.

In the forementioned 18 and 19 Pages, he endeavors to render it probable,
there were no Infants in the Households I had instanced in; but there is enough
said in these instances, that the blessing of Abraham, viz. Salvation, came to
an House, especially to the Children, if any such there were, upon the Faith or
Conversion of the Chief; that 'twas usual for the whole Family thereupon to be
put into the ordinary way of Salvation, added to the Church to be saved; and
especially Children that have not committed actual Sins, nor could reject the
Counsel of God against themselves. Whereas there might have been perchance some
others in the Families, who with those Pharisees and Lawyers might have so
done, and so have rendered themselves unworthy of the blessing; but this could
not have been incident unto the Children.

The stress then of the business lies not in this: Whether it can be proved
there were Infants in those Families, where it is recorded whole Households were
baptized; but the truth of the Case is this, That in all Families whatsoever,
were there never so many Infants they were all baptized, when their Parents
were baptized. Which shows the vanity of this repeated saying, Not one word of
an Infant in this House, Not one word of Infants in all those Households, and
the like.

Now to retort this their negative Argument upon themselves, let it be
demanded, where they find mention in Scripture of any Children of Christian
Covenanting-Parents that were baptized, when they came to Years of Discretion,
and not before. That they were baptized I suppose they will not deny; and if so,
let them show where and when, for this let all the sacred Register be searched,
from the time that John the Baptist began his Ministry, to the time that John
the Evangelist ended his, (which was above 60 Years, during which time
thousands, if not millions of Children of such Parents were grown up to
Maturity) and if in all that time they can but show any one Instance of any
Child so privileged, whose Baptism was deferred till he came to Years of
Discretion, and that then he was baptized, it may then be acknowledged, that
there is some strength in their Negative Allegations. In the mean time having
such general Instances of baptizing whole Families, surely we have more reason
to believe that Infants were comprehended, and are to be reckoned in the
number, than they have for the contrary. I said we read of none laid aside or
excluded Baptism upon the Account of their Nonage. To this he answers, Page
20. We never read in the whole Word of God, that ever any Infant was commanded
or offered to be baptized, and if so, how should we read of any laid aside or
excluded, that were Nonsense. But I say again, Is there any Direction given in
the Gospel to lay them aside, in case they be offered to Baptism? And who can
say they were not offered? Where then is the Nonsense? Can it be imagined, but
that the Jews brought their Children with them to the Baptist, to save them as
well as themselves from the wrath to come, who were so tender of their
Children, and so zealous for their Circumcision, they who had been always used
to have their Infants admitted into the same Covenant with themselves, by
virtue of a Divine Law, would have raised great Arguments against the Divine
Authority of Christ, if he or his Disciples in his Name, had refused to admit
their Children together with themselves into this Covenant, of which they
taught God's Messiah to be the Mediator. So that it is no Nonsense, to suppose
that we should have heard in the Gospel of Children being excluded, if they had
not been of course admitted. I ask therefore again, show us in any place of
Scripture, where any one was excluded Baptism upon the account of Nonage,
particularly such a one whose Parents were admitted thereto; for if in that
sacred Book, such are not expressly excluded, we are to take it for granted,
they are not to be excluded at all; since it has been God's constant Method to
take Children into his Covenant, when he took in the Parents. Thus for
instance, the Covenant made with innocent Adam included his Infant Children.
The Covenant made with Abraham (which has been already proved to be the Gospel
Covenant) included his Children. So the legal Covenant of which Moses was
Mediator, included the Jewish Infants also: Therefore they should show us,
where God has altered this Method in the Gospel; or else we are to take it
proconfesso, that God has not altered this his constant Method. And the
Abrahamical Covenant which included Infants (seeing it could not be disanull'd
by the legal Covenant) continued till Christ unrepealed. Gal. 3.17.
If therefore they cannot show, that it is repealed by Christ, we are to conclude
that it is not repealed at all.

Wherefore our negative Argument is more cogent from Scripture, for Infants
being in Covenant with their Parents, and that they have a right thereupon to
Baptism, than theirs is against it, and proceeds on the fairest and most
credible Grounds. As first, That there were Children in some at least of those
Households that are said to be baptized upon the Conversion of the Chief of the
Family. Secondly, That if the Jewish Converts Infants had been forbidden
Baptism, they would have made such a noise about it, that the sacred History of
those times must needs have taken notice of it. And lastly, It having been
God's constant Method, when ever he made a Covenant before Christ came, to
include the Infants in it, and particularly God having by an express Law
commanded Infants to be admitted to the sign and seal of the Gospel Abrahamical
Covenant, it must be supposed that God, if he had intended to exclude Infants
from the sign and seal of the Gospel Covenant under Christ, would have
signified his Pleasure, that his former Method of dealing with Infants was
altered, or that the aforesaid Law in the Covenant with Abraham was as to
Infants repealed. Whereas the Antipaedo-Baptists negative Argument proceeds
upon all the contrary improbable Grounds, and therefore their objecting, that
we have no certain instance of the Baptism of any such, and that we don't read
that ever they were offered to be baptized, is of no force; for it shall be
presumed by virtue of that Law which is unrepealed, viz. That Children should
keep the Covenant in the sign of it, that they were both offered and admitted
of Course. How highly had the Jews been scandalized, if the first Planters of
Christianity had denied an admission of Infants into the Covenant under the
Gospel despensation, when they had ever been allowed it under the Mosaic
economy, and had wholly shut them out like the Children of Infidels? This must
in all probability have galled them, to see their Infants so treated, to have
had no visible difference put between the Infants of those that embraced, and
those that resisted the Faith, having always reckoned upon Pagans Children as
common and unclean, but their own as separate and holy. St. Paul makes the same
distinction, that though but one of the Parents be a Believer, yet they are so
far sanctified each to other, that their Children are thereby entitled to the
Covenant of Grace, which they had not been, if both the Parents had been
unbelievers. Had St. Paul taught a contrary Doctrine, or any other of the
Apostles, viz. That the Children of Christian Parents had no more right to
Baptismal Initiation, than those of Heathen Idolaters, it would certainly have
offended them more than all they preached against Circumcision, and keeping the
Ceremonial Law.

Page the 17. He has these Words: The nearer you are to the Truth, the further
off you are from the Papists, and the further off from the Truth the nearer to
them. Which is so false, that it is not in the least deserving a confutation;
since they hold most, if not all the fundamental Articles of Faith, how e're
they may endanger the Foundation by their building Hay and Stubble thereon. But
it signifies nothing it seems, to retort upon them for symbolizing with the
Papists, though in points diametrically opposite to the Protestant Religion; it
don't affect them, as he gives us to understand in the Words just before;
neither will they be concerned to take notice of any such charge. At this rate
they themselves may fall into the grossest Principles of Popery, and yet be
nearer the Truth, and it must pass for sound Protestant Doctrine. And no
reflection must be made, as if they had a Prerogative peculiar to their Sect,
that whatsoever opinion they espouse (they are so infallible in their Tenets)
though it be never so Erroneous and Popish, it immediately commenceth Orthodox.

To my saying and proving that Antiquity is on our side; instead of answering
the Authorities, he says, Page 23. that it is my great Mistake, and wonders how
I could assert such a thing; since they can go back as far as John, and Christ,
and his Apostles. Now I must and do acknowledge, that no Argument or Antiquity
is equal to the Scriptures, when the Interpretations are not doubtful; yet when
they are so, I appeal to any sober Dissenter of whatsoever Sect or Party,
whether the harmonious Practice of the ancient Churches, and the undivided
consent of Apostolical Fathers, be not the most sure and authentic
Interpreters that can be betwixt Men and Men; they thought Infant Baptism
lawful and valid, and no abuse of the Ordinance of Baptism. And let any modest
or moderate Man judge whether it be likely that those famous Saints and
Martyrs, so near the Apostles times, should fall into such a delusion, as as to
conspire in the Doctrine and practice of a Mock-Baptism, and of making
multitudes of supposititious Christians and Churches? Or whether it be not more
probable, that a little Sect, repugnant to all the Ancient as well as modern
Churches, should be in an Error. The very Scriptures, whose sufficiency we
admire as well as they, cannot be proved to be the Word of God without
Tradition; and though they are sufficient, where they are understood, to
determine any Controversy; yet the right Understanding and Interpretation of
them in many Points, the practice of the Church is as requisite, as the
practice of the Court is to understand the Book of the Law.

I may further observe to them, that they themselves cannot defend, according
to their own Postulatum, the baptizing of such grown Persons, as were born and
bred in the Church, from the Scripture; for that the very Institution there, of
Baptism, has a special regard to Proselytes, who from Judaisme or Gentilisme
were coming over to the Christian Faith. Neither can they produce a Precedent
of such an one baptized in the New Testament, but all the baptized Persons we
read of in it, were Jews or Gentiles of an expiring or false Religion newly
converted; and therefore according to their own demands, if to justify their
own practice, they must produce such a particular Distinct Precept or Example;
they cannot defend themselves against the Quakers, who for this and other
Reasons have quite laid aside Baptism; nor against the opinion of the
Socinians, who use this very way of Argumentation for the Non-necessity of
Water Baptism. Though they think good in their present Circumstances to
practice it Vid. Johannis Volkelii, Misnici de vera Religione Lib. 6. Cap. 14.
de Aqua-Baptismo ab Apostolis Usurpato, page 663.
.

In the same Page he says, it is strange reasoning to Argue, that 'twas not
likely that St. Paul was dipped when he was baptized, seeing he was Sick and
Weak, having fasted three Days, etc. Methinks he should rather have said strong
reasoning, being it would be so unsuitable to the easiness of Christ's Yoke;
who will have Mercy and not Sacrifice. Ay, but says this Answerer, he being
commanded to be baptized, closed with the Command; and did not consult with
Flesh and Blood. Very good, it would ill become him to dispute God's
Commandment, but was the manner prescribed? That it must be by dipping the
whole Body under Water, or plunging it as they do with their Clothes on, which
would be rather a baptizing of Garments than of Bodies; nothing of this
appears. All Circumstances agree, that he was not so baptized: Such a penance
to St. Paul in his Condition, had perhaps been more Unsupportable than
Circumcision, and more dangerous than whatever the Ceremonial Law required; to
those therefore who are such stubborn Assertors of the Doctrine of dipping,
that of St. Peter may be well applied: Why tempt ye God to put such a Yoke on
the Necks of Christians, that are not able to bear it? And let them fear who
submit thereto, that God say not unto them at last, who has required this at
your Hands?

What he says to the Instance of the Jailer, is in short this: If they had not
gone forth out of his House, how could he say, when he had brought them into
his House? As if the Keeper had not, or might not have an Apartment in the
Prison peculiar to himself, and distinct from that of the Malefactors?

He is again with my strange reasoning, Page 24. about the manner of Philip's
baptizing of the Eunuch. It seems 'twas too difficult for him to Answer to any
purpose; and therefore he bids me to leave off such Carnal Reasonings. But what
does he seem to say to it, he endeavors to show that Philip and the Eunuch's
meeting could not be accidental, as I had observed, for this very Reason:
Because it was eminently Providential, which argues that he is so very Simple
and Ignorant, that he understands not what accidental Means, or that he most
erroneously thinks that some things may happen or fall out without the Divine
Prescience, and in which the Providence of God is not concerned. He has a mere
Figment of his own Invention, though he don't apply it, which would argue, that
their Meeting was not altogether accidental, but that Philip at least had some
previous Knowledge thereof; for he says, Act. 8.26. The Angel of the Lord bids
him, arise and go to meet him: When as there is no such thing in the Text. And
therefore he may justly fear, lest that Curse he more than once causelessly
alludes to Page 22. as of so tremendous and dangerous a Consequence, should
light upon himself, for having so palpably and so grossly added to the Word, and
to the belying of the Angel, making him say what he did not.

But he says it is hard for him to believe, that I really think that they were
baptized so by sprinkling, though I so write, and appeals to me, whether the
word Baptize does not signify to dip or plunge and not to Sprinkle? I have
shown that the Word signifies not only to dip, but to wash or pour on Water, or
to Sprinkle, and is often so used in Scripture; and gave instances of which he
takes no notice. Christ no where requires dipping but baptizing. And as to the
method or manner how it should be done, the Scripture is silent; nor can there
be an Example produced absolutely for dipping: I believe that some were
baptized in Scripture, by pouring on of Water, or by Sprinkling; others by
dipping: But I question, whether after the manner of our Anabaptists. We don't
deny dipping as in it self unlawful, as they do pouring on of Water, or
Sprinkling; but we say, the practice is Schismatical when done in opposition,
and dangerous in such a cold Climate, and in some seasons of the Year. And when
too the Party is of a, weak and sickly Constitution: And troubled with
Catarrhs, Consumptions, and the like.

Page the 26. He pleads for dipping from the significancy of the Ceremony,
referring to Colos. 2.12. I do not in the least deny, but that it seems to
follow from thence, that there was such a Custom in those Days as to Baptize by
immersion, which carried a very sensible show of a Burial and a Resurrection,
but the Negative cannot be thence concluded, that there was no other way of
baptizing but that, nor is it probable there was no other way; because there
are other Texts of Scripture, which allude to sprinkling in Baptism, as this
does to dipping: And the like Collection must be allowed to be made from the
one, that is made from the other; and farther, because there may be and is a
Baptismal representation made of a Burial, and of a Resurrection in aspersion
and affusion of Water, as well as in dipping Vossius cites several Authors, who
deny any such Representation to be required, the thing being as they say but
accidental and not essential to Baptism, and in case there ought to be at least
some similitude of that Nature, this he tells us, is expressed in aspersione,
etiam vel perfusione, quia cujus caput, as he adds, aspergitur vel perfunditur,
is aquis istis quasi sepelitur. Theses Theologicae, page 360.
. He that has Water poured on him as well as he that is dipped, is put under
Water: And the Water falling on him that is sprinkled, fairly represents the
Earth falling upon him that is Buried, and speaks the similitude of a Burial.
And by the one as well as by the other, we may be said to be buried with Christ
by Baptism into Death. The Representation then is made both ways, though in the
one it is more lively and sensible than in the other; and the appearing again
after, and from under that affusion, represents also a Resurrection; so that
the Symbol is not spoiled here. Accordingly in the Provincial Council of Colen
Sub Hermanno Celebrato, Anno 1530.
, sprinkling as well as dipping is indifferently spoken of, as expressive of a
Type of Christ's three Days Burial, and our conformity to him in that and his
Resurrection. Moreover Christ's bodily Actions and Passions must be imitated
and represented by us after a spiritual way; and it is a vain thing to imagine,
that every Metaphorical Expression used in the Scripture, signifying our
Communion with Christ and conformity to him, should punctually express the
Mystery in the Sacrament, both as to the Letter and Spirit. The Metaphorical
Expressions are various: Putting him on, buried with him, sprinkling with his
Blood. And what hinders but that the Symbolical Ceremonies and the Sacramental
Signs may be so too, or at least variously used, or accompanied with various
circumstantial Ceremonies? One Sign after one, and the same way administered,
cannot express our Communion with Christ and our conformity to him in his Death
and Resurrrection, as to all the foregoing Metaphors. Our Communion with Christ
in his Death and Resurrection, and our conformity to him therein is the
sacramental Grace, and that being represented as well by sprinkling or pouring
on of Water, as by dipping; it follows, that Water in either way of application
is Sacramental. Again, our washing and cleansing from Sin by the Blood of
Christ, and the raising up our Souls to a spiritual Life, being the principal
effects of Christ's Death and Resurrection represented and sealed in the
Sacrament, is truly set out as has been showed by sprinkling as well as by
dipping. Hence under the Law the sacrificial cleansing was done by sprinkling
in some Cases, and by dipping in others Numb. 19.18, 19. Heb. 9.13.
, and the purifying by Christ's Blood is equally represented by both, called
therefore the Blood of sprinkling, and sprinkling of Blood Heb. 12.24. 1 Pet.
1.2.
.

In his Conclusion, not to spare me, but to tell me my own, he reminds me of
his old Item, formerly given, that we have neither Precept nor Example for
Infant Baptism. So say the Papists as well as the Anabaptists, though in other
Words: That it is a mere Ecclesiastical Constitution, no Divine Apostolical
Ordinance. In this they are not unlike Sampson's Foxes joined together by the
Tails, whilst their Heads look several ways; both asserting the same Position;
though to different Ends; the one to establish human Tradition, the other to
undermine a Divine Ordinance. But I reply, nothing is more certain, than that
the Ordinance of Baptism is instituted and appointed us in the Gospel. But
there is no distinct Precept, that particularly determines us to administer it
to those of such or such an Age, or more to Persons of one Age than another,
but it is left to us to apply the Ordinance to those we find qualified,
according to the rules and directions given us in the Word of God, without any
respect to the Age. Neither do I know the particular Age of any one baptized in
Scripture. Unless that our Savior was then about thirty Years old Luke 3.21,
22, 23. Answering therein the legal Type of the Priests and Levites, who
ordinarily entered not their Function till at that Age. Number. 4.3, 23, 30.
; but who will say, that we are bound precisely to observe that Time in our
reception of Baptism? If you say in general Terms, it must be when we are come
to the Age of Maturity or Discretion, let it be proved, that the Scripture
either by Precept or Example has limited it to that only, or that the adult
or grown Persons are declared in Scripture to be the only qualified Persons; or
that those in the state of Infancy are declared not be qualified or capable,
and you have gained the Point. But the Scripture shows that the one sort are in
this respect as qualified and capable as the other: And therefore the Precept
makes it as much our Duty, to administer Baptism to such as are in the state of
Infancy, as to the Adult. We don't Baptize Infants as excluding grown Persons,
nor grown Persons as excluding Infants: Before and under the Law they were
commanded Circumcision precisely the eighth Day, but not so as to exempt others
of other Ages. For Abraham was circumcised at 99, and Ismael at 13 Years old
Genesis 17.24, 25.
; and afterward, if through neglect or otherwise the time lapsed, as in the
instance about which Moses Exodus 24.25.
was concerned, Joshua 5.2.
or that of the Jews, while in the Wilderness, they were not excused altogether
from being circumcised.

Now I have demonstrated that that Command of God, to keep his Covenant in the
Sign thereof, whatsoever it be, is still of force; and that as Children and
others were concerned to keep this Command, when Circumcision was the Token; so
Children and others are in like manner bound to do so, now Baptism is the
Token. I have also showed that Children are as fully commanded to be baptized,
as any others by Christ's Commission. Go Disciple all Nations, baptizing them:
Their Discipleship is their qualification for the susception of Baptism. And
that Children, whose natural or adopted Parents are Believers, are Disciples, I
have abundantly proved. First, In that they have an interest in the Promise or
Covenant. Secondly, In that they are made so, by God's graciously calling them
in their Parents. Thirdly, Because they are reckoned as such by Christ, for
that they belong to him. And Fourthly, Because they are so called by the Holy
Ghost. To all which he has not returned a word in Answer. Seeing then such are
Disciples, who can forbid Water, that they should not be baptized? There being
nothing in the Commission, as I have observed, to interpose between discipling
and baptizing.

If it be said the Command don't run to Baptize all Disciples, but to make
Disciples: And to Baptize those that they make, and that it is not in the Power
of Man to make Children Disciples. I answer, this alters not the Case, as
appears in the instance of Saul being baptized of Ananias, who yet was not made
a Disciple by him, but immediately by God. And they had it in their Commission
to Disciple Children, as being part of a Nation; and it is not to be supposed
that they were commanded Impossibilities. The plain truth of the matter is
this, some Infants are and others may be made Disciples, otherwise a Nation
cannot be discipled, whereof Infants are no small part; or Christ gives in his
Commission what is impossible. To understand it of as many or few as Men list
of a Nation, is against the sense of the Scripture, which plainly is, That the
whole of the Nations wherever they came was in their Commission to Disciple
Deuteronomy. 3.28. Psalm. 2.8.72.11.86.9. Mic. 4.1.
. To this purpose compare Scripture-Prophesies Qui dixit omnes nullos excludit
neque parvulos, says St. Ambr.
, with this Commission given in charge by Christ Rev. 11.15.
, and what the Spirit of God has foretold in those Prophesies, that in
succession of time must be effected; When the Kingdoms of the Earth shall
become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and his Christ Rev. 11.15.
. And in Europe, to look to no other parts of the World, it has been happily
accomplished. If they think to evade this by that distinction of the Apostle
Romans 9.6.
, they are not all Israel which are of Israel: That distinction can be no
otherwise applicable to the Christian Nations, than to the Nation of Israel,
and so 'twill still entitle Christian Nations to the Covenant of God, and to
the Privilege of Ordinances, notwithstanding there be amongst these Disciples
who are called, many that are not chosen. They have then the whole of the
Nation in their Commission; and it must be their endeavor in the utmost extent
of the Word to Disciple it; yet this Work in no one Nation can be done in an
instant. As a Nation cannot be born, so it cannot in a Day be discipled: The
meaning therefore is, to Disciple Nations, that is the whole of any Nation, and
being discipled to Baptize them; yet they are by degrees to Baptize, as they
can Disciple, till the whole of the Nation be discipled and baptized; which can
never come to pass, unless Children, who are a considerable part, may be
discipled.

But if this will not satisfy, unless they may understand too how they can be
discipled: I Answer. Some are made Disciples in their Parents; so that in
discipling the Parents we Disciple them. Others are made Disciples by adopting
them into the Family of Christ's Church; that is bringing them under a
Christian Government and Tuition; who are hence forth no more common or
unclean, but separate and holy, within the Covenant, and consequently to be
baptized; as those that were adopted into Abraham's Family were within the
Covenant with others, and to be circumcized, though they were not of the Seed, as
it is noted in the same verse Genesis 17.12.
, being they were under his Power and Education.

Thus, I hope, I have evinced, beyond all contradiction, that Christ's
Commission is as full for baptizing Infants, as any others. Therefore how many
untruths may he be justly charged with and convicted of, who has so often said
in his Papers, that we have not one Word of God, not one Precept or Precedent
in Scripture for baptizing Infants?

THE SERMON Preached on Occasion of the Author's baptizing an Adult Person.
With some Enlargements.
COLOS. II. 12. Buried with him in Baptism, wherein also ye are risen with him.
ALmighty God finding his ancient People the Jews too intent upon the Externals
of Religion, without any due regard to the vital and substantial part thereof,
the better to take them off from this their gross and carnal way of worshipping
him, was pleased to declare by his Prophets against the very Rites and Vsages
of his own Institution; not that he did absolutely prohibit them, and
countermand what he had enjoined, but disclaimed and rejected these external,
these lesser matters, rather than the Spirit and Life of Religion should be
neglected by them; or the more weighty concerns of the Law be left undone. Thus
St. Paul gives his Colossians here to understand, that the inward Circumcision
of the Heart, is infinitely preferable to the outward Circumcision of the
Flesh; and that though the Circumcision of the Flesh be now no more, yet God has
not left himself without a Witness in this Case, but has appointed another
external Rite in its Room, viz. Baptism. Buried with him in Baptism, says the
Text, whence we may note these following particulars.

First, As the Words bear a Relation to, and are occasionally introduced from
the verse foregoing; we may infer, that the Externals of Religion are not to be
regarded in comparison of its inward Life and Substance. The Circumcision of
the Flesh, when the Commandment was most in force, was nothing to that of the
Heart.

Secondly, We are given to understand that Baptism is the initiating Sacrament
of the New Testament, and so succeeds Circumcision, which was the initiating
Sacrament of the Old.

Thirdly, We may note that our Baptism represents Christ's Burial and
Resurrection, in the manner of its Administration, or if not in the symbolical
Ceremonies, yet at least it does and must in its spiritual Concomitants and
Effects. And it behooves us to exemplify Christ's bodily Actions and Passions
in a spiritual way; that as he died and was buried, so should we die, and even
be buried unto Sin; and as he rose, so should we rise to newness of Life,
Mortifying all our evil and corrupt affections, and daily proceeding in all
virtue and godliness of living, as our Church exhorts.

For the First, That the Externals of Religion are not to be regarded in
comparison of its inward Life and Substance. In the former Verse the Apostle
declares to his Colossians, that they are circumcized in Christ, that is by his
Spirit, as the Margin of your Bibles of the Geneva Translation has it; and
therefore they need not be so scrupulously Zealous after an external Rite; much
less this of Circumcision which is now antiquated. Since withal they want not
an outward Rite in this respect, they have Baptism though Circumcision be laid
aside and abolished, they have another Sacrament instituted in its room, Buried
with him in Baptism. Now should you compare the Circumcision of our Savior,
the inward Circumcision of the Heart, with that of Moses, the outward
Circumcision of the Flesh, you will without difficulty perceive, that it
infinitely surpasses it in Dignity and Excellency; that wounded the Body, this
enlivens the Soul: The one pared away a little Skin, and marked the Flesh; the
other mortifies the whole Body, and quickens the Spirit. And therefore they
were extravagant, who notwithstanding that excellent and Divine Circumcision
which Christians have received, are yet so sollicitously bent upon that which
is but the Figure and Shadow. Nevertheless to show how rich that sanctifying
Grace is, which we have in Jesus Christ; he adds, that besides our being
circumcised in heart, and so divested of the Body of the Sins of the Flesh; we
have moreover been buried with him in Baptism, in which we are also risen again
with him, which is a more excellent and lively Sacrament, than ever
Circumcision was; a Sacrament resembling it, and answering to it; signifying
and sealing up both our Mortification and Vivification. But then there is both
an outward and an inward Baptism; or, there is in Baptism the Body and the
Spirit; (as I might have said in effect concerning Circumcision) and the
internal spiritual Part is the most material, and ought to be more especially
minded by us. The thing that saves us is by St. Peter said to be Baptism. 1
Pet. 3.21. But that in Baptism which does most contribute to our Salvation,
next to the virtue of Christ's Resurrection, is not the putting away the filth
of the Flesh, but the Answer of a good Conscience toward God. Which shows the
outward washing is the least considerable, q. d. it is not so much the outward
Administration as the Conversion of the Soul to God, that is the effective
disposition in which Baptism saves us. God will have mercy and not sacrifice;
as he said by his Prophet, Hos. 6.6. that is rather than Sacrifice. Not that he
did then renounce Sacrifice, but would rather have Acts of Mercy and Charity
shown to Man; than any such Sacrifices or Oblations offered or made to himself.
He preferred not Mercy or Charity before inward Devotion, or the adoration of
the Heart, the Sacrifice of a contrite Spirit, which he will in no wise despise;
but before any outward Acts, or external Performances in his Service: which is
of little or no account at all with him, where the inward spiritual Part is
wanting, which is the very Soul and Life of Religion: But it cannot be supposed
he would not have Sacrifice too; seeing he had given so many Commands
concerning it: And therefore the Prophet immediately adds, that he desired the
knowledge of God more than burnt offerings, q. d. he did not desire either
Sacrifice or Burnt offerings, in the same degree with other more material
Duties. So when St. Peter says, that it is not the outward washing with Water,
that saves us, but the inward Purification of the Spirit, we are not to
suppose his meaning to be, that the outward washing is of no virtue, or that
the Baptism of Water is wholly excluded; being an Ordinance of God; but that if
we would approve our selves unto God, we must not rest in an outward formal
Worship: No not in Circumcision, though the Law was never so much in being, or
were renewed or reinforced. But we must Worship him inwardly with the
Circumcision of the Heart. So the sealing of the Covenant in our Baptism, will
be of little advantage to us, unless we make good our Stipulation, and can
return some satisfactory Answer touching the Faith we have entertained, and the
Resolutions we have taken up, to live according to that Religion we are
initiated into: Circumcision avails not, neither the outward Lavour of
Baptism; without the inward Sanctification and renewing of the Holy Ghost.
Hence arises our great Miscarriage, and the frustration of all the hopes and
advantages of those blessed Relations we are admitted to by Baptism, when from
time to time we mind only the external Rite and Ceremony; which is low and
mean, without considering the substance and reality; which is high and
excellent. The Figure, the outward Element is poor and beggarly: The thing
signified is rich and heavenly. The Seal is mean; the Inheritance is great. It
has differently fallen out with the carnal Jew, and the carnal Christian; the
outward Glory of their Ordinances was a stumbling Block to them; which made
them rest in the Type, and look no further; the meanness of ours, is a
stumbling Block with us; we look not for such Treasure in Earthen-Vessels. Nor
indeed can we, so long as we make the Ordinance a customary Piece of formality.
But here I would not be thought to insinuate the Non-necessity of the Ordinance
of Baptism, which God has appointed, as the way, in the common Order of means,
to bring to Grace and Glory; for in this way he ordinarily brings us to
Salvation. And therefore makes it our Duty: But he has not bound himself to
outward means and instruments, and consequently it cannot be said to be of that
universal absolute necessity; as if there were no Salvation without it. The
Covenant we know can convey Pardon and Salvation without the Seal. Abraham was
justified before he received the sign of Circumcision: The seal of the
Righteousness of Faith. And the Thief upon the Cross was saved without Baptism.
But the Seal cannot do it without the Covenant, that is the great Instrument of
Donation and Conveyance. Our Savior prescribing the ordinary way of Salvation,
Mark 16.16. says, He that believes and is baptized, shall be saved; but adds,
He that believes not, shall be damned: Not he that is not baptized. The
Covenant of Grace, and our being in Christ is absolutely necessary. But the
Sign, the external Seal, is not of a like necessity. And yet it is of such
necessity too, that it cannot be neglected without Sin and Danger. To speak
summarily and briefly, it is necessary, as a Law of Christ, as a part of his
external Worship, as a Seal of the Covenant of the Promise of remission of
Sins, as a means of exhibiting and conveying of Grace, necessary as the
ordinary way, by which in Conjunction with the Covenant, and the Grace of it,
God does save. And therefore none can neglect it, without great indignity to
Christ, and great ingratitude for such an high Privilege and eminent
Advantage. But still we must take along with us this Caution: That this sacred
Ordinance be not past over, as a mere customary Thing, as an external Rite
only, or Ceremony, without minding the thing signified; and the correspondent
of our part of the Covenant, which our Baptism Signs and Seals. Our common
Negligence in the Duties incumbent on us, and in those Conditions which our
Baptism obliges us to, is certainly one of the great Prejudices that has
hardened the Anabaptists, and made them look upon our Infant Baptism, as a
trifling Business, a mere insignificant thing.

I proceed now to the next thing I noted, as the second general Head, which I
am in order to consider, viz. That Baptism is the initiating Sacrament of the
New Testament, and so succeeds Circumcision, which was the initiating Sacrament
of the Old. And to discuss this the more fully and methodically; I will
endeavor to show you, First, What Baptism or the Sacrament of Baptism is.
Secondly, What it is to be baptized, or what are the Privileges and Advantages
that do accrue to us by our Baptism. And then in the Third Place, I shall
endeavor to prove that Baptism is the initiating Sacrament of the New
Testament. As to the First, The word Sacrament in its original intendment, had
the signification of such a Military Oath as was attended with sacred Rites,
and such as led Men, by sensible resemblances, to things of an higher nature.
As for the Sacraments of the New Testament, particularly that of Baptism; we
may consider it in diverse Respects; and so may take up various and distinct
Notions and Conceptions concerning it. If we consider it with respect to the
Divine Grace, so it may and ought to be conceived by us, to be such an outward
and visible Sign thereof, as is moreover ordained by Christ to be a means of
conveying it unto us, and a pledge to assure us of the same. Secondly, With
relation to our Virtue, or the embracing the Conditions on our Part: So 'twill
be such an outward visible Sign thereof, and ought to be so reputed, as is
appointed by Christ for us to make a Declaration of it, and an Obligation to
continue this our Profession, and to practice what we so publicly declare and
profess. Thirdly, With reference to that New Covenant, by which the Divine
Grace, and our Duty are as it were tied together, so it must be defined such an
outward and visible Sign, as is ordained by the same Christ for God and Man to
declare their mutual Consent, and by that Rite explicitly to enter into the
said Covenant. Lastly, As to those who are joined together in the same
Covenant, and so are connected to Christ, and to one another, then it is such an
outward and visible Sign, as is by Christ ordained and fitted as a general
Badge of their common Profession: And a means of bringing particular Men into
Society, Communion, and Fellowship one with another. In sum, it is an outward
and visible Sign ordained and fitted by Christ, to signify and convey and
assure the Divine Grace unto us, and on our part to declare the Duty we owe to
God, and to Christ, and to one another, and to oblige our selves to the
constant Profession and Practice of it See Towerson on the Sacraments.
.

Having thus seen what we are to understand by the Sacrament of Baptism; let us
consider, (2.) What it is to be baptized. What are the Privileges and
Advantages, that do redound to the party baptized.

First, Then to be baptized is by a solemn Rite to be explicitly admitted into
Covenant with God; a Covenant of Grace, Pardon and Salvation, which Christ has
purchased with his Blood. And surely it is no small Advantage to be brought into
such a State; whereby we are consigned to the Grace of the Gospel, and the
mercies of God: Who thereupon don't measure our performances by Grains and
Scruples, by perfect unsinning Obedience; but with the allowances of the
balance of the Sanctuary. Not exacting from us according to the strict measures
of the Law, but saving us by his Grace, or as it is elsewhere in Scripture
expressed: According to his mercy. That is by pitying and pardoning us, by
relieving and supporting us; because he remembers that we are but Dust. Some
say that Baptism only washes away all the Sins that are past; or at present
adhering; but not the Sins of our future Life. But this Sacrament promises
more and greater Things, even in futurum, and therefore is not repeated,
because it does all at once, which it can do at a hundred times. For it admits
us to a state of Pardon, to the condition of Repentance, and the Evangelical
Mercy. He that has entered into this gate of Life, is always in the ready way
of having his Sins forgiven, unless he turns aside out of this Path, by
renouncing his Baptism, and by utter Apostasy. The Messalians denied this, and
'twas part of their Heresy to undervalue their Baptism, and to lessen the
Grace thereof Whom you will find confuted by Isidore Pelusiot, lib. 3. 195 Epist.
ad Herman.
. But it was in pursuance of this Grace of Baptism, that St. Paul calls the
lapsed Galatians to their Covenant of Baptism, and the Grace of God stipulated
in that Sacrament Gal. 3.26.
, and therefore wished them not to hope to be justified by the Law; seeing they
are entered into the Covenant of Faith, and to be justified thereby. And this he
proves, for that they have been baptized, this being the Covenant made in
Baptism, the gate to all this Mercy. Wherefore he exhorts us to hold fast the
Profession of our Faith, the Faith into which we were baptized, when we had not
only the Truth of God's Promises absolutely Sealed and Confirmed to us; but
likewise an assurance of what God is ready to do for us, in a way of Grace and
Mercy, on condition we be faithful in the duties of the Gospel. For we must
know that the Gospel-Govenant, of which Baptism is the Sign, is not without its
Conditions, which Baptism seals in a way of particular application, not only
that upon the performing our part of the Covenant, we shall obtain the Grace;
but it seals up to every receiver, their particular right in the Graces
promised. If we do not forfeit all by violating and breaking the Covenant, and
rend'ring our selves unworthy of the benefits of it. Hence the Sacrament of
Baptism is said by the Schools to be gratiae exhibitivum, an Ordinance of
exhibiting and conferring Grace to those that are rightly baptized; not by its
own Operation, but through the Operation of God alone: who in the right use of
Baptism does always perform what he has promised: For who can deny the effect
when we have God's fiat for it. Some indeed ascribe too much to Baptism, others
leave it as a mere naked Sign. The bare Element, it is true, has not a power
and virtue to convey Grace. The Water is not a subject capable to receive it,
and consequently cannot convey it; it touches not the Soul, it cannot operate
upon that, to infuse real Grace; this would be to ascribe that to the external
Instrument, which is peculiar only to the great efficient Cause. What it
conveys and confers is not from any virtue of its own, by its bare application,
but by virtue of Christ's Institution, and its relation to the Covenant. For
this Reason its effects are not confined to the instant of its Administration.
But it extends its efficacy and influence throughout our Lives, it continues a
seal to the Covenant and the promises of Grace and Mercy; till the Covenant be
utterly violated by absolute Apostasy, or final Unbelief: And so it continues
an Instrument to convey Grace during our whole Lives; not only remission of
Sins for the time present, but upon our perseverance in the conditions of Faith
and Repentance, it continues this Grace of Pardon to us to the last Period. So
that we are but once baptized for the remission of Sins; though we daily
contract Guilt; because being once received it remains a perpetual Pledge and
Testimony of the everlasting Covenant of God; and of the continual washing away
of Sin by the Blood of Christ. 'Twas therefore a causeless fear, occasioned
from the Novatian Error, that made some of the Ancients defer Baptism till
near their death, as though it did not continue to exhibit and convey the Grace
of Pardon. But from what I have already noted, there is no resting on the bare
work done: All are not upon the receiving the external Baptism regenerate, and
made partakers of internal Grace; as if it were necessarily annexed to the
outward Ordinance. Real Sanctification does not always accompany the
Ministration of Baptism Nevertheless the Ordinance is not without its effect,
in a way of Grace; it does confer on us in a Sacramental Way what it does
exhibit, and Seal to. And till there be a Bar put by Men's actual Rejection,
those that are truly baptized have a right to the Grace and Mercy sealed. And
though Baptism be not always an Instrument of infusing real Grace: Yet hereby we
are actually, and de presenti, made partakers of relative Grace; and have a
right to real sanctifying Grace, in that way that God gives it; and so are
partakers of relative Regeneration: Being as it were, born again into a new
State of gracious Relations, Privileges, and Hopes: And our Baptism is the
Character and Sacramental Seal of this new blessed State of Adoption and
Salvation. And this continues, as I have said, till there be a forfeiture on
our Part; and he that will not call this Grace, knows not how to value things
Spiritual. But how rich so ever this Baptismal Grace may be in its self and
effects, for the benefit of Infant-Innocency; it is not that which is the terms
of our Salvation in riper Age, when we come under the guilt of actual Sins:
Those that arrive to the Years of Reason and Choice, to them the Gospel tenders
Salvation upon condition of actual Faith and Repentance. What is sealed to us
in our Infant-state is, continued to us, upon other conditions at Age: The
Grace that is made over by the free Covenant of God, and sealed in Baptism,
confers a right to the baptized. So that if he dies in this State, he dies in
this right: But there are other things required for the continuance of it, at
years of Knowledge and Reason, which as it is a great Foundation of comfort
touching the Salvation of dying Infants, and justifies that Clause formerly in
the rubick for Baptism; so it destroys the vain presumptions of others, and
takes Men off from resting on the Grace of Baptism, as if it were sufficient
for their Salvation; not considering whatever Mercy or Privilege Baptism does
confirm, is continued to us upon other conditions, after we come to Age, and
fall under the guilt of actual Sins.

Again, To be baptized, is to be enrolled a Member of the Church; incorporated
into the Communion of Saints; ingrafted into Christ's Mystical Body. The
Apostle speaking of Christ Mystical, under the similitude of a natural Body, 1
Cor. 12.13. says, We are baptized into Jesus Christ, into that noble blessed
Society of which Christ is the Head; and to which belong the Adoption and the
Covenant, and the Promises. It would be too large a digression, particularly to
insist upon the Privileges and Advantages of the Church of Christ, beyond the
rest of the World. Sure I am, of all the judgments that God inflicted upon the
Jews, none had comparably that fire of Fury, that terror of Wrath in it, which
was executed in the accomplishment of the threatening mentioned, Zach. 11.9, 10.
upon their heinous Provocation, in crucifying the Lord of Life, which filled up
the number of their Sins. Upon which they were rejected, cut off from the
Olive Tree, and their Church-enclosure plucked down: So that they were no longer
his peculiar People, but were left in common with the rest of the World;
without God, without Christ, and so without all hope of Salvation. Whereas they
only that are added to the Church, that are separated to be God's peculiar
Inheritance among all the Tribes of the Earth; are in the way to be saved; as
being the sole objects of his special Care and Providence: And therefore it
must needs be a blessed Privilege to be brought within the Pale; to be owned
by God under such a Relation: Now into this Body, this Society, this holy
Corporation, we are baptized. And as the Church, in its Constitution is blessed
of God, beyond all the World: So all its Members have the advantage of other
benefits flowing from the Communion of Saints, in order to their spiritual and
eternal Good. As the labors and services of God's Ministers and Ambassadors
all are theirs, whether Paul or Apollos, or Cephas, they are all Servants of
Christ, for the edifying this his Body, and the building of them up, till they
come to Perfection. Again, they have the invisible guard of Angels, watching
over, and ministering for the good of such as are Heirs of Salvation; they have
all an interest in the Charity, Love, and Prayers of the whole Mystical Body;
all joining in common in their Liturgies for every single Member, how e're
divided from one another, by Countries and Languages; yea every single Member
of this Body has the united strength of the Prayers of all the Saints on
Earth; and I doubt not but in a general manner, the Prayers of all the glorious
Society; the crowned part of the Church in Heaven; our elder Brethren; who have
finished their warfare, and do now possess the Kingdom of Glory. Should we go
no further, we may reflect, and thankfully acknowledge, this happy Privilege;
to be called to this state of Salvation. Hence we are brought into a state of
Union with Christ; made Members of his Mystical Body, and partakers of the
influences of his favor, in all the means and ordinances, helps and
advantages, whereby he declares himself the Savior of the Body: By virtue of
this Union, all the special saving Graces of his purchase are freely offered,
the doors of Mercy stand open to us, and the gate of Life and Glory is ready to
receive us; provided we abide in him, Hold the head from which all the body, as
the Apostle says, Colos. 2.19. by joints and bands have nourishment ministered,
and so don't separate from him by Apostasy, and fall off by an evil heart of
unbelief; by an impenitent course of Sin and Wickedness; so long I say as we
maintain this Union, we shall not fail to receive influences of Grace, and
spiritul Life, till we come to Glory.

Having considered what the Sacrament of Baptism is, and the Privileges and
Advantages that redound from thence, I come to evince the truth of the general
Proposition, viz. That the Ordinance of Baptism, is the initiating Sacrament of
the New Testament, and so succeeds Circumcision, which is generally granted to
be the initating Sacrament of the Old.

In order to this, let it be premised, that there can be no Reason given, why
we should not be by some rite matriculated Members of the Christian as well as
heretofore, they were thus solemnly initiated into the Jewish Church. Now what
other way is prescribed to us of doing this, than by Baptism; the most proper
rite for this purpose, as it has been in a manner all along accounted? This
rite of Initiation, of admitting Persons into religious Societies, was used by
the Posterity of Noah, at least very early among the Jews. Their Enquiry, John
1.25, 28. sounds as much as a tacit acknowledgment of their practicing it, Vid.
Wills against Danvers, page 7.
(though not as a Sacrament till the Messiah had confirmed it); for which we
have the Testimonies of their Rabbis, cited by the learned Doctor Hammond In
his Query of Infant Baptism.
. And Bishop Tailor is inclined to give the more credit to such Authorities;
because the Heathen (as he says) had the same Rite in many Places, and in many
Religions. Hence a Proselyte is called in Arrianus (...) one baptized: Baptism
being his solemn Investiture, who should enter into any Sect or Religion; being
thereupon reckoned one of that Sect or Religion. A Proselyte or Convert, in the
Apostle's Phrase, such an one is said to be added to the Church. The Jews have
a Tradition that Sarah and Rebeckah, when they were adopted into the Family of
the Church; that is the Church respectively, as it was in Abraham's and Isaac's
House, were baptized. In St. Paul's Catechism Baptism is reckoned, as part of
the Foundation of the first Principles of Religion; and so proper for Babes:
Whereby they are matriculated and adopted (as a late Reverend Prelate
expresses it) into the House of their Father, and taken into the hands of
their Mother. This then is the ordinary method God has taken of adding to the
Church, such as should be saved: And therefore it cannot be denied, but that
Baptism, as an initiating Rite, succeeds Circumcision: And my Text will avouch
for the truth thereof: For the Apostle having told the Colossians, that they
had the Circumcision made without hands, the Circumcision of the Heart: He
further signifies, by way of implication, that they had as good as the outward
Circumcision too, by being baptized; or he could have no occasion to add,
buried with him in Baptism. And his Argument had been a mere Non sequitur,
unless he gave them to understand thereby, that Baptism succeeded, and came in
place of Circumcision. And that this was the genuine Sense and intendment of
the Apostle, I have, I conceive, not only more fully illustrated, but
demonstrated in the foregoing Discourse Page 43.
, whereto I refer the Reader.

I proceed in the third Place to show, that as Christ's Death, so his Burial
and Resurrection are not only exemplified in the Ceremony and manner of its
Administration; but that they ought to be exemplified after a spiritual manner,
in the blessed effects and fruits of that Holy Sacrament, viz. In our
Mortification and Vivification.

First, As to the Symbol or Ceremony, Christ's Burial and Resurrection may be,
and are represented in the external Action of that Sacrament, or manner of its
admistration. And the Apostle seems to allude to a Practice, which might then
be used by some in those hot Countries, viz. Of dipping or putting the whole
Body under Water in Baptism. But forasmuch as the Word Baptize, carries not
always that signification, or import; and for that there is no Command, that
Baptism should be always administered exactly after that manner, such a Practice
cannot be binding to us: So that should it be granted, that there are some very
probable instances and examples in Scripture, of dipping and immerging the
whole Body in Baptism, as it must be granted, there are as likely examples and
instances of only sprinkling and pouring on of Water: This will only argue,
that we cannot thereby be bound up to either way. But are at liberty to
administer it, according to the more prevailing custom, where we live.
Moreover, this Ceremony of dipping cannot be practiced toward Infants, without
great inconvenience and even danger of their Lives, in so tender an Age, and in
so cold a Country as ours is; especially in the Winter Season.

But here the Anabaptists step in, and urge from hence their way of dipping,
and think this is enough for them, not only to plead in their own
justification, but to confute our way of baptizing, only by sprinkling or
pouring on of Water. Accordingly a certain Person who takes upon him, to Answer
my foregoing Discourse, has these very words: Baptism must be by dipping, not
sprinkling; because Baptism rightly administered, does figure out the Death,
Burial, and Resurrection of Christ. But I know not wherein sprinkling does it.
And then citing Romans 6.3, 4. he immediately subjoyns: When the Body is put down
under Water, O what resemblance is this of the Burial of Christ. And the rising
of the Body up out of the Water of his Resurrection! This is not so pointed
out, by sprinkling. Now for Answer hereto, to avoid Repetition; see the Reply,
Page the 80. And grant that we do not in our way of administering at least so
exactly and fully represent Christ's Burial and Resurrection; of which, as I
have shown, there is no absolute necessity that it should be so done in the
Ceremony; it will concern us nevertheless to consider, how we may be said to be
buried and risen with Christ, in a spiritual figurative Sense; and to see, that
the fruits and consequence of our Baptism do answer, as his Death, so his
Burial; which speaks not only our dying unto Sin, but our continuing and
persevering in this state of Mortification, and likewise his Resurrection in
our symbolizing therewith, in rising to newness of Life.

First, As to our Burial with Christ, our Savior's lying three Days in the
Grave, puts it beyond all doubt, that he was in the state of the Dead; so true
believers are buried with him. But how can that be, you will say, that we who are
true believers suppose, being yet living, can be buried with him, we never were
laid in the Grave? Surely not in our Lords! Which was situate on Mount
Calvary, nigh to Jerusalem; places very distant from our abode. But we must
know that it is not a natural, but a Mystical Grave or Sepulcher that the
Apostle refers to, and so we may be said, in a figurative Sense, to be buried
with Christ, and that in a double Respect. First, In regard of our
justification for the remission of Sins. Secondly, With respect to our
sanctification and the mortification of the old Man. Concerning the first, it is
certain, as he was not crucified and put to Death, so neither was he buried,
which is nothing but the consequent of Death, but for us; and having under-gone
Death, and descended to the dismal state of the Grave for our Salvation; it is
evident, that when he was buried, we were buried in him and with him; since
'twas properly for us that he descended into the Grave; in that his burial has
discharged this part of our Punishment, and consequently has changed the
nature of our Graves, that instead of being Prisons and Places of Execution,
our Graves are now so many Beds, and Dormitories; wherein our Bodies do repose
until the Resurrection. But it is not in this sense that the Apostle says here
we are buried with Christ, but he speaks rather of the first Part of our
Sanctification, the Mortification of the old Man in us and its Burial, that is
the bringing of it to naught; forasmuch as by Christ's Death and Burial, our
old Man the body of Sin has been destroyed and suffered a Death and Burial,
like to Christ's; that as his Flesh after it was deprived of Life, was laid in
the Grave, in like manner the old Man of true Believers having been slain, is
interred. It Is in him and with him that we have been buried in this sort. If he
had not suffered the one and the other for our Salvation, had not I say his
Death and Holy Sepulcher derived unto us an Image and a Copy of his Burial,
destroying and burying by the virtue and merits thereof, our old Man, and
bringing on him a Mystical Death and Burial, Sin would still live and reign in
us. In like manner the latter Clause of my Text must be so understood, viz.
That Christ by virtue of his Resurrection does work and produce one in us,
which has Resemblance and Analogy with his own, viz. A Resurrection to a new
Spiritual and Evangelical Life, instead of that vile and wretched Life which we
had by Nature; without which we had lain still dead and in bondage to Sin. For
that which forms in us the new Man, and gives us the courage to renounce the
World, that we may live above the World, is the persuasion of the love of God,
and the pardon of our Sins, together with the hope of a blissful glorious
Immortality, of which he gives us assurance, from his having taken possession
of the same for himself and us. These are the blessed effects and fruits
issuing, as from the Death, so from the Burial and Resurrection of Christ,
which are sealed to us in the Ordinance of Baptism. Indeed all the means and
ordinances which God has appointed, and enjoined us to make use of in
Religion, have no other tendency, but to communicate Jesus Christ to us, as
dead, buried, and risen again for us, to the destroying of the old Man, and
reviving the new; nor do they ever fail to produce these effects, in any of
those that receive them as they ought, and are not wanting in their Duty. But
the Apostle speaks here only of Baptism, the first and proper Sacrament, or
means of Regeneration. So treating of the same Subject elsewhere Romans 6.3.
, where, he expresses himself in like manner; which should confute their
folly, who withstood one of the old Sacraments of Moses, its giving place to
this of Christ's institution, so productive of this double effect, and which is
also represented as our Apostle here intimates, and as I have already observed,
in the external Action, and manner of Administration. But suppose sprinkling
does not carry so express a Figure of Christ's Burial and Resurrection, as that
of immersion or dipping; nevertheless the virtue of Holy Baptism is still the
same. If therefore we meet with any baptized Persons, as there are but too many
such, in whom the old Man is so far from being buried, that he lives and reigns
with absolute Power; and the new Man has neither Life nor Action at all: It
may not be imputed to Christ, who always accompanies his Sacraments with his
saving virtue; but unto their own unbelief, who do wretchedly repel the
operation of the Grace God, and obstruct the effects which he would have
assuredly produced in them, if their unworthiness had not frustrated his
efficacy toward them: And therefore it is added, Through the faith of the
operation of God, an evident Token, that the Sacrament does mortify Sin in us,
and raise us to Holiness, according to the Faith it meets with in us. Now how
happy should we be, if we had these things Written and Engraven in deep Letters
on our Hearts; if our actions did justify our Profession; that we are buried,
and risen again with Christ in Baptism, by the faith of the operation of God;
but alas, it must be confessed to our shame, there appears in the lives of most
of us, a very imperfect Idea, of the Burial, and least of all of the
Resurrection of Christ, the Flesh lives and exercises great Tyranny in us. The
new Man, that breaths nothing but Heaven, and loves nothing but Holiness, has
no place in us; it is so far from reigning there, that he, acts no more than a
dead Body fast shut up in the Grave. There is no need to run to Palestine, nor
to go up to Mount Calvary, for to enter into his Sepulcher, you are entered
into it, and buried with him, if by Faith you do mortify and destroy the Body
of Sin; to this end we are baptized. Nor is it a whit the more necessary for
having part in his Resurrection, to go and kiss the last Print of his Feet,
upon M. Olivet. We are risen with him, if being affected with the glory he
brought out of his Tomb, and convinced of the truth of the discoveries he made
of a blessed Immortality, we live, as becomes the Gospel, in all holy
Conversation; all the Graces and Privileges, of which Baptism is a sign and
seal on God's Part, are continued to us upon performance of that Duty, to which
Baptism is an Engagement on our Part; and there is no Grace of God, but tends
to lay an Obligation on us. The Grace which has appeared unto us in the Gospel
teaches us to deny ungodliness and worldly Lusts, and to live righteously and
holily; for it is naturally inconsistent, that we should be happy partakers of
the blessed effects of God's Love and Favor, and the merits of Christ; unless
we be holy: and therefore, as we have the privilege to be buried with Christ
in Baptism, or to be baptized into him, so it is necessary that we put on
Christ, as our great Lawgiver and Example, to live according to the rule of his
holy Doctrine and Precept, and to walk in that way which he has trod before
us. For in the Institution of Baptism our Lord did not only design a benefit to
us; so as to make it an Instrument of Advantage in a way of Grace, but also to
bring us under an Obligation of Duty. As then we value the Privilege; let us
not neglect the Duty. As we are glad of the mercy offered: So let us mind the
Stipulation on our Part, what an obligation lies upon us, to live a Christian
life, solemnly to resolve upon the profession and practice of the Law of
Christ, according to our utmost Capacity, and the Ability God has given us: So
that though in our Infancy, the faith and repentance of our Parents or
Proparents, such I mean by whom we are adopted, may be reckoned as ours by
virtue of God's Promise to Believers and their Seed: Yet if in due time, we do
not personally believe and repent, our Baptism is made frustrate and vain, it is
then in our Choice, either to rescind or annul our Baptism, and to turn
Heathens or Apostates: Or to ratify and confirm the same. If we disclaim and
renounce our Baptism: We do in effect disclaim and renounce all Right and
Title, claim and interest in the promises of Christ; we cast him off, tread his
Blood under Foot, as an unholy Thing: Neither can we expect any strength from
him against Temptations; but are left in the Power, and under the dominion of
all Sin and Villainy. We renounce the Article of remission of Sins, and the
claim and right which otherwise we might have to everlasting Life. But if we
submit to the terms of the Covenant, and embrace the Conditions, we stand
obliged and bound to lead a mortified and a Holy Life; to be implanted into the
similitude of Christ's Death and Resurrection; or we make void the Grace of
God, and most unworthily forfeit and reject it, by breaking Covenant with him.
These things being considered, we cannot choose but confess, that as it was a
great act of Charity in our Friends, so early to engage us in so beneficial an
Indenture: So we are bound to stand to their Engagement, which they made in our
Name, and to observe the Conditions of it, through the whole course of our
Lives; especially considering, that as God has by his own Institution and
Appointment, put us under a strict Obligation of Duty, so we have by our
Baptism submitted to the terms, and actually undertaken the Conditions. Having
to this purpose entered into a most solemn League and Covenant, and as it were
subscribed thereunto; promising and vowing unto God, to answer our Engagement,
to our utmost Ability: So that the Vow and Covenant of God is upon us, to live
as his Servants, as Men who are dead to Sin, and alive unto God: Know you not?
was the sharp and cutting expostulation of St. Paul to all licentious
Christians; Romans 6.3. who presume, when once they are baptized into the Church
of Christ, and profess themselves Christians, and partake of the Ordinances,
they may then live as they list, and be saved however. This is intimated in the
first Verse of that 6th to the Romans, where it is said, Let us continue in sin
that grace may abound; as if some had thus flattered themselves, that though
they continued in the course of their Sins, yet however grace and mercy from
Christ would abound toward them and save them. But the Apostle, as startled at
such an Imagination, cries out, God forbid! God forbid such a horrid thought
should possess any of our Hearts; and then subjoyns the impossibility, that any
such foul imagination should prevail upon the Heart and life of any regenerate
Christian; which would be as strange a Prodigy, as if the dead should rise out
of their Graves, and Walk, and Live, as they did in their life time; and
thereupon he bids them to look to their Baptism; for that they cannot be
Ignorant, that when they were baptized into Christ Jesus, they were baptized
into his death; and here in my Text, buried with him in Baptism. And does the
Death, the Burial of Christ, stand for a Cipher? Has Christ his Death and
Burial, no tie upon us in this holy Sacrament? Has it no Power, Virtue, or
Influence? Certainly it has done us little good, if we exemplify it not in
the death and mortification of Sin: This is the duty of every baptized
Christian. So far necessary, that we can have no benefit by our Baptism, no
portion in Christ, or in his Death and Burial, but by our being dead and even
buried unto Sin.

If it be said, how must we be thus dead to Sin, to have any share in Christ
and his Death? For we cannot say we are dead to it, we find it still lively and
stirring in us, and too much prevailing with us. I answer, We are then dead to
Sin, when we live not any longer therein. And that is (to expound the Apostle's
meaning) First, When we do not only refrain, and forbear our Sins for a while,
but do really aim at no less than the mortification of our Lusts. Secondly,
When though we are not quite dead to Sin, yet we are not dead in Sin, but are
sensible of the Venom and Sting of it. Thirdly, When though we cannot live, and
not Sin; yet we do not live in it: It Is not as our Life, so far from that, that
it is grievous to us, it is as Death. Lastly, When, though our Sins be not quite
dead, yet they are languishing and decaying, in a lingering and dying state:
and if we commit Sin; yet we do not continue in it, but repent and turn from
it. But how shall we, you will say, thus mortify our Sins? Why we must fetch our
Weapons against our prevailing Lusts from our Baptism: As David took the smooth
Stones out of the Brook of Water, with which he slew Goliath, 1 Samuel 17.40. So
ought we to draw help and directions, from the Water of Baptism, to deaden the
force of the most Giant-like Sin, and to lay it at our Feet: Yea our Baptism
does not only direct us herein, holding forth the conditions on our Part, what
Duty is incumbent upon us, and likewise empower and enable us for the
Encounter, as it conveys unto us the Grace of God, and the assistance of his
Spirit; but moreover it obliges us thereto in the highest nature, by the most
solemn and the strongest Bonds that may be; in that we Vow to God through
Christ to perform it. The firmest Obligation imaginable; upon the deepest
penalty, as ever we hope to have an interest in Christ, or in the Death of
Christ, q. d. we disclaim all hope and interest in Christ, and his Death, if we
be not the Death of every ruling Sin in us. This surely is enough to make us
bestir our selves; and set upon it, and even to compel us to it. When the forty
Jews, ( Act. 23.12.) Bound themselves with an Oath, that they would neither eat
nor drink, till they had killed Paul; how did the consciousness of this Oath
urge them to lie in wait for him! v. 16. and how resolved were they upon his
Death with all suddenness! And we, says they, e're he come near, are ready to
kill him, v. 15. We are under such an Oath to God by our Vow of Baptism, to
mortify and kill our prevailing Sins; as these were to kill Paul; theirs was
unjust, to murder an Innocent; ours most just and necessary, to Execute the
greatest Traitor in the World. And therefore let us remember, when our hearts
would fain spare our Sins, and any way indulge them: That this sacred Vow is
upon us. What was the Reason Jonathan durst venture to taste of the Honey in the
Wood, when the Israelites durst not touch it, 1 Samuel 14.27? He considered not
the Oath by which he and they were obliged not to eat of it. So why do you thus
follow and pursue such and such a pleasing profitable Sin? You mind not the
Oath, the Sacrament, the Vow, in which you are obliged, not to taste such
forbidden Fruit; but on the contrary to renounce the devil and all his works,
the pomps and vanities of this wicked world, and all the sinful lusts of the
flesh. But to come more near and home in the way of Application; Is Baptism an
Ordinance that engages us to Duty, and that as the Condition of the continuance
of the Benefits contained in the Promises and Covenant to which it is the Seal?
We see what a Foundation of loose vain hope, a bare Baptismal Christianity is:
What slight tinctured Christians those are, that have only the outward washing
of Baptism, but abandon the practice of a Christian Life: Who please themselves
in a Sign, without the effect; and boast themselves in a Figure and Shadow,
without the Substance and Grace of it. The Baptism of Water, howsoever it may
avail us in the state of Infancy, in which state God requires no actual
Performance of Duty: Yet when we grow up to Years of Knowledge and Reason, and
come under the Law of Duty, it avails nothing, without the Baptism of the
Spirit in actual Regeneration and Sanctification; I mean without an actual
Repentance and Abrenunciation of Sin and Satan, and the practice of a Holy
Life. Our Baptism will but remain as a Testimony against us of our perfidious
violation of the Covenant of God, and of the falseness and treachery of our
evil Hearts, who pretend to be and own our selves the Subjects and Servants of
Jesus Christ, and yet basely revolt from and disobey him: This is to speak
Christ fair, and then to betray him. Men's receiving the name of Christ's
Disciples and Servants in Baptism, makes the Disobedience of their sinful Lives
more hateful and abominable. In this respect some had an erroneous conceit of
Old, which made them defer their Baptism, thinking they had a greater Liberty
before than after their Baptism; and therefore were wont to say in St. Austin's
time, Sine illum facere, nondum baptizatus est; let him alone, he is not yet
baptized; implying the strict Obligation that lies upon Men by Baptism unto
Holiness of Life: What is Christian Baptism without a Christian Life? It Is not
this external Badge or Cognizance, it is not a common profession that follows
it, that will be a Title to Heaven. It Is in vain to pretend that we have been
baptized into Christ, or are buried with him in Baptism, and have made
profession of his name; if we be workers of iniquity; our doom at last will be
to depart from him. That which is most material and considerable in our
Baptism, and which most contributes to our eternal Interest and Salvation, is
not (as at first I noted from St. Peter) the putting away the filth of the
Flesh: But the Answer of a good Conscience toward God. What then does our
Conscience answer, touching the performance of the Conditions on our Part? We
build our hopes and confidences upon the Sands, unless we keep the Faith
whereinto we are baptized, and perform the Duty to which our Baptism obliges.
How vainly do Men bear themselves up, upon the Title of an outward Baptism, as
if thereby they were good Christians! though the course of their Lives be a
flat Contradiction to the holiness and purity of the Christian Religion, and in
effect the renouncing of it! The truth is, there is a sad answering of this
Engagement, in the generality of those that are baptized. What backsliding
from, and violations of the baptismal Covenant! From the observation of whose
Lives, a Heathen might conclude, as Salvian complained of old, Si Christus
sancta docuisset, if Christ had taught holiness, why don't Christians practice
it? Either, as he goes on, your Christ is no God, who allows such evil Lives,
or you are no Christians who practice such Things. Are they Christians, are
they dedicated to the honor and service of God, the Father, Son and Holy
Ghost, who lead such impure Lives, who slight the ways of Religion, and set at
naught the Laws and Commands of Christ, and are so devoted to the ways of their
own evil hearts? Would Men but consider how they have performed their Covenant
with God, into which they were entered by Baptism, and what an aggravation of
the Sin of their unholy unchristan Life arises hence, this must needs give a
check to their sinful Carreer. If Infidels, and they that know not God do
Blaspheme his holy Name, and fight against Heaven by their open Impieties, this
is no such great Wonder; but for you that have given up your names unto Christ,
that have dedicated your selves by Covenant to his Honor and Service, to break
those sacred Bonds, and to stand it out in your Impenitency and Rebellion
against God, and to live like Gentiles, his professed Enemies; to forsake him
and his ways, and to wallow in the impurities of an evil Conversation, is
unaccountable. How dreadful will the Day be, when the Lord shall come to avenge
him of his Adversaries? You shall not perish under such easy Circumstances of
Wrath and Vengeance, as do the Gentiles. The Aggravation of your Sin and
Judgment will be the treading under Foot the Blood of the Covenant. Thus far in
general.

But to proceed to some particulars, and so to make some further improvement,
by way of use, of what has been delivered on this Subject. Does holy Baptism
admit us to a state of such high Privileges and Advantages, as I have
observed? Then we may see how injurious they are who deny Baptism to Infants;
and so as much as lies in them keep them from Christ, I mean in the visible
way, in which we are brought unto Christ; from that Grace, which is the
internal mystery of this sacramental Ordinance. In which respect we are said to
be baptized into Christ, if they have any right to the grace and spiritual
Benefits, which are the Mystery, the Spirit and Life of this Sacrament, why not
to the external Symbolical signification and Seal of it? Shall Men hinder them
from this visible application of the Grace of Baptism? If we affirm they have
no right to this Grace, what greater uncharitableness and presumptuous
straightning the favor of God and Christ? For where has he debarred and
excluded them from his Covenant and Promises, and cast them out of that Body,
whereof he is the Head, and the Savior. Certain it is, this was one of the
great Blessings of the Covenant with Abraham; I will be thy God, and the God of
thy Children after thee. Thus ran the Promises of old, He shows mercy unto
thousands of generations of them that love him, and keep his commandments; the
seed of the righteous is blessed: Children are the heritage of the Lord. They
had the Seal of the Covenant, Circumcision externally applying the Promises:
And are the favors of Christ more narrow under the Gospel, who is yet the
Mediator of a better Covenant? Has Christ only a love for the Parents, and none
for the Children? and yet has told us, if the root be holy, so are the
branches; Is not Christ the Redeemer of Infants? Did he purchase no Pardon, no
Grace, or remission of Sins for them? How abominably injurious would this be to
Christ, and the fullness of his Oblation and Merit! Will Christ give them no
place in his mystical Body, in his Church and Kingdom? And yet, when he was
upon Earth, commanded the little Children to be brought unto him, and took them
into his Arms, and blessed them, declaring that such did belong to his Kingdom;
of such is the kingdom of God, Mark 13.14. If the Infants of Believers under
the Gospel be not capable of the Grace signed and sealed, then there will
follow many sad unscriptural Consequences: Then they belong not to the Church
and Body of Christ, they are in the same Case with the Children of Infidels,
left without as common and unclean. This Principle mingles the holy Seed with
the Heathens, and renders the favors of the Gospel more narrow than those of
the legal Covenant, and the Christian Seed in much worse Circumstances, than
the Jewish. Yea they would not only be without the Church, but without the
Covenant; and so without Christ, or any special relation to him. So far without
as are the Gentiles, Dogs and Strangers: While they are disputed out of the
Covenant, all well grounded hopes of their Justification and Salvation are
disputed away, dying in that State. It Is vain to recur to the secret Election
of God, for the grounds of this Hope. Faith and Hope must be grounded upon some
Word of God: If God have excluded them from the Covenant of Salvation, how
shall we conclude that they belong to the Election of God? And if the Case were
so, well may the Parents of dying Infants, mourn over them as those that have
no hope. All those then are rash groundless uncharitable Conclusions, highly
derogatory to the Love of God, to the infinite riches and freeness of his
Grace. But on the other hand, if God and Christ have not excluded them from the
Grace of Baptism, the Mercy and Grace which is there signified, who shall
forbid Water, the external sealing Application? If God have not denied the
greater, who shall deny the less; if God have not excluded them from the
Substance and Mystery, why shall they be denied the external Rite and Symbol?
Either then they must be highly uncharitable, in denying Infants the Grace of
Baptism, and so leave them in an evil Case; or else be very unjust, in denying
them the Seal, where God grants them the substance.

Thirdly, Let this serve to humble those that walk unworthy of this Privilege
of being baptized, and thereby admitted into the fellowship of Christ's
Religion, initiated Members of his Church. Can it seem a light thing in our
Eyes, that when God has passed by the greatest part of the World, as strangers
from his Family and Kingdom, and has left them under the Kingdom of Satan, and
taken us, no better by Nature than they are, to be his peculiar ones, into
Covenant with himself, and to train us up under such heavenly Ordinances: We
should notwithstanding walk as Rebels and Enemies unto him, like the unbaptized
World? Do we know into what a Covenant he has taken us, what he has done for,
and expects from us? What means then our Conversation, so repugnant to our
Profession? Is it because we renounce the Covenant, as being made when we
understood it not? If there be any such Apostates, let them take their Course,
serve the God they have chosen. But say what iniquity, what ill is there in
this Covenant of your Baptism, what disadvantage have you met withal? Or how,
or where do you hope to find better things, than what are here exhibited and
ensured? Than, for instance, for God to be your Father, Christ your Savior,
the Spirit your Comforter; than to have your Sins pardoned and remitted; than
to be adopted, justified, sanctified, and every way comfortably provided for
here, and in the end eternally saved. Do the Gods you have chosen to serve
provide better things than these, that you renounce Christ for their sake? If
you say God forbid you should so do, you hope to be saved by him, as well as
any other; then tell me seriously, do you expect that Christ should stand bound
to perform his Part of the Covenant, and you left at liberty, whether you
discharge your part or no? That he should love you, and you hate him? That he
should be your God, and you remain the Devil's Servants? That he should provide
Heaven for you, and you walk in the way that leads to Hell? Be not deceived, he
has sworn the contrary, and has heaped up Tribulation and Wrath for every
Soul that does Evil. For that Person more especially, who, though baptized,
has profaned and made the Blood of the Covenant as an unholy Thing.

Fourthly, Let the consideration of this great Privilege excite us to a Holy
Life, to live as Men who are dead to Sin, and alive unto God. To make account,
that it ought to be as strange, to see a baptized Person walk in a sinful
Course, as to see a Spectrum a walking Ghost at Noonday: We are buried with
Christ in Baptism; And how can we, who are dead to Sin, live any longer
therein? says the Apostle. So that we are or should be at least as it were
dead and buried to Sin; and that this may be the rather effected, and brought
to pass, we must be mortified as to the World. To this use the Apostle seems to
apply the Argument of the Text in the following Chapter, to call off Men's
affections from earthly Things, toward the Things that are above. There is
acted a kind of Similitude upon the baptized to the Burial and Resurrection of
Christ. And we profess in a spiritual Sense to be dead to the World, and to be
risen again to a more Noble and Divine Life, so as to be above the World: And
it is the Engagement of Baptism to be as it were dead and buried, with respect
to the Things here below. Thus some interpret that of the 1 Cor. 15.29. where
the Apostle arguing against the Atheists and Sadducees who denied the
Resurrection, and the hopes of Glory in another Life, says, What shall they do
that are baptized, (...), for dead Men, or as dead Men, into a mortification of
this World, so as to run all Losses, Dangers and Hazards for the Profession of
Christ; such would then be of all Men most miserable, if things were so as the
Sadducees and Atheists suggest. But certainly, there is a glorious state of
eternal Life hereafter, and therefore let us not be befooled with the Snares of
earthly Vanities, to neglect things Eternal: Our Baptism engages us to live
above the World, to be dead to it, to have mortified Affections to the things
thereof. The World indeed affords lawful comforts for the living, and
convenient resting Places for the dead; but their Souls are above: So should
Christians be in the World; use it, as it does administer to their necessities,
and conveniences, but the Soul, the affections should be above. We are not dead
Naturally, and so there is need, and there must be a using of the World; but we
must be dead spiritually to every thing in it, that is matter of allurement and
temptation, to draw us aside from God; and must be strangers to such immoderate
cares and desires, as drown multitudes of Men in Perdition.

Lastly, Let this serve to comfort those whom God Honors so far as to bring
them thus near unto himself; as to adopt them into his Family, and to take them
for his own. Let this encourage them to believe in him, and to rely upon him
for all the good things, that he has promised in the Covenant of Grace. They
of the Church of Rome, as in some things they give and ascribe too much to
Baptism, making it to take away original Sin, by the mere applying of the
Ordinance; so in other things, they rob God's People of the comfortable use of
it, because they say, when once we commit actual Sins after the susception of
Baptism, we make Shipwreck of our Baptism, and then Penance must be secunda
tabula post naufragium; the only Pinnace or Plank which we can safely catch
hold of in this extremity. But this blessed Sacrament is of a more durable and
comfortable use, even to be an Ark, (whereto it is assimulated, 1 Pet. 3.21.) to
carry us to Heaven. It Is not a business past and finished in the very Act of
its Administration. There are in it Promises of such Grace as we may still have
need of, and by its engaging us to Mortification and Holiness, (the most
comprehensive Duties of Christianity,) we may experience it to be an Instrument
of Grace throughout the whole transaction of our Lives: That is, when it is from
time to time improved, and actuated by a sober Consideration, and a serious
Recognizing of the Baptismal Covenant, and reflecting on the Terms and
Conditions upon which we stand with God, with respect to Justification and
Glory: And when the same is pressed home by the conviction of the Spirit. These
things being premised, we may readily Conclude, what an effectual Instrument
and Means it may prove of converting the Souls of Men, and regenerating them
long after the time of its reception. So that Holy Baptism continues still to
be altogether as effectual to apply the Blood of Christ, for washing away of
Sin, upon true Repentance, as when we first received it. Know then, that when
ever we find our selves at a loss, sensible of our undone Condition, conscious
of our Guilt and Bondage through Sin, and so do fly by Faith unto Christ, and
our Conscience bears us Witness, that we would fain Walk for the time to come,
according to the rule of the Covenant, in Uprightness and Sincerity; as often,
I say, as we do this, we may have recourse to our Baptism, and plead it for our
Comfort; as we may plead the Rainbow in great Inundations against the World's
destruction by Water. Thus upon the renewing of our Repentance, and Faith in
Christ, Holy Baptism will be as an Ark to the Soul in all Cases of Relapse,
Desertion, and Temptation. For the like figure whereunto does baptism also now
save us, says the Apostle. Which that it may so prove to every one of us, and
particularly to the Person that has even now received it, God of his infinite
mercy Grant, for Jesus Christ his sake. To whom, etc.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 5. line 19. read putting. p. 12. l. 12. r. token p. 17. l. 18. r.
Gentiles. p. 18. l. 16. r. the Case. p. 19. in marg. r. Rodolpho. p. 28. marg.
l. 30. r. Canon. p. 31. marg. l. 15. r. eadem. p. 33. l. 30. r. Independent. p.
34. l. 32. blot out has. p. 76. l. 20. blot out as. p. 83. l. 13. r. not to be.

A Catalogue of Books Printed for, and sold by John Tailor, at the Ship in St.
Paul's Churchyard.
POOL's Annotations on the Holy Bible, in 2 Vol. The 4th Edition: Much
corrected. Folio. Philips's New World of Words; or an Universal English
Dictionary, containing the Proper Significations, and Derivations of all Words
from other Languages, etc. The Fifth Edition, with large Additions and
Improvements from the best English and Foreign Authors. Folio. Archbishop
Usher's Life, and Letters, Published by Dr. Parr, his Grace's Chaplain. Folio.
Archbishop Usher's Sermons. Folio. The History of England. By Dr. Frankland.
Folio. Love's whole Art of Surveying, and Measuring of Land, made easy: With
plain and practical Rules, how to survey, protract, cast up, reduce or divide
any Piece of Land whatsoever. 4 to. Strode's New and Easy Method to the Art of
Dyalling. 4 to. -- His Arithmetical Treatise of the Permutations, Combinations,
Elections, and Compositions of Quantities. 4 to. Miracles performed by Money. A
Poem. 4 to. Godwin's Roman and Jewish Antiquities. 4 to. Bishop Hopkins on the
Lord's Prayer and Commandments. 4 to. Happy Union betwixt England and Holland.
4 to. Lord Shannon's Letter to an, Atheistical Acquaintance. 4 to. Reasons why
a Protestant should not turn Papist. 4 to. Rich's Epistle to the seven
Churches. 4 to. Religio Militis. 4 to. Archbishop Cranmer's Judgment on the
Holy Scriptures, Published by Dr. Gee. 4 to. Baxter's Church History and
Episcopacy. 4 to. Mr. Boyle's free Enquiry into the Vulgarly received Notion of
Nature. In English and Latin. 8 vo -- His Disquisition of the Final Causes of
Natural Things. 8 vo. -- Of Languid and Local Motion. 8 vo. Abbadie of the
Truth of the Christian Religion. 8 vo. Quintilian's Declamations. 8 vo. Dr.
Newton's Complete Arithmetician. 8 vo. Counselor Manner's Legacy to his Son. 8
vo. Ray's Nomenclator Classicus, sive Dictionariolum Trilingue. A Classical
Nomenclator, with the Gender and Declension of each Word, and the Quantities of
the Syllables, etc. For the use of Schools. 8 vo. Robertson's Large and General
Phrase-Book. 8 vo. Dr. Owen's Meditations of the Glory of Christ. Yworth's
whole Art of Practical Distillation. 8 vo. Bishop Hopkins Sermons and
Discourses, in Four Volumes. 8 vo. Dr. Salmon's Practical Physic, showing the
Method of curing the most usual Diseases happening to Humane Bodies; the whole
completed in Three Books. 8 vo. Lord Shannon's Discourses for the Modish
Ladies and their Gallants. 8 vo. Mrs Eliz. Walker's Life and Character 8 vo.

