A RELIGIOUS AND WORTHY SPEECH SPOKEN BY Mr. ROVSE IN PARLIAMENT.

CONCERNING THE GOODS, LIBERTJES, And Lives, of his Majesty's Subjects.

Laying open, the Paintings that are used by the Whore of Rome, and
Arminianisme amongst Us, to draw the people thereby to Idolatry.

By which means, they seek both to take away our wealth and Religion, and the
dangerous Consequence thereof.

With the near Correspondencie, and Alliance, that is apparently evident to be
between our Bishops, and the Bishop of ROME.

And the Remedy propounded, to redress all such Greevances.

London, Printed for W. H. 1641.

A Religious and VVorthie Speech Spoken in the High Court of Parliament by Mr.
Rouse.
Mr Speaker.
WE have of late entered into the consideration of the Petition of Right, and
the violation of it, and upon good reason; for it concerns our Goods,
Liberties, and Lives.

But there is a Grant of higher Nature, that preserves for us far greater
things; eternal life, our soul, yea God himself. A writ of Religion derived
to us from the King of Kings, confirmed to us by the King of this Kingdom,
enacted by Law in this place, streaming down to us in the blood of the
Martyrs, witnessed from heaven by miracles, and miraculous wonders, and
deliverances. And this right, in the name of this Nation, I this day claim,
and desire, that there be a serious consideration had of the violation of it:
my desire is, that it may be considered, what new paintings are laid upon the
face of the whore of Rabylon, to make her seem more lovely, and to draw so
many the more Suitors to her. J desire it may be consisidered, how the Sea of
Rome, does eat into our Religion, and fret into the banks and walls of it.

The Laws and Statutes of this Realm, especially since those Laws have been
made in manner by themselves, even by their own treasons, and bloody Designs.

And since that Popery is a confused mist of Error, casting down Kings before
Popes, the precepts of God, before the traditions of men, living and reasonable
men before dead, and senseles stocks and stones: I desire, that we consider the
increase of Arminianisme, and Error, that makes the grace of God, look after
the will of men: that makes the sheep to keep the shepherd, and make a
mortal seed an immortal God. I desire, that we may look into the belly, and
bowels of this Trojan Horse, to see if there be no man in it, ready to open the
gate of Romish tyranny, and Spanish Monarchy; for Arminianisme is the span of a
papist, and if there come the warmth of favor, you shall see him turn into
one of those frogs, that arises out of the bottomless pit.

And if you mark it well, you shall see an Arminian, reaching one hand to a
papist, a papist to a Jesuit, a Jesuit one hand to the Pope, and the other to
the King of Spain: and these men having kindled fire in our
Neighbor-countries, now they have brought some of it over hither, to set on
flame this Kingdom also.

Yea let us consider, and search, whether these be not the men, that break in
upon the goods, and liberties of this Commonwealth; for by this means, they
may make way, for the taking away of our Religion. It was an old trick of the
Devil, when he went to take away Jobs religion, he began at his goods. Lay
thy hand on all that he has, and he will curse thee to thy face.

Either they think hereby, to set distaste betwixt Prince and people, or to
find some other way of supply to avoid, and break Parliaments, that so they
may break in upon our religion, and bring in their own errors.

But let us do, as Job did, he held fast his religion, and then his goods
were restored with advantage. And if we hold fast God and our religion, these
things will be added unto us. Let us consider the times past, how we flourished
in honor, when religion flourished amongst us: but as religion decayed, so the
honor and state of this Nation decayed.

When the soul of a Commonwealth is dead, the body cannot long over-live it.
If a man meet a dog alone, the dog is fearful, though never so fierce by
nature: but if that dog have his Master by him, he will set upon that man, from
whom he fled before.

This shows, that low natures being backed by higher, increase in strength
and courage: and certainly, a man backed with omnipotence, is a kind of
omnipotent thing; all things are possible to him that believes, and, all
things being possible, there is a kind of omnipotence in them.

Wherefore, now let it be the unanimous consent, as our resolution formerly
was, to make a vow, and Covenant, from henceforth to hold fast our God, and
Religion, and then shall we from henceforth, certainly expect Prosperity, in
this our Kingdom, and Nation, and to this, let every one say,

Amen.
A Correspondency of the Pope with our Bishops.
THe Pope writes himself Father, so do they write themselves reverend
Fathers. The Pope sells sin for money, so do they, as the whole Kingdom, and
their Officers can well tell; and does nothing without money so do they. The
Pope forbids marriage and meats, and, which Paul calls the Doctrine of
Devils, so do they in the same manner, whatsoever they pretend. The Pope
commands superstitions Idoll-dayes to be kept and observed, contrary to the
Commandments of God, and punishes the neglect of his Commandments more
severely, then the breach of the waightiest Laws of God: so do the Prelates,
as their Courts can witness; yea and command men, and compel them as the Pope
himself, to break the Commandments of God to observe vain and impious
traditions. The pope sells Licenses for meat and marriage, the Prelates do
the same: the pope sells Non-residences, pluralities, trialities, totquots,
the Prelates do the same, to the starving and ruining of the souls of men.
the pope rules and governs the Church, by the cursed Canon Law, and popish
Excommunications, the scalding of the Conscience, the prelates do the very
same, and the breach of their stinkingest Canons is more deeply punished in
their Courts, then the violation of the Laws of God and the King: the pope
prefers his Ceremonies and traditions before the Word of God, the prelates
do the same, as daily experience teaches us: the pope persecuteth all godly
preachers and people, that preach the Gospel in the purity of it, and desire
in sincerity to serve the Lord, and would bring their brethren to the knowledge
of the same, and to the purity and truth of the Apostolical Churches, the
Prelates do the like, as the whole Kingdom knows well, and the Gaoles and
prisons daily witness, and the silencing of so many learned and painful
Ministers: the Pope appoints his priests to stand at the Altar with the Deacon,
apparelled with his foppish and playerlike accutriments, those Babylonish
garments, and to cry out Dominus vibiscum, the Deacon and Subdeacon, with all
the rest of Baals Priests, answering him as loud as they can* the Bishops do
the same, saving only that it is in English: the Pope commands adoration at
the Sacrament, crossing of children in Baptism, demanding of the newborn
Babes, if they will forsake the Devil, and all his works, etc. and esteems
the Font more holy then other places; injoyeth likewise purifying of women, and
a thousand such like costly and chargeable vanities, which were too tedious to
relate: and all these and more then these do the Prelates in like manner: in
all which, their Antichristian Authority with their Popish practices, are
sufficiently manifest: so that there is little or no difference between pope
and prelates. And all Authority of doing this, they arrogate unto themselves
Iure divine. Limbs therefore they are of Antichrist, from whom Dr. Pocklington
gloryes, that they are lineally descended, in his impious pamphlet, entitled
Sunday no Sabbath.

FINIS.

