A CENTURIE OF Divine Meditations UPON PREDESTINATION, and its Adjuncts:
Wherein are showed the comfortable uses of this Doctrine.

To which are annexed sixteen Meditations upon Gods Justice and Mercy.

By ALEXANDER ROSS.

LONDON, Printed by James Young, 1646.

TO The Right Honorable and Virtuous Lady, FRANCES Countess of Rutland, wife
to the Right Honorable JOHN Earl of Rutland.
Noble Lady,
AS you have been pleased to make me happy, by permitting me to gaze with
admiration upon the rare structure and goodly fabric of that beautiful temple
of your Virtues; so give me leave to pass through this, into your temple of
Honor, and there, at the shrine of your perfections, to lay this Centurie of
Divine Meditations; a sacrifice, I know, more acceptable to you then whole
Hecatombes of fat beasts, or the smoke of Sabean incense. Your noble
Progenitors have devolved upon you many natural endowments, whereby you
outstrip most of your own sex: but grace has gifted you with cleernesse and
perspicuitie of judgment in the mysteries of speculative Divinity, even
beyond many who think themselves learned Clerks of our sex. Madam, though you
are every way honorable, yet nothing does so much enoble you, as your zeal to
Religion, and love to learned men: When your beauty, wealth, outward honors
and pleasures shall determine in death, even then Religion and Learning will
beautify and enrich your soul, and immortalize your name. The highest pitch of
my ambition in this, and the former Dedication, is only to show my gratitude to
your honorable Husband, and your Self, though in small mites, compared to your
noble favors; and withal, to set forth the luster of your own knowledge in
these points which still perplex the minds of many Christians. The Father of
Mercies crown you both, and your hopeful Issue, with the blessings of both
hands here, and of Eternity hereafter. This is, and still shall be, the prayer
of

Your Honors devoted Servant, Alexander Ross.


I Have perused these divine and learned Meditations on Gods Predestination,
Justice and Mercy; and, judging them to be pious and profitable, I allow them
to be printed and published.

JOHN DOWNAME. January the 7. 1645.

DIVINE MEDITATIONS UPON PREDESTINATION, and its Adjuncts.
I.
I Find that God by his absolute power can do that, which in justice he may
not; He can torment the good Angels that sinned not, but he will not: if he
could not do so, he were not omnipotent; if he should, he were not just. I
will therefore reverence that power which can do what he wills, but will not
do all that he can.

II.
God may justly annihilate the good Angels, though justly he cannot punish
them: He could not be unjust in taking that nature from them which he freely
bestowed; and he could not be just in inflicting a punishment which they had
not deserved. But I, that am a sinful man, must acknowledge it goodness in
him to annihilate me. I must reverence his Justice if he punish me, but will
admire, and extol his mercy, if he save me.

III.
God is a most free Agent, being subject neither to a commanding law, nor to a
constraining power; yet has he necessitated some of his external actions,
partly by his goodness, partly by his Promise: He must do what he promises,
because he is true; he must do what is just, because he is good. I will claim
Heaven as my due, not because I merit it, but because he promised it; his own
goodness has tied him to give it, though my sins may deter me from
begging it.

IIII.
If my Adoption be the end of Predestination, by which Grace and Glory are
prepared for me; then shall the end be first in my intention, but the means
shall be first in execution. I will strive and beg for faith in Gods natural
Son, that in him I may become Gods adopted son.

V.
The good Angels were made happy by the grace of Confirmation, Adam by the
grace of Restoration: the Angels fell not, therefore needed not this grace;
Adam stood not, therefore wanted that grace. He that is confirmed falls not, he
that falls, is not confirmed: God showed his love to the Angels in confirming
them, but his mercy to Adam in restoring him. Lord show thy mercy to me when I
fall, in restoring me; show thy love to me when I am raised, in confirming me:
make me happy with Adam in the one, happy with Angels in the other.

VI.
Gods Prescience is of a larger extent then his Predestination; for he foreknew
or foresaw both good and evil, but he predestined good only: he foresaw good
and evil, because he is omniscient; he predestined only good, because in him
there is none, and from him there comes none evil. O that we could be like
him, to foresee evil, and hate it; to resolve only upon good, and do it.

VII.
Gods decrees are in our power, and our power is in his decrees; they are in us
as causes in their effect, we are in him as effects in their cause: It Is by his
decree that we have power, it is not by our power that he decrees: 'Its in our
power to perform his decrees, but this power we have by his decree. Lord, if
thou have decreed my obedience, give me power of performance, and so thy decree
shall be in my power: not that thou did decree, because thou knew I would
obey; but I will obey, because I know thou have decreed.

VIII.
God has decreed to give us faith, and he has decreed to justify us by that
faith; by the former decree he makes us his sons, by the other he acquits us
of our sins. Lord, if thou have decreed to make me thy son, bestow faith on
me; if thou have decreed to blot away my sin, by that same faith justify me.

IX.
God first loved us, and then he decreed to bestow Grace and Glory on us; his
love to us is the cause of our happiness, so our love to him must be the cause
of our obedience. Lord make me to love thee, and then I know I shall obey thee.

X.
Faith and Holiness are graces by which we attain to happiness; but Gods love
is that grace by which we obtain faith and holiness. As the action follows
the quality, so Gods decree follows this first grace, but other graces come
after his decree: it was by his decree that we have any grace, it was by his
grace that he was pleased to decree. Lord, as the grace of thy love made thee
to decree my happiness; so make the love of thy grace in me increase, that I
may enjoy this happiness.

XI.
God does so determine the actions of the Will, that sometime he bends it to
what he pleases; and so it works necessarily, not freely, if we consider the
act or use of working: sometime he determines it so, that he leaves it to its
own inclination; and then it works freely: Gods Providence does not thwart his
Creation, if he sometimes suspends, hinders, determines the properties and
motions of his creatures; in the creation he gave them, that in his providence
he might use them. Lord, if thou should leave my Will to it self in this
corrupted estate I now am in, what fruit can it produce but sour grapes, and
wild olives? for the fruit cannot be better then the tree, and men gather not
grapes of thistles, nor figs of thorns. I had rather have a necessity laid on
me to do good, then be left at liberty to do evil; I had rather my Will
should be a servant to thy commands, then be master over its own actions.

XII.
If Adam had not sinned, he had been saved; and being a sinner, yet he is
saved: grace had saved him then, and grace saves him now; the grace of Gods
love had saved him then, the grace of Gods mercy saves him now; Gods love then
had been grounded upon the first Adams perseverance, it is now grounded on the
second Adams death and obedience. I had been happy in Adam, had he not been a
sinner; but I am now much more happy in Christ by being my Savior. I lost
Paradise by the first Adam, I have gained Heaven by the second: the first Adam,
being man, would needs be God, and so made us equal to the beasts; the second
Adam, being God, would needs be man, and so has made us equal to the Angels.

XIII.
Some Supralapsarians.
say, that God in predestinating man, looked on him as he was to be created;
others, Sublapsarians.
, that he considered him as already created and lapsed, because we are
predestined in Christ: but Christ is a Savior, and a Savior presupposes a
sinner. I will not dispute the question, but this I know, that my misery
occasioned his mercy; and, had I not been a sinner, he had not been a Savior.

XIIII.
I am elected in Christ, who is my Mediator, not only by his merit of
impetration of pardon for me, but also by the efficacy of application of that
pardon to me. Not only by his blood has he made a purchase of Heaven for
sinners, but also by that same blood he has delivered the possession of Heaven
to sinners.

XV.
There is a Promise of Heaven made to us, and there is a law of obedience and
faith imposed on us: Heaven is promised upon condition of faith and obedience,
and these are promised upon condition of divine assistance. Lord, if thou
assist, I will obey; if I obey, thou will reward: but here are the odds, that
my obedience is the effect and fruit of thy grace and assistance, but not the
cause of thy remuneration and benevolence.

XVI.
God, being the supreme cause, can have no superior cause of his actions; yet
some say, he may produce an effect which may occasion him to work further: thus
the foresight of man's sin gave him occasion to precondemne him. This well is
too deep, and I have no bucket to draw with: I will not soar with the waxen
wings of humane reason too nigh this inaccessible light, nor will I pry into
the sacred Arc of Gods secret decrees; only this I can say, that whatever his
decrees were before time, I am sure, his proceeding to judgment is just in
time. He is so just, that he never condemned any man but for sin; and he is so
merciful, that he will not condemn every man that does sin.

XVII.
Justice and Mercy were still in God actually from all eternity, in respect of
the first act, to wit, of existence; though they were not always in respect of
the second act, to wit, of operation: God could not always exercise Justice
and Mercy on sinners, because there have not been always sinners; as soon as
man sinned, these attributes in God appeared, which were eternally existent in
him, but not eternally exercised by him. Lord, thou have exercised the
eternity of thy Justice in punishing for me thy natural Son, exercise, I
pray, the eternity of thy Mercy for him, in saving the soul of me thy
adopted son.

XVIII.
God by his antecedent will decreed to bestow Faith and Grace on us, which by
his consequent will he resolved to deny us; his former will was moved by his
own goodness, but his latter will was provoked by our wickedness: if we have
unjustly rejected the grace which by his former will he resolved to give us,
may not he justly by his latter will deny that grace, which was rejected so
perversely by us. Lord, if thou art resolved by thy first will to bestow grace
on me, let me not by my disobedience provoke thy second will to deny that grace
unto me.

XIX.
Our wickedness is the cause that moves God to exercise his acts of Justice;
but his own bounty is the cause, and our misery the occasion, why he
exercises his acts of Mercy. When I am punished, I will accuse my own
wickedness, which provoked against me divine Justice; and when I am saved, I
will extol and reverence that bounty, which took occasion by my misery, to
make me an object of his Mercy.

XX.
I find a twofold decree, the one of Providence, the other of Predestination:
by that, God resolved to give us as much grace as might suffice to save us; by
this, he appointed to give us effectual grace, that we might be powerfully
saved: by the former we may believe if we will, by this we do actually
believe. They are inexcusable that have sufficient grace, though it be not
effectual; for God has dealt graciously with us in affording sufficient helps
of our salvation, and we have dealt wickedly with our selves in hindering the
efficacy of these helps. No man then has cause to complain of Gods cruelty,
seeing he has bestowed on all men sufficient grace of Providence, whereby they
may be saved; but many men have cause to admire Gods mercy, who has bestowed
on some the effectual grace of Predestination, whereby they shall be saved.

XXI.
God will have all men to be saved, and he will have wicked men to be damned:
that, is his antecedent will; this, his consequent: that, is sometimes
frustrated of its end, this never; and its fitting that seeing his will cannot
be fulfilled by us, it should be fulfilled upon us. They that will not satisfy
his will by their obedience, shall satisfy his will in suffering just
vengeance.

XXII.
God loves himself, and so he does man: the one love is internal, the other
external; the one is eternal, the other temporary; the one necessary, the
other voluntary; for Gods internal actions, if the object be internal
naturally, are absolutely necessary; as when he loves himself, the agent, the
object, the action are all internal, and all necessary in respect of
existence: but if the object be internal voluntarily, as when God decrees and
understands external objects, which he makes internal, by uniting them to
his understanding, then all these actions are voluntary and free, even his
very decrees which proceed from his free will. It was in his choice whether he
would decree any thing concerning man or not; whether he would bestow grace and
glory on him: The eternal generation indeed of his own Son is an action of
necessity, but the regeneration of his adopted sons is a work altogether
voluntary. So much the more then will I admire and praise that goodness which
elected and saved me, by how much the more I see it was free and voluntary,
but no ways, in respect of his perfection, necessary.

XXIII.
There is in man a twofold judgment, to wit, an antecedent, which is that of
the affections and senses; and a consequent, which is that of reason: so there
is a twofold volition; the one follows the judgment of sense, and it is
rather

an imperfect desire, then a perfect volition; the other follows the judgment
of reason: both these volitions were in Christ more eminently then in us,
because in him were two Wills, and these, by reason of his two natures, were
distinct in him, though his person was but one; therefore he desired the cup
might pass from him, but willed it not; or, he willed it by his antecedent,
not by his consequent will. O thou that made in thy self, the judgment of
affection stoop to the judgment of reason, and made thy desire subservient
to thy will, and causedst thy antecedent will to give place to thy consequent;
produce in me the same effect, that these sinful delights which my affections
so earnestly run after, and thy gentle corrections, which they so earnestly run
from, may be so ordered, that the one by me may be courageously subdued, the
other patiently endured; that my affections may submit to my will, my will to
reason, and reason to thy Spirit.

XXIIII.
God works not immediately by his decree, but by his power: his decree is but
a remote cause, his power immediate; his decree is an internal action, the
actions of his power are external; the actions of his decrees depend on his
wisdom, the actions of his power are subservient to his decrees. Lord, if in
thy wisdom thou thoughtest it good that my soul should be saved, and if thou
have decreed it, then let thy power be seen in effecting it.

XXV.
The necessity and contingencie of things is not to be attributed to Gods
decree, but to the working of his power; contingencie, is when he uses his
resistible power, if he works irresistibly then follows necessity: what is
contingent to the second cause, is infallible to Gods prescience, but
necessary to the work of his omnipotency: his decree is a remote cause, which
without his power works not. Christ's death was contingent to the Jews, that
crucified him; infallible to Gods prescience, who foresaw that the Jews would
kill him; but necessary in regard of his decree, working by his power in
presenting that bitter cup unto him. Why then shall afflictions dismay me,
which though they be contingent in respect of the second agent, yet they are
infallible to that all-seeing eye of Heaven that foresaw them; and necessary,
if we regard that powerful hand which inflicted them?

XXVI.
God orders sin, though he ordained it not: he orders it, that it may be
subservient to his glory; he ordained it not, because he sins not: He could
not ordain it, seeing he hates it, forbids it, and punishes it. Lord, I ascribe
to thy glory both my salvation, and my sin: my salvation thou have ordained,
my sin thou have ordered; that by the one I may love thy mercy, and by the
other, I may fear thy Justice. Who but Goodness it self would ordain the
salvation of a sinner, and who but Wisdom it self would order the
prevarications of a sinner? What is more offensive to thy nature then sin? What
is more destructive of thy feature in me then sin? yet out of sin thou have
drawn the means to manifest the goodness of thy nature in my salvation, and
out of the same sin thou have drawn a means to repair in me thy decayed
feature by my repentance and conversion.

XXVII.
God gave to Adam sufficient grace to stand, but not to persist; he permitted
him to fall, who by the grace he received might have stood; he gave him
sufficiency of grace, not permanencie in grace: by the one God is cleared from
iniquity, and by the other he manifests his justice and mercy: if man had not
been a sinner, God had not been a Savior; we had not known Emanuel, God with
us, if Adam by sin had not separated God from us; we had known him as Jehova,
but not as Jesus. O my God, if thou give me sufficiency of grace, I may fall;
but if thou give me permanencie in grace, I shall not fall: give me Adams
happiness in Paradise, that I may sufficiently love and know thee; give me the
Angels happiness in Heaven, that I may constantly love and know, and eternally
abide in thee.

XXVIII.
God delivered his Son to death, so did Satan by Judas: God had power to do
so, Satan had none; God did this in love to the sons of men, Satan did it in
malice to the Son of God: by an affirmative act God was willing to permit Satan
to exercise his malice, by a negative act he hindered him not: in all this God
sinned not, if we consider the authority of the agent, the form of the
action, and the justice and goodness of his intention. Though God acts not
sin, nor is willing it should be acted by man, yet he is willing to permit it.
Not sin, but permission is the object of his will; he could not will sin,
because he is not sinful; he permits it, because he can draw good out of it.

XXIX.
God permits not punishment, but inflicts it; he permits not good, but commands
it; he wills not sin, but permits it; not as it is good, but as out of it he
draws good. O thou that drewest light out of darkness, and meat out of the
eater; draw good out of my evils, and comforts out of my afflictions: Thou
can draw honey out of the rock, and turn water into wine, and make bitter
Meribah potable; we pray thee, turn the bitter waters of our Meribah, our
strife and contention, into the pure and sweet streams of Peace and Union.

XXX.
What God cannot do, he cannot will; what he cannot will, he cannot decree:
and although affirmatively his power be of a larger extent then his will, for
he can do that which he will not do; yet negatively he cannot will what he
cannot do, nor do what he cannot will: he cannot do evil, therefore he
cannot will it; he cannot will it, therefore he can neither do it by an
external, nor decree it by any internal act. O that my will and actions,
Lord, were conformable to thine: for oftentimes I do the evil which I will
not, and I will the good, which I do not. Lord, make my will conformable to
thine, that my actions may be conformable to my will.

XXXI.
Gods grace reaches further then his mercy; his grace is extended to all, his
mercy only to those that are in misery: by grace the Angels were confirmed, by
grace the world is preserved, but by mercy man is redeemed; he is gracious
then to all, but merciful only to some: yet though his grace be more
universal and communicable, his mercy is more wonderful and amiable. Lord,
the noblest of all thy Attributes is thy goodness to thy creatures* but the
excellency of thy goodness is, in showing mercy to sinners: Thy goodness
made me a man, but thy mercy a happy man: by the one, thou deliverest me from
nothing; by the other, from worse then nothing: thy goodness gave me being,
and thy mercy well being.

XXXII.
In every sin the act and the obliquitie, in every virtue the act and the
circumstances are distinguishable. In sin the act is always good
metaphysically, but evil morally; either because it is prohibited, as the act
of eating the fruit to Adam; or because it is repugnant to justice and
sanctity, though they were not prohibited, as theft and murder: In every
virtue the act is always good both morally and metaphysically, but the
circumstances may be evil; as to give alms is good, but to give out of pride
is evil. I will not forbear to do good, because the circumstances may be
evil; nor will I venture to do evil, because the circumstances may be good. If
God command that which may seem to be evil, I will do it; for his command
makes it good: if he forbids that which may seem to be good, I will not do
it, because his prohibition makes it evil. Adam sinned in eating of the fruit
(though seemingly good) because God prohibited it; and the Hebrews sinned not,
in spoiling the Egyptians (though seemingly evil) because God commanded it.

XXXIII.
God did no ways necessitate Adam to sin, neither by inward persuasion, nor by
outward coaction: besides, he gave him a law easy to be kept, and power
sufficient to keep it: He did then neither will nor decree his fall, nor
persuade nor force it, only he gave way that he might fall, who had power to
stand; that, being by Christ raised from his fall, he might more firmly stand.
Lord, as thou did permit my fall, so be now pleased to remit it; I fell
willingly from thee, make me to return as willingly to thee: Thou gave me a
will to stand or fall, give me a will to rise, and so to stand, that I may
never fall again.

XXXIIII.
There is a twofold necessity; the one is Consequentiae.
Syllogisticall, the other is Consequentis.
real: there was a Syllogisticall necessity of man's fall, in respect of Gods
foreknowledge, but not real: Gods prescience was an antecedent not a cause;
and man's fall was the consequent, not the effect of that prescience: but there
is a real necessity of that which God decrees. Lord, I did not sin, because
thou did foresee it; but because I was to sin, therefore thou did foresee
it: my fall was a necessary sequel of thy precognition, so let my rising be a
necessary effect of thy Predestination.

XXXV.
Sin properly is not the punishment of sin, because we sin willingly, we suffer
punishment unwillingly; in sinning we are agents, in punishments we are
patients: yet sin may be the cause of sin; not that one sin can procreate
another, but because one sin can deserve and prepare the way for committing of
another. Lord, free me from the guilt and stain of Adams sin, which has been
both the preparatorie and meritorious cause of all my actual sins.

XXXVI.
God works on the will either by a physical motion, or by moral persuasion;
and he persuades either powerfully by his Spirit, or sufficiently by his Word:
so he hinders sin, either by his law prohibiting it, or by his power
inhibiting it: let no man sin presumptuously, because he is not stopped in the
full careere of his sin powerfully; though there is not always an inhibition
by his Power, yet there is still a prohibition by his Law, to make us
inexcusable. Lord, work on my depraved will physically, work morally, work
sufficiently, and work powerfully, by the Word, by thy Spirit, by thy Law, by
thy Sword: circumcise my heart and ears; the one by the Sword of the Spirit,
the other by the Sword of the Word: if I cannot be restrained by thy Law, to
forbear the forbidden fruit with Adam; let me be constrained by the glittering
of thy sword, to stop in the ways of wickedness with Balaam.

XXXVII.
Though nothing is contingent to God, yet his knowledge may consider
contingencies, as they are contingent: for what by man is done contingently, by
him it is foreseen certainly; in which regard Gods judgments are founded upon
sin, which may more fitly be called the object and occasion of his judgments,
then the cause. Lord, the cause of thy judgments is thy justice, and my sin
the occasion: thy justice is eternal, thy judgments are just, my sins are
contingent: if it were not for thy judgments, I should not acknowledge my
sins; if it were not for my sins, thou could not exercise thy judgments;
and if it were not for thy justice, there would be no proportion between thy
judgments and my sins: the exercise of thy judgments will cease, if thou
put an end to my sins; but thy justice shall not cease, though thou in mercy
pardon my sins.

XXXVIII.
Nature is before grace, and the works of creation before the effects of
Predestination: Man was first made a living soul, by the outward breath of Gods
mouth; and then was made a quickening spirit, by the inward breath of the holy
Ghost: so he decreed first to give man natural ability by the work of
Creation, and then to bestow on him supernatural graces, the effects of
Predestination. Lord, thou have gifted me with natural faculties, whereby I
exceed the beasts; and thou have endowed me with supernatural graces, whereby
I am equal to the Angels: I praise thee for the work of thy Creation, much
more for that of Predestination; by the one thou made me a man, by the other
a happy man: make me to exceed the beasts as much in moral virtues, as I
excel them in natural abilities; so make me to equal the Angels as much in
love and obedience, as I come near them in supernatural happiness.

XXXIX.
God did first foresee that Adam would sin, before he predestined Christ to
die for sin; he foresaw the disease, then prepared the remedy; he foresaw the
leprosy, then ordained the blood of his Son to wash it: for as the sinner only
is capable of the grace of Regeneration; so this grace was preordained to the
sinner in Gods Predestination. O my God, if thou wast so provident as to
prepare physic for my sinful soul before I had sinned; I am confident thy
goodness is not now lessened, but that thou will apply that same physic to my
soul having sinned.

XL.
Gods Image in man consisted in nature and natural properties, in moral
virtues, and supernatural graces; the first were totally retained in Adams
fall, the third totally lost, the second lost in part. Again, the essential
part of Gods Image remained, to wit, the soul; but the accidental part was
lost, to wit, justice and holiness; the subject continued, though this form
perished: therefore for the soul, renovation is sufficient; but for those
graces in the soul, a new creation is required. Lord, by thy Image I excel the
beasts, by it I match the Angels, by it I resemble thy self; but the subject of
this image is by sin decayed, and by sin the form is quite abolished. O thou
that in my Creation did grace me with the breath of life, now in my
Regeneration breathe in me the life of grace: the temple of God is decayed in
me, and the God of this temple is banished from me; repair this temple, that
thy image again may stand in it, and renew thy image that this temple may be
sanctified by it.

XLI.
Adams sin was committed after Predestination, if we consider Adams actual
existence; but it was before Predestination, in respect of Gods prescience.
What madness is it to think, that God sees not our sins which we commit
secretly; whereas he did foresee our sins before they were committed, and that
from all eternity?

XLII.
In Predestination, the preterition of some men, was the punishment of those
men; and the denial of felicity, was their misery: but punishment
presupposes sin, and preterition as a punishment must come after the prevision
of sin. If this doctrine be true, that the prevision of sin was the cause of
preterition; sure it is most true, that the commission of sin is the cause of
condemnation.

XLIII.
Passive excaecation, or the wilful ignorance and spiritual blindness in
man, is both a sin, and the cause of sin: active excaecation, as it is from
man, it is a sin; as from God, it is the punishment of sin. It stands with thy
justice, O God, to punish them with blindness, who have with delight blinded
themselves; and to deprive those of light, who love to walk in darkness. Why
should thou hold out the lamp of thy Word to those that despise it; and
cause thy sun to shine on them, who wilfully shut their eyes against it? Lord,
deal with me as thou did with Saul: I am blinded spiritually, make me blind
corporally; that by losing the sight of my body, I may regain the sight of my
soul. I will gladly lose the light of the sun, moon, and other planets; so I
may behold the light of the Son of righteousness.

XLIIII.
Some say, that the hearts induration is not the cause of Gods indignation; but
that God is first angry, then hardneth: I am sure God has just cause to be
angry with those who will be hardened, and therefore in his just anger hardneth
them. I confess, Lord, that I have hardened my own heart, therefore thou may
justly be angry with me; and because my voluntary hardness has provoked thy
anger, therefore may thy anger effect in me, and that most justly, a further
degree of hardness.

XLV.
God who by his irresistible will decrees the hardening of a sinner, yet
actually by his resistible will uses to harden that sinner. Though none can
resist the will of his decrees, yet he permits us sometimes to oppose the
actions of his will: in the one he shows himself the God of power, in the
other he shows his mercy, in suffering man to resist the power of God. O thou
that did wrestle with Jacob, and gave him strength both to resist and
conquer thee; when thou wrestlest with me by tentations, give me so much
strength as by mortification to subdue my self, and then give me leave by faith
and tears to vanquish thee.

XLVI.
There is in God a twofold negative act; the one of Providence, the other of
Preterition: by the former, God denied to Adam the gift of Perseverance, and so
suffered him to fall; by the other, he denies to some men the gift of Faith
and Repentance, and so suffers them to remain in their fall. God was not bound
to give Adam perseverance, seeing otherwise he furnished him with grace
sufficiently; nor is he bound to give to those faith, and repentance, who fell
from their former grace willingly, and oppose his Word and Spirit obstinately.
Lord, I confess, that as thou wast not in Adams debt for perseverance, so
neither art thou in mine for any grace: but if thou will be pleased to bestow
on me so much grace, as to attain true happiness; I will impute it not to my
deserts, but to thy favor and goodness.

XLVII.
Some say, that those whom God has decreed for Salvation may be damned, but
that they shall not be damned; that his decree hinders the act, but not the
possibility. I leave this nicetie for the Schools: But this use I will make
of it, that if I may be damned, I will work out my salvation with fear and
trembling; if I shall not be damned, I will not fear, though I walk through the
valley of death: if I may be damned, I acknowledge, Lord, it is through my own
wickedness; if I shall not be damned, it is out of thy unspeakable goodness.

XLVIII.
It is the doctrine of many in these days, that as God by his revealed will
saves none, but such as believe in him; so he decreed by his secret will to
save none, but such as he foresaw would believe in him. I am confident, God
could foresee nothing thing in me, but what he was pleased to bestow upon me:
if he foresaw my faith, he foresaw the fruit of his preventing grace; if he
foresaw my perseverance, he foresaw the effect of his subsequent grace.

XLIX.
Election (say some) is Gods decree to justify the faithful; others say, it is
Gods decree to save man, as he is man, and to that end to make him faithful:
In the one opinion, I find faith the means of Justification; in the other, of
Salvation: means, I say, but not the cause. Lord, the cause of my happiness
is in thee, the means in me; but the efficacy of this means, both in my
justification and salvation, is only from thee.

L.
If the decree of preterition went before the act of sin, but not before the
prevision of that sin; I am confident, the act of preterition cannot, much
less can the act of condemnation, precede the act of sin. Therefore how
injurious are some to the God of mercy, in daring to accuse him of cruelty,
who is so far from condemning any man, but for sin committed, that he would not
decree man's condemnation, but for sin foreseen?

LI.
There was enjoined to Adam the law of abstinence from the forbidden fruit, and
the law of obedience: the former was particular to Adam, the other was common
to him and his posterity: it was not for the breach of the former, which was
personal; but for the breach of the other, which was universal, that we are
condemned: not Adams act of eating, but his disobedience was our bane; for we
sinned in him: sin is a transgression of the law; but the law could not have
been transgressed by us, had it not been in him given to us. Lord, we have
great cause to admire and respect thy mercy, in saving us for the second Adams
obedience; but we have no cause to suspect thee of cruelty, in condemning us
for the first Adams disobedience.

LII.
Punishment was prepared in Gods decree as well for the sin of Jacob as of
Esau, both having sinned alike in Adam; but it was pardonable in the one,
unpardonable in the other: which difference proceeded from grace, not from
nature. Lord, I confess, thou could see no more original sin in Judas, then
in me; yet thou wast pleased to punish him, and to spare me: if thou had
condemned us both, thou had done justly; but in sparing the one, thou have
magnified thy mercy.

LIII.
There is a twofold grace, the one of Creation, the other of Election; the one
was the gift of God without Christ, the other was the gift of God in Chirst;
the one was the image of God, the other was the renovation of that image; the
one was lost in Paradise, the other shall never be lost in Heaven. Lord, thou
had no other inducement, but thine own goodness to create me to thy image;
but now thou have another inducement, to wit, thy Sons merits, to renew in me
that decayed image: the one thou might not have done, the other thou can
not but do; for, though thou wast not bound in the creation to bestow thy
image on me, yet now thou art bound by thy Sons satisfaction to repair this
image in me.

LIIII.
Adam could have abstained from the external act of touching, by natural
grace only; but in him could not be the inward and permanent affection of
obeying, without supernatural grace also. Lord, if Adam could not yield
constant obedience to thee in his estate of integrity, how shall I be able to
persevere in obedience, without thy special grace, being now in the estate of
iniquity?

LV.
Though the habit of justice, as it is the essence of God, be necessarily in
him; yet the actions of justice, which are not his essence, are not necessarily
performed by him: He is necessarily just, but a voluntary agent: He does
necessarily hate injustice, but freely and voluntarily he punishes it, and
decreed punishment for it. Lord, what should become of me, and of all the other
wretched sons of Adam, if it were as necessary for thee to punish, as it is
to be just? But my comfort is, that, as justice is so necessary in thee, that
thou can not be unjust; so thy actions are so free and voluntary, that thou
can pardon my sin, and yet notwithstanding thou can not be but just.

LVI.
There was no necessity why God should manifest his justice in punishing
sinners, seeing he had power to manifest that, in punishing his own Son for
sinners. In the one, he shows himself to be a God of mercy, not of revenge, in
sparing his enemies; in the other, he shows himself a God of justice, in
punishing his beloved Son, who became surety for his enemies.

LVII.
There is a twofold cause of predemnation; the one is sin, the other is Gods
decree; the one is necessary, the other voluntary: sin is the cause why God
may condemn all, Gods decree is the cause why he will condemn but some: he
looks on sin as it is pardonable in some, unpardonable in others; the one eye
by which he looks is justice, the other is mercy. Lord, thou did look upon
my sin with justice and severitie, when thou punishedst it in thine own
natural Son; therefore look on it as it is in me, with meekness and mercy,
and pardon it in me that am thy adopted son.

LVIII.
Every man is not a reprobate that falls into sin, but he that finally
perseveres in sin: for all men fell into sin, by the permission of providence;
but wicked men only continue to the end in sin, by the permission of
preterition. Lord, that sin which was voluntary in Adam, is necessary in me;
but although in thy just judgments, there is a necessity that I should be
tainted with original contagion, yet there is no necessity why I should lie
still and persevere in actual transgression: without thy providence I could
not fall, without thy assistance I cannot rise: as by thy providence thou
hinderest not my falling, because the glory of thy justice was thereby
manifested; so, I pray thee, further, by thy assistance, my rising again, that
the glory of thy goodness may be thereby magnified.

LIX.
In Gods external actions there is neither natural nor coactive necessity;
for both nature, and coaction exclude liberty: the fire burns naturally, the
bullet flies upward violently, therefore both necessarily; but Gods internal
actions on himself are natural, therefore necessary: the Father begot his
eternal Son, neither willingly nor unwillingly, but naturally and necessarily;
so because Gods attributes are natural, and essential to him, they are
necessarily in him: he is necessarily not voluntarily good, because he cannot
be but good; he does voluntarily, not necessarily make man good, because he can
forbear, if he would, to make him good. Lord, I confess, that the more free
Agent thou wast in the work of my conversion, the less free am I, but the more
necessitated to praise thy goodness and wisdom; for, how can I choose but
honor and obey thee, who could have chosen whether thou would have
redeemed and saved me?

LX.
Faith is both an habit, and an action: if it justify, as it is an habit, I
will not dispute; this I know, that it justifies, as it is an action: for
Abraham believed, and so was justified. The life then of Religion consists in
action; not only of the outward works of the hand, but also of the inward work
of the heart; for this is the work of God, that we believe in him. O Lord,
faith is thy work, and it is mine too; it is thy work to infuse it, it is my
work to apprehend Christ by it: let thy work be first performed in me, and then
I know my work, if thou assist, shall be performed by me.

LXI.
Though we are not actually free from sin in this life, yet there is a
possibility that we may be free; if either we consider the power of God, who
can mightily effect it; or the will of a regenerate man, who does so earnestly
affect it. Lord, in that I may be free from sin, it argues thy omnipotency;
but in that I am not free from sin, I must blame my own impotencie: There is in
me a desire to be freed from this body of death, and in thee there is power to
free me, who art the Lord of life.

LXII.
There was in Adam a directive light of the mind while he was falling, to let
him see his danger; but there was not in him that persuasive light which might
powerfully restrain him from danger: that light had kept him from falling, had
he followed it; and this light had kept him from falling, had he received it.
Lord, though thou did not give Adam this light, thou art unblameable; seeing
thou did give him so much of that light, as made him inexcusable.

LXIII.
In what faculty of the soul the cockatrice of Adams sin was first hatched, I
will not now dispute; whether it was in the understanding, being first blinded;
or in the will, being first perverted: this I know, that the will is apt to be
seduced by a blind understanding, and the understanding as apt to be clouded
by a perverse will: The understanding Quoad speciem actus.
moves the will by proposing the object, which the will cannot affect, except
the understanding knows it; the will Quoad exercitium actus.
moves the understanding to judge and consider the object, which the
understanding cannot consider, except the will command it. Lord, illuminate my
understanding, that it may direct my will to affect the things that thou
command; and rectify my will, that it may command the understanding to
exercise its act in meditating on the things which thou command.

LXIIII.
If Christ's obedience had been necessary or natural, and not voluntary, he
had not been like to us in all things except sin; neither had he been subject
to the tentation of disobedience, nor had his obedience been meritorious, nor
had it been more excellent then the obedience of Angels: but in this was his
obedience more noble then theirs, in that he yielded that obedience willingly,
which they do necessarily. I will strive whilst I am here to obey willingly,
that hereafter I may obey necessarily: for, though voluntary obedience be the
nobler, yet necessary obedience is the surer; for I may disobey in the one, I
cannot but obey in the other.

LXV.
Though the sufficiency of Christ's death be extended to all, yet the efficacy
thereof is not applied to all; nor did he pray and make intercession for all:
By his death he procured pardon for us, and by his intercession he applies that
pardon to us. Lord, in thy birth, thou acceptedst my nature; in thy death, thou
representedst my person: by thy intercession put away my sins, and pardon my
offenses, that the mediation which thou begannest in thy birth, and did
accomplish in thy sacrifice and passion, may be fully made effectual to me, by
thy prayers and intercession.

LXVI.
Action follows the affection; therefore we love and hate actually, because
these affections are in us radically: Though hatred be no affection in God, yet
we conceive it as an affection: God therefore rejected Esau, because he hated
him; but he did not hate him, because he rejected him. Lord, I know thou may
justly reject me, because in me there is that pravitie, for which thou may
justly hate me: repair therefore in me the lost image of thy Son, and so I
shall escape thy just wrath and indignation.

LXVII.
The acts of Christ's righteousness are ours, not as they are performed by him,
but as they are imputed to us.; imputed, I say, by his merit and goodness, and
apprehended by our faith, though in much weakness. Then I see, Lord, that
without faith thy righteousness will not avail me, and without thy merit and
goodness my faith cannot prevail with thee: give me then the hand of faith,
that with the Hemorroisse, I may touch thee; and by thy merit strengthen that
hand, that, with Jacob, I may hold thee.

LXVIII.
Christ first suffered, before we could be redeemed; and we are redeemed,
before it is applied, or can receive benefit by it: then are we fully redeemed,
when we are from Satan and sin delivered. Though Christ in suffering has
sufficiently paid the ransom, yet whilst we are here subject to sin and Satan,
we are not fully partakers of redemption; Heaven, not earth, is the place where
that shall be perfected. I will therefore lift up my head with joy, because by
death the day of my redemption draws nigh.

LXIX.
A double benefit we have by Christ: one, that he has purchased Redemption for
us by his blood; the other, that he has applied that Redemption to us by his
Spirit: if he had not died, I could not have believed; if I had not believed,
he had not applied his death and merits to me: Redemption is the cause of
Faith, and Faith the cause of Application. Lord, produce Faith in me by the
virtue of thy passion, that by Faith I may enjoy thee in a true and spiritual
Application.

LXX.
That the Church injoyes life eternal, she is bound to Gods dilection; but
that she injoyes that life alone, she is bound to his election: because he
loved her, he has bestowed this happiness upon her; because he chose her, he
has appropriated this happiness unto her. Lord, I will praise thy love, by
which I was elected; and I will praise that election, by which I am separated
from the reprobate.

LXXI.
Gods will is the cause of preterition, his justice is the cause of
predemnation: he was not bound to give grace to all, therefore he passed by
some without prejudice to his goodness; he was bound to punish sin in all,
therefore he preordaines the death of his own Son; and eternal pains for
reprobates, that he might not suffer prejudice in his justice. Lord, if thou
had passed by me, I could not have blamed thy goodness: if thou should
punish me eternally, I cannot blame thy justice; for, if thou give grace to
all, where is thy liberty? if thou forgivest all, where is thy justice and
equity?

LXXII.
God is a most free Agent, because he can do what he pleases, not because he
can do every thing: his will is the supreme cause of all external things, but
not of his justice, which is internal: as he cannot do that which is evil, so
he cannot will that which is unjust; as goodness is the object of his actions,
so justice is the rule of his will. Lord, make my actions subordinate to thy
will, as thy will is subordinate to thy justice: that, as thou can not will
that which in justice thou may not; so I may not do that, which in wisdom
thou wilst not.

LXXIII.
Though God foresaw sin in all, yet he rejected not all: sin was the occasion
why he rejected some, his will was the cause why he rejected but some; his will
was the cause of discrimination, but sin of reprobation. Lord, I confess, it
was not for want of sin in me, that thou did not reject me; but because there
was no want of goodness in thee, therefore thou did elect me: my sin was the
cause why I might have been rejected, but thy mercy is the cause, why I was
not rejected.

LXXIIII.
God hindered Adams sin morally, by his law; not physically, by his power: he
gave a law to guide him, threatenings to affright him, promises to induce him,
sufficient grace to strengthen him; but used no violence or force to restrain
him: he would not thwart or destroy, by any violent restriction, that liberty
which he gave him by Creation. Thus we see his prudence, in not restraining sin
physically; and withal his goodness, in curbing it morally.

LXXV.
God wills the death of a sinner, because he foresaw the impenitencie of the
sinner: this is his consequent, not his antecedent will; in this, his will
depends not on the creatures actions, but on his own prescience: his will may
be Posterior to the foreseen sin of the creature, but no ways depending on the
will of the creature. In willing the death of sinners, he shows his justice;
in willing the death but of some sinners, he shows his goodness.

LXXVI.
All men may believe, only some men will believe; in all there is a
possibility, in some only a velleitie: the possibility to believe, is the
gift of nature; but the will to believe, is the gift of grace: the one we have
by Creation, the other by Regeneration. Lord, what is possibility without
will, and nature without grace? As in Generation thou gave me a reasonable
soul, that had a capabilitie to believe in thee; so, in my Regeneration, give
me a sanctified will, that I may actually and constantly believe in thee.

LXXVII.
He that bestows Faith upon sinners, bestows also Salvation upon repentant
sinners; by faith we are brought to repentance, by repentance we are prepared
for salvation. Lord, if thou had not bestowed faith upon Peter, to believe in
thee, he had not repented for denying thee; and if he had not repented, he had
not been saved: lead me then, by the hand of faith, to the Jordan of
repentance; that, being washed there from my spots, I may see Heaven opened
with Christ, and with him enjoy thy Spirit, and light of thy Countenance.

LXXVIII.
There is in Gods will both a necessity, and a liberty; he wills necessarily
what concerns himself, he wills freely what concerns other things besides
himself: he did necessarily will his own glory, he did freely will and decree
my felicity. Lord, thou could not but will thine own honor and goodness;
thou could not have willed my happiness: the more free thou wast from
necessity in willing my felicity, the more am I bound to praise the glory of
thy mercy.

LXXIX.
Gods will has a twofold consideration, one as it is concealed, another as it
is revealed; the former has relation to his own actions, the other to ours;
what he will do himself is concealed, what he will have us do is revealed:
this will is not always forcible, the other is powerful and irresistible.
Lord, let me follow the directions of thy revealed will, and not meddle with
the hid secrets of thy concealed will. I will not be too forward to know what
thou have not revealed, nor will I be too backward to do what thou have
commanded.

LXXX.
God has decreed to bestow on man first grace, then glory: to the decree of
giving grace, preterition is opposite; to the decree of giving glory,
reprobation: no man is debarred from glory, but he that was first deprived of
grace; preterition then is the antecedent to reprobation, and the want of grace
to the want of glory. Thus they whom God does here honor with the spiritual
crown of grace, shall be hereafter graced with the eternal crown of honor.

LXXXI.
That is a just law which is given by him that has right to impose it, and
imposed on him who has power to perform it: such was the law that God gave to
Adam; the one had power to give, the other power to keep it. Lord, thy law is
just which thou have given to me, because thou have power to impose it; this
law will not be the less just, if thou will assist me, and give me power to
obey it.

LXXXII.
As Gods will has relation to his own actions, it is accompanied with
omnipotency; as it has relation to our actions, it is regulated by justice:
for, when he will do what he has determined, he cannot be resisted; so, when
he will have us do what he has commanded, he cannot be unjust: what he
himself will do, is best known to him; what he will have us do, is not unknown
to us. Lord, as it is thy will, that I do that which thou command, wherein
thou show thy justice; so let it be thy will to command that, which by thy
help I can do, and therein show thy goodness.

LXXXIII.
He that opposes Gods revealed will, which can be resisted; deserves to be
hardened by Gods concealed will, which cannot be resisted: for that will of God
which is not done by him, shall be done on him. Lord, assist me to follow the
direction of that will which is revealed, that I may avoid the destruction
which by that other will is decreed: for although, by the secret will of thy
Voluntas placiti.
pleasure, thou have determined death for obstinate sinners; yet, by the
pleasure Voluntas signi.
of thy revealed will, thou have proposed life to penitent sinners.

LXXXIIII.
God in his goodness made man a vessel of mercy, Satan in malice made him a
vessel of misery; therefore God in his justice has made him a vessel of his
wrath and fury: God made the vessel, which, whilst it staid in his hand,
remained sound; falling from thence, it has received a crack, therefore, by
this crack being made unserviceable, it is rejected. Lord, the substance of the
vessel is thine, the crack is mine; I have made my self unfit to serve thee,
therefore justly may thou refuse to honor me.

LXXXV.
God hated Pharaoh, not because he hardened him, but because he obstinately
resisted God, therefore he hated him, and consequently hardened him; and that
not by the force of his omnipotency, but by his patience and longanimitie.
Lord, if I by thy goodness should take occasion to become obstinate in
wickedness, why may not thou take occasion by my perverseness, to obdurate
me in my sins, and to debar me from grace and happiness? Therefore, I pray
thee, keep me from obstinacy, that thy patience, by my sins, may not be turned
into fury.

LXXXVI.
There be two sorts of carnal men; some are carnal in knowledge, some in
affections: the former sort are children, who are fed with milk, and not yet,
with spiritual men, able to judge of all things; the other sort are wicked
men, who walk after the flesh, not after the spirit, and have not mortified the
deeds of the flesh: now God is a Spirit, and will be worshipped in spirit.
Lord, remove from me all fleshly understanding, that I may conceive thee
spiritually; and remove from me all carnal affections, that I may love thee
spiritually. Give me the love of knowledge, that I may attain to the knowledge
of thy love: Make me by the spirit of understanding, to come to the
understanding of thy Spirit.

LXXXVII.
Goodness has a twofold residence; one in the mind, the other in the flesh:
when it is there, I will good; when it is here, I do good: it is good to have the
knowledge of good, and that is in the mind; it is good to subdue and mortify
sinful lusts, and that is in the flesh: the former goodness is sometimes in
wicked men, the other is only in good men. Lord, place in my mind the
goodness of knowledge, whereby I may see and understand thee; and place in my
flesh the goodness of holiness, whereby I may love and enjoy thee: for what is
knowledge without goodness, and sight without enjoyment? It is by knowledge I
see, it is by love I enjoy.

LXXXVIII.
1. There is in us an inward man, so there is an outward. 2. There is a new
man, so there is an old man. 3. There is a law of the mind, so there is a law
of the members, and there is a law also of the spirit of life. 4. There is a
voluntary dominion in sin, and there is an involuntarie. 5. There is an
universal tyranny of sin, and there is a particular. 6. There is a
regeneration in the mind and will, and there is a regeneration in the members
and affections. 7. There is a complete will, or volition; and there is an
incomplete will, or velleitie. 8. There is a general, or confused judgment;
and there is a more particular, or distinct judgment. 1. The inward man is the
mind, the outward man is the body. 2. The new man is grace, the old man is
sin. 3. The law of the mind is knowledge and conscience, the law of the
members is sin, the law of the Spirit of life is saving grace. 4. The wicked
are under the voluntary, the godly under the involuntarie dominion of sin. 5.
Original sin is an universal tyrant, actual sins are particular tyrants. 6.
Regeneration in the mind and will, is knowledge and desire; Regeneration in
the members, is action, or working the will of God. 7. Volition follows the
last judgment of reason, velleitie follows the antecedent, or confused
judgment. 8. By a general and confused judgment, my will affects the good
which is commanded by Gods law; by a particular and distinct judgment, my will
affects the evil which is condemned by Gods Law. Lord,1 as I praise thee for
the inward and the outward man,2 so will I much more praise thee, if thou will
strengthen in me the new man of grace, and weaken the old man of sin;3 if thou will give me the law of the spirit of life, to illuminate the law of the mind,
and to debilitate the law of the members:4 Make my service of sin
involuntarie;5 and though I cannot be free from that catholic tyrant of
original sin, yet in thy mercy deliver me from the insolency of these
particular tyrants, my actual sins:6 And let not my Regeneration be only
intellectual, but also operative and effectual. 7 Rectify and clear my
judgment, that it may direct my will: 8 And make my will to affect the good
which thou c^mmandest, and to dis-affect the evil which thou condemnest.

LXXXIX.
Though Predestination, as it is an act or work of God, can nothing be
furthered or hindered by our good or wicked lives; yet salvation, which is the
effect of Predestination, may be furthered by prayers and holiness, hindered
by our infidelity and wickedness: for God who preordained Salvation,
preordained also the means which may help forward our Salvation. Lord, let not
the conceit of my Election dull me with security, or puff me up with
presumption: but assist me, that by good works I may make my Election sure, and
in fear and trembling I may work out my Salvation.

XC.
There are three books of life; the one is Gods Register book, the other is
Gods book of Statutes, the third is his book of Records. In the first, as in a
Register, are set down all the names of the predestinate; in the second, which
is the Scripture, are set out all the duties that are to be performed by the
predestinate; in the third are set down all the good actions and sufferings of
the predestinate: Out of the first we cannot be blotted, for our names are
written in Heaven; and though an earthly mother may forget the fruit of her
womb, yet our heavenly Father cannot forget the fruit of his Spirit. Out of the
third book we may be blotted, because our sins may occasion him to forget our
good works, and to slight our sufferings. Lord, I confess that I have slighted
thy sacred Book of divine Statutes, therefore thou may justly blot me out of
the book of thy remembrance: but in that thou have not blotted my name out of
thy first book, I ascribe it to thy immutabilitie; and if thou will not blot
out my patience and sufferings out of thy other book, I will admire and praise
thy mercy.

XCI.
Though God loves all men, yet he saves not all men: he loves them, because he
made them; he saves them not, because he willed it not: he could not in justice
will all men's Salvation, seeing man by his voluntary unjustice deprived himself
of Salvation; he loves his own image, but hates that which defaced his image;
he loves the man, but hates the sin; and if it were not for sin, he would not
punish man. Lord, thy love to man is unspeakable, in that thou savest some; and
thy justice is unsearchable, in that thou savest not all. I cannot blame thy
justice, but my sins, that caused my misery; I cannot brag of my merits, but
of thy goodness, that moved thee to mercy.

XCII.
God hates the sins of man, because he loves his own justice with the love of
Amor benevolentiae.
complacencie; he hates the miseries of man, because he loves man's welfare with
the love of Amor amicitiae.
amity; but by accident he loves the death of wicked men, because he hates the
works of iniquite. Thus it is as natural for God to hate evil, as it is to
love himself; and as impossible for him to love evil, as it is to hate himself.

XCIII.
Christ loved us when we were his enemies, and he loves us being his friends:
when we were his foes, he suffered death for us; being his friends, he has
purchased life to us: that love was greater then this, if we consider the
object; this love is greater then that, if we consider the benefit. O my God,
how am I bound to thee, who when I was thine enemy, did wear the crown of
thorns for me; and being now thy friend have bestowed a Crown of glory on me:
Let not the servant repine to bear the reproaches of so gracious a master, who
was content to bear the sins and shame of so ungracious a servant.

XCIIII.
God did first will his own glory. 2. Man's existence. 3. His righteousness. 4.
His own Promises. 5. The execution or accomplishment of them concerning man's
happiness. Gods glory is the great wheel of this clock, which moves all the
rest; the final cause, which moves all other causes. Had it not been for his
glory, I had neither had being, nor well-being; he gave me existence, he made
me to his image, he promised me happiness, and he has performed it, to the
end I might glorify him. Shall I then dishonor thee, O God, by whom I am what
I am, when I look on my creation; and am by grace what I am not by nature, when
I look on my regeneration? Therefore I will praise the glory of thy power, for
my existence; the glory of thy goodness, for my righteousness; the glory of
thy mercy in promising, and the glory of thy truth in performing what thou have
promised, though thus I have not deserved.

XCV.
All the afflictions of Gods people are either punishments, chastisements, or
probations; punishments for sins past, chastisements to prevent sins to come,
probations to make trial of our Christian virtues: and, though Christ was
punished for our sins, to free us from eternal torments; yet we are not
thereby exempted from temporary punishments: he died to save us from death
eternal, not from death temporal: he both suffered and satisfied; we suffer,
though we cannot satisfy: our sufferings are to show our conformity with
Christ, but not to show any insufficiency in the death of Christ. Thou, O
Lord, have paid a plenarie ransom for sin; and thou that knew no sin,
becamest sin, and did suffer death as a punishment for us, that we who are
born in sin might be free from sin, that death might not be a punishment, but a
chastisement to us.

XCVI.
As by one simple act God knows his own Essence, so by one simple act he wills
his own goodness; which will, whether we take it for an act or for an habit,
is eternally in God, and differs but in some respects from his essence, and
therefore is immutable, infinite, and holy as his Essence: and though many
things are willed by him, yet there is but one will in him; which cannot be
moved by any efficient end, or object different from himself. Lord, though my
will cannot attain that simplicity, infiniteness, and immutabilitie that is
in thee: yet let it obtain some measure of holiness, that in desiring of that
only which is good, it may in some measure resemble thine.

XCVII.
All have not had the happiness to hear of Christ, and yet there is no
happiness without Christ: in this God is not unjust, for they who either in
themselves, or in their parents have rejected him, are not worthy of him;
besides, God has not left himself without a witness, for he has left a law
written in all men's hearts, and so much light of his goodness and justice as
may make all men excuselesse. If therefore they shall be rejected that had not
that light of knowledge which we have: how can we think we are elected, who
have even spurned at the knowledge of that light which they have not?

XCVIII.
Regeneration, which is the killing of the old man, and quickening of the new,
has for her ushers Sorrow and Contrition; for her Attendants Faith and Hope;
for her followers the works of Charity: if any of these be defective,
Generation will be little effective: neither is this the work of nature, but of
grace; for nature by generation can give us a mortal essence, but grace by
regeneration gives us an immortal existence: in our first birth we had a new
nature from our corporal parents, in our second birth, nature is renewed by
our spiritual parents: So easy is the work of physical generation, that it is
performed in the instant of our conception; so difficult is the work of
hyperphysicall regeneration, that we cannot be consummately reformed, till the
instant of our dissolution. Lord, the great world was with greater facility by
thee created, then the little world of man could by thee be re-created; that
was done only by uttering thy external word, this could not be done, but by
the suffering of thy internal Word: therefore, as I am bound to thee for the
tempor all life, which in my generation by thy spirit thou breathedst in me;
much more am I bound for that eternal life, which, in my regeneration, by thy
Sons death, thou have purchased for me.

XCIX.
In thy sight, O Lord, no flesh can be justified, if we consider the purity of
thy nature, the rigor of thy justice, the infirmities of our flesh, and the
imperfections of our righteousness: For the first, the Angels are not pure in
thy sight, much less we who dwell in houses of clay: For the second, if thou
should mark, Lord, what is done amiss, who could abide it? For the third,
there is no man that does good, no not one, we are all gone out of the way: For
the fourth, the justest man falls seven times a day, and our righteousness is
like a menstruous cloth. Therefore we acknowledge, Lord, there is no
righteousness inherent in us, by which we can be saved, but that
righteousness which is inherent in thee, and imputed to us, and by that we are
justified; and there is in thee exuberance of mercies, by which we may be
pardoned.

C.
We are justified by grace formally, by faith instrumentally, by the word
ministerially, by good works demonstratively, by sorrow and repentance
preparatively, by Christ's death and obedience meritoriously, and by God himself
principally: if then God be the efficient cause, if Christ's active and passive
obedience be the material, if grace be the formal, if Gods glory be the
final cause of our justification; how can we claim any share in it? We are
only subjects and patients, no ways agents; our good works are but fruits and
effects, no ways causes; our sorrow and repentance are effects of preventing
grace, not of free will; our faith is from above, not from our selves.
Therefore, O Lord, I disclaim all merit of congruitie and condignitie, all
efficacy of Sacraments, all suffrages of Saints, all power of Roman Prelates,
all absolution of Priests, all observation of humane tradition, and all
will worship, from my justification. I acknowledge no other merits but thy
mercies; by thy grace thou preventedst my merits; my merits are thy sufferings,
my holiness is thy goodness; my righteousness is but a sparkle of thy
brightness, a drop of that Ocean, a grain of that heap, a stone of that
immense mountain of thy incomprehensible goodness; for which I am indebted to
thee, not thou to me: Therefore, not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but to thy
Name we glve the glory.

DIVINE MEDITATIONS UPON Gods Justice.
I.
GOD will not pardon any sin, except we repent of every sin; for as he that
breaks one command, is guilty of the breach of all; so he that fails in
repenting of one sin, repents of never a sin. God loves not to do things by
halves, he will pardon all, or none; and he will have us repent of all, or
none: for, as it stands not with his goodness and perfection to give an
imperfect pardon; so it consists not with the sincerity of repentance, to
conceal any sin not repented: as he ejected seven devils out of one, and a
legion out of another, without leaving any behind in the possessed; so he will
have us cast out all our sins, without hiding of any unrepented. What availes
it to be freed from Satan's power in casting us into the water of drunkenness,
if he can, when he pleases, fling us into the fire of concupiscence? O thou
that art the great Physician of my soul, to thee I open all my wounds, and
disclose all my maladies: make me, by the vomit of confession, to cast up all
my sinful humors before thee; that, by the cordial of a general pardon, my
soul may be cured, and totally saved by thee.

II.
So severe is the great Judge of the quick and the dead, that when he shall
come to judge the world in righteousness, at his presence the powers of Heaven
shall shake, the elements shall melt, the stars shall fall, the sun shall be
darkened, the sea shall roar, and the moon shall give no light; yea, the
heavens shall be rolled up like a scrole, and shall pass away with a noise.
Lord, if the righteous shall scarcely be saved, where shall sinners appear? If
there be no purity in the Angels, nor stabilitie in the heavens, nor holiness
in thy Saints, what shall become of me, who am sold under sin, and drinks in
iniquity as water? But my comfort is, that thou have committed all judgment
to thy Son, who died for sinners. Shall I fear to be judged by a brother; or
appear before a Savior? He that left Heaven to suffer death for me, will he
after death shut Heaven against me? I will not fear from that mouth the
sentence of condemnation, which by prayer has been the means of mediation
between God and me. Surely, he that came to seek that which was lost, will not
loose that, which he came to seek.

III.
Such is the severitie of Gods Justice, that he will not exempt his own
children from temporary punishments, though he died for them: 1. Because, like
gold, they must shine in the furnace of affliction. 2. That they may not be
damned with the world. 3. That they may be the better fitted for Heaven; for
they must be baptized in this red sea, before they can obtain that heavenly
Canaan; and through the temple of Virtue must pass into the temple of Honor.
4. That the wicked may have less cause to complain when they see Gods own
Sons not spared. 5. That by chastisements sin may be suppressed, as Paul's
pride by an Angel of Satan was buffetted. 6. That the Patience, Faith, and
Obedience of the Saints might be manifested and exercised; that the metal of
their virtues may not, for want of exercise, be rusted. 7. That in some sort
they might be made conformable to Christ their Master; for, if he suffered for
sin, that knew not sin, shall we escape punishment, that are born, live, and
die in sin? Shall the head be wounded with thorns, and the members sleep in
beds of Roses? 8. That others by their example may be animated to run with
patience the race which is set before them. 9. That Gods love to them may be
testified; for he passes by bastards, and corrects those whom he loves. Lord,
with all reverence I kiss thy rod; by it I am bettered; thy flail does not
break me, but separates the chafe from me; thy fire purifieth, but consumes
me not; in thy mortar, the more that the spices of my virtues are bruised, the
more they are made fragrant: My spiritual Camomell by thy treading is not
spoiled, but made more redolent: in thy Press, though, like grapes, I am
squeezed, yet the precious liquor of my virtues are not lost, but increased;
the more that the storms of afflictions beat upon me, so much the more, like a
strong Cedar, let my roots be fastened in thee; the darker the night is, I will,
like a star fastened in thy firmament, shine the cleerer; and the more burden
thou layest upon me, with the Palm, I will rise the higher. I acknowledge,
Lord, thy goodness, in that thou have not drowned the Ark of my soul in the
flood of afflictions, but have raised it higher then the highest mountains:
Thy rod has sweetened my bitter waters; and thy salt has preserved me from
rottenness.

IIII.
Such is the severitie of Gods Justice, that some men's temporary sins are
punished with eternal pains; because the person offended is eternal, the
happiness which they lost is eternal, their desire to sin is eternal, the
malice of Satan in tormenting men is eternal; the Justice of God is immutable,
the fire of hell is inextinguishable, the repentance of wicked men in hell is
impossible, the wrath of God without Christ is implacable. Lord, make me
seriously to meditate upon these infernal pains, which for acerbitie are
unspeakable, for variety innumerable, for permanencie interminable; that I may
not run the hazard of suffering endless torments, for the enjoyment of a few,
short, and fruitless vanities: make me to prevent thy wrath by timely
repentance, that I may, before I go hence, obtain thy favor and indulgence.

V.
As God in his Justice suffers his Children to lie under the rod of correction,
and adversity; so does he permit wicked men to flourish with all outward
prosperity. Lazarus starves, whilst the rich Glutton surfets: whilst Joseph is
a prisoner, his brethren are at liberty; and whilst Belshazzar is feasting,
Gods people are in captivity. This God is pleased to suffer: 1. That his
goodness may appear, which causes his sun to shine upon the good and bad. 2.
To make the wicked inexcusable, who have not wanted the bait of outward
blessings to bring them to goodness. 3. That we may know worldly prosperities
to be none of Gods choicest blessings, seeing bad men enjoy them; and outward
adversities to be none of his chiefest judgments, seeing good men are annoyed
by them. 4. That the wicked may not complain for wanting the reward of their
good actions; verily they have received their reward here: let them be content
with their temporary blessings, that is all the reward they shall have; let
them take then that which is their own, and go their way. 5. The more outward
prosperity is heaped on them, the greater judgments are prepared for them. 6.
It stands with Gods Justice, that these temporal vanities which they prefer
to life eternal, should be the occasion of their stumbling and downfall. 7.
Here is the comfort of Gods Children, that he who heaps so many outward and
earthly benefits on his Enemies, will not forget to bestow inward and heavenly
blessings on his Friends: if the few good actions of wicked men are here so
plentifully rewarded, surely the many sufferings of good men cannot be forgot
and obliterated. O my God, as thy outward blessings, which are but temporal,
content not my desires, which are immortal; neither am I assured by them that
thou love me, seeing thou bestowest them on such as hate thee: therefore,
Lord, confer on whom thou will wealth and honor; that which I desire of
thee, is thy love and favor.

VI.
It stands with Gods Justice to suffer us to fall into diverse doubts and
tentations, when we are puffed up with pride and conceit of our own
excellencies; he will by such means humble us, that we may see our own
infirmities; he will suffer us, with Peter, to sink in these waters, that with
him we may fly to our Master Jesus: the Angel of Satan is permitted to buffet
us, that we may, with Paul, pray to him whose grace is sufficient for us: God
himself in these tentations wrestles with us, as the Angel did with Jacob; but
we must not despair though we halt: he that strives with us all the night,
will give us a blessing in the morning; and he that commanded Abraham to
sacrifice his only son, will send an Angel to Abraham to rescue his son; though
Satan seek to winnow us, yet we have a supporter of our faith, a Savior who
prays to his Father for us. Fear not drowning, though these billows of
tentations shake our ship, so long as we have Christ with us in the ship,
though our tentations are unpleasing, (for a wounded spirit who can bear?)
though all the waves and storms of the Almighty go over our head, though
from our youth up we suffer his terrors with a troubled mind, though he give
us vinegar and gall to drink, and feed us with the bread of tears: in a word,
though he would slay us, yet, with Job, let us trust in him; he will lay no
more on us then we can bear; he can make the same rod that beats us, support
and comfort us; and though the vinegar which he powers into our wounds be
sharp, yet he will temper it with oil: he can sweeten our corrupted potage
with meal, as well as our corrupted waters with salt. What though the gall of
tentations be bitter; what though the spitle and clay of afflictions be
unpleasant, so long as he can by them recover our spiritual eyesight, which
we by pride have lost? Give the Physician leave to lance and scarifie, so long
as by such means he can cure thee of thy malady. O great Physician of my
soul, I will not refuse to swallow the bitter Aloes of afflictions, if by them
thou can purge out the rank humors of my sickly affections. If I cannot
obtain the Crown, but by fighting in this bloody field; if I cannot attain the
haven of Heaven, but by sailing through this stormy sea; be thou my Pilot to
conduct me, my Captain to lead me, and my King to reward me, or rather thy own
work in me. O my God, if these waters of tentation do at any time overflow
their banks, like Jordan, let the presence of the true Ark of the Covenant
drive back these waters, that I may pass safely through them to the land of
eternity: let the rod of thy passions divide this red sea of tribulations, and
let the long robe of thy righteousness, which far exceeds Elijah's mantle in
virtue and largeness, make me a way through this Jordan, to the Kingdom of
true happiness.

VII.
1. God in his severe Justice does often punish a multitude for the sins of
one man; one Achan offends, and all the host of Israel suffers. 2. Oftentimes
he punishes the children for the parents, to the third and fourth generation.
3. Sometimes he punishes the good for the sins of the bad; Mordecai, Daniel,
and the three Children are punished with captivity, for the Jews rebellion
and iniquity. 4. Oftentimes for man's transgressions, he destroys the dumb
creatures; Man sinned, and the earth with the beasts are destroyed. In this God
is not unjust, though his judgments be occult: for, if the Surgeon can
strike the arm for the infirmity of the head, why may not God punish one for
the offense of another, if by punishing the one, he can cure the other? 1. It
was no injustice in God to punish a multitude for the sin of Achan, because the
multitude was guilty of other sins, though not of the sin of Achan. 2. It
is no injustice in God to punish children for the sin of their parents, because
they are parts of their parents. 3. Neither is it injustice in God to punish
the good, for the offenses of the wicked, because no man is so good, that can
say, he is no ways wicked. 4. It is no injustice in God to punish the
creatures for man's transgression, seeing it was Gods goodness to make the
creatures for man's use and recreation: thus, as God can justly punish a whole
nation for the sins of a wicked Prince, so as justly can God punish a good
Prince for the sins of a wicked nation. O Lord, if harmless Infants, who
have not sinned but in their parents, are not exempted from thy justice; how
shall I, who to the stock of my parents sins have added such an increase of
actual transgressions, think to escape? And if the dumb creatures, which know
not sin, are punished for mine iniquity; do not I deserve to be punished both
for mine own sins, and for subjecting the creature unto vanity?

VIII.
Gods Justice appears in punishing the wicked, in releeving the oppressed, in
rejecting the bribes of rich men, in refusing to accept the persons of any men,
in pronouncing just judgment, and putting the same in execution toward all
men; and in tempering his justice with mercy toward the most wicked men: He
drowned the first world for their abominations: he relieved the Israelites from
their oppressions: he spared not kings and rich men for their wealth and
greatness; and yet in sparing some, when he drowned the world, he showed his
mercy and goodness. O thou righteous Judge of the world, look with the eye of
Justice upon the oppressions of thy Church, and remove them; and with that same
eye of Justice look on her oppressors, and destroy them: but yet with the other
eye of mercy look upon such of her persecutors as thou will save, and in time
reclaim them.

DIVINE MEDITATIONS UPON Gods Mercy.
I.
AS there is in God no passion, so consequently no compassion; yet he is truly
the God of Mercy, because there is in him a promptitude to help those that are
in misery: This mercy he extends not only to the good that love him, but also
to the bad that hate him: 1. That they who are bad by their own perverseness,
may be made good by his love and kindness. 2. As no man is so bad, in whom
there is not some goodness; and no man so good, in whom there is not some
wickedness: so God is not so unjust, as to suffer the one to go unpunished;
nor is he so merciless, as to suffer the other to go unrewarded. 3. As he
shows mercy to the bad, and to those by whom he is hated; he will teach us,
by his example, how to carry our selves to those by whom we are persecuted. He
healed the ear of him that came to apprehend him; he forgave Peter that denied
him; he made Paul a vessel of mercy, though he persecuted him; he prayed for
those that crucified him; and he died for those sheep that went astray from
him: he causes his sun to shine upon the good and bad; his rain to fall upon
the just and unjust. O my God, I acknowledge thy goodness and mercy toward
me a wretched sinner, who am sold under sin, and laden with iniquity: O let
this thy goodness be a forcible means to reclaim me from the course of
sin; that I may henceforth walk before thee in truth, in righteousness, and
in sincerity.

II.
A great argument of Gods goodness and mercy is his forbearance and
longanimitie: he stretches out his hands all day long to a rebellious
generation. Why will you die, O house of Israel? As I live, says the Lord, I
will not the death of a sinner. Many miracles did he work to turn Pharaohs
heart: sixscore years did he spend to bring the first world to repentance:
many Prophets did he send, before he would destroy the Jews; he would have
healed Babylon, but she would not be healed; he would have gathered Jerusalem,
as the hen gathers her chickens under her wings, but she would not be
gathered: How loath was he to cut down the fig tree, though fruitless? how
loath was he to destroy his Vineyard, though grapelesse? how loath to overthrow
the Jews, though graceless? O Lord, I confess, that thy forbearance in
punishing me so great a sinner, proceeds not from any liking thou take in my
sinning, for thou art most good: nor for any neglect in correcting, for thou
art most just: nor for any ignorance that can be in thee, for thou art
omniscient: nor for any impotencie that can befall thee, for thou art
omnipotent; but only out of thy goodness and mercy toward me, who
delightest not in any man's destruction, but patiently waitest for the sinners
conversion. Lord, I am more bound to thee for thy long forbearance, then the
Angels, who sinned in Heaven, and Adam in Paradise: they had no sooner offended
thee, but they were rejected by thee; I have oftentimes sinned, and yet I am
spared. O let me not abuse thy long animitie by presumption, but let it work in
me a true and speedy conversion.

III.
God shows his great mercy toward us, in using so many means to call us:
when we are weary, he bids us come to him, and he will ease us; when we are
thirsty, he bids us come and drink, that with these waters of life he may
refresh us; when we are hungry, he bids us come and eat, for with his own body
he will feed us; when we have fought, and got the victory, he will bid us come
to receive the Crown of glory, which he has laid up for us. He calls us by
his Spirit inwardly, and by his Word outwardly: Every good motion is a call,
and an inward knocking: every Preacher is a Messenger, every Sermon is a
Summons, every Scripture is a Love-letter, by which he invites and calls us.
Besides, every benefit that we receive from him, is a Messenger to invite us to
him: every morning the sun rises, not only to give us light, but to invite us
unto him who is the fountain of light: every night the moon or stars appear,
not only to lessen the darkness of the air, but also to drive away the
darkness of the mind; to call us both out of corporal and spiritual
obscurity; Every drop of rain, every flower in the field, every ear of corn,
every grape in thy Vineyard, every increase of thy flock, every addition to thy
stock, are so many trumpetters of Gods mercy, to stir up and call thee.
Again, every cross and affliction he lays upon us, whether sickness,
poverty, banishment, imprisonment, or infamy, are so many Heralds sent to
summon and call us. Besides all these, the horror of hell-darkness, which
shall never be illightened; of that fire, which shall never be extinguished; of
that thirst, which shall never be quenched; of that worm, that shall never be
consumed; of that weeping and gnashing of teeth, which shall never be ended;
are proposed to us as so many sad Apparitors to summon us: But, lastly, if none
of these will prevail with us, then the joys of Heaven are painted out unto
us; the light that knows no darkness, the joy that knows no sorrow, the life
that knows no death, the comfort of Gods countenance, the beauty of the new
Jerusalem, the society of holy Angels, the company of Christ, and of all the
blessed Souls; the rivers of delight, fullness of joy, and pleasures for
evermore. O God, how wonderful is thy goodness, which thou have showed to me,
in profering so many baits to catch and draw me out of the turbulent sea of
this world, unto the shore of eternal happiness! But I have not obeyed thy
outward invitations, nor inward motions: I have not taken notice of thy
benefits, nor of thy chastisements; not of thy threatenings, nor of thy
promises. Lord, I am so backward, thou must not only call me, but compel me;
thou must not only warn me, but thou must draw me, and then I will cheerfully
run after thee.

IIII.
The mercy of God appears also in this, that, after our relapses, he is ready
to receive us: his mercies are those sweet ointments, which make the Virgins
follow him. He came to call sinners to repentance, to save that which was lost:
he rejected not that sinful Mary Magdalene, nor Matthew, though a Publican;
nor the Canaanitish woman, though a dog; nor the Thief upon the Cross, nor
Peter that denied him, nor the Jews that crucified him, nor Paul that
persecuted him: that loving Father in the Gospel did not receive his prodigal
Son when he returned, nor the shepherd that sheep which went astray, nor the
woman her groat which she had lost, with so much joy and gladness, as he will
us, if we return to him by repentance. O Lord, I have gone astray, like a lost
sheep, from thee; I have, like a Prodigal, spent that patrimony of grace
which thou gave me; I have gone a whoring after this vain world, and have
forsaken thee: O thou that art a careful Shepherd, a pitiful Father, a loving
Husband, reject not thy lost sheep, thy prodigal son, thy disloyal wife.
Shall I despair to come unto thee, whose arms are stretched out on the cross
to embrace me, whose head bends downward to kiss me, whose heart is opened
to receive and entertain me?

V.
Gods mercy is to be considered, either as it is in him, or as it is from him:
as it is in him, it is his act or habit; as it is from him, it is his effect:
as it is in him, it is immutable; as it is from him, it is changeable: as it is
in him, it is necessary; as it is from him, it is voluntary (for he will have
mercy on whom he will:) as it is in him, it is his (...).
power; as it is from him, it is his (...).
operation: as it is in God, it is God; for nothing is eternal except God, but
his mercy is eternal, from generation to generation, says David: it is not
lawful to trust in any, but in God; yet David trusts in Gods mercy;
doubtless then his mercy is himself: and, being it is so, his mercy and
justice are all one, though the effects of his justice and mercy are different.
Lord, as thy justice is seen in punishing sinners; so is thy mercy manifested
in sparing them; as thy justice was unspeakeable in punishing thy Son for my
sin, so is thy mercy incomprehensible in pardoning my sin by the punishing of
thy Son.

VI.
As Christ's active and passive obedience is the meritorious cause, so is Gods
free mercy and grace the impulsive cause of our Justification and Salvation:
And although God was bound in justice to pardon our transgressions, having
received full satisfaction by his Sons death and mediation, yet was he not
bound in justice to send his Son into the world, or to make him an atonement
for our prevarications: to send a Mediator, who, by his obedience, might make
satisfaction, and consequently save us, was an act of his free grace and
mercy, to which he was not tied; but having sent a Mediator, who, by his
obedience, has made satisfaction, it is an act of justice now to save us, and
to this he is necessarily tied. O my God, how much am I bound to love and
honor thee, who have bound thy self to justify and save me? I pray thee, as
thou have divested thy self of thine own liberty in condemning me, and have
freely subjected thy self to necessity, that thou might save me; so debar
me from all liberty in offending thee, and impose on me this necessity, that
all my days I may love and serve thee.

VII.
To show mercy, and to pardon sin, are not of equal extent; for God shows
mercy to all that are in misery, but he only pardons their sins whom he
means to glorify: he is merciful to the wicked, in causing his sun to shine,
and his rain to fall, and in bestowing of many outward blessings on them; but
he pardons only the sins of them, who by repentance turn from sin to him,
and by faith lay hold on Christ that died for them. And, although God be mercy
it self, or merciful in the highest degree; yet, without satisfaction, he will
not pardon iniquity; because pardoning is an act rather of his free will, then
of his mercy: neither is it essential to his mercy to pardon, for so he should
pardon all to whom he is merciful; which is not true: and though he is
merciful to all those whom he pardons, yet the act of pardoning is not
mercy, but the effect of mercy: for his mercy is essential, immutable,
necessary; but to pardon is a free and mutable act: therefore, as Gods justice
is not prejudiced by punishing one for the sins of another, seeing that other
undertook voluntarily to suffer punishment; so neither is Gods mercy wronged by
pardoning that sin for which satisfaction is made, because the satisfaction was
not made by the party that offended: it was justice then in God to punish
Christ for our sins, because voluntarily he took upon him our sins; so it
was mercy in God to pardon that sin, for which Christ had fully satisfied. It
was justice in God the Son, having become our surety, to satisfy for us; so it
was mercy in God the Father to apply and impute his Sons satisfaction to us.
I confess, Lord, that though thou art bound in justice to pardon my sin, for
which thou art fully satisfied; yet thou art not bound in justice to impute
that satisfaction, or to account it mine; seeing by my personal righteousness
thou have not been satisfied. I will admire thy justice in punishing thy Son
for the sins which by him were not committed, and I will magnify thy mercy in
forgiving my sins, for which I have no ways satisfied.

VIII.
The highest degree of Gods mercy was in sending of his only begotten Son
into the world, to be our Jesus, to procure Salvation for us; which he did, not
by showing us the way of Salvation only, or by declaring his Fathers will unto
us, or by showing us the example of his life and death; but by paying the price
of our Redemption: for we are reconciled to God by the death of his Son, Romans
5. 10. we are redeemed by the precious blood of that immaculate Lamb, 1 Pet. 1.
18. his blood was given for the remission of sins, Matthew. 26. 28. we are
justified by his blood, Romans 5. 8. he was made a curse, to free us from the
curse of the law, Gal. 3. 13. by his death he has abolished death, etc. Heb.
2. 14. the Son of man came to give his life for the Redemption of many, Mat.
20. 28. his blood cleanses us from all sin, 1 Ioh. 1. 7. by his stripes we are
healed, Isai. 53. 5. he made himself a sacrifice for sin, Isai. 53. 10.
therefore it is by his blood, by his sacrifice, by his death, by his stripes,
that we are saved, expiated, justified, redeemed, cleansed, healed: and it was
for our sins that he suffered, Romans 4. 25. for our iniquities that he was
bruised, Isai. 53. 5. our transgressions he bore in his body on the tree; and
upon him was laid the iniquity of us all, Isai. 53. 7. neither did he
undertake this wretched condition for us forcedly, but freely; nor was the
death temporal, but eternal in the intention, and greatness of the torments;
neither was Christ's death a bare manifestation, but a just price of our
Redemption: for in him we have Redemption by his blood, remission of sins, etc.
Ephesians. 1. 5. we are redeemed by the precious blood of that immaculate Lamb Christ
Jesus, 1 Pet. 1. 18. which was represented by the Leviticall sacrifices, save
only that the Leviticall Priest offered for his own sins, and for the sins
of the people; but Christ had no sins of his own for which he should offer: And
as the Priests office was to offer sacrifice, and to make intercession, Christ
performed the one upon the Cross, when by his death he made satisfaction, and
blotted out the handwriting of Ordinances; but the other, Christ performs in
Heaven, interceding for us, and applying his death unto us; for we have an
Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, 1* Ioh. 2. 1. whose
Intercession must not be confounded with his oblation, because this was once
performed, and cannot be iterated, for he cannot die often, Heb. 9. 25. and
with one oblation he has consecrated for ever those that are sanctified, Heb.
10. 14. but his Intercession is performed daily, for he is entered into Heaven,
that he might appear in the sight of God for us, Heb. 9. 24. by virtue of
whose propitiatory sacrifice we are not taught the way to offer and reconcile
our selves to God, but by him we are reconciled, redeemed, justified, saved. O
my God, who is able to comprehend the height, depth, breadth, and length of thy
unspeakable mercy? In height it reaches to the heavens, in confirming the
Angels; in depth it reaches to hell, for thou deliveredst David from the
nethermost hell; in breadth it extends from East to West, over all the world,
even over all thy works; and the length thereof is from generation to
generation: Therefore there is none of thy Attributes so gracious and admirable
as thy mercy: for, as there is nothing greater in thee, then that thou can;
so there is nothing better, then that thou will have mercy on those that are in
misery.

FINIS.

