A CATALOGUE Of Approved DIVINITY-BOOKS, Which have been Printed or reprinted
about twenty Years past, And Continued down to this present Year, 1657, Mensis
Junii 18.

Much enlarged.

LONDON, Printed for JOHN ROTHWELL, at the Fountain in Goldsmiths Row in
Cheapside, 1657.

Christian Reader,
TO satisfy the Studious, both Ministers and others, that desire to see a
Catalogue of the most Approved Orthodox Books that have been printed for about
^^^entie years past, and likewise what has been published lately, Here is
presented thee in this small Manual, the most Approved Authors (in the
Judgment of them that are both Wise and Learned.) Though in some few of them
something may be disputable, yet because their Practical Pieces may be of good
use (being read with a Caution) I have inserted them.

I have on purpose waved the Heterodox Divinity Books, as not worth naming,
which have much prejudiced the Church, and stuffed the Shops of some, to the
corrupting the Heads and Hearts of those that receive not the Truth in the love
of it, but are given up to believe a lie.

I have left between every Letter spaces, that thou may add what Books come
forth in the interim.

I have also put a Star in the Margin of those that came forth latest.

If this give satisfaction to those Ministers beyond the sea, and these at
home, that desire some such thing, the defects in this shall be supplied, and
what other choice Pieces come forth in this kind (if God permit) shall be added

By one that desires to be found a Friend to the Truth, J. R.

Imprimatur,

ED. CALAMY.

A CATALOGUE OF The most approved Divinity-BOOKS, The greatest part whereof
have been printed or reprinted many years ago, and those with a * prefixed,
printed or reprinted lately
A
* ANnotations upon the Bible, by diverse learned Ministers, in two volumes in
folio reprinting Mr. Ainsworth on Pentateuch folio Psalms folio Canticles folio
against Anabaptists 4
The Annotations on the whole bible by choice learned men in Germany and other
parts, translated out of the dutch copy now in the press. D. Arrowsmith
Tarticorum sacrorum libri. 4. Printing at Camb. Alablasters Lexicon Heb. fol.
Adams on Peter fol. Sermons, fol. Gods Anger, 4.
Arnd'ts divinity 8. Allen and Shephard against Ball 4. Ainsworth marrow of the
Bible 8. Communion of Saints, in 12 Arrow against Idolatry, in fol. and 12
D. Airay on Philppians in 4. Bp. Andrews Sermons. folio on Commandments, folio
Chatechisticall Doctrine 12 manual for the sick 24 private devotions 24 of
prayer 12 of Tithes 4 of Episcopacy 4
M. Attersol on Numbers, folio on Philemon folio on Jonah 4 on the Sacraments 4
Catechism 8
* M. Ambrose, Prima, media, ultima: a practical Piece. 4 * M. Abbot of
Household Government. 8 Young Man's Warning-Piece 12 against the Brownists 12
Hand of Fellowship 4 Four Sermons 8 Milk for Babes 8
M. Abbot's Paraphrase on Job 4 on the Psalms 4
Vindiciae Sabbathi 4 D. Abbot on Jonah 4 Two Vol. against Bishop 4
M. Angier Helps to get better hearts 12 Ames marrow of divinity 4 on Peter,
lat. and eng. 4. 8 Cases of Conscience 4 in Psalms 4
Assemblyes Confess. and Catechize large and small, with Scriptures at length in
the press 4 Assemblyes Reasons 4 4 Tracts 12
Athertons Life 8 Ashwell on the Creed 8 Acontius Satan's Stratagems 4
presumption man's mirror 12 Scripture-manifestation 8
Albertus of adhering to God 8 Arraignment of the Creature 4 Antidote against
sin 12 Dr. Anthonys Gospel Physician 4 Apology for the Ministry 4 Alingtons
Sermons 12 Archer of Christ's personal reign 4 Antoninus Meditation Engl. 4 S.
Ambross Christian offices 4 Alefords Church Triumphant 12 souls dispensatory 12
Articles of the Church of England being 39. 4 Articles of the Church of
Ireland 4
B
Bodius in Ephefios fol. Mr. Baine on the Ephesians fol. on Colossians 4
Directions to a godly life 12 his Letters 12 Spiritual Armor 12 Diocesans
Trial 4
Mr. Brinsley on Mediatorship, 8 * Brazen Serpent 8 * Communion of the Saints
12 Several Sermons 4 stand still 4 antidote against Schism 4 against the
Anabaptists 4 Tears over Jerusalem 8 a Sermon of Ordination
Mr. N. Byfield on Colossians fol. on Peter fol. on the Creed 4 Oracles of God
12 Principles 12 on the Promises 12 signs of a godly man 12 Directions 12
Essay of Assurance 12
Bohemian Churches persecution 8 Hen. Burtons Truth-triumph over Trent 4
Isreal's fast 4 on the sixth and 7 Trumpets on the 9. 10. 11. Revel.
Dr. Beard and Dr. Tailor Theater of Gods Judgments folio * Mr Baxters Saints
Rest 4 * Directions about settling peace with God 12 * Concord of Churches 4 of
the day of judgment 12 of making light the Gospel 8 of unbelief 8 Gildas
Salvianus Or Reformed pastor 8 * Of Baptism, against M. Tombs 4 * Defense of
the Worstersh. Petit. 4 * Apology against M. Eyres and M. Crandon etc 4 * Two
Sermons at the Assise 12 * his confession of Faith 4 A Chatechisme drawn up by
him and the Ministers of Worcestersh.
Mr. Burges Refining, first part folio second part 4
De Lege, against Antinomianism 4 * Of Justification the first part, 4 * of
Justification the second part, on John 17. 4
M. Bulkley on the Covenant 4 *M. Bohemus on 100 Scriptures opened and applied:
called the Christians Delight: with an Appendix about promiscuous receiving the
Sacrament 8 M. Bradshaw on the Thessalonians 4 of Justification 12 Sin against
the H. Ghost 12 on the Sacrament 12
M. Buroughs Jewel of contentment 4 Gospel Worship quarto Conversation quarto
Earthly-mindedness quarto Irenicon quarto Lord of Hosts quarto Gracious Spirit
octavo Moses Selfe-denyal octavo Moses Choice 4 Jacobs seed 12 Saints treasury
4 Of Faith and Hope and evil of sin, Sermons before the Parliament 4 on Hosea 4
of England 8 against Militere 8
Barkers psalms 12 Bartons psalms 12 Bakers Instauration of grace and glory 8
Bembridge Gods fury Englands fire 4 Bartlets Balsome 4 Benbridge against usury
4 Bowen account of Church Catholic 4 M. Bowls, Pastore Evangelico 4 M. Bridge
his Works 4 Containing Benefit of Christ's Priestly Office 4 Satan's power to
tempt, and Christ's love to his under temptations. 4 Thankfulness required in
every condition 4 Grace for Grace 4 Spiritual actings of Faith 4 Evangelical
Repentance 4 Spiritual Life 4 The woman of Canaan 4 A vindication of
Ordinances 4 With some few Sermons, as of Gods Anger and Babylons downfall 4
M. Bridges new piece in 4 M. Broxolme on Perkins Chatechism, opening the six
principles Sermon wise 8 M Robert Boltons Directions to walk with God 4
Discourse on the First psalm 4 Instruction for afflicted Conscien ces 4 Four
last things 4 carnal Professor 12 helps of humiliation 8 and on Usury
Mr. Breerwood on Sabbath 4 Enquiries 4
Mr. Rich. Byfield on Sabbath 4 Light of faith 12
Dr. Boys Postils fol. Mr Bernards concordance fol.
Bp. Babingtons works fol. Mr. Barlow on Timothy fol. of spiritual
steadfastness fol.
D. Sam. Bolton Arraignment of errors 4 Bounds of Christian freedom 8 Wedding
garment 8 Tosled Ship, 8 on sin and the Royalties of faith fol.
Mr. Ball on Faith 4 on the Covenant 4 against Cann 4 against Separation 4
Larger Chatechisme 8 Smaller Catechism 8 A new piece in folio
D. Bilson on Christ's Sufferings, folio of Government, 4
M. Blake on the Covenant of Grace 4 of Baptism 4 of the Seals of the Covenant 4
D. Cor. Burges baptismal Regeneration, 4 of zeal 12 several Sermons 4
Baker on the Lords Prayer 4 on the Creed 12 meditations 12 on the first Psalm
4 on 7 Consolatory psalms 4 7 Penitential psalms 4
Birckbecks Protestants evidence 4 4 last things 4 Cordialls 12
Bernards Isle of man 12 way to good works 4 on the Sabbath 4 on Conscience 12
Rheims against Rome Faithful Shephard 12
* Bucklers God all in all 8 Benthams Christian conflict 4 Society of Saints 4
Beza in novum Testamentum folio Bedford de Sacramentis 8 against the
Antinomians 4
Brooks remedies 4 on Assurance 8 Riches of Christ 4 and a new Piece
Baly against Errors 4 Elenchus Chatech. Error. 12 Brownings 6 Sermons of
prayer 4 D. Burges of Ceremonies 4 Brightman on Revelation 4 on canticles 4 on
Daniel 4
Redivivus 4 Sermons 4 Bithner in Psalms 4 Hebrew Grammar Lethargy 12
Bogans Scripture-threats 8 mirth 8
Blow at the Root 4 Balls 6 Sermons 12 Biscows glorious mysteries 8 Bee-hive of
the Romish Church 8 M. Robert Bolton on the first psalm 4 Direction to walk
with God Instructions for afflicted Consciences Four things 4 of Examination
Helps to Humiliation Of Usury

C
Calvin's Institutions fol. Harmony 4
Crumbs of comfort 24 Cotton on Canticles 8 2 picees 8 Way of life quarto Gods
mercy quarto Keys of the kingdom, etc quarto Vials quarto Way of the Churches
quarto Constitution of a Church quarto Congregationall Way quarto of Baptism
quarto of singing Psalms quarto Holiness of Church memb. quarto of public
Prayer quarto Bloody Tenent, against Williams; and is about Magistracy 4
Covenant of Grace 4 * Fountain of Life 4 Gods Promise 4 A Letter to M. Williams
4 * of Ecclesiastes 8 on Revelation 4 Gospel Conversion 8 on Covenant of grace
8 abstract of government 4 on John fol.
Cawdry Superstitio Superstes 4 Mr. Cawdry and Mr. Palmer on the Sabbath, two
parts 4 The power of the Keys 4 against Dr. Hammond, called his Diatriba 8
against Independency 4 on Family reformation 12
M. Cottons Concordance fol. Mr. Sam. Clarks Martyrology, the first part fol. *
The second part fol. * Lives of the Primitive Fathers and modern Divines 4 *
Lives of eminent Christians 4 * Examples of Gods judgments of several
offenders fol. * Life of Tamberlaine 4 His relation of the Powder treason by it
self 8. for all families
M. Caryl on Job, in seven Volumes 4 1 Volume on 1 2 3 Chapt 2 Volume on 4 5 6
7 Chapt 3 Volume on 8 9 10 Chapt 4 Volume on 11 12 13 14 Chapt 5 Volume on 15
16 17 Chapt 6 Volume on 18 19 20 21 Chapt 7 Volume
M. Cobbet of Baptism 4 Of Magistracy 4 of Prayer Ejaculatory, Closet, Family,
Public. 8
Bp. Carletons Remembrance of the fifth of November 1605, never to be forgotten
4 M. Case his Encouragements 4 Diverse Sermons 4 Of Correction and Instruction 12
M. Culverwell Light of Nature, with ten Sermons 4 White stone alone, a
Treatise of Assurance 8
K. Charles 1. defense of Episcopacy 4 Culverwells Time well spent 12 of Faith
12 ready way to remember Script. 8
Clarks holy oil in the Press folio holy Incense 12 Saints Nosegay 12
Caudries similies 4 Carpenters Achitophel 12 Cradocks Gospel-holiness 4
Gospel-libetty 4 Divine drops 4
Carters Tombstone 8 Cromptons Principles 12 Collets Devotions 24 Crookes
guide to Blessedness 12 his Life 8
Cole of Assurance 4 Contemplatio mortis 12 Crakenthorp against Baronius folio
Collins Spouse 4 Cordials in 3 parts 4 5 lessons 8 Faith and experience 8
vindication of Ministry 4 against Humphreys answer to Mr. Fisher 4 Saints duty 8
Henry Churches Missellanies 4 Letters 12 Treasure 12
Nath. Church pocket Companion 12 Casaubon of Enthusiasme 8 Chomlyes defense of
Bp. Hall 8 Chute of Baptism 8 Catholic History 8 Dr. Chapel on the 103
psalm 8. methodus Concionandi 12 Crashaws meditations 12 Character of a
Christian 12 Chetwinds strait gate 12 Crofts terrestrial paradise 12 Cokes Art
of Logic 8 Conference between K Charles and the Marquess of Worster 4 M.
Croftons Answer to John Rogers 4 of zeal 8 of Catechizing 8
Chafie on Sabbath 4 Clements first epistle to the Corinthians 4 Counsel of
Trent fol. Cheynels Chillingworth novissima 4 Cartwright of York on faith 8 on
Genesis.
Crooks life 8 and a new Piece, fol guide to Blessedness 12 waking sleeper 12
death subdued 12 discovery of the heart ministerial husbandry
Cook of infant Baptism 4 D. Cheynels learned Vindication of the Trinity 8
Against Socinianisme, with other Sermons 4
* M. William Carter of Baptism 4 * M. Crandon against M. Baxters aphorisms 4
M. Capel of Temptations 8 M. Cartwright on the Rhemist Testament in fol.
Chatechisme 4
Bp. Coopers Works fol. D. Cudworth concerning the true notion of the Lords
Supper 4 * M. Colvill, a Scotch minister on the Fullness of Christ, Of
Justification and Sanctification 4
D
* Dr Diodates Notes on the Bible, folio Mr Downhams Warfare folio Guide to
Godliness folio on the 25 Psalm 4 Abstract on Commandments 8 of Liberty 8 on
the Sacraments 8
Bp. Downham of Justification fol. Sum of Divinity 4
D. Day on the Resurrection 4 M. Day on Isaiah fol. M. Dickson on all the
Psalms 8 on Matthew 8 on Hebrews 8 on Epistles 4
M. Davenport on Messiah 4 Mons. Despagne on the Creed 8 of eating the Body of
Christ 8 on the Lords Prayer 8 Popular Errors 8
Mr. Daniel Dike on the Deceitfulness of the heart 4 of Repentance 4 of
Michael and the Dragon 4 Evangelical Histories 4 School of Affliction 4 on
Philemon 4 on the 124 Psalm 8
Mr Jeremiah Dike Select Sermons 8 Of Conscience, 8 of Scandals 8 of the
Sacrament of the Lord Supper 8 With an Appendix of the right receiving of
Christ 8 Select Sermons in 8 one before the Parliament 4 of Covetonsnesse 4 of
Archippus 4 The name of God a strong tower 8
M. Dingleys Glimpse 8 of Angels 8 of the Eye 8
M. Dod on Commandments 4 on the Sacraments 4 Houshold-Government 8 Paraphrase
on Proverbs 4 Sermons on Proverbs 4
M. Down of Faith 4 Bp. Davenant de morte Christi fol. De pace 12 Prelectiones
fol. on Colossians fol- Determinationes fol. against Hoard 8
Dawsons 18 Sermons 4 summa moralis 12
M. Drake revived 8 Mons. Dallies use of the Fathers 4 Apology for the reformed
Churches 8
Dales Analysis on the Epistles 8 Davenports Knowledge of Christ 4 Drexelius of
Eternity 12 hive of devotion 12 Christian zodiac 12 School of patience 12
forerunner of Eternity 12 right Intention 12
Dr. Denisons threefold resolution 12 on Peter, 2 epist 4
Dent on Revelation 8 pathway to heaven 12 Sermon of repentance 8
Bp. Downham of prayer 4 of sying 4 on Covenant 12
Dubartus Divine Works poetry fol. Discourse of Usury 12 Digby of the souls
Immortality 4 Discourse of Eternity 12 S. E. Deerings discourse of proper
Sacrifices 4 Duport on Job Greek and Lat. 8 on Proverbs 8 Greek and Lat.
Dr. Donus Sermons compl. fol. devotions 12 and 24 Sermon at Lady Davers
funeral 12 of self Homicide 4
Dugards Blind eye 12 Dividing of the hoof 4 Doctrines Trial 12 Durrants
Sipps of sweetness 8 comfort and counsel 8 love of Christ 8 Salvation of
Saints 8 prayers for Mariners 12
David's diamond Delamarsh on the Revelation 4
E
M. Elton on the 7, 8, 9 Chapters of the Romans fol. on the Colossians fol. on
Commandments 4
M. Edward's Gangrena 4 Against Toleration 4
Antipologia 4 Egertons comforts 12 Estwick against Biddle 4 Air of
Justification 4 Ezekiels wheels 8 * Eusebius Ecclesiastical History fol.
F
M. Fuller, Holy Land fol. Holy War, fol. Holy State fol. his Meditations in
good and bad times 12 * on Temptations 8 * on Baptism 8 reconciler 8 on Ruth 8
on Corinthians 4 Ecclesiastical History fol.
Fisher on Sacraments 12 Fonseca's Postils fol. Ld. Faukland of Infalibility 4
Fatherby against Atheism fol. * M. Ford of Exeter on singing of psalms 8 M.
Fenner of Affections on Conscience on Impenitency Saints Alarm Christian
directory Divine Message Practical Divinity Christians Sacrifice Riches of
Grace Hidden Manna With a new piece, all in folio.
* M. Firmin of Separation 4 Case stated concerning Baptism of Infants 4
* M. Ford of Reading, The great interest of Kingdoms 4 * Two Latin Sermons,
Ambitio sacra 4 * An Assise Sermon at Reading 4 * A Treatise of the practical
use of Infant Baptism 8 and catechizing * The Spirit of Bondage and Adoption 8
D. Featley Sermons fol. Handmaid to devotion 12 Against Fisher 4 The Dipper
Dipped 4
Featly's case for Spectacles 4 fountain of tears 12 vertumnus Romanus 4
several Sermons single 4
M. Forbes of Justification 4 on Revelations 4 his Irenicon 4
D. Fulk Rhemist Testament fol. Fullwords vind. of the Ministry 4 Fishers love
token 12 Fletcher on the 1 Psalm Forbidden fruit 12 Fulword against Errors 8
Lady Fauklands life
G
M. Gataker his Sermons fol. Of Lots 4 of Transubstantiation 4 De
Justificatione 12 Against Saltmarsh 4 * A vindication of the Annotations,
Against Lilly, two pieces 4 Contra Phochenium 4 Cinnus 4 de nomine Jehovah 12
de baptismatis Infantilis 8
M. Greenhams Works fol. * M. Phil. Goodwin on the Sacrament 8 the Sabbath
enlivened 8
M. Greenhill on Ezekiel in 3 Volumes 4 D. Gouge his Domestical Duties 4 Lords
Prayer quarto Spiritual Armor quarto CXVI Psalm quarto on the Sabbath quarto
Three Arrows 4 * upon the Hebrews fol.
M. Gillespie Aarons Rod 4 Miscellanies 4
Gurney on the 4 Commandment 12 Dr. Gores Sermons 4 Grosses soul Inducements 4
happiness of enjoying Christ 4 fiery pillar 12 buddings of grace 8
Gauls distractions 12 Contemplations 12 of witchcraft 12 against Astrology 4
Gerhards Meditations 12 Souls watch 12 Garden of spiritual flowers 12
Greys perfection of Christian 12 Goves hony-combe 8 Gill on the Creed fol. Dr
Gaudens Apology for ministry 4 3 Sermons 4 of Marriages 4
D. Gregoryes Notes 4 Posthuma 4
Goads Sermons 4 Grand prerogative of humane nature 8 Gees steps to assention
24 Grimstons new years gift 24 Gays Sermons 8 Government of the Church of
Scotland 4 M. Gee of Prayer 8 M. Tho. Goodwin, Child of light, 4 Return of
Prayer 4 Agravations of sin Growth of Grace 4 Triumph of Faith 4 Peacemaker 4
M John Geere on Baptism 4 of drinking Healths 4 of the Red Horse 4 Character
of an English Puritan 4 * Might oercoming Right 4 Judahs joy at the Oath 4 M,
Guild, Moses unvailed 8 on Revelation 8
M. Greenward his Works 8 M. Gurnall on spiritual armor 4 M. Graile on the
Covenant of Grace, against M. Air 4 Godwins Roman Antiquities 4 Jewish
Antiquities 4 Greek Atticks 4
Garcut on Resurection 12
H
M. Hudson of the Visible Church 4 M. Hildersham on the 51 Psalm fol. on the
4th of John fol. of Fasting 12
* M. Hall his Pulpit guarded 4 * of Holiness in God 8
M. Hookers Soul preparation 4 Souls exhaltation 4 Unbeleevers preparing 4
Souls Humiliation 4 Vocation 4 Souls Implantation 4 Of Self denial 4 Duty and
dignity of Saints 4 Farewell Sermon 4 On the Lords Prayer 4 Church Discipline 4
Four Treatises 12 Souls possession 12
Hookers Doubting Christian 12 Pattern to Perfection 12 Saints Guide 12
D. Hackwel, Apology for the Power and Providence of God folio. M. Hughes,
Gain and Pain of Affliction 4 Funeral Sermon, And a Parliament Sermon 4
Heinsius in Novum Testamentum 4 Horns Three Sermons 4 on the 9 Psalm 4 Woman
of Faith 4 Of Infant Baptism against Tombs and Kendal 4
D. Homes of Christ's personal Reign folio. Against Tombs 4 against Astrology 8
Gospel-Musick, viz. Singing Psalms vindicated 4
Hookers Ecclesiast. Policy folio Sixth and eighth Part 4
Hamptons Sermons 4 Harmony of Confessions 4 Hills Pathway to Piety 12 Sermons
4
Lord Hattons Psalms 12 Herberts Divine Poems 12 Haine against the Millenaries
4 Hardy's Sermons in one Volum 4 on the first Epistle of John 4
* Mr. Hutcheson on the twelve small Prophets, and on John Evang. folio * Mr.
Herle against Independency 4 * Of Policy and Prudence 12 Of Wisdom 12
Contemplations 8
Mr. Hieroms Works, two Volumes fol. * D. Harris on Beatitudes folio Covenant
of Grace folio Threefold state of man folio A Supplement folio Several Sermons
folio Peter's Enlargement 12
D. Hayward, Strong Helper 8 Sanctuary of a troubled soul 12
David's Tears 12 Bp Hall, Contemplations on the Old Testament fol.
Contemplations on the New fol. Paraphrase on the Bible fol. against Smectymnus
4 against Profaneness 8 etc. of Moderation Octavo. old Religion Octavo.
Sermons Octavo. Bp Hall, Balm of Gilead 12o Occasional Meditations, Latin and
English. 12o Meditations and Vows. 12o Satan's Fiery Darts 12o Holy Raptures 12o
Holy Soliloquies 12o Of Contentment 12o Cases of Conscience 12o Against
Millenaries 12o Holy Order 12o Devout Soul 12o Peacemaker 12o Select Thoughts
12o Mystery of Godliness 12o
Harvey on the Sabbath 12 Divine Poems 12
Harfleets Desplay of Flattery 12 Heywood of Angels fol. Howsons Sermons 4
Holland on Revelation 4 Looking-glass 8
Dom. Herbert de Veritate 4 De Causis Errorum 4
Huis on Daniel 4 * D. Holdsworths Sermons 4 * Hows Pagan Preacher silenced in
answer to J. Goodwin. 4 Hausteeds ten Sermons 4 Hodges apology for the use of
the Lords Prayer.
I
Dr. Jermin on Proverbs folio. On Ecclesiastes folio.
* Mr. Jordain, Life 4 Mr. Arthur Jackson on Pentateuch 4 On the Historical
part 4 * Five Poetical Books
Dr. Jenison apparelling of Christ 8 Compunction for sin 8
Dr. Jacksons Works in folio and quarto. * Jones on Hebrews fol. K. James
Psalms 8 Johnson on the Parables 4 Judicial Astrology condemned 8
Institutiones piae 12 * Mr. Jenkyn on Jude fol. Four Sermons 4 His Answer to
Joha Goodwin 4 * Funeral Sermon for D. Gouge 4 His Sermon before the Parliament
1656.
Isacksons Chronology fol. Spiritual Duel 12 Of pacification 12 Divine
Contemplations 12 Substance of Religion 12
Imitation of Christ 12 * Journal of a Christian * Jeans of the Sacrament Of
Appearance of Evil Several pieces in quarto.

K
Bp King on Jonah 4 Dr. King on the Lords prayer 4 Mr. Knights Concordance,
folio Dr. Kendal on Universal Redemption, against Mr. John Goodwin; folio.
Sancti Sanciti, or the perseverance of the Saints folio.
D. Kellet. Miscellanies folio Sermons 4
Knewstub 4 Mr. Kings Marriage of the Lamb 12 Key of David 12 Kings way to Syon
4 Knox History of the Church of Scotland fol. King Charles his Works 8
L
Bp. Lake, Sermons. fol. Sermons. quarto.
Bp. Latimer, Sermons. quarto. Col. Leigh his Critica Sacra, on the Old and New
Testament fol. A Comment on the New Testament fol. on the Promises 12 Saints
Encouragements 12 Body of Divinty, fol. * On the Poetical part
Mr. Love of Different Degrees of Grace 4 Zealous Christian 4 Heavens Glory,
Hels Terror 4 Effectual Calling and Election 4 Combat between Flesh and
Spirit, and Christian Direry 4 Mortification 8 Natural man's case 8 Pardon of
sin 4 A Christians duty 8 * Dejected souls cure 12 Catechism
Mr. Lockyer, Christ's Communion 12 Discovery of sincerity 8 Englands Wounds 4
Balm for bleeding England, and Ireland 8
D. Lightfoot's Harmony on the Old Testament 4 Gleanings on Exodus 4 On the New
Testament, fol. On the Acts 4 Temple 4 Temple Service 4 Some Sermons 4 Harmony
on N. Testament fol.
D. Luther's Mensalia fol. on Galatians 4 on the Psalm of Degrees 4 Christian
Liberty 8 Choice Sermons 8 Prayers 12 His Life 4
Mr. Lifords Catechism large 8 Of the Ministry 4 Legacy 12 against Errors 4
Sir Humphrey Linde, Via tuta 12 Via devia 12
Mr. Laurence of Angels 4 of Ordinance 4
Luptons Meditations 24 Life of Christ 12
Lynakers Consolations 12 Lawson on the Sabbath 12 Gleanings 4
Laurence of Faith 4 in the press. Mr. Ley on the Sabbath 4 against Saltmarsh
4 on Liturgy of the Oath and Cannons of Mortality

M
Mortons threefold state of man 12 Touchstone of Conversion 12
Bp Morton of the Mass fol. The Grand Imposture 4 Of Providence 8
Dr. Mayer on the Pentateuch folio. On the Historical part folio. On the
Poetical part folio. On the Great Prophets folio. On the small Prophets folio.
On the New Testament folio. on James 4 On the hard places 4 On the Catechism 4
Mayers Antidote 4 M. Mossums Sions Prospect 4 M. Manton on James 4 on Jude 4
in press
M. Mede on Revelation 4 Apostacy 4 on Peter 4 Diatriba, four Volums, with
other small pieces. Appendix on Apocalipse, 4 Triga 4
M. Mores Cabala 8 against Atheism 8
Marrow of modern Divinity 8 Metropolitan Feast vindicated 4 Mason De
Ministerio, fol. Of Conscience 4 Of Fasting 4 of hearing and doing 120 of
Equivocation 120 of Lying 120 of Contentment 120 Cure of cares 12 120
Mores Yearning 8 Maxeys Sermons 8 Mockts Duty and Dignity 4 Dr Mayn concerning
false Prophets 4 of Unity 4
Dr. Morguns Christian Diurnal 12 Mountagu. Vita Christi, fol De Originibus
Ecclesiast. fol.
Maton Isreal's Redemption 8 Id Redempt on Redeemed. 4 Milbourns three Treatises
Merchant Manual 12 Meditations and Prayers 12 Meditations and Contemplations 12
Mean liberal maintenance for Ministers 4 Mirror of Martyrs 12 Ministry
Vindicated, called, Jus Divinum Eccles. Evaugel. An elaborate Piece, by Mr.
Whitaker and Mr Calamy, and diverse other Orthodox Ministers of the Province of
London with Smectymnuus both parts annexed to it, by five learned Ministers now
living 4 M. Marbury on Obadiah, 4 On Habakkuk 4
Monlins Buckler of Faith 4 Antibarian 12 Love of God 12 Christian Combat 12
Encounter 24

N
M. Newmans Concordance folio Mr. Norton of New England his Apologia 8 His
Discussion of the great Point in Divinity, The sufferings of Christ, and the
questions about Active and Passive Righteousnefs debated 8 His Catechism 8 *
His Orthodox Evangelist: a confutation of Errors 4 Contra Apolonium 8 Narrative
of Church courses in N. England 4 None but Christ 12
Nashes fourfold way to a happy life 4 Negus of Faith 4 Napier on the
Revelation 4 Nevils Conversion 4
O
* Dr Owen against Universal Redemption, quarto against Arminianisme 4 Pastors
Duty 4 Perseverance of Saints, folio Escol 12 Of the Death of Christ 4 Sermons
4 De Justitia Divina 8 against Biddle of Mortification of Schism
Oats on Jude fol. Opinion of Divines concerning Religion 4 Office of
Christian parents 4 Observations on the History of Nabal and Abigail 12
Original of the soul 12 Ornament of Women 12
P
Philipps of Hell 12 Popes deadly wound 12 Prices Souls Porter 12 Pelham on
John 12 Pembles works fol. on John 12
Parker of the Cross fol. Perkins Works in three Volumes, fol. Cases of
Conscience 4 Reformed Catholic 8 six Treatises 12 Pensive man's practice 12
Poor man's Rest 12 Posie of godly prayers 12 Pastors plea 12
Pagets Heresiography 4 of Church Government 4 History of the Bible 12
Pattern of man's imperfections 12 Preachers plea 12 Plea for old age 8
Pembertons Sermons 8 Powels Summons for swearers 8 on promises 8 Experiences 8
Peitre against Maton concerning the Millenaries 4 Petto's Voice of the Spirit
8j Proceedings of the Assembly at Perth, Anno 1548 4 Photii Epistolae. Gr. and
Lat. fol. Mr. Pool of the Deity of the H. Ghost 12 Presbytery vindicated by the
Ministers of the Province of London 4 D Preston on the Covenant quarto Faith
and Love quarto Saints Qualification quarto Golden Scepter quarto Attributes of
God quarto Mortification quarto Lively Life quarto Four godly Treatises quarto
Court Sermons quarto Of Prayer quarto Saints infirmities quarto Divine Love
quarto Remains quarto Christian Freedom quarto Fullness of Christ quarto Mount
Ebal 4 Theses 4 on the Sacrament 12 Dr. Prestons chief Works epitomized by M.
Jemmat 12
M. Pinshion on the Sabbath 4 D. Prideaux his Lectures folio Fasciculus
Controversiarum Of Prayer 12 Sermons 4 on the Sabbath 4
Pooley Vindication of Ordinances 4 Exposition of pouring out the fourth Vial 4
Mr. Prinne, The perpetuity of a Regene rate man, quarto. against Healths
quarto against Love-locks quarto against Stage Plays quarto on the beginning
of the Sabbath quarto Gospel plea for Tithes quarto on Sacrament quarto of
Magistracy quarto Discovery of new lights quarto
Pareus on Revelation fol. Prisoners Prayers 12 Parr on Romans fol. Abba Father
12 Grounds 12
Pinks Trial 12 D. Playfers Sermons 8 Practice of Quietness 12
Palmers Sectaries unmasked and confuted 4 Defense of Christmasse 4
Pierson on the Psalms 4 Cure of cares 12
Potters Vindication of 5 John 1.20. against Eaton 4 Peter's Complaint, and
Magdaleus Tears 12 Potters 666. 4 Theses 12 Want of Charity 8
Palmers Memorials of godliness 8 Christian freedom 12 against Humphreyes 8
Tempestuous soul calmed 8
Pincheon of Universal Redemption 8 Jewish manner of Worship 4 on the
Sufferings of Christ 4
Primrose on Sabbath 4 on Sacrament 12
Paraphrase on Job 12 Practice of Piety 12 of Christianity 12 of the Faithful 12
Pecks Dangers of little sins 12
Q
Quarles Judgment and Mercy 12 Emblems 8 Boanarges Poems 8 Fancies 12

R
Mr. Rutherford Triumph of Faith 4 Covenant of Grace 4 on Toleration 4 Christ
dying 4 Survey of Familism, etc. 4 Several Volumes about Church Government 4
Mr. Roberts Key of the Bible 8 on Sacrament 8 Believers evidences 8 Broken
heart 4
Rouses Catholic charity 8 Mella Patrum 8 Musical Marriage 12 Greek
Antiquities 4 Art of Happiness 12
Robourough on Justification 4 Ramsdens Gleanings 4 Religio Medici 8 Rose of
Sharon 8 Randal on Romans, and Communion with God, in quarto. 2 on the
Sacrament 4 3 on the Church 4
Readings guide 4 Of Baptism 4 David's Soliloquies 12
Reeves Divinity 4 Way to Christian Unity 4
Robotham on Canticles 4 Preciousnesse of Christ 8
Richardsons divine consolation 12 Rogers on Judges fol. on Naaman, fol.
Matrimonial honor 4 Samuels Encounter 12 Protestant Church existent 4
Reformatio Legum Ecclesiast. 4 Jo. Rogers of Church Discipline 4 D. Reynolds
three Treatises quarto on 110 Psalm quarto on Sacrament quarto on Passions
quarto on Hosea quarto of Self-denial quarto Shields of the earth quarto Peace
of the Church quarto Animalis Homo quarto True Grain 4
Mr. Rogers on Peter, fol. on Faith 12 On Love 12
Mr. Rogers his seven Treatises 4 on 39 Articles 4
Mr. Rogers practical Catechism 4 on Sacrament 4
Mr. Tim. Rogers Righteous man's evidence for heaven 12 Bosom friend 12 News
from heaven 12
Mr. Rogers on the Parables quarto Lost Son quarto Lost Sheep quarto Lost Groat
quarto Penitent Citizen quarto Vineyard of Palestina quarto Good Samaritan
quarto
Bp Richardsons Annotations: from Genesis to Ezekiel. fol. Reinold of
Episcopacy 4 Dr. Reynold on Haggai 4 On portraiture 12
Ross View of Religions 8 M. Ralph Robinson Christ All in All, in 37 Allusions
to Christ Spiritual Armor Two Sermons 4

S
Mr. Symson of the Church fol. Bp Spotswoods History of the Church of Scotland,
fol. Southwels Works 12 Swifts ruin and repair of Kingdoms 8 Sambrooks three
Sermons 12 Symsoni Cronolog. fol. Spalato de Republica Ecclesiast. fol. Mr.
Shutes Sermons on Hagar, fol. on Exodus 4
Mr. Scudder Daily walk 12 Lords Prayer 12
Mr. Sympson's Dictionary, fol. on Peter 4 on Justification 8 on Psalms 4
Mr. Sheffield on Conscience 8 Rising of the Sun of Righteousness 8
Dr. Sibbs, Cordials fol. on 2 Cor. Chap. 1. fol. Returning Backslider quarto
Beams of Light quarto Light from heaven quarto Evangelical Sacrifices quarto on
Philippians 4 Glorious Feast 4 A Christians end 4 Bowels opened 4 Miracle of
Miracles 4 Souls Conflict 8 Saints Fell city 8 Bruised Reed 12 Spiritual man's
Aim 12 Charter of a Christian 12 Excellency of the Gospel 12 Exaltation of the
Gospel 12 Precious promises 12 Breathing after God 12 Favorite 12 Divine
Meditations 12 Brides longing for the Bribegrooms second coming 12 Fountain
sealed, With two Sermons 12 A Glance of Heaven 12 Two Sermons 1. The Spouse her
earnest desire after Christ. 2. The power of Christ's Resurrection 12 Riches of
Mercy 12 Heavenly Conference between Christ and Mary after his Resurrection 12
Dr. Slater on Thessalonians 4 on the 1, 2, 3, 4 Chapt. Romans. 4 on Malachy 4
his Catechism 8 on the Psalms. 4 on the Sacrament. 4 on Judges 5.31. 4
M. Symonds, Case and Cure 8 Sight and Faith 8 Three Treatises, The sixed eye 8
M. Sym of murder 4 M. Stock on Malachy folio D Sandersons Sermons 4 D.
Stoughtons 13. Sermons 4 Two Sermons 12
M. Shepherd, Sincere Convert 8 Sound believer 8 on Sabbath, and select Cases 8
of the right use of Liberty 8
M. Obad. Sedgwick, Doubting Christian resolved, nature and grace 12 Counsel to
the Church of Sardis, 8
Dr. Spurstow on the Promises 8 Three Sermons 4
Sedgwick wonder working God 12 Strodes Anatomy of mortality. 4. Swans Read
debitum 4 Speculum mundi 4 Calamus Mensurans. 4
Shepherds 4 cases 12. Defense of Lay men's expounding Scriptures 4
Sutton on Romans 4 Live and Dye 12 On the Sacrament 12 Englands Summons 12
Falsehood of Romes Church 12
Bp Smiths Sermons fol. Smith on the Creed fol. Essex done 4
Smith of David's Repentance 12 David's Blessed Man 8 Great Assize 12 Admirable
Convert 8 Ethiopian Eunuch 8
Staffords Day of Salvation 24 Skippon on Promises 24 Vows 24
Sacramental stumbling block removed 4 Saints Zeal against sinful altars 8 Hen.
Smiths Sermons 4 Stay of the faithful 12 Shipwreck of false Churches 4 Ed.
Symonds Scripture vindicated 4 Sydenham of Baptism 8 Mystery of godliness 8 of
hypocrisy 8
Senaults Man become guilty 4 Christian man 4
Sarsons Analysis on Timothy 4 Esquire on Thessalonians 4 Sermons on sundry
occasions 4 Sweet posie of Saints 12 Stoaks Wiltshire Rant 4 Sovereign salve 8
Spira's Life and death 12 Spare hours of Meditations 12 Spiritual Alms 2
Saints solace 12 Stalham against Oats exposition of Matthew. 13.44. 4 Strength
out of weakness, a relation of the Indians conversion 4 Scultetus of Episcopacy
4 Spencers Art of Logic 8 Saltmarsh Free Grace 12 Sparkles of glory 12
Stock on Attributes 4 Stoughtons Definition of Divinity 4 15 Sermons 4 7
Sermons 4 Christian Sacrifice 4 Foelicitas ultima saeculi Epistola 8 Heavenly
conversation 12
Sing against Maloone a Jesuit 4 Sands Europae Speculum 12 Paraphrase on
Psalms 12
Spelmans Divine Right of Tithes 4 De non temerandis Ecclesii 4 Psalterium
Davidis Saxonicum 4
Synopsis of the Fathers 8 Sprint on the Sabbath 12 Struthers christian
observation 12 School of the heart 12 Sinners salvation 12 Saints Legacy 12
Sheerings heart happiness 12 Shipwreck of false Churches against Doctor
Chamberlain 4 Story of Stories or Life of Christ 8 Ob. Seidgwick of Faith 4 On
Revelat. 12 On the Covenant

T
D. Tuckney's Sermon at Dr. 12 Hill's Funeral 12 His Balm for Gilead 12 None
but Christ: With an Enquiry what becomes of Heathens and Idiots 12 The Day of
the Churches peace and rest improved Travels of the Patriarcks 4
Tillinghasts Generation Work 8 Knowledge of the times 8
M. Trapp on Pentatench 4 on Proverbs 4 on Historical part folio on the Small
Prophets folio on Evangelists folio on Epistles folio True Treasure 8 Love
Tokens 12
Dr. Th. Tailor on the 32 Psalm quarto on Titus quarto on Acts quarto on chapter
12. Revelations quarto on Temptations quarto on the Types quarto Saints
progress quarto Parable of the Sower quarto Kings Bath 8 Of Contentment 8 Of
Repentance, and the Meditation of the Creatures: Of the New creature 12 His
case of flying in time of the Plague. A sheet broad way. Pearl of the Gospel;
With a Looking-glass for Gentle-women 12 Circumspect walking 12 Regula Vitae,
against the Antinomians 12 A Book in folio containing these following Tracts,
Catechistical exercises The Jaylors Conversion. Famine of the Word. Peter's
Repentance. Judas his Repentance. The Oracle of the Gospel. The stranger at
home The green and dry tree. The pattern of Peace. A caveat against offenses
The Nicholaitan doctrine hateful Moderation in things of this life. A precedent
for Preachers. Excuse of a good Christian Two contrary Masters. The House of
God The badg of a true Christian Jephthah's Vow. New Map of Rome. Labor in
Vain Against following the multitude Principle of Practice. Kings Bath.

Teats Scripture map 4 Torshel of hypocrisy 4 Woman's glory 12 Two Questions 12
Cases of conscience 12 Harmonizing the Bible 4
Tozers Directions for godly life 12 Christian Wisdom 8
Top on the Psalms fol. Tailor of Election 8 Twiss against Hoard fol. on
Sabbath 4 Vindiciae gratiae 4 Doubting Conscience 12 Vindication of the Church
of England 4
Tombs of Scandal 12 Against Baxter 4 of sin in glorying in men 4
Thorndik's Right of the Church 8 Religious Assemblyes 8 Lexicon fol.
Tichburnes Canaans Grapes 4 Tompson Antichrist arraigned 4 Touchstone of Truth
8 Timpsons vindication of Humphreys 8 Taffins Marks of Gods child 12 Dr. Turner
of the right of the Church 4
V
Bp Vshers Body of Divinity fol Chronologia, first part the second part fol His
answer tn the Jesuit 4 His Gotteschalci 4 De Primordii 4 Epistolarum Hibern. 4
Method for Meditation 8 Principles 12 View of the Scripture fol.
Vdal on the Lamentations 4 Virels Grounds 12 Visibility of the true Church 4
Valdesso's Divine Considerations 8 Vaughan Church Militant, a Poem 8 Mr.
Vennings Orthodox Paradoxes 8 New Commandment 8 Mysteries and Revelations 8
Milk and Honey, first part 8 the second part 8 A warning to Back-sliders 8 Path
to true happiness 4 Mercies Memorial, with M. Clarks Relation of the Powder
Treason annexed 8
Vrsinus Catechism fol. Vindication of Accademyes against Webster 4
W
Dr. Willet on Genesis, and quarto Exodus quarto Leviticus quarto Samuel quarto
Daniel quarto Romans quarto Synopsis Baptismi quarto De Gratia quarto
D. Francis White against Fisher fol. D. John White Orthodox Church fol. Bp
Williams Best Religion fol. on the Church fol.
M. Ward on Matthew fol. D. Wilkins Ecclesiastes 8 An elaborate Piece in this
kind but in a different method 8 of Prayer 8 Beauty of Providence 12
M. Whately Prototypes fol. Bride-Bush 4 Care-cloth 4 Husbandry 4 New Birth 4
Redemption of time 4 Poor man's Advocate 12 Oil of Gladness 12 Caveat for
Covetous 8
M. Wilson on the Romans fol. His Dictionary fol. Saints by Calling 4
M. Walls None but Christ 8 M. Wells Prospect of Eternity 8 M. Watsons
Christians Charter 8 Anatomy of the Heart 8 Divine Contentment 8
M. White Directory to Perfection 12 on Matthew 8
M. Woodbridg of Justification 4 Wollebius Body of Divinity 8 Wetherels five
Sermons 12 Wilsons Help to Faith 12 Wallers Divine Meditations 12 Wells Anchor
of Hope 12 Woottons Run from Rome 12 Warwicks Meditations 12 Wardners Gains
loss 12 Woodards Child Patrimony 4 Westfields Sermons 4 Wrights Passions of the
Mind 4 Wings Saints Advantage 12 Wards divine use of the Lodestone Latin and
English 12 Sermons in octavo.
Weynels Covenants plea for Infant Baptism 4 Willis Divine Meditations 12
Websters Overthrow of Academies 4 Dr. Warmistry's Blind Guide 8 Meditations 12
White Salt 12
Williams Six Sermons 4 Dr. Westfields Sermons 4 Wilcox six Sermons 4 Worships
Three Sermons 4 Weemse Works 4 Walker On Creation 4 Key of Knowledge 4 Against
Socinianisme 8
Wilmer on the Sacrament 8 Wilsons Child's Trade 12 Zacheus converted 12
Weak Believer resolved 12 Withers Psalms 12 Warrens Spiritual thrift 4
Whetfield against the Antinomians 4 of the Conversion of Indians 4
Whitles Celestial Paradise 4 Ward against Hobbs 8 Wallis against Hobbs 8
Y
M. Young De Sabbatho 4 M. Yarrowes Comfort^ 12 M. Youngs Drunkards charge, or
sin stigmatized 8 Cure of misprision 8 Victory of Patience 8 Against Swearing 8
Englands bane 8 With several small Pieces.
Yates Imago Mundi 4 Honor of Gods House 4 Model of Divinity 4

FINIS.
A CATALOGUE OF SERMONS Upon Sundry Occasions: Some Printed long since, others
of Late Years.
A
ATkins The Christians Race: Alisbury the Passion Sermon. Abbot the danger of
Popery. Andrews the Brazen Serpent. Adams White Devil. The Temple
Bp. Andrews A Sermon before the King. A Sermon before the King November. 5. 1618.
D. Arrowsmith Englands Ebenezer D. Archbold The Beauty of Hell Ash The Church
sinking best Refuge Real Thankfulness Religious covenanting Self Surrender
unto God Gods Incomparable Goodness to Israel The efficiency of Gods Grace
Christ the Riches of the Gospel Support for the sinking Heart Living Loves, at
Mr. Whitakers Funeral At Mr. Gatakers Funeral Of Zeal At Mr. Robinsons Funeral
Good Courage

B
Bayne The Christians Garment A Caveat for cold Christians An Epitomy of Man's
Misery A Counterbane against Earthly covetousness
Brooks The House of God A Sermon at Paul's Cross against Schismatics and
Heretics
Bury The Modern Christian Burrell Suttons Synagogue Buggs David's strait Miles
Mediterraneus
Burches A Sermon at Owburn in Buckinghamshire D. Burges A Sermon before K.
James Brinsley The Preachers Charges D: B. A Sermon at the Funeral of the Earl
of Kent
Barnes A Sermon at a Visitation at Henly, 27 April: Bayn the Trial of a
Christians Estate Baylie the Spiritual Marriage. Buckeridg A Sermon before the
King Brown A Copy of a Sermon December. 24. Brinsley the Glory of the later
Temple Boughen A Sermon of Decency and Order. Bagnal the Stewards last Account
Benifeild Auguration of King James Bargrave A Sermon before the Parliament A
Sermon before King Charles.
Burges Romes Cruelty and Apostasy Brown A Sermon at an Assize at Winchester
Bery The School of Godly Fear D. Belcanqual A Sermon at the Spittle, 14 April
Berkenhead A Sermon before the King Bales Oration Dominica Bond A door of Hope,
two Treatises Byrd Loves Peerless Paragon Barnes Vox Belli, Allarum to War D.
Bray A Sermon of the Sacrament Blenkow, Michaels Combat with the Devil Boles
Zeal for Gods House Burgess A Sermon before the Parliament Bond Salvation in a
Mist. B. The Narrow Way Burton Isreal's Fast A most Godly Sermon
Baughe A Summons to Judgment Bridges Joabs Counsel A Sermon before the House
of Commons Babylons Downfall
Burton A Sermon preached at Warwick Byfield Temple Defiler defiled Bailey Satan
the Leader in Chief Blackwell A Caveat for Magistrates
C
Caril The Nature of a Covenant Cheynel Sions Memento Cook A White sheet Carter
Christ his Last Will Cheaste The Christian Pathway the Way of Life
Cooper The Worldlings Adventure Carpenter the Conscionable Christian Crashaw
the Parable of Poison Cantrel a Sermon preached in Oxforshire Cleland Jacobs
Well Copland Virginia's God be thanked Case the Nature and Necessity of Godly
fear Of the Nature and end of Repentance
Clever on the 51 Psalm 1. Carter Isreal's Peace with God Caril the Works of
Ephesus David's Prayer for Solomon
Cheshire A Sermon at S. Peter's before the Lords A copy of a Sermon at Paul's
Cooper the Converts first Love the Blessing of Japheth
Cade S. Paul's Agony Cawdry Humility the Saints Livery C. the Just Man's
Memorial Cannon the Crier Calvin Four Sermons profitable for the times Corbet
Gods Providence Chambers A Divine Ball Crakanthorp A Sermon at the Inauguration
of King James. Catlin the hidden Treasure Cawdry The Good Man Coleman Hopes
deferred, etc. Cotesford A Very Sovereign Oil Caril the Airaignment of
unbelievers Calamy Englands Looking-glass Gods Free Mercy to England The Noble
Man's Pattern Englands Antidore An Indictment against England The great danger
of refusing The Saints Transfiguration The Monster of self-seeking At D.
Boltons Funeral
Crofton at Mr. Frests Funeral.
D
Dought A Discourse, etc. D.G. Rex meus est Deus Dyke A Sermon at the
Consecration of Epping Chap. A Sermon before the Parliament A Caveat for
Archippus A counterpoison against Covetousness
Draxe The Earnest of our Inheritance The Churches security
Denison New Creature The White Wolf
D. Downame A Sermon defending the Function of Bishops Two Sermons commending
the Ministry
Dod and Cleaver two Sermons on Lam 3.48. Done A Sermon at Whitehal 24
February A Sermon 15. September. at Paul's Cross Deaths Duel
De Dominis, Bishop of Spalato, A Sermon preached in Italian Dod A Remedy
against Contention Dalton Londons Lautel Denison The sin against the Holy
Ghost. Dodson A Sermon preached in the Cathedral at York Digitur Dei Drant the
Divine Lanthorn Darton the True and Absolute Bishop
E
Eburn The twofold Tribute The Royal Law.
Eaton A Sermon, the Funeral of Mr. Dutton E. Anthropophagus, the Man-Eater
Evans A Translation of the Book
F
Fawkner the Pedigree of Peace Nichodemus for Christ Comfort to the Afflicted
D. Fulk the Woman of Canaan Farmer A Sermon at Paul's Cross The bitter waters
of Babylon
Flask Man's Arraignment, and Gods Mercy Featly A Sermon preached to Sir Thomas
Warner The honor of chastity
Fuller A Sermon of Reformation A Sermon in S. Peter's Westminster at the
Inauguration of the King
Fuller A Sermon preached before his Majesty at D. castle The Mourning of Mount
Lebanon
Fary Gods Severity
G
Gauden the Love of Peace and Truth G. A glympse of Sions Glory Gore the Way to
Prosper the God of Heaven Garey A New years Gift for the soul Gee Two Sermons
the curse and crime of Meroz A Sermon of Patience at S. Marys Oxford Hold fast
Granger The sight of the World The Bread of Life
Gataker Jacobs Thankfulness David's Remembrancer Noah's Obedience
Gumbledon Three Sermons in several places Godskall The Ark of Noah Gardener A
Sermon at Paul's Cross Gouge the Saints support Gatford an Exhortation to Peace
The Praise of a Godly Woman Paul's Crown of Rejoicing
Goodcole The Good Treasurer Goffe Deliverance from the Grave Gardner A Sermon
on Easter day Gataker S. Stephens Will Grantham A Marriage Sermon Grant Gods
deliverance of man Goodwin, Z^rubbabels Enemies Greenbil The Axe at the root
Dr. Gardener Kings Inauguration 27 March Gower Things now a doing Green
Nehemiahs Tears Dr. Gouge Mercies Memorial A Recovery from Apostasy.
Gillespie A Sermon preached March 27 before the House of Commons A Sermon
before the Lords August 27.

H
Harris Destruction of Sodom Hall Two Sermons Hook A Sermon before the King,
Jerusalems Peace Hopkins Two Godly and Profitable Sermons Hall A Sermon at S.
Bartholomew, Mar. 27. D. Holsworth A Sermon at S. Marys, March 27. Hoard the
Churches Authority asserted Huget A Divine Aenthyme Holbrook Loves Complaint
Harris Peter's Englargement Drunkards Cup
Hill the Splendour of the Spouse Holbrook A Sermon before the Company of
Blacksmiths Harris Gods goodness and mercy A Sermon preached before the House
of Commons
Hampton Two Sermons preached before the King in Hampshire Hill Trade of Truth
Herie Pear of Compasses David's long
Hodges A Glympse Hall Heaven Ravished Henderson A Sermon preached before the
House of Commons Thanksgiving July 18. A Sermon before the Lords.

I
Jones Londons Looking back Johnson The Gospels Maintenonce The Way to Glory
David's Teacher, at Paul's Cross.
D. Jackson Judah must into captivity Nazateth and Bethlehem The Converts
Happiness
Jofferay The Son of Gods Entertainment Jones a Trearise of Patience in
Tribulation Jacomb sen. Active Spirit Jacomb jur. at Mr. Brights Funeral.
K
Bp King A Sermon at Whitehal 5 Novem. Vitis Palatina His Sermons at Hampton
Court A Sermon at Paul's Cross in behalf of Paul's Church A Sermon of
Thanksgiving for recovery of his Majesty A Sermon in Oxon 5 Nov. 1607
Dr. Kellet A Return from Algier D. King a Sermon of deliverance King A Sermon
at Paul's Cross, March 27 Kenrick The Tell Troth's Requital Kem The Messengers
Preparation Knollys Christ exalted.
L
Lee The Spiritual Spring Leslie a Sermon before the King at Windsor D. Laud A
Sermon before the King A Sermon preached at Whitehal.
Lo The Kings Shoe Lougher A Sermon preached before the Bishop of Bristol
Leech S. Paul's Challenge Lovel The Publican becoming a Penitent. Ley the
bruising of the Serpent Lo Come and see Love Englands Distemper Laurence A
Golden Trumpet Lightfoot Elias Redivivus.
M
Mossom The King on his Throne Marston A Sermon before the Parliament D.
Meriton The Christian Man's Assuring House The sinners Conversion
Milward Jacobs Great Day May A Sermon of the Communion of Saints Milward the
Sword Bearer The Soldiers Triumph
Bp Morton A Sermon before the King Moulin A Sermon before the King at
Greenwich Mandevil Timothy's Task Matthew Peter's Net let down Masson Christian
Humility May, Epaphras Maynwaring Religion and Allegiance Maudit The Christian
soldiers great Engine Marshals first Sermon Peace Offering Meros Curse
Deformations Reformed Pyms Funeral Divine Project Sermon of Baptism Gods Master
Piece Strong Helper Sacred Record Two Edged Sword August 12. 1647 Immanuel
Hardness of Heart Understanding of the Times Thanksgiving 27 July 1648
Vindication of Infants Baptism Sermon at the Spittle at Easter 1652. Sacred
Panigerick Parliament Sermon Jan. 27. 1647 Song of Moses

O
Olmain Life's Brevity Oxley The Shepherd
P
Pigot The sharpness of the Sword Price Lamentation for Prince Henry The
Spring, a Sermon before the Prince The Creation of the Prince Four Sermons
Spiritual Odours to the Memory of the Prince
Peeling A Sermon of the Providence of God Pigot Jerusalem bedewed with Tears
Preston The godly man's Inquisition, two Sermons Parsons Honos and Onus
Levitarum Ruth and Boaz blessed
Price Saul's Prohibition said Pestel Morbus Epidemicus Gods Visitation, a
Sermon at Leicesters Visitation
Price Ephesus Warning before her woe Perrot Jacobs Vow Proctor The Watch-mans
Warning Petley The Royal Receipt Paynter S. Paul's Rule for Religious Peace
Philips The Fisherman Parsons The Magistrates Charter examined Pay Nine
Sermons on special occasions D. Prideaux The Doctrine of the Sabbath Palmer The
Saints Support Powel A Sermon at S. Marys Oxford
Q
Quelch Church Customs vindicated, two Sermons.
R
Reading A Sermon at Maidstone in Kent The Old Man's staff
Rollensons Sermons before the King The Triumph of Constancy The Banishment of
dogs
D. Reynolds The Peace of the Church The Shields of the Earth
Reynolds A discovery of the Man of sin Rawley A Sermon of Meekness Rawlinson
Fishermen Bp Roch^ster A Brand 5 November A Sermon ^t Paul's Cross, 10 Nov.
Reading Moses and J^thro Ross God's House Reeve Three Sermons on several
occasions Rainbow Labor forb^dden Reeks Faith and Good Works Reynolds Isreal's
Pe^ition Rogers the Poors Pension.
A
Sweeper Isreal's Redemption Swift A Pious President for both Kingdoms Squire A
Sermon appointed for the New Churchyard Sanford, Gods Arrow of the Pestilence
Symonds A heavenly Voice Swale Jacobs Vow Sutton The good fight of Faith Seller
A Sermon against halting between two Opinions Sutton Iethro's counsel to Moses
Skinner A Sermon preached before the King Scot The Projectors Assize Squire A
Sermon on the second Commandment Smart A Sermon preached in the Cathedral of
Durham D. Sclater Three Sermons Singleton The Downfall of Shebna Styles the
Gains of seeking God Sermon preached in the City by a Lover of Truth
Scot The Belgic Pismire Squire a Thanksgiving for decrease of the Plague
Sermon preached at Plymouth in New England
Sibbs A Miracle of Miracles Sclater the Worthy Com. rewarded Deaths Summons,
and the Saints duty
Seidgwick Englands preservation An Ark against a Deluge
Shaw A broken Heart Squire A Sermon preached at harford Assize Schloer The
death of the two Renowned Kings Symonds A Sermon before the Commons Scudder
Gods Warning to England D. Spurstow Englands Pattern On the fifth of November.
Magistrates Duty A Sermon at the Lady Vinors Funeral.

T
Tailor Heavenly Voice The value of true Valor
Teelink Paul's complaint Tynley Two Learned Sermons Tompson A diet for
Drunkards Temple Christ's Government in and over Tailor Self satisfaction Tuke
Jehovah Jireth D. Tuck^ey Balm of Gilead At D. Hills Funeral None but Christ
Good day.

U
Valentine God save the King Four Sea Sermons at Deptford
Vdny The Voice of the Crier, two Sermons A Golden Bell and Pomgranat
V. A Discovery of the Rebels Bp Usher Immanuel. etc.
Vines Calebs Integrity Valentine A Sermon preached before the Parliament Virtue
A plea for Peace Vdal The good of Peace
W
Whately Redemption of time Bp Williams A Sermon before the Parliament
W. Englands Thankfulness, a Sermon at Stoud Wilkinson The stripping of Joseph
Wigmore the Holy City The Way of all Flesh
White Londons Warning Wheatly Sin no more Watson A Sermon of Schism Whitaker
Christ the Settlement, etc. Walker A Sermon before the Parliament Whincop Gods
Call Wilkinson Merchant Roval Williams Great Britains Solomon Wh. English
Paradise Wild A Sermon preached at Oxford 3 Mar. W. A Receipt to stay the Plague
White Truth and Error discovered Wilkinson a Sermon at Northampton Whitly
Londons Return Whitfield Idolaters Ruin Wilson David's Zeal Woodcock Two
Witnesses Christ's Warning Piece
White The Pastors Chare Watsons Sermon, One thing necessary.
Y
Younger The Unrighteous Judge.
FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for, and are to be sold by JOHN ROTHWELL at the Fountain and
Bear in Cheapside.
A
Mr. AInsworth Arrow against Idolatry in fol. and 12 Dr. Ames Cases of
conscience. Engl. Marrow of Divinity. 4 On Peter 4
D. Arrowsmith Tactica Sacra sive de milite spirituali pugnante, Vincente and
Triumphante.
B
M. Bradshaw Sin against the H. Ghost 12 M. Bridges Babylons downfall 4 M.
Bohemus on 100 Scriptures opened 8 M. Broxolme on Perkins Six Principles 8
C
M. Church, Miscelanies of the Attributes of God The creatures of God 4 Good
man's Treasury 12 Of Ejaculations 12 His Golden Sayings 12 Pocket companion. 12
M. Culverwells Light of Nature 4 White stone (alone) 8
M. Clark Of Persecution and Lives of Ministers. folio. M. Cravens Catechism 8
M. Cotton of singing of Psalms 4.
D
M. Dales Shepherdizing of Lambs 8 D. Drake De Sanguine 4 M. Dyke of Epping,
His Right Receiving of Christ 8 Safety in case of danger 8 Select Sermons of
Quenching the Spirit, and Pardon of sin etc. 8

F
M. Fenner of Afflictions 4 of conscience 4 Alarm for drousie Saints 4 Wilful
Impenitency 4 Catechism on the Creed Lords Prayer Ten Commandments
M. Ford of Baptism, Catechizing, and first Fruits of David's Government 8 His
Catechize against the Anabaptists.

G
Germany Lamentations octavo Invasion octavo Prodigies octavo

H
M. Huges Of Affliction, the benefit of it 4 Funeral Sermon 4 Parliament Sermon
4
M. Hooks New Englands Tears 4 New Englands Sense 4
M. How of Universal Redemption 4 Pagan Preacher silenced 4
M. Haines Grammar 8
L
M. Lockier Balm for bleeding England and Ireland 8 Communion of Church
militant Discovery of sincerity 8 Olive leaf 8 Paliament Sermon 4 Englands
Wounds 4
Love, Grace with its different degrees 8 Zealous Christian 4 Heavens Glory and
Hels Terror 4 Effectual Calling 4 Combat between the Flesh and Spirit 4
Directory of a Christian 4 The Penitent Pardoned 4 The dejected souls cure
Administration of Angels 4 Gods Omnipresence. The sinners Legacy to their
posterity 4
By Mr. Calamy Whitaker Ash Tailor
Longland On the four last things. Death, Judgment, Hell and Heaven 12
M
M. Milton His Reason of Church-Goverment 4 Apology for Smectymnuus
M. Mathers Catechism 8 Reply to M. Rutherford 4

P
M. Pool his Answer to Biddles denial of the Holy Ghost to be God 12 A
Pacification between the Lutheran and Reformed Churches 8

R
Bp Richardson his choice Observations on the Old Testament, as a supplement to
the large Annotat. fol. M. Robourough against Goodwin about Justification 4
S
Smectymnuus Redivivus first and second parts about Episcopacy and Presbytery 4
M. Shepherd on the Sabbath, with Cases of Conscience 8 Of Subjection to Christ 8
D. Sibbs Miracle of Miracles 4 Glorious feast of the Gospel 4 Glance of Heaven
12 Spiritual man's aim 12 Charter of a Christian 12 Conference between Christ
and Mary after his Resurrection 12
Dr. Stoughtons Sermons in his younger years 4 His form of sound words, with
the righteous man's plea to true Happiness 4 Heavenly conversation, Two Sermons
12
D. Seaman of Ordination 4 Solomon's choice 4 Head of the Church 4 Glass for the
Times 4

T
Thesaurus Poeticus 12 D. Tucknoy Balm for Gilead 12 Death disarmed: A Sermon
at D. Hills Funeral 12 None but Christ 12

U
M. Venning Orthodox Paradoxes 8 New Command octavo Mysteries and Revelat.
octavo Milk and Honey Second Part. octavo Warning to Backslid octavo Way to
Heaven 4

W
Wise Virgin, A Narrative of Gods dealing with a child of eleven years of age:
and her gracious speeches in the time of her affliction: Published by three
Ministers 8.
FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT.
WHile this Catalogue was Printing, most of these Books came forth, viz. *
Power of Godliness, of the Affections, Spiritual Combat, Government of the
Tongue, on Prayer, on the Lords Prayer in folio, By Mr. John Ball. * M.
Murcotts Sermons preached in Ireland 4 * D. Jackson XI. Book of Commentaries on
the Creed, containing, Christ's Session at the Right hand of God, His being made
Lord and Christ, his coming to Judgment the Resurrection, and Life Eternal,
with diverse Sermons fol. * D. Sam. Wards Works in Latin fol. in the Press. * M.
Baxter of Baptism, second part 4 * of Popery 8 * of Conversion. * Rams
Catechism 12 * Establishment, or a Discourse tending to settle the minds of men
about some Controversies of the present times 4 * The Leper cleansed, or an
Anabaptist reduced 8
* M. Cawdry against Saunders 8 * against D. Owen of Schism
* M. Buroughs of Reconciliation, Matthew 11.28, 29, 30. in Press. * Bridges
Scripture Light 4 * Craggs Spiritual Jewel 8 * Calvert Minister in York on
Isai. 53. * Gumbledon on Matthew Heaven and Earth shaken, written by M. Davis 8
* Christian Legacy, Preparation for death, and Consolation against death, by D.
Hide 12 * Four Sermons by M. John Hinckley * M. Ford and M. Fowler against the
Quakers * M. Fowler against Pordage * Demonium Meridianum * M. Teats
Meditations of Hearing and Praying * A bewildred sinner 4
* Hen. Carpenter of Conscience 12 * Pringle Stay in Trouble 8 * Holidays
Sermon, Motives to godliness 4 * Antidotum contra Naufragium Fidei and Bonae
Conscientiae Concio ad Clerum, per D. Sibbs 12 * Man's Fury, a Sermon by M.
Warren. * M. Obadiah Seidgwick a Treatise of Faith 4 * of Grace 12 * Fountain
opened 4
* M. Calamy's Godly Man's Ark, Sermons preached upon occasion of the death of
Mistress Moore, who died of a Cancer in her Breast; with some Evidences of her
Salvation annexed, under her own hand. * The Young Man's Memento 12 * The danger
of being almost a Christian, by John Chishull 12 Some New Pieces of M. Love;
viz. * The Dejected souls cure 4 * The Administration of Angels 4 * Gods
Omnipresence 4 * The Sinners Legacy to their Posterity
Attested by M. Calamy, M. Ash and M. Tailor, etc.


There was a Piece of M. Loves called The Souls Cordials, printed in Octavo
about two years past, on Psalm 32. ver. 5. and John 14. ver. 3. which was
published by a very imperfect Copy. But now called, The Penitent Pardoned,
published by the Trustees, and compared with his own Notes, and much amended
from very many faults.

FINIS.

