To day a man, To morrow none: OR, SIR Walter Ravvleighs Farewell to his LADY,
The night before he was beheaded: Together with his advice concerning HER, and
her SON.

LONDON, Printed for R. H. 1664.

Sir Walter Rawleighs farewell to his LADY the night before he was beheaded.
Together with his advice concerning her, and her Son.
Dear WIFE,
YOu shall receive my last words in these my last lines; my love I send you
that you may keep it when I am dead, and my counsel that you may remember it
when I am no more. I would not with my will present you sorrows (dear Besse)
let them go to the grave with me, and be buried in the dust. And seeing it is
not the will of God that ever I shall see you any more in this life, bear my
destruction gently, and with a heart like your self.

First, I send you all the thanks which my heart can conceive, or my words
express, for your many troubles and cares taken for me, which though they have
not taken effect as you wished, yet my debt to you is not less, but I shall
never recompense it in this world.

Secondly, I beseech you even for the love you bare me living, that you do not
hide your self many days, but by your travel seek to help your miserable
fortune, and the right of your poor child: Your mourning cannot avail me
that am but dust.

Thirdly, you shall understand that my Lands were conveied ( bona fide) to my
child, the writings were drawn at Mid summer was twelvemonth, as diverse can
witness, and I trust that my blood will quench their malice that desire my
slaughter, and that they will not seek also to kill you and yours with extreme
poverty.

To what friend to direct you I know not, for all mine have left me in the true
time of trial; most sorry I am (as God knows) that being thus surprised with
death I can leave you no better estate; I meant you all my Office of wines or
that I should purchase by selling it, half my stuff and my jewels, (but some
few for the boy) but God has prevented all my determinations; The great God
that works all in all.

But if you can live free from want, dare for no more, for the rest is but
vanity.

Love God, and begin betime to repose your self on him, therein shall you
find true and everlasting riches and endless comfort: for the rest when you
have traveled and wearied your thoughts over all sorts of worldly
congitations, you shall sit down by sorrow in the end.

Teach your son also to serve and fear God whilst he is young, that the fear
of God may grow up with him, then will God be a husband unto you, and a father
unto him, a husband and a father that can never be taken from you.

Bailey owes me 1000 l. Arion 600 l. In Iersie also I have much owing me; the
arrerages of the wines will pay your debts.

And howsoever (I beseech you for my souls sake) pay all poor men when I am
gone: no doubt you shall be sought unto, for the world thinks I was very rich.

But take heed of the pretense of men and of their affections, for they last
but in honest and worthy men: and no greater misery can befall you in this
life, then to become a prey, and after to be despised: I speak it (God
knows) not to dissuade you from marriage, for that will be best for you, both
in respect of God and the world.

As for me I am no more yours, not you mine, death has cut us asunder, and God
has divided me from the world, and you from me: Remember your poor child for
his fathers sake that comforted you, and loved you in his happiest times.

I sued for my life (but God knows) it was for you and yours that I desired
it: for know it (dear wife) that your son is the child of a true man, and
who in his own heart despises death, and all his misshapen and ugly forms.

I cannot write much: God knows how hardly I stole this time when all were
asleep, and it is now time to separate my thoughts from the world. Beg my dead
body which living was denied you, and either lay it in Sherborne or in Exeter
Church by my father and mother. I can say no more, time and death call me away.
The everlasting God, infinite, powerful, and inscrutable God, That Almighty
God which is goodness itself, mercy it self, the true light and life, keep
you and yours, and have mercy upon me.

Teach me to forgive my persecuters and false accusers, and send me to meet him
in his glorious Kingdom.

My true wife farewell, God bless my poor boy, pray for me, my true God hold
you both in His Arms.

EVen such is time, which takes in trust
Our youth, our age, and all we have,
And pays us but with age and dust,
Who in the dark and silent grave,
When we have wandered all our ways
Shuts up the story of our days.
And from the earth, the grave, and dust,
The Lord shall raise me up, I trust.
WALTER RAVVLEIGH.

LIke Hermit, poor in pensive place obscure
I mean to end my days with endless doubt,
To wail such woes as time cannot recure,
Where none but love shall ever find me out.
And at my gates despair shall linger still
To let in death when love and fortune will.
A Gown of gray my body shall attire,
My staff of broken hope whereon I stay
Of late repentance linkt with long desire,
The couch is framed whereon my limbs I lay.
And at my gates, etc.
My food shall be of care and sorrow made,
My drink naught else but tears fallen from mine eyes,
And for my light in this obscured shade
The flames may serve which from my heart arise.
And at my gates, etc.
WALTER RAVVLEIGH.
FINIS.

