CATHOLIC CHARITY: COMPLAINING, AND MAINTAINING, That Rome is uncha^itable to
sundry Eminent parts of the Catholic Church, and especially to Protestants,
and is therefore Uncatholick: And so, A Romish Book, called CHARITY MISTAKEN,
though undertaken by a Second, is it self a Mistaking.

By F. ROUS.

OPTATUS Lib. 2. Quia noluerunt fratres agnoscere, nullam habuerunt charitatem.

LONDON, Printed by R. Young, for John Bartlet, at the sign of the gilt Cup,
near S. Austins gate. 1641.

REcensui Librum hunc, cui Titulus CATHOLIC CHARITY, in quo nihil reperio
fidei orthodoxae, aut bonis moribus contrarium, quo minus summa cum utilitate
Typis mandetur.

JOH. HANSLEY, R. P. Episc. Land. Capel. Domest.
December. 2. 1640.
The Publisher to the READER.
IT might well have been wished, that the growth of Romish errors and
superstitions (the complaint of this time) had not made this Work too
seasonable: True it is, though it do but now see the light, yet it came to the
birth before any other Answer of Charity Mistaken was known to the Author; it
came indeed to the birth, but there was no strength to deliver; the judgment
of those times not giving way to any other besides those whose Answers have
been already made public. But though they have run before like Cushi; 2 Samuel
18.
this, like Ahimaaz, (yet perchance not altogether without tidings) may run
after: and with Ahimaaz, it may make the better speed, because, with him, it
goes the way of the Plain; it goes a plain way, speaking plainly the
Protestant Shiboleth; and it uses plainness and evidence of speech, in which
way it is likely to meet with most Readers. Neither does it come altogether
without tidings; for it brings with it the tidings of Truth and Love, and, by
both, a remedy against error and uncharitableness. And, as it is a work of
charity, so is it sutably fitted with charitable expressions; for it does not
take up those sharp arrows which in these Concertations too often are shot at
men's persons, besides the Mark of the Matter. True it is, that where the
Writer does put his faults into the matter of his Book, and does publish them
of purpose to have them seen, and by the sight of them to make others faulty,
there it will be a duty of obedience, as well as of necessary providence (for
the Readers safety) to take notice of them. Controversies certainly look like
breaches of love, and therefore the Author has not been much in love with
them: But if love will be lost, except it be kept by a Controversy, there the
Controversy that keeps it, is a work of love: To strive against
uncharitableness, that it may be removed, and charity put in the room of it,
is an act of charity; and this charity is the business of this work.

The Reader may also take notice, that diverse passages not insisted on by the
other, are here examined, because this work surveyeth the whole Book, which
it answers more particularly then the other.

There has indeed come forth a Reply in defense of Charity Mistaken: But both
the one and the other turn mainely on these two hinges; That there must be an
entire unity of faith in all Truths revealed by God, and proposed by the
Church: And, That if unity were to be held by the faith of Fundamentals, a
perfect and uniforme List should be given of those Fundamentals. Now these two
hinges being taken off in this Book, I hope it may give a fall to the maine
matter of them both.

And whereas the Replyer strives to divide our unity by this Engine, Page 81.
That some Protestants directly, wittingly, and willingly dis-beleeve what
others do believe to be testified by the Word of God; and herein is no
difference between Fundamental and not Fundamental: It is rejoyned for a
defense against this Engine of division, That if herein be no difference
between the one and the other in Fundamentals, there is no proof that they
are not united members in the body of Christ: For, he that wittingly and
willingly dis-beleeves that which the other believes to be testified by the
Word of God, may know, (as the term wittingly seems to import) that the point
dis-beleeved is not testified by the Word of God; and so he may be safe, and
is still one with Christ and his Members: Again, the other who believes it to
be testified by the Word of God, may be deceived: yet the point not being
fundamental, his error may not divide him from the other which is a member of
Christ. Indeed, if a Protestant should know a point to be testified by the Word
of God, and then dis-beleeve it, that might prove him not to be in the Body of
Christ; but first, This would bring him within the difference of Fundamentals
and not Fundamentals, contrary to the Replyers Affirmation: for it is a maine
Fundamental to believe God; whom that man believes not, who wittingly and
willingly denies the Word of God. And secondly, It is merely inconsistent and
incompossible, That he who believes Fundamentals, should wittingly and
willingly dis-beleeve what he knows the God of Truth has spoken. And, if out
of weakness, error, and ignorance he does not believe that God has spoken
it; this ignorance, if it be not in Fundamentals, does not enforce a disunion
from other Members of the Body of Christ. Thus the Replyers objected
Not-beleeving, either falls under Fundamentals, and then his case is not
rightly put; or else it falls not under Fundamentals, and then it does not
conclude a disunion between Protestants. This having received my self, I
impart to the Reader, with a Prayer, that in reading this Work, he may be
enlightened with that Spirit of Truth which alone can kindly discover both the
Mystery of godliness, and the Mystery of iniquity; and that the same Spirit may
hold him in the one, and keep him from the other.

CATHOLIC CHARITY.
CHAP. I.
Of Christian Love and Peace.

SECT. I.
Concerning the Excellency, Necessity, and other motives of Christian Love;
with an exhortation to the embracing of it.

THE Spouse of Christ Jesus, when she shines in Love, she is amiable in
Beauty, precious in the eye of her Husband, powerful with God her Father,
prosperous in her own spiritual health and vigor, and prepared for her
consummate marriage in celestial glory. Her husband is God, and God is love,
and God cannot but love that love which is like himself. And that he may love
his Spouse for her love, when she becomes one Spirit with him, by this unity
of Spirit he gives her an uniformity of love; the ointment of Christ Jesus,
the Head, flows down into all his members, and breaths love into them; and
as far as his life goes, so far goes his love: therefore no love, no life in
Christ Jesus. Agreeably, the beloved Disciple, and an especial Teacher of
love, having showed that the new birth brings love with life, he fitly adds,
He that loves not, ^ Joh. 3.14.
abides in death. No wonder then, if the great Master and Lover of this
Disciple, John 13.34.
make love the mark of his true Disciples, seeing those are only Christ's true
Disciples, which so learn Christ, as they draw that spirit from him, which
teaches them love, and breaths it into them.

And surely if a son of God, by that spiritual eye which he receives from
Christ Jesus with his Sonne-ship, do clearly behold another son of the same
father, how can he choose but love him as a brother? he cannot choose but love
him for the unity that is between them; for they are one spirit, by being
begotten of one Spirit in Christ Jesus: John 17.21. 1 Cor. 12.13. Ephesians. 5*
and as none hates his own flesh, but cherishes and loves it, so none
should hate his own spirit, but cherish and love it. Secondly, he should love
his brother for uniformity as well as for unity* there is a spiritual likeness
and conformity between spiritual brethren; and commonly likeness breeds
love: they are both created unto one image, and how can a son of God but love
his own likeness which he sees in his brother? As in a glass face
answers to face, so a Saints soul answers to the soul of a Saint; and
when one sees his own shape in the other, from this likeness and harmony,
there must needs arise spiritual love and amity* Thirdly, if a Saint consider
the excellency of a Saint, how can he choose but love him for his excellency?
God is the chiefest and highest excellence, and he that most resembles God, is
therefore most excellent. Now among visible creatures, there is none that
resembles God more then a Saint; Col 3.1^.
for he is a son of God, begotten to the true image of God his father; 1 John
5.^^
therefore he that loves God that begat, loves also the Sons whom God has
bego^ten; and the man according to Gods own heart; Psalm. 16.2, 3.
because his goodness (the fruits of love) extends not unto God, therefore he
communicates it to the Saints and Sons of God that excel in virtue; as if that
were the next degree to doing good unto God himself, to love, cherish, and do
good to his sons and Saints: And indeed, what is a fitter object of love, next
to the chief and sovereign Good, then a Saint, who by a derivative goodness
most represents him? God is light, Ephesians. 5.8.
and a Saint is light in the Lord; God is goodness and righteousness, and a
Saint is created according to God in righteousness and true holiness. Ephesians.
4.24.
The heart of a Saint is according to Gods heart; 1 Samuel 13.14*
yea, he is partaker of a divine nature and grows in it from glory to glory*
2 Pet. 1.4. 2 Cor. 3.18. Gal. 5.22. Ephesians. 5.9.
And as this divine nature is glorious and lovely, so are the fruits of it
atractively amiable, Love, joy, peace, long suffering, goodness, faith,
meekness temperance, yea, all goodness, righteousness, and truth.

The beauty of the body is by no means comparable with the beauty of the soul;
for the beauty of the soul is the Image of God: and the glory of this Image
having in it divine light, virtue, and goodness, shines in the soul with a
far higher excellence, then color and complexion laid on the clay and earth
of a fading and corruptible body: and according to this excellence the beauty
of the soul is preserved to immortality, when the beauty of the body is
suffered either to vanish before the body, or to lie with it in the dust, and
there to die a kind of second death; neither shall it ever recover life
again, but by a conjunction with the beauty of the soul: If corporal beauty
have been joined with spiritual beauty, then shall it rise in a far more
excellent beauty; but if it had not with it spiritual beauty (purity, and
goodness, and fairness of soul) it shall not arise in glory and beauty, it
shall not see the face of God, but it shall be sent away with ougly spirits,
being it self transformed into the deformed character of a countenance weeping,
and wailing, and gnashing of teeth.

If then a Saint be so lovely, and the love of a Saint is so just and
reasonable, and God does love this Love, and does give his Saints the Spirit of
love of purpose to love one another, and so this love is the mark of a Saint,
a Son, and a Christian; let every Saint make himself sure of this love, and
not only of the show and word of it, but of the essence and life of it. Let
him love a Saint whom God loves; and love him because God loves this love of a
Saint: Let him love a Saint as he loves his own safety, which is annexed to
the love of the Saints: Let him love a Saint, because a Saint loves God: Let
him love a Saint, because he is like himself, and because the Saint loves
him. Dilige Deum tuum, dilige in Deo tuo, Claud. Man. de statu animae. Lib. 1.
charum tuum, Imaginem Dei tui: Ille te perinde, diligendo Deum, in Deo
diligat: Love thy God, and in God love thy brother the image of God; and let
thy brother, in requital* by loving God, love thee also in God.

SECT. II.
Peace is declared to be the first fruits of love, and to make love fruitful
in other graces, and is further commended* 1. By the beauty and usefulness of
it. 2. By the mischiefs which proceed from dissension. 3. By the authority of
Scriptures. 4. By the example of Christ.

TRue Christian love will not be solitary, and fruitless; but it must bring
forth peace, and be attended by it. Love is it self the fruit of the spirit,
C^l. 3.14, 1^.
and peace is the fruit of this love; yea, love which delights to be
fruitful, loves this peace, because by her she communicates her other
fruitfulness. It is best sowing in a calm; James 3.18.
and, if we will believe Saint James, the fruit of righteousness is best sown
in peace: So Peace (the eldest daughter of Love) is a midwife to her mother,
and delivers her of the rest of her children; and without her help the mother
does nothing but make abortions. Therefore, as thou would have thy love to
be fruitful, and by her fruits profitable to the Saints; so be thou sure to
have her attended by peace, that through peace with the Saints, thy love may
profitably extend it self to the Saints. The unity of the spirit must be kept
in the bond of peace: and indeed, with whom will thou keep peace, if thou will
not keep it with those who are one spirit with thee? 1 Cor. 12.12, 13.
By one spirit are we all baptized into one body, and we be members one of
another by our unity in this one body. How comely, yea, how necessary is it to
the preservation and prosperity of the body, that the members of one body be
at peace and unity? and how monstrous and destructive is it, when one member
fights with another? That fatal sentence cannot be avoided; Gal. 5.15.
If ye bite one another, ye shall be consumed one of another. But
contrarily, the kingdom of God which is peace, flourishes by the peace of the
subjects of that kingdom: and therefore St. Paul having taught the former to
the Romans, adjoyneth the latter, Ro^. 14.17, 18.
and that with a vehemency; for he injoynes them, not barely to follow, but
as it were to persecute (even with a swift and eager prosecution to run after)
the things of peace; yea, he adjures the Philippians by all consolation in
Christ, Phil. 2.
and by the fellowship of the Spirit, and by the bowels of mercy, that they be
of one accord. Finally, the Son of God, Heb. 7.2.
our Savior (of whom Melchisedech was a type) is the King of peace, as well as
the King of righteousness; and his subjects, who will partake of his
righteousness, must also partake of his peace. Christ has made peace between
God and us, even peace between heaven and earth; not that men being at peace
above with God, should have discord below among themselves; but the peace which
is begun in heaven, must come down and dwell among his members on earth; we
must be one as he and his Father are one: Joh. 17.21.
the peace which we receive from God by Christ, we must impart each to other;
Colos. 3.15.
yea, it must rule in our hearts, being called to it in one body. Accordingly
as we expect peace from God through Christ, so let us hear and obey Christ
commanding peace amongst our selves: Mar. 9.50.
Have peace one with another, and then let us not doubt, but if the Peace of
God be among us, the God of peace is also with us. Deus semper in pace est;
Chrysol. Ser. 54.
Where spiritual and true peace is, there ever God is.

SECT. III.
That this love and peace are catholic and universal, extended to all the
members of Christ; and that our Church by professing this Catholic love,
declares her self to be a truly Catholic Church.

THe two excellent and powerful Graces, Love and Peace, may not be bounded by
us, but by God himself, the Author and Commander of it; Him must we follow in
the enlarging or straitning of it, and not go from his leading to the right
hand, Act. 10.15.
or to the left: where God commands love and peace, we may not forbid them;
neither whom God by sanctifying has made fit for our peace, must we account
common or unclean, and fit for separation. Colos. 1.4. Ephesians. 4.3.16.
Now the extent and bound which God appoints for our love and peace is no less
then all the Saints, even the whole body of Christ; the bond of peace is not
one jot shorter then the unity of the spirit. 1 John 5.1. 2 Timothy 2.22.
If then God have not disdained to bestow on any man his sanctifying Spirit,
let not man scorn on such a one to bestow his love and peace; for he that
denies his love and peace to that man in whom is the Spirit, he denies his
love and peace to the spirit which is in that man: Therefore if God have gone
before with his saving grace and sanctifying spirit, let us not doubt to follow
God with our love and peace. Now we know that God (according to his promise to
Abraham) has an holy seed out of all Nations, Docere voluit quod haec tria
sibi invicem connexa sint, and cohaerent Deus, Christus, and Ecclesia, seu
universitas credentium, adeo ut qui (...) ex his vel diligat vel odiat, omnia
diligat aut odiat. Ferus 1 Ioh. 5.
which is the catholic and universal Church: if then the Church be catholic
and universal, let our love and peace be also catholic and universal. And
to this end our affections must be enlarged and made capable of the whole
world. For he that will love a catholic Church with a catholic love, must
not have a narrow love contracted and confined to the measure of one City,
Kingdom, or Nation; but extended and enlarged to the measure of all Cities,
Kingdoms, and Nations, even of the whole world. If that which is to be loved,
be universal, the affection which loves must not be partial: For if the
love be but to a part, when it should be to the whole, this is not that
catholic love which belongs to the Catholic Church; and whatsoever title such
men may take to themselves, they are not true, but counterfeit Catholics: for
they have not that catholic spirit of love which is in the true catholic
Church, and by which the catholic Church does love it self with a catholic
love. But such men by likelihood, have a private spirit, by which they love a
private part and faction, and are short of that universal spirit which loves
the universal Church with an universal love: for there is a private spirit of
love as well as of faith; and it is that kind of spirit which Saint James
mentions, James 4.5. and 3.14, 15.
a spirit that lusts after envy, after sects and divisions. But let us never
rest until we get that catholic spirit by which we may embrace the catholic
Church with a catholic love; and then we may be assured we are not titular,
but true and real Catholics. Hereby we know that we are of the truth (says
Saint John) and we shall assure our hearts before God: 1 John 3.19.
And, we know that we have passed from death to life, Ver. 14.
because we love the brethren; even the brethren without exception and
reservation: and he that dwells in this general and unreserved love, 1 John
4.12.
God, who is love, dwells in him and he in God; Ver. 13.
And we know that we dwell in him and he in us, because he has given us his
spirit, even the spirit of this catholic and universal love. Let no man
therefore say of another, He is of such a Nation with which my Nation is at
enmity; or of such a Church which professes some differences with the Church
in which I live, and therefore I will by no means have love and peace with
him; but remember, that in every Nation he that fears God and works
righteousness is accepted of God: Act. 10.35.
and therefore do thou enquire, whether this spirit of fear and holiness be
in him, which those that have are accepted of God: if he be accepted of God,
take heed he be not rejected of thee: It were a madness in thee for Gods sake
to hate one whom God loves, and for Christ's sake to hate a member of Christ.
Indeed, if he be of a Church infected with errors, thou must be wary of him,
that he infect thee not with those errors; but be also wary of not hating the
spirit of Christ in a member of Christ: It is an Apostolical, and so an
undeniable Inference, Col. 3.10.
If ye have put on the New-man, in which is neither Greek nor Jew,
Circumcision nor Uncircumcision, Barbarian, Scythian, bond nor free, but Christ
is all in all; Put on therefore (there is a binding force in this therefore) as
the elect of God, holy and beloved, bowels of mercy, kindness, etc. And above
all these things, put on charity, which is the bond of perfectness; and let
the peace of God rule in your hearts, to which ye are called in one body.

Let us then have love and peace with a believing Muscovite, Grecian,
Ethiopian, Indian, if he be of that one body wherein Christ is all in all,
and by the unity whereof we are called to love and peace: yea, from this
universal peace and love may not be excluded any remnant according to the
election of grace, pertaining to the body of Christ, though sojourning in the
tents and territories of Rome: we may not hate the seven thousand that do not
bow their knees to Baal, though dispersed among seven millions of Idolaters:
we may not hate Israel, though in bondage under Pharaoh. But to the true
Israel, even to the pure in heart, and those who in Christ Jesus are new
creatures, and walk according to this rule, Gal. 6.15, 16.
peace, and the prayers of peace, the true fruits of love do belong, the
divine Apostle being herein our guide and example. Ephesians. 4.16. 1 John 3.14. and
4.7.
And while thus we enjoy and embrace this universal love with the universal
body of Christ, great is our safety; for hereby we know and may assure our
hearts, that we belong to that universal body, which alone loves it self
with this universal love. That is the truly catholic Church, which is endued
with this catholic love; that is a living Church, which is a loving Church:
Our Church therefore embracing and exercising this catholic love, is a Church
truly catholic; and our Church being a Church of love, is a Church of life.

Cass^nd. de (...).
Let therefore Cassander, a Doctor of the Church of Rome, conclude for us, Qui
recta sententia de Christo capiti injunguntur, etc. They that by a right
belief concerning Christ, are joined to the head, and by the hand of love and
peace are joined to the body of the Church (howsoever they may differ in some
opinions and rites) are by no means to be accounted Schismatics, or
separated from the Church, though they seem rejected and excomunicated by some
other part of the Church, more mighty, and possessing the Government.

CHAP. II.
Wherein is declared, that Rome wants this catholic love; 1. By her separation
from other Churches. 2. By her hatred to Protestants, manifested in the cruel
persecutions and massacres practiced against them in Popish countries, and by
the rebellions, treasons, open hostility stirred up against this Kingdom. All
which prove her to be uncharitable and un-catholick.

IT has been showed that love and peace must be catholic and universal,
that so they may be capable of a catholic and universal Church: for as wide
and as large as the Church is, so large must the love of the Church be; The
body of Christ is the measure of this love, and this love must be no jot
shorter then the body of Christ; the body of Christ then extending to all
Nations, and so being a catholic body, must be followed through all Nations
with no less then a catholic love: but love, as much as it is short of loving
this catholic body of Christ, so much is it short of being a catholic love,
and so much it is indeed uncatholick. Now, the Romish Church (which according
to the Church Homily of Whitsontide.
of England, is to be understood of the Pope and his The name Papists is from
an whole state and order of chief Governors, to whom we are bound to cleave
in Religion, and to obey in all things. So, to be a Papist, is to be a
Christian man, a child of the Church, and subject to Christ's Vicar. Romish
Test. on Act. 11. ver. 26. Pontificem Romanum quem Papam dicimus tantum non
Deum faciunt, ejusque authoritatem non modo supra totam Ecclesiam, sed supra
ipsam Scripturam divinam efferunt, and sententiam ejus divinis oraculis parem,
imo infallibilem ^idei regulam constituunt; hos non video quo minus
Pseudo-Catholicos and Papistas appellare possis. Cassan. de Offic. pii viri.
adherents) does not make this body of Christ the measure of her love, but the
body of the Papacy; not Christ's Kingdom, but the Popes Kingdom is the
measure of Romish love. As much then as the Popes Kingdom is short of the
Kingdom of Christ, so much is Rome short of a catholic love, and so much is
she uncatholick. Now, we know that the Kingdom of Christ spreads it self
much farther then the Kingdom of the Pope; yea, Christ is known and believed
where there is neither knowledge nor faith of the Pope. Accordingly, Neque id
tantum de Occiduis, sed etiam Orientalibus Ecclesiis, ut Graecorum, etc. Id.
Ibid.
Cassander thinks, not only the Western Churches of Protestants; but the
Eastern and Southern also, and by name, the Russian, Syrian, Ethiopian, and
Armenian, that believe the Apostles Creed, and do not by schism divide
themselves from the communion of other Churches, to be members of the true and
catholic Church of Christ. And these parts of the Church are so great and
large, that a Countryman of ours in his diligent Inquiries, Brier-wood his
Inquiries of Tongues and Religions. cap. 18.
gives this judgment of the Greek Church alone; If we should collect and put
together all the Christian Regions hitherto entreated of, which are all of the
Greek Communion, and compare them with the parts professing the Roman religion,
we should find the Greek far to exceed, if we except the Roman new and
foreign purchases made in the West and East Indies: Id. cap. 21. and 24.
Now to these, if we shall add the Christians in Syria, Cyprus, Mesopotamia,
Babylon and Palestine, which are by the least computation 50000. families, and
by the greatest 60000. And if again we join with these the Armenians, who are
under two Patriarchs of their own, whom they term Catholics, and are
esteemed to exercise jurisdictions over 70000. families: And if yet further we
shall increase this number by those innumerable Christians of AEthiopia, that
are spread far and wide in the vaste Dominions of Prester John: And lastly, if
to these we add the no little number of Protestant Christians in the West;
we may see that the Kingdom of the Pope is far short of the Kingdom of
Christ, and consequently that the love of Rome at least, so much is short of
catholic love.

But if we leave those other famous, and far dispersed parts of Christ's
body, whom Rome leaves without true catholic love, and more particularly and
punctually examine Romes want of love to Protestants, whereof especially is our
present inquiry; all the paper in the world were scarce sufficient to contain
the words that might be written for the proof of it, with the blood of
Protestants shed by the Romists. So that the ancient parable of Iotham has
been fulfilled in our days; If indeed ye annoint me King over you, Judge. ^ ^.
then come and put your trust in my shadow; and if not, let fire come out of
the bramble, and devour the Cedars of Lebanon. The fire and lightning of the
Popes excommunications fly out against the denyers of his universal Kingdom
and Supremacy; and that fire is too often seconded with material fire. For the
maintenance of his pride Christians must be hated, spoiled, and butchered of
Christians. There is a method of cruelty set forth against such who are Romes
Heretics, and the true Churches Christians. This we find thus summed up by
Azorius the Jesuit; Azor. Instit. moral. lib. 8. cap. 10.11.12.
1. Excommunication. 2. Irregularity. 3. Confiscation of goods. 4. Dissolving
of all bands, be they oaths, fealty, service, or any other covenant and
promise. 5. Deprivation of all dignities and honors. 6. Loss of
Ecclesiastical burial. 7. Infamy. 8. Uncapacitie of all dignities and offices
Ecclesiastical to themselves, their favorers, receivers, and children, to the
second generation by the fathers side, yea, though the children were borne
before the heresy. 9. Loss of life. And even Bellarmine himself, whom
learning (which once had a name of emollit mores) and seeming devotion should
have made somewhat milder, drinks deeply, if not pleasantly, in this cup of
blood, and delivers it to his Disciples, that they may pledge him: Solum
remedium est mittere illos mature in locum suum: Bellarm. de (...), cap. 21.
The only remedy is to send them betimes to their own place; which place,
though indeed it be heaven, it seems yet the good Fathers charitable meaning
was, by a first death speedily to send Protestants to hell, the place of the
second death. But no wonder is it if this Father drank to his children in this
red cup of cruelty, when the Father of these Fathers, being now ready to go
out of the world, drank to his fatherly Sons very stiffely in the same cup of
the blood of the Saints: For the Pope, that he might show some contrariety to
Christ, (for which some Omnis Spiritus qui solvit Jesum, and negat in carne
venisse, de Deo non est, sed hic de Antichristo est, etc. Nunquid omnis qui non
negat ^^sum in carne venisse, Spiritum Dei habet* Sed hanc negationem in opere,
non in voce esse --. Si credat Christum inca^na^um, quiescat odi^e memb^a
Christi. Si credit Verbum caro-^actum, quid persequitur in carne Verbum
caro-factum? -- Non op^^^tur mal^m in Christi carne, hoc est, in servis suis,
quoniam Domin^^ and Eccl^sia una caro est: In qua carne si credit esse hominem,
cur non ^^^igit, aut q^od c^udelius est, cur odit? sicut scriptum est, Qui non
(...) in morte: and, Qui fratrem suum odit homi^ida est. Aliud in (...)
evidentius signu^ cognoscendi Antichristi non esse dixit, qua^, Q^i negat (...)
carne, idem edit fratrem. Ticonius in his Rules, which Rules are commended by
S. A^^ust. de Doctr. Christ. lib. 3. cap. 30.
perchance may epsy in him a likeness of Antichrist) when he was to leave
the world, as Christ left peace, so the Pope leaves war to his Disciples; for
at parting, above all, he bequeathes to his Cardinals a legacy of blood,
commending to them chiefly the Inquisition, as a maine Pillar of the Papacy.
And if this be the chief Pillar of the Papacy, no doubt, as the Pope was before
contrary to Christ, so is the Papacy or Popes Kingdom contrary to Christ's
Kingdom; for Christ's Kingdom did grow by the blood of his own subjects,
Plures essicimur quoties metimur a vobis: Semen est sanguis Christianorum.
T^rt. Apolog.
but the Popes Kingdom must grow by the blood of them that will not be
subject to him; yea, by shedding the blood of Christ's subjects. But yet we see
him deceived; for the blood of the Martyrs even now (as in the Primitive times)
has increased the Church, and diminished the Papacy: Yet still they go on,
the devils malice herein overcomming his wit, as it did when he entered into
Judas to kill Christ, Heb. 2.14.
that Christ by his death might overcome him that had the power of death, even
the devil.

And according to this Satan's method of Hist. Con. Tr^. l. 5. id (...). 1558
cruelty, we read of 50000. in a few years hanged, beheaded, buried alive,
and burned in the Low Countries; and of 30000. slain and The soldiers and
common executioners refusing to kill the Protestants at Lions, the butchers
were impl^y^d in it. Comment. ^f France.
butchered in a few weeks at and after the Massacre of Paris, Ab origin
Jesuitarum, ad annum 1580. hoc est, paulo pluribus quam 30. annis nongenta sere
millia fuisse trucidata notat ^^lduinus de Antichrist^, C^ment. Apoc.
and of nine hundred thousand slain since the original of the Jesuits, to
the year 1580. which is little more then thirty years. Generally, Europe has
been flaming with fires, wherewith Romish charity has turned Protestants into
ashes; many of which were burning in this Land some years before Queen
Elisabeth, whom God did send as a gracious rain to quench those fires, and to
refresh his Inheritance. But when she assayed to quench the Popes fires, the
Pope sends out his fires to devour her; yea, many vipers came out of that fire,
and would have stung her to death, but that the hand of God did so shake them
off for her, and from her, that the fire which sent them forth became their
destruction. Declaramus See B. Jewels answer to this Bull.
(says the Pope) praedictam Elisab. eique adhaerentes in praedictis, etc. We
declare that Elisabeth and her adherents, in the matters aforesaid, have run
into the danger of our curse: We declare also that we have deprived her from
that right which she pretended to have in the Kingdom aforesaid (of England,)
and also from all and every her authority, dignity, and privilege: We
change and forbid all and every the Nobles, subjects and people, and others
aforesaid, that they dare not to obey her, or her will or commandments, upon
pain of like curse upon them After the bellowing of which Bull, or blowing of
which Trumpet by Sheba the son of Bichri, many inspired with the spirit of the
Papacy, contrary to that spirit of Saint Peter, 1 Pet. 2.17.
which said, Fear God, Honor the King, practiced treason against Gods
Anointed, and their Sovereign Queen. Yea, See B. Carltons Thankful
Remembrance, and there the continual treasons and rebellions following the
Popes Bull and Curse, but followed with a curse.
open rebellions have been added by the Popes incitations and encouragements
(whereof that in the North is recorded to the Popes honor by the Popes own
Historian; and others in Ireland we find in our Stories to have been animated
by his own money, soldiers, and benediction.

And here I cannot but with grief complain, that so learned a man as Doctor
Sanders, the cunning builder of the Babylonian Monarchy, should be so
bewitched with the cup of abomination, as to be the Popes Ensigne-bearer in an
unnatural rebellion against his natural Sovereign. For with him came over a
consecrated banner from his holiness, to a most unholy service: And yet
notwithstanding the Popes blessing, the curse of God haunted that design, and
the learned man that had abused his wit and learning, lost the use of both; and
so being distracted, and pitied, and wandering in the mountains, lamentably
dyed. But the great Fleet of Eighty eight, that should have swallowed up both
the Queen and her Kingdom, comes forth against both, having her sails filled
with the wind of the Popes Benedictions. For the Pope sets forth in print a
Cruciate, as against Turks and Infidels, wherein he bestowed plenary
Indulgences out of the Treasury of the Church, upon all that would join their
help against England. And against the Queen he renews his former Bulls, he
denounces excommunication, he deposes her, and absolveth her subjects from
their allegiance. But God curses where the Pope blesses, and blesses where
he curses; a most certain sign that the Pope is not of Gods mind; yea, not
so good a Prophet as Balaam; Number. 23.8.
Not so good, for Balaam said, How can I curse where God has not cursed? and
not so good a Prophet; for of Balaam it was acknowledged, He whom thou
blessest is blessed, N^m. 22.6.
and he whom thou cursest is cursed.

But as the Author to the Hebrews says of the faithful, and the great virtues
of faith; so may I say of the faithless, and miserable effects and issues of
their faithlesnesse: What! What shall I more say? Heb. 11.32.
for the time would fail me to tell at large of The first was made General,
Baron, Vicou^t, Earl, and Marquess by the Pope. The second set on work by
hearing the Popes Bull extolled. The third took his infection from the second,
and Ballard a Priest. The fourth would not kill the Q^. except the Pope did
approve it, and give him a plenary indulgence; which was assured to him by a
Cardinals letter, to be seen in Speeds Chronicle.
Stukely, Savage, Babington, Parry, and others, who by treasons, springing from
the spirit of the Papacy, have assayed to overthrow Kingdoms, opened their
mouths like Lions upon Gods anointed, have wrought unrighteousness, and
endeavored by the violence of fire to destroy both King, Peers, and choice of
the people. For that masterpiece of Satan, and the very wit of hell may never
be forgotten, both as a perpetual bond of thankfulness upon English
Protestants, for a miraculous deliverance, and as an everlasting scandal and
detestation of Popery; seeing hellish Atheism or Turcisme has scarce brought
forth such a monster of treason, as the K. James his Apology of the O^th. The
only reason they gave for plo^^ing so heinous an attempt, was the ze^le they
(...).
zeal of that which these Romists call by the name of Religion. And now, if
we look steadfastly on the faces of these treasons, rebellions, invasions,
murders and massacres, do they look like the fair children of charity, or
like the horrid broods and bastards of uncharitableness? Charity her self is
a chief fruit of heavenly wisdom, and the daughter is like the mother;
therefore is charity first, pure, then peaceable, gentle, easy to be
entreated, full of mercy: Behold the amiable and beautiful face of charity.
But on the contrary, see in these Romish actions foulness and impurity, wars
and sedition, cruelty and inhumanity. A viperous generation that truly
represents and owneth uncharitableness for their mother; uncharitableness,
a fury which ascends from below, even from that infernal wisdom which is
sensual and divelish.

And surely since the actions are so manifest, and so manifestly uncharitable,
how can Rome, but by the forehead of an harlot, say that she loves us? does
she love us with treasons, murders, rebellions, fires upon earth, and fires
under the earth? are these fruits of Romish love? O then what, and how cruel
are the fruits of her hatred! If she love us thus to death, she cannot but
hate us to hell.

Wherefore, upon the whole matter, we may undoubtedly conclude, that Rome, as
she wants catholic love and peace toward many famous parts of the catholic
Church, and is therefore uncatholick; so she notably and especially pr^ctiseth
her unpeaceablenesse and uncharitableness toward Protestants. And if we will
have their uncharitableness and hatred expressed and confessed in their own
words, Let us hear their Jesuit Maldonate, Maldonate in Ioh. 4.
on the Gospel of the beloved Disciple, and a great teacher of love, thus
publishing their hatred to Protestants: Qui Catholici sunt, majore odio
Calvinistas, caeterosque omnes haereticos prosequuntur, quam Gentiles: The
Romish Catholics hate Calvinists, and all other heretics, with a greater
hatred then heathens.

CHAP. III.
Containing an answer to the first Chapter of Charity mistaken, wherein the
Author of that Book assumes to himself the office of a Cavalier or Champion for
Rome, laboring to prove that the Romists are improbably and untruly charged
with want of charity; and is divided into four Sections.

SECT. I.
An Inducement to the rest, laying down Romes false claim to charity, under
the usurped name of the Church, and vai^ boast of pretended good works.

THough the hatred of Rome^ Protestants be thus plainly co^^fessed in her own
deeds a^ words; yet a Cavalier of Rom^ advances himself to rescue this Lad^
from the blot of her confessed uncharita^blenesse, and will needs prove that
she wants not love, even when she hates u^ Thus he sets forth:

If it be a part of honor and justice for ^ Cavalier of this world to defend
the righ^ of the oppressed, and to contribute, if there b^^cause, with
particular care, toward the pr^^tection and defense of some excellent, but
af^flicted Lady, whose fame were blasted b^ the ill tongues of men; How much
more ju^^ and honorable will it be for a Catholic (w^^ in this time and place
may well go for a Ca^valier of Christ) to defend the honor an^ fame of his
Lady and Mother, which is the hol^ Catholic Church; she being so innocent, a^
the immaculate Spouse of Christ our Lord ought to be, and yet withal so much
wronged, as to be (...) for wanting the very wedding Ring* and the nuptial
Robe it self of Charity?

There is a Scarlet woman drunk with the blood of the Saints, Isa. 47.5. Rev.
17.6.
and her own mouth says, I sit as a Lady, and shall see no sorrow. This Lady
is also a mother, even the mother of abominations; and this is the Lady mother,
which the Protestants charge with uncharitableness, for condemning them to
hell. Now I would hope that no Cavalier should so misplace his valor, as to
fight like a Knight for a bloody Lady, nor as a son for a mother of
abominations; and yet if this Cavalier do not fight for this Lady in this
Book, he fights not against us, nor for her whom we accuse; and so the Book
is but a long mistaking.

Yet, because this scarlet and bloody Lady does cover her self with the title
of the Church, and under that cover deceives many; and here we find that a
defense of the Church is undertaken, as charged with uncharitableness, there
appears some possibility that this Lady, who is indeed so charged, may be
defended under the title of the Church, her son by that title being deceived
into this defense: Wherefore it may be not altogether useless to make good
this charge of uncharitableness on this Lady, though mistaken, and defended
under the name of the Church, lest perchance some others also may be led away
from their steadfastness by this Cavaliers error, and think it improbable and
impossible, that she which is called the Church should be uncharitable;
Whereas indeed it is neither probable nor possible that the scarlet Lady,
drunken with the blood of the Saints, though wearing the title of the Church,
should be to the same Protestants both charitable and cruel; yea indeed this
Lady does thus double her wrong: for it is one injury uncharitably to hate and
prosecute the true catholic Church in her children; and a second to take her
name from her, thereby to justify and bear out her own wrong and persecution
with her own name.

But yet here I must at first acknowledge that this Cavalier, fighting for this
Lady, is not far from agreeing with us that fight against her: for we find
this position avowed by him, That if she proceed uncharitably against
Protestants, she is a Harlot, and a Strumpet, not the Spouse of Christ; now
hereunto we subjoyne: But the Chapter foregoing plainly shows that Rome
has proceeded uncharitably against Protestants; and now, how can we keep off
this Cavalier from agreeing with us in one common conclusion; Therefore Rome is
an Harlot, and not the Spouse of Christ: which if he affirm, I will not blame
him, Rev. 17.
because Saint John says the same, and it were a fault to find fault with him
when he speaks Scripture. Yet he will needs strive to show, that what has
been proved is improbable, and that truth is untrue.

And first he endeavors to prove it unprobable that this Lady, through want
of charity, should pronounce a damning sentence against Protestants, but rather
from some error in Judgment, indiscreet zeal, etc. because she has abundance
of charity; and this abundance of charity again he will prove by many
particulars, which, it seems, appear to him in the shape of works of charity.
And indeed, because the Romish Champions stand much upon their works, and cast
the carcasses of them in our way, so to hinder our prosecutions of the Romish
Sheba, 2 Samuel 20.12, 13.
the Author of uncharitable hatred and dissension in Israel, I shall desire
leave of the Reader to bestow some time in removing them out of the way.

SECT. II.
Diverse general considerations are propounded of Romish works, whereby some
are proved to be corrupt in the Spring or Fountain, issuing from carnal
wisdom, for the support of carnal greatness: Other in their kinds and
nature, as Indulgences, Iubiles, and the like: A third sort are corrupt in
their aim and motives, being done for merit and satisfaction, and not for Gods
glory.

TOward this removal, I answer, that there are many works that look like
fruits of charity, but are not that which they seem: They may perchance have
the same matter that works of charity have; but, not being quickened and
enlived by charity, a fruit of the spirit, they are but dead carcasses, and not
the fruits of living charity.

The Sacrifice of Cain was to the outward eye a fruit of love to God; but while
he hated his brother whom he saw, he could not love God whom he saw not:
and thus wanting charity, his Sacrifice could not be a fruit of that charity
which he wanted. And indeed, there are many motives and causes besides charity
that may bring forth to the eye such seeming good works. And we see such
motives generally overspread upon the face of the Romish Monarchy: especially
since we see in Romists, killing of brethren joined with these works; as in
Cain, fratricide was joined with sacrifice, how can we take the works of such
to be other then the sacrifices of Cain?

And now to make it appear that there are such motives in the Papacy, I will
present to your sight some of them. And the first shall be the glory,
reputation, and support of the Papacy: and that the Reader may the more
clearly discern this, I wish him to get a spiritual eye, therewith to behold
her; for the man of sin is a mystery of iniquity, and mysteries are not well
discerned by a carnal, but a spiritual eyesight. 1 John 2.20.
Accordingly, Saint John, when he speaks of Antichrists going out of the
Church, he tells us of an unction that must teach us to know him: Now, if by
this spiritual unction we behold the Papacy, we may see it to be a Dominum
Christum, Antich^ist^s, non voto, sed occasion praedicat. Alio t^nde^s s^b
Christi nom^n ingreditur. quo sibi (...), quo su^ Christ^ nomin^ ventri pa^^a^.
Ty^on. Reg.
mixed creature, and a twofold Beast, with the horns of a Lamb, and the mouth
of a Dragon. He sits like God in Gods Temple, but works by Satan; he
exercises a professed holiness, but therewith practices a deceivable
unrighteousness. There is a show of Christian Religion, yea, and diverse
realities of Christianity within the limits of the Popes Tyranny; but his Being
raised by th^se steps unto earthly Power, they laid aside by little and little
the care of souls, and of divine precepts, so that setting their affections
wholly upon earthly greatness, and using their spiritual authority only as an
instrument of their temporal, they seemed rather to be secular Princes, then
Priests. Guicc^rdine, Lib. 4. S^e the additio^^ to the later Edition of the
History of T^ent.
own maine purpose in and by them is an aspiring to temporal honor and
eminency; yea, this is his very character, and by this you may know him: for
this converting or making use of some realities of Christianity for the
advancement of temporal Eminence and Supremacy, has been a long time the
business of the Papacy. Now a State supported by the show of Christian
Religion, may very well give way to many works of Christian Religion which
help to make this show; especially those, which besides the advancement of
Rome, in advancing her horns of the Lamb, or show of Religion, do also
immediately advance her wealth, strength and supremacy. And if we examine most
of those works whereof this Author has made a glittering Table, they are such
as by some one of these ways do increase the glory of the Papacy. Now the
Church of Rome being understood (as before according to the words of the Church
of England) to be the Pope and his adherents, even the man of sin sitting as
God, with the believers of his deity: These, I say, want charity to the
Catholic Church, and particularly to the Protestants, notwithstanding any
seeming works of that remnant done within the command and extent of this
Antichristian Church; yea, the works of that remnant which truly belongs to
the Church and Temple of God, do nothing prove the charity of the
Antichristian Church, though they be tolerated by it while they serve to
advance her glory and supremacy; for let those that work them but touch the
in-errable supremacy and deity of the Papacy, the doers of these very works, by
which the Author will prove the charity of the Church of Rome, shall feel and
make up the proof of her uncharitableness. And indeed, this is the very
quarrel for which they kill and damn us, because we complain of the Popes
errors, and will not say, that when the Pope erreth, he cannot err. Let us
hear Cassander speaking to this purpose; In iis qui Romanae Ecclesiae
Gubernatores and propugnatores haberi volunt, illud improbandum existimo, quod
morbum nullum agnoscunt, and (quod huic rei consequens est) remedia non
admittunt; imo, de correctione admonentes and ad curationem exhortantes:
operamque sua^ ad id efficiendum offerentes, non modo rejiciunt, and ab
Ecclesiae societate depellunt, verum etiam multis in lo^is crud^liter
interficie^dos ce^suerunt: Quae res huic miserabili Schismatici occasion
dedisse videtur. Cassa^. de of^ic. pii viri.
In those that will seem to be the Governors and Protectors of the Church of
Rome, I condemn this, that they will acknowledge no disease, and (which
naturally follows thereupon) they will admit no remedy; yea, those that
speak to them of amendment, that exhort them to be healed, and that offer
their help to effect it, they not only cast off and drive from the fellowship
of the Church, but also in many places have judged them miserably to be slain.
Which thing seems to have given the occasion of this wretched schism.

Thus Rome may maintain the show of good works; yea, perchance some works
truly good, for her own honor and glory, while they serve and advance these
ends; and yet be cruel and uncharitable, not only against Protestants, but
against those who do these good works within her own territories, when
otherwise they cross those ends for which she did tolerate them. So the
encouraging of such works in the Papacy may prove her ambitious, but leave her
still uncharitable, cruel, and malicious; yea, these works joined with
ambition and uncharitableness, and plea^ing for them by the shows of
charity, give her the true shape of the second part of Antichrist, even of
that beast, which with the show of the Lamb, kills Saints like the Dragon.
And herein lies the very cunning of Pope-craft, and the mystery of iniquity, by
contraries to bring in and maintain contraries; by the show Ministros subornat
suos, velut ministros justitiae, asserentes noctem pro die, and perfidiam sub
praetextu fidei, Antichristum sub vocabulo Christi; ut dum verisimilia
mentiuntur, veritatem subtilitate frustrentur. Cyprian. de Unitate Ecclesiae.
of faith to persuade faithlesnesse, and by the show of charity to palliate
uncharitableness and persecution: And indeed, I think the Serpent wonders at
his own wit in the Papacy, and applauds it as the highest and most
artificial counterfeit of a creation, because therein he has wrought, and as
it were created contraries out of contraries; Out of a doctrine of deepest
humility, he has raised the highest pride; and from a doctrine of contempt of
the world, he has raised a title to the whole world; from a doctrine of
patience, long-suffering, and perfect charity, he has raised a catholic
persecution, tormenting the world with uncharitableness and cruelty. And so by
this kind of infernal Alchimie (which he still continues,) the seeming good
works, yea, the true ones done by the remnant of Grace, are digested to nourish
and defend the sins, and among them the uncharitableness of the man of
Sin. There is yet a second sort of works, which pass for works of charity,
but are indeed works of error; for they issue from error, and therefore not
from charity; these are fained, empty and hollow inventions or imaginations
given by Rome to her children, in stead of nourishing and solid gifts of true
motherly piety; so indeed they are rather works of Poetry, then of Charity:
such are the Popes Jubiles and Indulgences, especially those which are annexed
to a cruciate, like that sent into Ireland, which stirred up subjects to rebel
against their Sovereign. But in our Authors own Catalogue of Romes charitable
works, I take notice of her giving things for Sacraments conferring grace,
which are none; now when Rome gives these to her children for Sacraments which
are none, she gives them not gifts of charity, but of vanity, yea, of
cruelty; for a cruelty it is for a mother to feed her children with fictions
in stead of Sacraments: as when a father to his hungry so^^e gives a stone in
stead of bread, it does rather prove the fathers hatred then his love.

There is also a third kind of Romish works, which look like works of
charity, but are not such indeed, because they come not from a right spring,
nor aim at a right end; they come not from the love of God, nor aim to the
glory of God; but come from error, pride, and self-love, and have selfe-ends:
such are works done for merit, satisfaction, and supererogation: and indeed,
these carnal ways of doing good works, are generally very successful; for
all mankind is flesh of flesh; so that if you speak of a work of charity to
be done a carnal way, and to carnal ends, you have all mankind already
fitted to hear you: but if you speak of works of charity to be spiritually
done, and for spiritual ends, there are far fewer that have a spiritual
ear to hear what the Spirit says: Yet upon the works carnally done, and for
carnal ends, does the Papacy exceedingly multiply the number of her works of
charity, mentioned in the Catalogue; yet an army of these is but an army of
dead men, even of dead works, which have not the spirit: And uncharitable is
she who suffers, yea, teaches her children to bring forth dead works, when,
by good instruction, they might have gotten life into them from the quickening
Spirit.

SECT. III.
The Claim of Charity is confuted, which is drawn from the seven Romish
Sacraments.

ANd as thus generally, so now more particularly let us put the Cavaliers
supposed works of charity to the touch, and try whether true charity may be
proved by them to be in the Papacy.

But before we come to his proofs, I cannot but take notice that his
preparative is very pleasant; for therein he speaks of seeing the holy
catholic Church dissolve, and as it were defeat her self of her very self,
for the acquiring of all imaginable, both temporal and eternal blessings to
mankind. Surely, it seems to me, he could hardly have chosen words more
contrary to the actions of the Papacy: and this the former Chapter, and many
Stories do over-abundantly show; for we see plainly, that Rome is so far
from defeating her self, for eternal blessings to mankind, that for the
acquiring of temporal blessings to her self, she defeats Kings both of their
kingdoms and lives. And whereas he says, a man needs no more, but to have
eyes in his head to see her charitablenesse; it seems much rather, that he who
in numberless slaughters, and actions of blood, does not see her
uncharitableness, has need of that strong delusion which causes men not to
believe truth though they see it with their eyes.

But I come to the Authors own Inventory of Romish works of charity, and take
notice of it as it begins with a man's beginning, and for profitable reasons
does not end at his ending: For, seven proofs of charity which he names, are
seven Sacraments; of which, one begins at man's birth, and the last comes as
near his end as it may; but when it can go no further, it is lengthened with
prayer for the dead, which often brings good, or at least profit to the living
(if they be paid for these prayers) and so perchance may be taken for good
works.

But whereas among these he speaks of giving Baptism and the Lords Supper, as
fruits and proofs of Romish charity; I answer, that the Papacy must allow or
suffer the giving of these, or else there cannot be under her Throne that show
of a Church in which Antichrist must sit, that he may look like the beast
which has horns of a Lamb: Without these his mystery were near dissolved,
and we should see the Dragon stark naked in him: therefore the Pope may keep
these for love to himself, and not to his subjects.

But, says the Cavalier, his Church gives Baptism very early, as soon as the
child is borne, and this haste is a sign and a fruit of charity. And why may
it not be a sign and fruit of error in judgment rather then of charity? yea,
why may it not proceed of an uncharitable error, seeing it often damneth
children for want of that washing which they could not have in their mothers
belly? for many thousands of infants must be damned by the same charitable
opinion which makes this haste to baptize others. And although this opinion
anciently might perchance be taken for an error in judgment; yet on the
latter, to whom the point has been more plainly cleared, it may much more
probably lay a guilt of uncharitableness. Sure it is, that if want of charity
be not the cause of it, yet want of charity does accompany or follow it, as it
does the Popish belief of Protestants damnation: for to infants unbaptized,
and Protestants, I think there is little charity afforded by Papists when
they have once damned them.

Let them also consider how this does give a proof of their charity, when
thereby they make the Gospel of grace more deadly then the killing Law: for the
Law damned not infants for dying without circumcision seven days after the
birth, in which time there was a possibility of circumcising them; but these
men make the Gospel to damn children for dying unbaptized before they be
borne, when it is not possible to baptize them.

The Lords Supper is put off for a while, and Confirmation is brought in next
for a Sacrament, and this Sacrament for a confirmation of Romish charity: and
indeed, so much as Confirmation is a Sacrament, so much let it be a
confirmation of Romish charity. Suar. in 3. T. 3. Disp. 32. Sect. 2.
But Suarez the Jesuit confesses, that great Romish Doctors (as Alensis and
Bonaventure) have taught that Confirmation was not instituted as a Sacrament by
Christ or his Apostles. And himself affirms, that the time when Christ did
institute this Sacrament is not recorded by the sacred Historians; and withal,
he acknowledges (according to Thomas) that to institute new Sacraments
belongs to that excellency of power which is Christ's alone. So the
sacramentality of Popish Confirmation seems to be a stone, and not bread,
which being given to children by a mother, proves rather her hatred then
charity. But indeed, if they would make this use of Confirmation, to see that
children be brought, and made to understand the grounds of salvation, this
were bread and not a stone, and so a fruit of charity, and not of hatred: but
to give them an outward sign, that gives nothing from without by any
Sacramental institution; and to give them no knowledge within, but a Creed or
Lords Prayer in Latin, which they understand not, this is not a work of
charity, but a deceiving, yea, a soule-killing cruelty and uncharitableness.

The next seal of Romish charity, is the Sacrament of Confession and Penance;
whereby, as our Author says, when a man has drunk of the poisoned cup of
actual sin, Rome strives to make him cast it up again. Much might here be
said to prove this auricular Confession to be no Sacrament, and so no charity
in giving that for a Sacrament which is none. But of Romish uncharitableness
in the use, or rather abuse of this which they call a Sacrament, there would
scarce be time and place enough in the world to contain the proofs of it. We
know what Markets are made of Indulgences, even absolution from Penance; which
being set to sale, do plainly cross Christ's charitable doctrine, by making
it easier for a rich man then a poor man to enter into the Kingdom of heaven.
But indeed, it has had this charitable consequence, that it has caused many
Nations to cast up, not single sins only, but the man of sin himself: But
otherwise, whereas this Author speaks of this Sacrament to cast up sin, we
must complain, that it has been used as a means to cast up goodness, and
to cast sin into a mould, even to nourish and strengthen it; for Garnet
thought it a good covert and hiding place of treason, saying, that in
Confession he first received the knowledge of the Powder Treason; and
secondly, himself would not say that he did cause his Penitents to cast up
this treason, but left it in their stomachs, wherein it lay with some of them
until death, not acknowledged as a sin: Behold right Romish charity, plainly
proved by the Sacrament of Confession; yea, this Sacrament has been by them
uncharitably used, as a means (not to cast up sin, but) to cast up
righteousness; for some maine acts and duties of righteousness have been put
to Penance as great sins. Sir Thomas Overbury and my self met with an Irish
Pilgrim in France, who taking us, as he said, for Catholics, (wherein he
was not mistaken, if he had rightly understood the word) told us, that he was
enjoined by way of penance to go on Pilgrimage to Rome and Compostella, for
serving Queen Elizabeth in her wars against Tyrone. See here not a sin cast
up, but an excellent duty of subjection and loyalty; and so the Romish
Sacrament of Penance not a proof of charity, but of disloyal
uncharitableness.

He goes on, and says that Rome, to make her child grow and stand out, feeds
him from time to time with the precious Body of our blessed Lord in the
Sacrament of the Altar. But where is Romish charity in taking away the Blood
of our blessed Lord in the same Sacrament? If it be charity to give bread to a
child, is it not uncharitable to deny him drink? but the children of Rome are
left to cry like Sampson, though not heard as Sampson, Judge. 15.18.
Thou have given this great deliverance; and now shall I die for thirst? Christ
has given them a great deliverance, and now Rome would kill them with thirst:
Yet the same Lord in his Passion gives both meat and drink to their souls; and
therefore he not only says, that his flesh is meat indeed, Joh. 6.55.
but that his blood is drink indeed; and so is he perfect nourishment, and a
just refection, being both meat and drink. He gives no less to the true
Israel then to the typical Israel (the type of the Church) in their Journey to
Canaan; 1 Cor. 10.3, 4.
it is said of them, they did eat -- spiritual meat, and drank -- spiritual
drink, for they drank of the Rock, and that Rock was Christ. But Romish
charity, or uncharitableness takes from the people that drink which Christ
gave them, and as it were drives the true Israel from the waters that issue
from this Rock, to refresh them in their walking through the wilderness to
this heavenly Canaan. Neither does it avail any thing to say, that there is
blood in the body, for blood out of the body is given us in this Sacrament, to
quench the otherwise unquenchable and ever-thirsty guilt of sin. Blood that
was shed for us is given to us in this Sacrament, as the very words of our
Savior in the Institution of it do affirm; Mat. 26.28.
and if Christ say he gives us blood that is shed, either they must profanely
deny the words which our Savior spoke, or else they must be enforced to
witness that they do uncharitably, and unchristianly deny to us, that which
our Savior gave us: and indeed, blood that is shed and so powered out of the
body, is the proper Sacrifice for sin; for without the shedding of blood
there is no remission: Heb. 9.22.
yea, our Savior himself here says of his blood given in the Sacrament, that
it is shed for the remission of sins. What therefore Christ the fountain of
charity has shed for us out of his body, and so given us being shed for the
remission of our sins, is it not extreme uncharitableness in Rome to take
the same from us? for thereby she takes from us an excellent means of the
remission of our sins, and so the remission which should come to us by this
means.

I could here multiply complaints of Romish uncharitableness in the manifold
abuses of this Sacrament; and among them, of their Latin (that is, barbarous,
as Saint Paul says) and whispering Consecration. 1 Cor. 14.11.
It is no Sacrament in the Romish belief, without the Priests intention; and
the words that should give some guess of his intention are not heard and
understood: How short then are the poor people of knowing the Priests
intention, when they either hear not, or understand not the words which might
give them at least some hope of his intention? But darkness fits best with a
doctrine of darkness, and it is best nourished by that which begat it.

But their doctrine of worshipping this Sacrament, yea, even when they know not
whether it be a Sacrament, yea, carrying it about the streets in a solemn
procession, on a set day, of purpose to be worshipped, is a most killing
uncharitableness; if I may say of the Sacrament by their corruption, as Saint
Paul of the Law by the corruption of nature, Romans 7.10.
That which Christ ordained to life, is thus found to be unto death. The Lord
of life appointed this Sacrament to communicate life by it; and Popish
uncharitableness by it gives death to her children. But I say the less,
because the truly reverend and learned Bishop of Durham has so plainly
revealed, and soundly convinced the Idolatry of the Mass; that he who reads
it, and after kills his soul by stumbling at this Idol, and falling down
before it into hell, cannot lay all the fault on Rome, but must share
uncharitableness with her, and have part of his own blood laid on his own
head. It follows, If he will bestow himself upon the service of Almighty God,
in a more particular manner, by taking Priesthood, she not only gives him
holy Orders, but she does it by a Sacrament conferring grace: I should here
have expected that Romish charity should have expressed her self in giving
Orders and Grace to one that before had the grace and gift of Teaching from on
high, Ephesians. 4.8. 1 Kin. 12.32.
which that Lord that ascended on high gave unto Pastors for the building of
his Church; but I hear nothing of this fruit of charity; but I hear of a
Priesthood, which too often is a resemblance of the order of Jeroboam, and that
the Priesthood is a Sacrament divided into two Powers, Utramque potestatem,
nimirum, co^secrandi, and absolvendi. Vasq. in 3. T. 3. Disp. 239. C. 1. and C.
3. Ex Medina.

In duas has parts esse distributum.


one to sacrifice, and another to absolve; but I read not of a third power or
commission of teaching to be given by this Sacrament: and so the Priests lips,
that under the Law and the reign of the letter should preserve knowledge, now
under the Gospel and Kingdom of light, notwithstanding any grace or power from
this Sacrament, may leave the people in ignorance; and the old complaint under
the old, may be Cardinals and Bishops let not to make their servants, their
Co^ks and Horse-keepers Priests, whereby Ecclesiastical persons are be^^me a
jest and laughing stock to every man. Bish. of Valence in the (...) of France,
Part. 1. lib. 2. Hos. 4.6.
renewed in the new; My people perish for want of knowledge. And if thus they
perish, it is very likely that, notwithstanding any grace of this Sacrament, it
is not charity, but uncharitableness that kills them.

He proceeds; If he have not spirit for so much as that, but resolves to walk
on in the broad way of a married life, that state is honorable, though it be
inferior to the former; and she joins him to a wife by a Sacrament also
conferring grace.

A strange opposition of things agreeing, and a setting at ods of things which
God has set at friendship. If he have not spirit for so much as that, says
our Author, but resolves to walk on in the broad way of a married life, etc. as
if he that resolves to be married may not have so much spirit as that which
is fit for the Priesthood. I cannot see in any place of Scripture but that the
spirit of Priesthood may very well agree with marriage, if the spirit of error
that forbids marriage, 1 Timothy 4.1, 2, 3
did not work in the Papacy to set them at discord: yea, our Author says,
Order gives grace, and Matrimony gives grace; and I wonder how one of these
graces falls out with the other: I wonder also with what charity, or rather
uncharitableness, Rome can deny Orders to a man that has a gift of teaching,
because he has not the gift of continency; surely, she is either
uncharitable to Gods Church, in thus denying Orders where God has given a gift
that deserves them; or uncharitable to the Minister, in tying him to that
continency whereof the gift is not given him. On the one side, if this man want
Orders, a Congregation that wants him, may starve for lack of him; on the other
side, if he want marriage, his soul is tied to the fire, and so is in danger
to be consumed with the flames of it; and either way is Rome still
uncharitable, even in these things by which our Author would prove her charity.

As for the sacramentality of Marriage, and grace conferred by it, I must take
them but for empty words, before I see Christ's Institution in the Scriptures to
put substance into them. ^^ssan Consult. Art. 13.
A Sacrament, as Cassander from Hugo well gathers, is a sign instituted by
Christ, to signify and convey an inward grace, which by some likeness it
represents: Now Marriage indeed represents the union between Christ and
his Church; Ephesians. ^.
but it was not instituted by Christ, that this union should be given by it:
and indeed, that such grace is represented and given by Marriage as by a
Sacrament, we read not in the Scriptures; yea, their own Peter Lombard,
Lombard. lib. 4. did. 2. lit. A. Cass. quo supra.
Durand, and Cassander deny that marriage gives grace: therefore it remains
only as a Tridentine, and not a divine Sacrament of grace; and the gift of a
supposititious Sacrament with fained grace, is but a fruit of that carnal
charity which gives stones for bread.

He goes on; If in his last sickness he be afflicted by those sharpest
arrows of his invisible enemy, she annoints him toward the combat, and
enables him by that extreme Unction, and by the benedictions and prayers which
accompany it, to resist and conquer those adverse powers. Behold a Romish
Unction, different from the ancient Unction, even by the confession of Pamelius
in his Notes upon Tertul. de praescrip. ad haeret. cap. 41. says, We will
prove extreme Unction to be a Sacrament of the Church, especially because it
promises health, o^ recovery. And Cassander, by the ancient prayer,
benediction and hymns, ad corporal^^ morbi le^ationem p^rtin^re, that it
pertaines to bodily recovery: Which is also the opinion of the Master of
S^n^^nces.
Romists themselves; for this Unction is given us, as our Author tells us, in
his last sickness. But the ancient Unction was given of purpose that it might
not be his last sickness; that was given to heal, this because he is
condemned to death, and thought past healing. Saint Mark 6.13.
Mark says, that the twelve did anoint with oil many that were sick, and
healed them; and S. Iam. 5.14, 15.
James, Let them pray over the sick, annoynting him oil, and the prayer of
faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up. So we see that
healing or raising up is expected as a fruit of this ancient Anointing; but
death is expected as a follower of Romish Anointing, Bellarm. de extr^m. unct.
cap. 5.
for even Bellarmine's proof of this Sacrament is drawn from the desperate
and dying state of the sick; That since Sacraments were provided for our help
in our ingresse into the Church, and our progress in the Church, it is not to
be believed that there should want one at our egresse. See here, that the
Unction which anciently was used for our regresse, is now used by Romists for
our egresse; And therefore it is not the same Unction; yea, it is not the same,
if we believe their Cardinal Cajetane, saying, that Saint James his Unction
agreeing with the Apostles Unction, does not agree with extreme Unction in word
nor effect: and indeed, the effect of S. James his Unction was health; but the
expected consequence of Romish Unction is death. Wherefore, let them join
health to their Oil, which was anciently joined to it, and then we will think
they give that Unction which was the ancient Unction, and a fruit of charity.
But if they give Oil without health, the sign without the thing, what charity
is there to give an empty sign in stead of a reality? Yea, how do they abuse
that Oil, as well as the Receivers, in misgiving it as a Sacrament of death,
which in the true use of it was appointed for a means of life?

SECT. IV.
Monasteries, and other Romish works bearing a show of charity, are proved to
be contrary to it.

BUt Romish charity seems not to leave men when they be dead, but then
follows them; even dead men with dead prayers, issuing from a blind, and
therefore a dead charity. For is it not a dead charity that in her prayers for
the dead is not animated by a true and lively faith? the want whereof turns
all things (and therefore both the shows of charity and prayers) into sin.
Romans 14.23.
And can there be any faith without the Word of God? and does the Word of God
any where show Purgatory so evidently that faith may assuredly believe it, and
thereupon offer up prayers for the deliverance of the dead from it? A Work
ascribed to S. Hypognost. lib. 5. where a third place being denied besides
heaven and hell, Erasmus in the ^argent puts the word Pur^^^^rium: But the
Spanish Purgatory has pu^ged and taken away this Purgatory. Index Hisp.
Augustine plainly says; The catholic faith by divine Authority believes a
first place, The kingdom of Heaven; it also believes a second, which is Hell:
a third we wholly know not; yea, we find that it is not in the holy
Scriptures. Now, if it be not in the holy Scriptures, it is no matter of
faith; and if Purgatory be not of faith, then the prayers for souls to be
freed from that Purgatory whereof there is no faith, are prayers not of a true,
that is, a believing and seeing charity, but rather of blind infidelity.

As for this Authors praying for the dead to the worlds end, I wonder why he
should speak of it, when he should not be ignorant, that if the living friends
of the dead be rich, there is a shorter way to free them out of Purgatory,
then to pray to the worlds end. Besides, the Treasure of the Church growing by
the growth of Papal charity, which delivers souls out of Purgatory; it is a
wonder how that Papal charity does not enlarge it self and the Churches
Treasure to the utmost, in a whole deliverance of Souls out of Purgatory, and
so leave no work for the tedious charity of praying for them to the worlds
end. But it seems, that either there is a want of charity in the Pope, who may
deliver souls and will not (especially seeing Dogma de purgatorio igne
exterminandum est ab Ecclesia, etc. The doctrine of Purgatory should be rooted
out of the Church, because it makes men careless of purging themselves in this
life, while they look for another purging hereafter: Graecus de purgatorio
igne. To which add, that the purging fire hereafter may be taken away for money;
and so they need not to be troubled with purging here or herafter. To this end
( Hist. Trid. lib. 1.) Leo the tenth sent an Indulgence and pardon for sins
through all Christendom, granting it to whosoever would give money; and
extending it to the dead, for whom, when the disbursement was made, his will
was, that they should be freed from the pains of Purgatory.
for money they may be delivered): or if he do deliver them, it is rather
vanity then charity that prays for souls to the worlds end, which before the
worlds end are delivered.

Our Author comes next to Monasteries and religious Houses, as proofs of
Romish charity; where he tells us, That being consecrated by the vows of
Poverty, Chastity, and Obedience, their Church, with excessive charity,
provides means for them, that they may be enabled to live, and wholly to
attend that sacred function, for the assistance of mankind in the way of
Spirit, without scattering and dispersing their thoughts and cares upon
providing for the necessaries of this life.

Surely, if the Author can prove it to be charity which has made this
provision, all the world without more proof may believe it to be excessive:
For so excessive has it been in provision, that it has fret deeply into
Church and Commonwealth, having eaten up a great part of the maintenance of
the Clergy in Appropriations, and a great part of Lay possessions in
Bequeathes and Donations: yea, this excessive charity has provided such means
for these thus consecrated by the vows of poverty, obedience, and chastity,
that the excessive provision has exceedingly devoured the consecrating
poverty, obedience, and chastity: for the spirit of error works in these
members of the Papacy, as it does in the Head, bringing contraries out of
contraries; from the prosession of poverty infinite riches; of chastity, most
foul uncleannes; and of obedience, high disobedience to the Lord of the
Universe: yea, rebellion against his Deputies and anointed Ones, the Kings of
the earth.

And whereas the Champion thinks that this provision of excess should look
like the fruit of charity, because it enableth Monks to live without
distraction; if he mean labor by distraction, let him know, that herein his
wisdom differs much from the wisdom of the ancient Fathers. S. Quia sunt
(...) qui (...), Psalmodiaeve, necessarios in exercendis artificiis; labores
def^giunt, illud est intelligendum, certis quidem aliis quibusdam in rebus
(...) ^e^tam unicuique temporis tempestivitatem; ut est apud Ecclesia^^^^, qui
omni negotio suum esse tempus dici^; orationi vero, and (...) sicut in aliis
etiam plerisque, nullu^ non esse tempus (...) licet, ut vel in eo ipso du^
manibus opus tractamus, and lingua (...) (quandocunque id fieri potest, aut
expedit potius, and ad fidei (...) conducit) munere hoc fungi possimus; sin id
minus, cord (...) Psalmis, and hymni^, and canticis spiritualibus Deum
colla^demus, (...) ita orationi satisfaciamus: interim dum laboramus (...).
Basil both urges the labor of Monks by the example of Christ and his
Apostles; yea Basil. Regul. susius disput. in cap. 37.

In telis texendis, in consuendorum calceamentorum Artificio, and maxim
agricultura. Ib. cap. 38.


, he particularly names the Trades and Professions which he would have them
to use. And Saint Hieron. ad Rusticum.
Hierome is very earnest in it, and says, that the Egyptian Monasteries admit
none without labor. St. Augustine, he has a Work of the work of Monks, and
tells the meaner sort of them, Nullo modo enim decet, ut in ea vita ubi fiant
Senatores laboriosi, ibi fiant opifices otiosi. August. de opere Monachorum,
cap. 5.

Mallem per singulos dies certis horis, quantum in been moderatis Monasteriis
constitutum est, aliquid manibus operari. Ib. cap. 29.


That by no means it is comely, that in that course of life wherein* Senators
are laborious, laborers should be idle. And he confutes this idle conceit
which then was on foot, That Monks must be idle, because they must live like
the Ut de opere Monachorum librum conscriberem, illa me necessitas compulit
quod cum apud Carthaginem Monasteria esse caepissent, alii se suis manibus
transig^bant, obtemperantes Apostolo: Alii vero ex oblationibus Religiosorum
vivere volebant, ut nihil operantes unde necessaria vel haberent, vel
supplerent, se potius implere praeceptum Evangelicum existimarent, atque
jactarent, ubi Dominus ait, Respicite Volatilia coel^, and Lilia agri? August.
Retract. lib. 2. cap. 21.
Lillies, and neither work nor spin. And in poorer Houses, the works of the
Monks was taught and required until late Operari manibus, bonum est corpori,
deseruit Spiritui, aedificatio est proximi, and reparatio est sensus nostri. Et
si interdum pigri sumus, tamen perseverando vincimus. T. Campensis. De
disciplina clausteralum. lib. 5. cap. 4. Florui^ circa annum Salutis
incarna^ae, M.CCCC.X
times, even so late as the Abbot Tritheimius, who lived about an hundred and
fifty years past. This Abbot in an Homily of the handy-labour of Monks,
presses it earnestly, by the blessedness in the Psalm, pronounced on them
that eat the labors of their hands; by the first penalty of labor laid on
Adam; by Saint Paul's rule, That he who would not labor should not eat: yea,
he cites their own Pater noster Benedictus, otium detestans Monachorum, in
Regula qua^ nobis tradidit, inquit, Otiositas inimica est animae, and ideo
certis temporibus occupari debent Monachi in labor manuum, cerrisque item
ho^is in lectione divina. Tunc ^nim vere sunt Monachi, si labor manuum suaru^
vivunt, ficut and patres nostri fecerunt, and Apostoli. -- Item, Erat in
primordio Monastici status ista consuetudo Monachorum, ut nullum sine labor
admitterent ad sui consortium, etc. verum posteaquam census Monachi habere
caep^runt and redditus, p^istina mox simpli^itatis studia defecerant, crevitque
paulatim cum divitiis reru^ te^poralium supe^bia, in tantu^, ut labores manuum
omnes cum tempore Monachi recu^^^ent. -- Ne igitur pane^ vestrum manducetis
otiosi, semper vos aliquo l^bo^e honesto and utili opo^t^bit esse mancipatos,
quo and men's a taedio relev^^ur observantiae ^egularis, and inopia gravis vel
in parvo saltem (...): Messis ^empore ad ^^^num, and autumni diebu^ ad
vindemiam vos (...) extra Monasterium con^uevimus occupare, etc. (...)
^^^acho^u^ (...).
Father Benedict, who says in his Rule, Idleness is an enemy to the soul,
and therefore at certain times the Monks must be busied in the labors of
their hands. He acknowledges honestly, that which was formerly spoken out of
Saint Hierome, That in the first setting up of the Monastical estate* it was a
custom not to admit any Monks into that fellowship without labor: And he
confesses as plainly, how idleness came in; After that the Monks began to
have riches and rents, the ancient simplicity decayed, and pride grew so upon
the growth of riches, that at last Monks generally refused to labor with their
hands. Yet he cease not to exhort his own Monks to that labor which was
now grown so much out of use, and from which (as this Abbot tells us) excessive
provision had distracted other Monks; though it be here by the Cavalier
mistaken for a proof of charity.

And whereas he calls it a sacred function; surely idleness is no function:
yea, I doubt not but I might truly say, that it was never any function, even
when it was at best. But men of diverse functions met together to Monachismus
sinceritate^ suam retinens, no^ aliud est quam sincerior Christianismus. Talem
primam Christo credentiu^ Ecclesiam fuisse, qualis nu^c Monachi esse nituntur.

Gabr. Puterbeus frater.


live (as they thought) so near as they might, according to the pattern of the
primitive Christians. And as a Citizen that lives under the rules and
government of a City, cannot call his citizen-ship a function, no more may the
Monk call his Monkery a function for living under the rules of a But Clemens of
Alexandria thinks that a man more perfectly imitates the Apostles in a married
then a Monastical life. Qui autem fuerit persectus, exempla habet Apostolos;
and revera vir probatur, non in eo quod vitam elegerit Monastica^: ve^u^ ille
viros vincit qui in matrimonio and libero^u^ procreatione, and domus cura ac
providentia citra voluptate^ and dolore^ se excercet and cum in Familiae
versetur curatione, indivulsus tamen est a Dei charitate, in surgitque adversus
omne^ tentationem quae affertur, per filios, uxore^, and famulos, and
possessiones. Clem. Alex. Stro^. l. 7. And Chrysostom differs not much from
him: Ne Monachum quidem magnopere admiremur, quod is apud se vivens, neque
commoveatur, neque in multa ac magna peccata prolabatur: Neque enim ei res
illae adsunt, quibus ipse animo irritetur, aemuleturque: sin vero quis se
turbis un versis tradiderit, animum ipsum vel tempestate actum tanquam in
malacia and tranquillitate gubernans, hic dignus est quem omnes plaus^ and
admiratione prosequantur. Chrysostom. de Sa^^rd. l. 5
Monastery.

But as it stands at this day, we have too many proofs, that if it were a
sacred function at the first, it is generally now neither function, nor sacred.
Ne quem offendat quod in hac Epistola, sicut nec in superioribus Divus
Hieronymus nihil eorum praecipit, quae his temporibus a Monachis exiguntur. De
tribus illis votis quae vocant Solennia, ne verbum quide^ ullum. Sed meminisse
debemus id quod palam liquet ex hujus scriptis, aetate Hieronymi nondum fuisse
hoc Monachorum genus, cujusmodi nunc nostra tempestate videmus. Erasm. in
Antidoto Epistolae Hieronymi ad Rusticum.
Erasmus, in his Antidote upon that Epistle of Hierome to Rusticus, formerly
alleged, says, Let it offend no man, that in this Epistle, nor in any of the
former, Saint Hierome commands none of those things which in these days are
required of Monks. Of those three vows which they call solemn, there is not
one word. But we must remember that which is clearly manifest by this man's
Writings, that in Hieromes time there was not that kind of Monks which we see
in our age. And Quam autem long Monachatus ^odie, a prima sua origin
degeneraverit, and quantis abusibus contaminatus and deformatus sit, satis per
se est manifestum; nam paulatim religio vera and solida in superstitionem and
inanem speciem ^eligionis conve^s^ est; and accrescentibus opibus, decrevit
pietas. Cassander Consult. Art. 25.
Cassander thus agrees with him; It is manifest enough, how much Monkery is
now degenerated from the first original, how defiled and deformed with abuses;
true and solid religion being changed into an empty show of religion: and
riches increasing piety has decreased.

Thus we see what is become of the sacred function, and what a work of
charity it has been to give those riches to it, which have been the means to
diminish the piety of it. And indeed, such fearful abominations have been
discovered in monasteries, since idleness met in them with excessive
provision, that scarce any roaring Nusquam fere licentior and profanior vita,
quam i^ nonnullis Monasteriis. Cass. Ibid.
Society can match this sacred function. So far is it from assisting mankind
in the way of Spirit, that it has given to mankind most loathsome and
scandalous examples in the way of the flesh: For how many Stories are stuffed
with their adulteries, murders of children, unnatural pollutions? yea, Speeds
later Edit.
in our own Chronicle, the eyes of the Reader are almost defiled with the
names of Monks found guilty of that sin of fire and brimstone. And indeed,
take a man with strength of body, and by the provision of excessive charity
joined with idleness and fullness, you make him a right Citizen of Sodom.

And now call him a Monk if you will, he shall be but a Monk of the Order of
Sodom; his function far from sacred, far from the Spirit, but even a
hellish trade of fleshly abominations: And so I think we have drawn up these
conclusions, First, That it should not be true Christian charity which by
excessivenesse gives that provision which makes such a child of hell.
Secondly, It may be no charity, because it may be an erroneous opinion of
merit and satisfaction. And it is too well known, that the supposed expiation
of crying sins has laid the foundation of too many Monasteries. Thirdly, This
Provision may be a fruit not of Romish Charity, but of Romish Policy: for Rome
may cherish this provision, and enriching of Monasteries, that they may serve
as so many Garrisons for Rome against Princes: for by them they may diminish
Kingdoms; and as much as they take from these, so much they add to the
Kingdom of Rome.

The Champion passes on, and having wrought a glittering curtain bespangled
with the seeming good works of Visiting the condemned, Redeeming captives,
Instructing the ignorant, he spreads this curtain before the eyes of his
Readers, at once to dazzle them with this glorious show, and to cover from them
the horrid spectacle of Romes bloody uncharitableness. That there are no good
works in the limits of Rome, I will no more say, then I will say there are no
knees there that do not bow to Baal. And these (as I said before) serve well
the turn of the Beast, to make his horns show like those of the Lamb, as
they do at this time serve our Author to make a show that Rome is charitable.
But take out of his Inventory those works that are done for satisfaction, to
pay God the debt of sins, and so to make them Saviors; or, for merit and
supererogation, to bring God in debt unto man, I doubt not the remaining works,
like Gideons Army, will abate from thousands to hundreds. And indeed, the
greater multitude there is of erroneous works; the more Arguments, not of
Romish charity, but of Romish error and superstition.

But when among these works of Romish charity I see the Instructing of the
ignorant, I wonder at the Cavaliers blind partiality, that could not see this
which he brings forth as a proof of Romish charity, to be an high proof and
accusation of Romish uncharitableness: and this uncharitableness is the
greater for his own reason, because souls are more precious then bodies. So
that the Ignorantia malum est and miseria, quam vera charitas expellere tenetu^
Lorca 22. Disp. 41. n. 15. Quanquam omnes Christianit ^eantur dil^ction^m suam
testa^i observatione mandatorum, juxta illud, Si d^ligiti^m^, mandata mea
servate; a Petro tamen ejusque successoribus, al^ud quiddam and majus exigitur,
nempe ut pascant: vide au^em emphasim verborum; Non dicit, Occide, aut lanam
and lac a^^ipe; sed Pas^e: Nec dicit, Potestatem in eos exerce tyrannicam; fed,
(...).
great deluge of this transcendent uncharitableness to souls, seems to
drown all the former w^rks of charity to the body: And indeed, what
instruction can a Latin Pater no^ter, a Latin Creed, a Latin Ave Maria, a Latin
Mass give to an ignorant soul? It has been to me a spectacle of compassion,
when beyond the Seas, in some principal City, I have met with a poor Popish
soul, that spoke some of these her devotions in that which was thought to be
Latin, but could not be understood to be Latin by those who knew that
language, much less by the party that knew it not: what instruction can these
words give to the ignorant, which the ignorant know not? This is not to take
away ignorance, but to add new ignorance to the old. And surely, they need not
to send men to compass sea and land to convert Infidels abroad, until they
have converted their ignorant unbeleevers at home; for if they make no better
Christians abroad then they leave thousands at home, it is but to pollute that
glorious Name wherewith we are called, and to put the name of Christians on
those that know not Christ.

Now, that Rome is this cruel Stepmother, whose children thus lie swowning and
dying in the streets for hunger, though our eyes have seen it, let Romish words
speak it. Let us hear their great Jesuit Navarre setting forth the ignorance of
the Romish Church as her shame, Peccat mortaliter qui judicio rationis utens,
negligit s^ire explicit and in particulari secundam personam Trinitatis, puta,
Filium Dei Patris, propter nostram salutem factum esse hominem, natum, and
mortuum, etc. Imo and qui ignorant alios Articulos praedicti Symboli, salte^
quos Ecclesia solemnizat, etc. Quocirca, omnes Parochos, Patrimos, Parente^,
and Confessores, (praesertim plebe^orum) ac Verbi divini Praecones obse^ramus,
ut fidem istam Articulorum explicitam, and in particulari. caete^orumque qui in
Symbolo Apostolorum quo sancta Romana Ecclesia utitur continentu^, saepissime
co^mendare, and inculcare non desinent: Quand^quidem unive^s^ C^risti Republica
^i^ca haec tanta sit se^o^dia, ut multos passim invenia^, nihil ^^gis in
particulari and explicit de ^is^e crede^e, quam ethnicum Philos (...) sola
(...) very Dei n^tu^ali cognitione praeditum. Navar. (...). 11. (...) 22.
whereas the Cavalier sets forth the Instruction of the ignorant as her glory.
He sins mortally, says he, who being come to the judgment of reason,
neglects explicitly and particularly to know the second Person of the Trinity,
that is, That the Son of God the Father was made man, was born, and dyed,
etc. And he that is ignorant of other Articles of the Creed, at least those
which the Church does solemnize (by Festival days) etc. Wherefore we desire
all Curates, Godfathers, Parents, and Confessors, (especially of the common
people) and all Preachers of Gods Word, that they will not cease to inculcate
this particular and explicit faith of these Articles, and of those other which
are contained in the Apostles Creed, which the holy Church of Rome does use:
For in the whole Church of Christ there is so great negligence about these,
that every where you shall find many that believe no more explicitly and in
particular of these, then an heathen Philosopher, endued only with the
natural knowledge of one true God.

And now, if the Reader withdraw this painted and deceitful curtain that
seems to represent a Heaven sprinkled with the Stars of seeming good works,
and look into the Hell of Romish uncharitableness, whereof a small, but true
model was represented in the former Chapter: Or, if he see it not there; he
will look into the Inquisition House, and there behold it set forth to life, or
rather to death, in several torments; I doubt not but this pleasant image will
soon be frighted out of his Imagination, by the terrible shape of Rome
appearing all bloody, and drunken with the blood of the saints. And so the
improbability of Romish uncharitableness to Protestants will vanish away like
a fantasy, and a Poetical fable. And indeed, if the Pharisee, notwithstanding
his tyth-paying and fasting, went away condemned, because proudly and
uncharitably he despised and damned the Publicane, though he did neither
imprison no^ burn him; how shall Rome escape this condemnation, which both
despises, and damneth, and imprisoneth, and tortureth, and burns
Protestants, whom she accounts worse then Publicans and Heathens.

And thus, though the Cavaliers words may be true, that At the first sight it
is wholly improbable that Rome is uncharitable; yet at the second sight it is
more then probale, because it is proved.

This Chapter is almost ended; but before the end of it, the Champion shoots an
arrow like a Parthian flying, even then to hurt us when he seems to look
from hurting us. He would seem to spare Protestants in not recriminating; yet
in naming this not recriminating he did not spare us; but indeed he did spare
himself most, in not urging it more; for we have such proofs of Protestant
charity as may shame his Recrimination: For they are ready to be brought forth
against a Recriminator, and may bind his Recrimination as a crown to the head
of the Protestants. And when a catalogue of them is brought forth, we may
boldly say (and that not without Recrimination to Romists) that none of them
are the bastard fruits of Romish and carnal errors of merit and satisfaction.

But a pattern of these works of charity has been already presented to the
world; and yet not of all Protestants, but of this Kingdom, and yet not of the
whole Realm, but of some part for the whole. And that I send not away the
Reader altogether empty, I will take a part of that part; and this part, I
doubt, is not to be matched by any proportionable part of the Romish
Jurisdiction, in the same proportion of time. D. Willets Synopsis, large Edit.
page 1220.
Thus he begins; Whereas the Professors of the Gospel are generally charged by
the Romanists, as barren and fruitless of good works, I will, to stop their
slanderous mouths, show by a particular induction, that more charitable works
have been performed in the times of the Gospel, then they can show to have
been in the like time of Popery, or in twice so much time now going
immediately before. And because it would require an endless labor to make
collection of all such works, -- I will give instance only of three most
famous places of this Land, which have most abounded in these fruits: namely,
the City of London, and the two Universities. And then, having reckoned and
summed up diverse gifts, he thus concludes his total; They want not much of a
Million. But if all other gifts which came not to my knowledge were added, the
sum would far exceed a Million. In which sum I comprehend not the yearly
collection of 30000. pounds through the Parishes of this Land.

And I think the time since this computation has yet been more fruitful; the
sums being very great which have been given for the maintenance of foreign
Preachers and exiles, repairing of Churches, redeeming of captives, enlarging
and beautifying of Colleges, erecting or increasing Libraries; amongst which,
that of Oxford grows to so large and glorious a luster, that doubtless it
dazels the eyes of Popery to behold it.

CHAP. IV.
Opposed to the Cavaliers second Chapter, wherein he labors to excuse the
uncharitable censure of Papists in damning Protestants.

SECT. I.
The Protestants Religion is declared to be a saving Religion, In respect 1. of
the Object of faith. 2. Of the means of believing the Word and Sacraments. 3.
Of the effects of faith, charity and repentance.

We are told in this Chapter, that when Romists give the sentence of damnation
against us, they do it not against us, but against our heresy; or, if you
will, Protestancy. But I answer, If Protestancy do not damn us, then Papists
do damn us: for as a guiltless person, whom his own crime does not condemn,
may be truly said to be slain and condemned by the witnesses which falsely
accuse him; so Protestants not being condemned by Protestancy, are damned by
the false witnesses of Rome. And indeed, if they would suspend their
uncharitable censures of damnation until they had manifestly proved the faith
of Protestants to be damnable, the Cavalier on this quarrel might have had no
need to put on his defensive Armor: yea, if he had but considered the whole
verse, whereof he takes a part, therewith to conclude this Chapter, he needed
not to have begun it: (...) ^6.16.
his piece is this; He that believes not shall be condemned: and that which
he left out is this; He that believes and is baptized shall be saved: now
hereunto I subjoyn, But, Protestants do believe, and are baptized; and how can
it choose but follow, Therefore Protestants shall be saved? And that there may
be no quarrel about saving faith, Let the Author and Finisher of our faith,
the Judge of quick and dead, be Judge between us. Hear the Word of that Word
which is God; Joh. 6.40.
This is the will of him that sent me, that every one which sees the Son,
and believes on him, may have everlasting life; and I will raise him up at the
last day. And if this Word who is Truth had any need of witnesses, it were
easy to produce them: John 1.12.15.16. Joh. 3.36. Act. 10.43. Romans 9.33.
So that whatsoever distance between Christ and a soul this Author does
speak of, it is taken away by that justifying faith which uniteth us to
Christ, and makes us one spirit with him: For by faith we being made his
Spouse, flesh of his flesh, Romans 8.32.
bone of his bone, and spirit of his spirit, Christ is ours, and we are
Christ's; our debts are his, his merits are ours: for indeed, if Christ be
ours, all things are ours; Romans 8.1.
and among those all things are Christ's merits. And now being in Christ Jesus,
let Rome, and the present Romists say what they will, Saint Paul to the pure
and primitive Romans plainly said, There is to us no condemnation. None can
separate whom God has thus put together; no, Romans 8.38, 39.
not the gates of Hell, though set open in the Papacy, and sending sorth
Champions against us, can separate us from the love of God in Christ Jesus.

Again, for the means and furtherance of this uniting and saving faith, the
advantage is incomparably on our side. The ordinary and maine means of
begetting and increasing this faith, is the preaching of the Gospel, Gal. ^.2,
5. Romans 10.14, 17 Joh. 1.12.13. Romans 1.16. 1 Cor. 1.21. Ephesians. 1.13. Jam. 1.18. 1
Pet. 1.21. etc.
if we will believe the Spirit of God speaking in the Apostles. And let the
Pope take a survey of his Dominions, and I think it will palpably appear,
that he comes far short of matching this Nation with any proportionable part
of his Kingdom, in the Gifts, Abilities, and Numbers of solid and profitable
Preachers: These gifts then being given by Him that ascended on high, for the
edifying and saving of his Body, we will make no doubt, but that the Harvest
is great where the Laborers sent forth with these gifts, are so many: And
withal, hereby we may learn, That to obtain th^se gifts from on high, by
which souls may be saved, and to obtain salvation by the ministry of those
gifts; there is no need of being subject to the Popes Supremacy, seeing we
have both very plentiful without it.

But this Champion is still angry, because we have not great store of
Sacraments; and yet he knows that his own Doctors do confess that a man may
be saved, Those which flowed e later^ Christi.
if he have no more Sacraments then we do use and acknowledge. And indeed, if
a man in Regeneration, whereof Baptism is a seal, do put off original sin
with the guilt of it, and receive a new life of Grace, and by the use of the
Lords Supper, put off the guilt of actual sin, and nourish and increase this
new life, I doubt not but he may go safe and sound from strength to strength,
until he see God in Sion.

And therefore the French Tria siquidem nobis sunt ad profectum christianae
religionis proposita, sed ad co^summatam justitiam perinde necessaria, ut in
his tota humanae salutis summa consistat: horum primu^ est intelligere and
firmiter tenere mysterium Trinitatis, and unius veritatem Deitatis. Secundum,
salutaris Baptismi ratione^ nosce, vel causam. Tertium, in quo duo vitae
Sacramenta, id est, Dominici corporis and sanguinis continentur. Fulbert.
Carnot. Epist. 1.
Bishop Fulbertus, said, five hundred years past; that in three things; A right
Faith in the Trinity, To know the reason of Baptism, And of the Lords Supper,
the whole sum of Man's salvation did consist.

As for charity and penance, which the Author would commend to us, we
acknowledge that charity is the sap which issues from the true vine Christ
Jesus, into those that are ingrafted in him by faith. But we must be in the
vine, before we can draw this sap from him: And if we be in him, then (as
Saint Paul told us before,) we are, even at the same instant, those to whom
there is no condemnation. And penitence (for I hope that is the best penance)
also is the fruit of this union, and of the new life which we receive by it:
For Regeneration makes a Well of water in the soul, which springs up to
eternal life. Now the nature of a Well, is, by an ever springing purity, to
purge and cast out the filth that is cast into it: And thus does the Well of
Grace in our souls cast out the filth of actual sins by repentance. And,
indeed, to both these does our Church call us in our preparations to the Lords
Supper: so that in regard of the care of our Church and her Remembrancers, we
have no need of Popish admonitions, toward charity and repentance; and in
regard of the Lords Supper, which is Christ's remembrance of these duties to us,
we have no need of more Popish Sacraments.

And now, if there were cause, I could say much more of the sufficiency of our
faith: for we believe that which Quae summa est fidei, seu omnium credendorum?
Symbolum Apostolorum in duodecim distinctum Articulos. Canisii Catechismus.
Canisius the Jesuit says, is the sum of things to be believed, the Creed
of the Apostles. And if there were yet need of a larger faith, King James his
premonition to christian Kings.
Let us hear King James of ever glorious memory, what he says of his
Protestant faith: I am such a Catholic Christian as believes the three
Creeds, I reverence and admit the four first general Counsels as Catholic
and Orthodox.

Briefly, we have so full and saving a faith in Jesus Christ and his Gospel,
2. Cor. 11.4.
that, except the Pope bring us another Jesus, and another Gospel, we need
not to hear him; Gal. 1.8, 9.
and if he bring another Jesus, and another Gospel, then he is accursed.

SECT. II.
The presumption of Papists in condemning this saving faith, and whereas the
Cavalier denies, that they hold Protestants to be in the case of those who
sin against the Holy Ghost, it is showed, by a fearful example, that denying
the Doctrine of the Protestants has been taken for the sin against the holy
Ghost.

ANd now being justified by God in Jesus Christ, through a saving faith, who
shall condemn us? Certainly the faith which saves us, will not condemn us:
Therefore, if Romists condemn us when we have this saving faith, they are to
be condemned for unjust condemning us. Mat. 7.1, 2.
They must have that judgment wherewith they have judged others; and so they
have not so much condemned us as themselves. They draw the woe and curse upon
themselves, Esaias 5.20.
which is denounced against those that call good evil, and take the
righteousness of the righteous from him. And thus doing, Pro. 17.15.
they are far from taking the place of Almighty God in judging his servants,
which this man says some of ours do lay against them as a charge: For indeed,
to speak more rightly, they might say, that herein Romists take the place of
the Accuser of the Brethren: Rev. 12.1^.
They put themselves into the place of that Father of untruth and
uncharitableness that falsely accused Job as an Hypocrite, Job 1.9, 10, 15 and
2.3, 4, 5.
and assayed to provoke God and Men against the Children of God.

Yet does not the Devil (nor his instruments) falsely accuse and terrify the
faithful without an especial craft: For he is a cunning Fowler; and a
Fowler, when he has spread his net before some cleft of a Rock where birds
rest in safety, he assayes by noyses, outcries, and terrors to fright them out
of their safety, that so they may come into his net: So the Devil, when he
sees souls safely resting by faith in the Rock Christ Jesus, he assayeth to
fright them out of their safety, by the outcries and terrors of damnation. And
the Romists join with them in these terrible noyses, so to fright Protestants
from their Rock of safety, into their net of errors, superstitions, idolatries,
and especially that large Net of Idolatry, the Popes Deity and Supremacy. But,
as the only safety of the bird is not to fear these outcries, neither by
fear of a false danger to run into a true one; so it is the safety of
Protestants not to fear these noyses, nor for the fear of a false damnation,
to run into a true one: Let them keep close to their Rock of safety, Christ
Jesus, and from this safety they may assuredly expect salvation. But
contrarily, the false Accusers, and affrighters, and casters of damnation,
shall be truly in danger of the same damnation which they have falsely laid on
the heirs of salvation.

This Author speaks yet further, of a charge laid by us on Romists, That they
say, Protestancy is as the sin against the Holy Ghost. I think the meaning
of this charge is only to this purpose; That Romists, in saying that
unrepented Protestancie does damn men, do make it, in effect, as mortal as
the impenitent sin against the Holy Ghost. But for every way of charging them
for their uncharitable censure, I do not undertake; for it may suffice me any
way to show that this censure is uncharitable. Yet seeing we are fallen into
the mention of comparing Protestancy to the sin against the Holy Ghost, let us
behold in a pattern how nearly falling from Protestancie has been taken for
the sin against the Holy Ghost.

F. Spira, a learned Lawyer, dwelling near Padua, Sl^ydan. Com. lib. 21.

Gowlart. Admir. Hist. ex S^ringe^o, test oculato.


having embraced the true Religion with great zeal, and making open profession
of the same, was complained of to the Popes Legate; which when he understood,
and saw the danger, after he had long deliberated and consulted what was best
to be done, he resolved at last to go to the Legate; accordingly he went to
him to Venice, craved pardon, and promised future obedience: The Legate, for an
example to others, commanded him after his return to make an open recantation;
which accordingly he performed. But having done this against his conscience,
to maintain himself and his charge, being returned to his house, he could
not rest an hour, no, not a minute, nor feel any ease of his continual
anguish. And even from that night he was so terrified, and had such horror of
his actions, as he held himself for lost: For, as he himself did confess,
he saw plainly before his eyes all the torments of hell, and the damned; and
in his soul did hear the fearful sentence, being drawn before the Judgment
seat of Jesus Christ. He was carried to Padua, where famous and excellent
Physicians did visit him, and gave him Physic with singular affection: but
they soon found that he was little sick in body, but grievously in mind.
Nothing came out of his mouth that was lightly or foolishly spoken, or that
might discover any raving in him. They asked him if he thought his sin to
be so foul, that it could not be pardoned through the bounty and infinite
mercy of God. His answer was, That he had sinned against the Holy Ghost,
which was so great a sin, as it is called a sin unto death; whereof this
wretched man discoursed amply, learnedly, and too subtly against himself: He
said, that he did acknowledge the severity of Gods judgment, who had chosen
him to make him a spectacle rather then any other, and to admonish all by one
man's mouth, to abstain from all impiety, confessing that there was no reproach
nor punishment which he had not deserved by reason of his foul offense.

After he had discoursed gravely of the Divine Justice, he said, That they
should not account strange this his speech, for that oftentimes God does wrest
out of the mouth of Reprobates most assured testimonies of his Majesty, his
Justice, and his fearful Vengeance; as we see in Judas, confessing his own
sin, and justifying his Master.

Many testimonies of Scripture being alleged to divert him from this fearful
apprehension, and being exhorted to receive into his heart a hope and a trust
of salvation by Jesus Christ; he said, even in that whereby you do exhort me
to gather some hope, I see all means of health and pardon taken from me. For,
if the Testimonies of the holy Scripture have any authority (as they have) do
you think that Jesus Christ said in vain, that he which renounceth him before
men, he will renounce him before his heavenly Father? Do you not see that
this concerns me, and that it is as it were particularly verified in my
person? What shall become of him whom the Son has disavowed before his
Father, when, as you say, we must hope for no salvation but in Jesus Christ?

It cannot be believed with what gravity and vehemence his words were
delivered; neither was there ever man heard pleading better for himself, then
Spira against himself: He said, That God did set the precious blood of Jesus
Christ, and the dignity of his obedience, as an high and strong Rampart, that
sinners, repenting them, might not be drowned with the overflowing of their
sins, and offenses: As for himself, seeing he had renounced our Savior
Jesus Christ, he had (as one should say) overthrown this strong Rampart with
his own hands, so as the deluge of the waters of vengeance had covered and
swallowed up his soul. One of his most familiars said unto him; that his great
torment proceeded from abundance of Melancholy which troubled his brain. Spira
remembering that he had many times refuted this opinion, said; You may think
what you please, but God in truth has troubled my spirit, seeing it is
impossible for me to have any hope of salvation. Thus he continued, and
withal, refused to eat any more meat, and so being carried from Padua to his
own house, in this despair he died.

CHAP. V.
Against the Cavaliers third Chapter, First, it is proved, That although unity
be necessary in the true Church, yet does not this discharge the Papists from
uncharitableness in damning Protestants.

SECT. I.
Wherein is declared; first, the weakness of his Grounds and Deductions.
Secondly, what kind of unity is required in the Church.

We are past the Champions unproved, and indeed disproved improbability of
this assertion; That Rome wants charity in casting damnation upon Protestants.
Now we are com to his untruth: It is untrue, says he, that Romists want
charity, in thus damning Protestants. And by what reason does he prove it to
be untrue? Because there is but one Church: a strange kind of reasoning; that
this should be an untruth, that Rome is uncharitable in damning Protestants
because there is but one Church; when even hence appears the truth of her
uncharitableness. For if there be but one Church, and Protestants be members
of this one Church, how is it not most true that it is uncharitable to damn
the true members of this one Church? Now that Protestants are members of this
one Church is a truth already proved, which nothing that this Author says in
this book, or can say, will ever disprove; but much rather his grounds or
rules, by which he would oppugn our truth, do prove it, and make against
himself and his untruth.

His grounds are these; There is but one Church, and one Religion, out of which
there is no salvation. Secondly, the unity of the members of this Church is
broken between Papists and Protestants. Thirdly, that both Papists and
Protestants are not saveable in their several Religions. But what does all
this prove but that Protestants* first, may be members of the true Church;
with whom, secondly, Papists do break unity; therefore, thirdly, Papists are
not saveable? His own proofs make not against us, but make against him and
his own fellows.

But the inference sowed hereunto is most miserable, That no one is to be
blamed, if, conceiving his own to be the only true Religion, he declares
the dangerous estate wherein he takes any other man to be, who communicates
and agrees not with him: but rather that he is obliged to let him know it. An
inconsequent untruth, except consequent because deduced from untruths; and so
it must either accuse the premises, or it self. Does the Author himself
believe what he says? or can it come into his judgment, that if two hold two
contrary opinions, whereof one is true, and the other false, that he which
holds the false is not to be blamed, if he declare to the other that the truth
is falsehood, and thereupon tell him that he is in danger to be damned by
believing the truth, so to terrify him out of the truth into his own
falsehood? If there be no fault in this, then how can any man blame a Turk for
telling a Christian that he cannot well be saved, except he turn Turk?
Surely whatsoever this Cavalier may think of this kind of doctrine, I believe
that if the same were maintained in false titles to a Crown, the Law would call
it treason: For if a Subject conceiving his false title to be good, should
tell his Prince that he were an Usurper, were not such a Subject to be blamed?
Surely, whatsoever a Romist may think of such a one, I doubt not but the Law
would think him worthy of a capital Sentence. And it is likely the abbetters
of him by such doctrines, would not be freed from blame and danger. But if
this Champion had sought advice, his own Doctors could have helped him out of
his error: For they Quaeritur an conscientia errans vim habeat sibi obl^gandi,
hoc est, ut eam sequi, and juxta ipsius praescripta agere debeamus. Duae su^t
opiniones: prima asseverat non habere vim obligandi, sed ligandi -- Qua^do
conscientia ligat, and non obligat, tunc si contra eam agatur, peccatum quidem
admittitur, non tamen secundum eam agere debemus, quoniam possumus hujusmodi
conscientiam errantem deponere. Azor. Instit. moral. Lib. 2. ca. 8. Aliquando
proponitur a conscientia erronea ut fiat id quod malum est; ut si quis
culpabiliter existimet necessariu^ esse mentiri utsuam vel alterius vitam
conservet, in quo eventu non tenetur quis mentiri, quia me^tiendo peccaret.
Nullus autem tenetur ad id quod, si fecerit, peccatum co^mittit. -- Quod si
urgeas, ergo homo iste erit perplexus in utramque partem, quia quicquid faciat
peccatum non evadit. Respondetur culpa sua posse quem esse perplexum, quando se
ignorant id quod scire potest and tenetur. Non est tamen simpliciter perplexus,
quoniam potest and tenetur in hoc eventu conscientiam illam deponere, and
scientiam contraria^ habere, quo facto ab illa perplexitate liberatur. Sayer.
Clau. Reg. Lib. 1. ca. 4. Continge^e potest ut conscientia erronea ex
ignorantia culpabili proponat tanquam necessarium, and in praecepto, facere
aliquid quod revera alias malu^ est, ut mentiri ad tuendam vit^m -- si ex tali
conscientia mentiretur, sequendo positive judicium ejus, nihilominus peccaret,
quia illa ignorantia non excusaret eum, nullus enim obligatur ad faciendum
illud quod peccatum est -- potest autem and debet evitari and omitti mendacium
deponendo conscientiam illam e^roneam. Vasques in 1. 2^. Disp. 60. Number. 5.6.
can tell him that an erroneous conscience does not bind to the doing of that
which it erroneously thinks should be done; the proper Guide of our Actions
should be Light and Knowledge, not darkness and error: Neither is the Will
bound to obey other then the rectified Understanding. And therefore, if the
conscience being deceived, do prescribe that to be done which is unlawful, the
true and only remedy is to clear the conscience from the errors, and not to
follow it in errors: For this were to double the fault which before was single;
for the error in the conscience was one, and now the following of that error
is another. And if the Cavalier know it not, there is also a Romish Doctor that
can tell him a cause and root of this very error which damneth men that shall
be saved. And indeed it is a vice not beseeming a Cavalier, which he calls
Pusillanimity. Error co^scientiae causatur ex cordis pusillanimitate, qua quis
timet non timenda secundum rectum rationis judicium; et talis conscientia est
nimis stricta, et ideo vi^anda, quia causat t^ia mala:

Nam de bono facit malu^, and de festuca trabem, id est, de levi peccato grave.
Secu^do generat desperatione^. Tert^o damnat salva^dum. Pa^ant. in 2. L^ct. 165.


An error of ^onscience is caused by pusillanimity of heart, whereby a man
fears that which should not be feared according to the right judgment of
reason; and such a conscience is too strict, and therefore to be avoided,
because it causes three evils, whereof the third is this, It damnes him that
should be saved.

But thus this error of the Cavalier being taken from him, by which he thinks
he may follow his erroneous conscience, in denouncing damnation to those that
are saved, the very sinnew and bond of his discourse is cut assunder; and all
his ensuing labor lost, by which he strives to prove that Protestants and
Romists are divided, and cannot both be saved: For though they be thus
divided, a Papist cannot charitably tell a saved Protestant that he is damned
because he does erroneously believe it.

Yet will he needs go on to his proofs of unity, though altogether
unprofitable, and unable to excuse Rome from the charge of being uncharitable
to Protestants: yea, it rather aggravates his charge, and makes her more
uncharitable, in not holding unity with so good Christians as Protestants. Yet
he is resolved to go on, and to utter that which he gathered upon this head,
or rather upon this word of Unity: for the places which he brings forth, it
seems, please him well, if they do speak of the word Unity, or something
near to the sound of it, though the meaning be nothing of that unity which it
concerns him (even in this his walk of impertinency and wandering) to pursue
and prove. For sometimes his Allegations seem to prove that there should be
in the Church one Head, and sometimes one Heart and Affection, sometimes one
Spirit. But if the Author would be pleased to remember his own business, he
might consider that his work is to prove that there is in the Church such an
entire unity in all points of Doctrine, that there can be no difference or
dissent in any one point, though never so small, but that by this difference
the unity of the Church and salvation is lost. For we deny not, but there must
be one heart, and one affection, and one spirit in the Church, and all this in
and under the unity of one Head, Christ Jesus.

Again, we acknowledge that God did found but one Church, and one Religion;
and that without these two there is no salvation: But except the Author prove
that the unity of this one Church, and of this one Religion consists in this,
that the belief of all must be one and the same in all points, under pain of
Damnation; the former words of unity are mere words, and not pertinent to this
end, neither will they make up his task. For when he comes to his next point,
that this unity is broken between Protestants and Romists, we will presently
deny that we have any way broken that unity of faith, which holds us in unity
with the Church; and consequently we are still in the state of salvation, and
so all his errand is lost. Therefore the most places being impertinent, as
proving that which we deny not, and indeed make nothing for him being granted,
he has two or three, which by screwes are wrested toward this full unity in
points of belief, though they reach not home to it. This perchance he aimed
at in other places but they would not join with him.

SECT. II.
The argument drawn from the authority of the High Priest among the Jews
answered.

A First of his unproving and impertinent places, is that of Deuteronomy. 17. where
(as our Author says) his whole people should be subject to the determination
of the High Priest for the time being; and this upon no less then pain of
death: In which sentence, there was to be no appeal. And a little after, The
great authority and power, which was cast upon the individual Person of one
Judge.

But first if we will read the words of God himself, we may see that He
speaks of more then one individual Person: Ver 9. and Ver. 12.
For He speaks of the Levites, the Priests, and the Judge. And if a man will
not hearken to the Priest, or to the Judge, that then he should dye.

Verse 11.
But secondly, it must be remembered, that that which the Priest or the Judge
must pronounce, must be the sentence of the Law: For even the Prophet must
dye, which shall presume to speak a word which God has not commanded. Deuteronomy.
18.20.


Yet thirdly, we well know, That this speaking according to the Law, was often
neglected by the Priests; and therefore they brake the Covenant of Levi, Mal.
2.8.
and led the people into errors, as hereafter more fully may be proved. And I
hope this Champion will not say, that the people lost their salvation if they
did not hold unity with the errors of the Priests.

And whereas he adds, That there could be no Religion or Church that did
not agree with this; We take not this to be the present Question: but,
Whether all believers, Proselites or Jews, did in every point, by the Priests
decision, hold an unity of belief, and did in no point differ: Now this, I
think, will never be both affirmed and proved. For not only humane
Testimonies, but the Scriptures themselves do show us, Mat. 22. Act. 23.6, 8.
that there were diverse sects and opinions among them, and yet they joined
together in external unity, not dividing themselves into two Religions and
Churches.

But to put this Author out of trouble, in regard of his individual High
Priest, the mention of whom seems to look asquint on the Pope, as his shadow;
let him remember, That the High Priest was himself a shadow of Christ, Heb.
7.12. and 8.5.
and when Christ came, this shadow was abolished; and when this shadow dyed, it
left not the Pope either heir or executor; and so he can be at best but the
counterfeit of an abolished shadow.

And thus all this Authors labors for the High Priest are left to the Pope.
But see how yet it falls out more unhappily against him; for after he had made
mention of the individual High Priest, his next proof arises from Korah,
Dathan, and Abiram, punished for Schism (and not for Heresy, and difference
in Doctrine) against two individual persons, Moses and Aaron.

SECT. III.
It is declared, 1. That the unity of the Church may be preserved without an
exact agreement in all points of doctrine. 2. That the Papists exalt the Pope
above God, in that they hold all differences from the Popes determination to
be mortal, and yet some breaches of Gods Law to be venial.

ANother place of his, very impertinent to his purpose, (...) Unic^ solitaru,
Psalm. 68.7. Pagnin. lex.
is taken or racked out of the Psalms; which, differently from the original
and corrected Translations, he thus paraphraseth; He makes them to be all
after one manner, and to be endued with the same affections and dictamens
concerning Gods service. But the word dictamens we leave to this Author, as
being his own, and not the Texts; only we may upon request allow this place,
and the next (of Christ's prayer for unity, John 17) to intend unity of
affections; and yet he will be short of his unity in all points of Doctrine.
And it is well known, that if this were meant, the present Romists themselves
have not that unity, neither those who far excelled them, the ancient Martyrs
and Fathers. And far more guilty are they against the prayer of Christ, in
maintaining division Schismatis tota radix and vera causa est, and jam diu fuit
Romanus Ponti^ex. -- Schismaticus enim est qui ab Ecclesia universali se
separat; non qui Papam errantem nolit s^qui. Spalat Ostens. error. Suarez. cap.
6.
of affections toward Patriarchall Sees, and many eminent parts of the
catholic Church: for the Pope is like Ismael, his sword against every man that
will not submit to his universal Supremacy.

And according to this dividing Spirit of the Papacy, is it this Authors
business in this work, to make a division in the Church (for false proving is
making) even where there is an unity? for, is not this his employment in this
Chapter, (and more hereafter in taking away the distinction of points
fundamental) to set Christians by the ears, and one to damn another for
differing in every little point of doctrine? For thus he says, even soon
after his former places of unity (and he would feign have Saint Matthew and
Saint Mark to say so with him, Mat. 28.20. Mar. 16.16.
) Whosoever should fail of believing any one point of Christian doctrine,
should be as sure of condemnation, as if he had believed but any one, or none.
A Foundation laid of Babel it self, even of division and hatred in the Church
of God; A Position to which I cannot be silent for Sions sake, nor for my
brethren and companions sake, whom this Position has often slain with death
temporal, and adjudged to death eternal. For let it look as smooth as it
will, do you break up the bowels of it, and you shall find it full of blood,
division, and damnation. This, even this is it which has wrought those
fearful Massacres, Treasons, Excommunications, Fires, whereof many horrid
spectacles in the second Chapter have been presented.

And how should it be otherwise, but that it should produce such hellish
effects, when it teaches Christians, for every failing in the belief of any
one point of Christian (that is in their language, Romish or Popish) doctrine,
to account other Christians in the state of damnation, and to hate them more
then heathens; So that if the Pope say, that the Worship of Images, Prayer in
an unknown tongue without understanding, Rats eating the body of Christ, and
such other errors, be points of Christian doctrine; the man that believes them
not, though he believe in Christ, yea, all other points but one of these, has
forfeited his salvation, and is fallen into the odious state of a combustible
heretic, and of a damnable person. But this Author might have been put in
mind of more mercy by one of his allegations; for though Christ in the place
of Matthew by him alleged, wills that all Nations be taught to observe
whatsoever he has commanded; yet his own fellow Romists allow, that the
breach of some of Christ's Commands are not damnable: I might allege a Command
of Christ in the Lords Supper, Drink ye all of this; which (as concerning the
lay people) they have turned into Drink ye none of this: But I will pass to
other Commands, such as those are which command the keeping of the moral Law,
( Matthew. 5.17.28.48.) and forbid every idle thought: but the breach of these
Q^i concupiscit inordinate contra solam liberalitatem, vel pauxillum contra
justitiam, solum venialiter peccat. Navar. Man. cap. 20. N. 1.

Negari non debet peccatum veniale es^e co^tra praeceptum aliquod. Vasq. in 1a.
2r. Disp. 144.9.


Commands by inordinate thoughts, or small deviations, the Romists can make not
mortal and damnable, but venial. How comes it then that they will allow us no
venial errors and failings in small points of doctrine, but any one point of
Christian (that is, in his sense, Popish) doctrine not believed, is damnably
mortal? Is there not in this a great piece of Popish leaven, even of the
wicked mystery, that sins against Gods Commands of moral obedience may be
venial; but against the Popes Commands, in the least point of doctrine, are
altogether mortal? And does not the reason appear to be this, That in the
breach of a moral Law (as that of coveting our neighbors goods) God is
offended, but the Pope is not hurt: but by not believing any one point which
the Pope delivers for Christian doctrine, his In^rrability falls to the ground,
and so his Supremacy? And it were better, according to the policy of this
wicked Mystery, that all the world were burned or damned, or set at division,
then that the Papacy should fall. But thus does the Pope set himself above
God, by valuing offenses against himself of a more damnable nature then sins
against God: But well it is withal, that they show hereby, that God is yet
far more merciful then the Pope; for God, they say, makes little sins
venial, whereas the Pope makes little errors against Popish doctrine deadly
and damnable. But the truth is, to those that are in Christ Jesus, God does
make venial both errors in lesser points of faith, which grow by ignorance,
blindness, or weakness of faith, as well as lesser errors in life, by
infirmity and weakness. Christ's blood is a propitiation for all our sins,
as well sins in the understanding, as in the will. And to those who attain to
that measure of faith which knits them to Christ Jesus, Christ Jesus by his
blood will make other ignorances and unbeliefes in those points of doctrine, to
which they cannot attain, venial and pardonable: and surely, our Author is
hardly driven to get a show of proof from Scripture, of this doctrine of
division and damnation: The place of Matthew could not serve; for there was
only a command to the Apostles, to teach all Nations to observe all Christ's
Commands. But we have seen above out of Romists, that the breach of some of
Christ's Commands is not damnable, but venial; wherefore another place must be
forced to confess it. Accordingly that of Saint Mark is set on the rack; but
this place speaks not of not believing all and every point of doctrine
delivered and decreed by the Pope and his adherents; but the maine scope of the
place is a casting of damnation upon men for the great point of not believing
in Christ: for in the Gospel this is an usual sense of the word believing,
especially when it stands upon life and death. And, it seems, this Author can
bring no plain place of Scripture to prove, Joh. 3.36. and 6.29, 35, 40. Joh.
17.3. Act. 10.43. Romans 3.25, 26. 1 John 5.12.
that he who believes not every small point of doctrine decided by the Pope,
shall be damned; for if he could, these places had not been so unmercifully
racked toward it. But thus still behold a going on of the Mystery of iniquity.
Unity unto salvation is urged, thereby to make division unto damnation; Words
are taken from Christ the Head, therewith to tear his body into pieces: But
hereof we may make this use, That when a Papist preaches to Protestants of
unity, then let them expect and beware of division.

SECT. IIII.
The place taken out of the 18. of Matthew. is cleared, which the Cavalier had
perverted to the maintenance of four Popish grounds: First, The perpetual
visibility of the Church of Rome. Secondly, The absolute authority of this
Church, in judging controversies. Thirdly, The Inerrability of this judgment.
Fourthly, a Necessity of submission thereunto, whereby their imaginary unity is
produced.

I Might here be at rest for this Chapter, but that this Champion, besides two
impertinent places (one of which speaks of unity of Affection, and a second of
the unity of Spirit in the bond of Peace,) brings forth a third, even the often
answered place of S. Matthew. which he perverts to diverse ill uses, Mat. 18.
whereof this imaginary Popish unity is one; For, he assayes hereby to prove
the Church to be the judge of controversies, to prove her visibility, to prove
her inerrability and thereupon he thinks presently should follow an unity.

First, to remove the stumbling block of visibility, for which the Author went
out of his own way, that he might lay it in ours: I answer, That this Text
may teach what is to be done where there is a Church, as commonly there is
where there is a Brother and a Brother, but it does not teach that there shall
be a Church visible in all places, and at all times.

But notwithstanding this text, a Church may be visible sometimes in one
Nation, and sometimes in another, according to the fruitfulness of the people,
and the just pleasure of God, who sometimes removes the Gospel and the
Candlestick from a Nation that bears no fruit, to another that shall bear it:
And so we see that there are no Churches now to be seen where there have
been famous Churches in times past. Accordingly the Church may be visible in
Greece, in AEthiopia, in Armenia, yea in England, though it be not visible in
Rome; and so the visibility thereof may be true, though there were no Rome,
and no Pope. So that neither this, nor any other text, though they say the
Church is visible, Potest in aliis Episcopis et quidem firmiter pietas religio
^isque inte gr^^as conserv^ri. Nilus de Prim. p^pae.
yet they do not say that Rome or the Pope shall still be the visible Church:
but contrarily the Scripture gives us good hope that Rome shall be invisible;
yea, it gives us great proof that she is now the Scarlet Lady that persecutes
the Church, and is now the Mother of abominations.

Secondly, no Scripture does say that in time of persecution or prevailing
Heresy, the Church shall there be visible where this persecution drives it
into corners, that it may escape the fury of it by a kind of invisibility: And
when the Arian heresy had covered the face of the Earth, and the Roman Bishops
or Pope had subscribed to it, this Scripture does not say that then the Pope or
his Adhaerents were the visible Church; nor that they shall be so when the Pope
turns Antichrist.

For the second point, that the Church is the judge of controversies, I could
perchance say, that there appears very probable reasons why this text does not
speak of the Churches authority in judging of controversies of faith, but of
her authority in admonishing her children; and requiring reconciliation and
satisfaction from one brother to another, in evident wrongs, even faults
without controversy: For the text says, If thy Brother sin, or trespass
against thee, go and tell him his fault; So that there is a sin and a fault
without controversy, and such a fault, that the offended Brother himself may
first judge and tell him of it that has offended: And according to this
beginning may be the proceeding, that is, that the two witnesses, and so the
Church may be not to judge of the fault, whether it be a fault or no; but to
witness and condemn the contumacy of the party in denying satisfaction, and
reconciliation after an evident fault. And when the offending Brother will not
hear the Church thus admonishing, persuading, and injoyning him satisfaction
and reconciliation, then he is to be cast out of that Church, which he has
thus contumaciously disobeyed: Agreeable to that of S. Paul, If any man obey
not our word, have no company with him. 2. These. 3.14.


But be it that the Church be the judge of controversies, this also may be
true, in Russian, Ethiopian, and Protestant Churches; And so the Church may
judge controversies though there were no Pope, and where the Pope has no
power: Besides, the Romists themselves differ concerning the meaning of the
word Church: So that while we labor in this text to find a Judge of
controversies for reconciling them; we are left unreconciled, by being at
controversy about the Judge of controversies mentioned in this text: For,
Hieronymus and glossa no^ine Ecclesiae multitudinem intelligunt. vid. Lorcam.
in 22. Disp. 46. n. 22.
some say, the multitude is this Church; and they have for them the most usual
acception of the word Church in that sense through the new Testament: And the
current of the place, seems to him that way, according to proportion: For,
first the offended Brother, alone was to admonish his Brother; and next with
one or two witnesses; and lastly, he was to be admonished by the congregation:
So it is a doctrine of degrees, from one to two, and from two, to many; And if
it be thus, then the Popes power of judging controversies has no footing here.
But thirdly, (and so withal to include and resolve the question of
inerrability,) If the Prelates be meant by the Church, (which Lorca says is
the most usual opinion amongst Romists) yet does not this place say, that
Romish Prelates shall have still an unerring judgment in controversies;
especially any single Prelate, as the Pope. Again, it can hardly be thought,
that when a Brother has offended a Brother, this text would have him presently
to call a Council or Synod of Prelates, and so complain to many Prelates at
once, and so to the Church. But if it be his own Prelate of whom he must
ask, does this place promise that no Prelate shall err in judgeing of
controversies? it is well known that in the Jewish Church, (which was
undeniably the true Church before Christ,) Priests did not judge controversies
without error: Yea, God Himself complains of the contrary, Mal. 2.7, 8.
when he says, The Priests lips should preserve knowledge, and they should
seek the Law out of his mouth; for he is the messenger of the Lord of Hosts:
But Ye are departed out of the way, Ye have caused many to stumble at the law;
Ye have corrupted the Covenant of Levi.

Accordingly we find in the Prophets a continual outcry upon the Priests
for mis-leading the people; yea, the Priests are chief in false judgments,
Jer. 26.8.
and injuries of the true Prophets. Accordingly, Pashar both prophesied lies,
Jer. 20.1.2, 6.
and did cast Jeremy into the stocks for prophesying truth: yea, Mat. 26.6, 5.
the High Priest himself falsely judges Christ to have spoken blasphemy; And
S. Peter tells the High Priest and his associates, that they were the builders
that despised the Corner stone, and crucified Christ. And thus we see it
plain in the Scripture, that the Priests and Prelates did err, even when our
Author ascribes that inerrability to them by which he would prove the
inerrability of Rome; yea, we see farther that this same opinion of
inerrability was the cause of their Error, as it is even now in the Romish
Papacy. Their presumption of not erring, was so far from being an Argument of
inerrability, that it made them to run into error, and to lead the people
after them, (blind after blind) into the ditch of error. This we see in
their own words; Jer. 8.18.
for thus they say, Come let us devise devices against Jeremiah, for the law
shall not perish from the Priest; yea, this presumption of not erring was
thought a very sure ground of erroneous judgment in this strange controversy,
whether Christ be Christ: Do any of the Rulers, or of the Pharisees believe on
him? Joh. 18.^8.
as if they should say, The Rulers, and the Pharisees, the Priests and the
Doctors cannot err; and they have judged this controversy, that Christ is not
Christ: And therefore without controversy men ought not to believe in Christ.

But is there then no use of judgment of the Church? yes surely very great;
The Church, yea, the Priests or Ministers of the Church, according to the
covenant of Levi, ought to speak the Law of God to the people, and judge
controversies thereby. And then as the Thessalonians hearing Saint Paul, we
must not think that we do so much hear their word, as the very word of God:
And this word being followed, will make a true and inerrable judgment, and
truth ever being one, it will ever cause unity.

And so are we come to the fourth point, and indeed the point most proper to
the present question, though the place be not proper to prove the Popish
unity, which this Author would pick out of it.

For whereas to raise this unity out of this text, he would thereby enforce an
absolute yielding to the judgment of the Church, without appealing to
Scripture, he must remember that in this judgment of the Church, the
Scripture is employed and included: And the including of it is the only right
means of causing true christian unity; For the case wherein a man, not hearing
the Church, is to be accounted an Heathen, is sinning against a brother: Now
sinning against a brother is plainly forbidden by Scripture, being contrary to
that Royal law of love, which commands a man to love his Neighbor as
himself: So that not to hear the Church in a case of sinning against a
brother, is not to hear the Church advising or judging according to Scripture:
And so upon the matter it is a not hearing of the Scripture speaking by the
mouth of the Church; and then see how unhandsomely arises the Inference of
this Author; That he that will not hear the Church judging according to
Scripture, may not appeal to the Scripture, that is, he may not appeal from
Scripture to Scripture.

But much more right and reasonable is this consequence, Heb. 13.7. Obey your
Rulers, etc. Take with you this Limitation; Which have spoken to you the Word
of God; which S. Paul gives even in the same Chapter. B. Bilson^ difference,
etc. part. 2.
That if a man shall wilfully not hearken to the Church in a case thus
evidently judged by Scripture, let such an one be accounted as an heathen. And
indeed, I can scarce think, that if this man who is questioned and accused by
his brother were guiltless, and so by the Word of God should be acquitted,
that this Author himself would have him taken for a heathen, being judged by
the Church, against Gods Law and Scripture, to be an offender. But in this
case the Hac caeci exclusione Pharisaei, sibi ipsis plus damni intulerunt quam
caeco; per hoc enim seipsos separarunt and a Christo, and ab omnibus fidelibus,
etc. Ferus in Ioh. 9.
curse lights on the false Judges that call good evil, as it does on those
that falsely damn Protestants.

And thus also the Cavaliers imaginary contrariety of two Churches judging one
against another, is prevented and removed through this steadfast rule of unity:
for two Churches judging one case, according to one right rule, (and such is
the Scripture) cannot pronounce of one case more then one judgment. And so the
man whom he would affright is put out of fear, for being tossed between two
damnations by two contrary judgments; for there is but one right judgment
according to the Scripture, and so but one damnation to be feared, which any
man may avoid by hearing the Church judging uniformely according to the
Scripture: for if the Church make a man a heathen against the Word of God, we
have seen that Ejectus quidem est a Templo, sed a Templi Domino inventus est.
Ferus ibid.
Christ did not take such a one for an heathen; for Christ took the blind man
into his company, whom the Jewish Prelates had unjustly excommunicated, and
made like an heathen. And no wonder; for Nicodemus, Christ's Disciple, takes it
for a confessed ground; neither is it denied by the Pharisees, That the Law is
Judge, and from the Law all Judgment should proceed: Joh. 7.51.
Does our Law (says he) judge any man? Accordingly, S. Paul tells the High
Priest, Act. 23.3.
That he sits to judge after the Law. Therefore when the Judgment is contrary
to the Law, it has in it a nullity: Now, in all Judgments according to the
Law, as there is a power and efficacy, so there is an harmonious unity.

But when there are two Popes, a Pope and an Antipope, or two successively,
that Judge one against the other, how are the poor Popish souls that depend on
a Popes word as a divine Law tossed miserably between two damnations? But this
while the children of the Church are safe from this distraction by the unity of
that judgment which proceeds from the constant unity of verity in the
Scriptures.

CHAP. VI.
The Testimonies of the Fathers, which the Cavalier in his fourth Chapter
alleges for the necessity of his conceited unity, are turned upon himself
and the Papists.

THis Champion of Rome goes from Scriptures, which indeed went from him, and
runs after Fathers, which also run from him: And although he please himself
much when he finds the word Unity, especially Books written for Unity; yet he
must still be put in mind, that all mention of unity in the Fathers does not
prove this unity which he undertakes. They write of unity in love, and unity
under lawful Pastors, that flocks be not divided by partial and
schismatic setting up Pastors against Pastors in one and the same Flock. But
our Authors business is, (as I said before, and himself now and then
remembers) that there must be an universal unity in all points of doctrine
decreed by the Pope, be they great or small; which he will never prove by any
Fathers to be absolutely necessary to salvation, or to a real unity in the
Church. Yet thus he strives to wrest out this unity.

-- Others have written and framed express Catalogues of all the heresies
which had risen in the Church of Christ our Lord, from his ascension to heaven,
till their own time; expressly showing hereby, that both the unity of the
Church was directly broken by the obstinate belief of any one doctrine, which
was held in disobedience to the same Church; and withal, that whosoever did so
break it, must forfeit the salvation of his soul thereby: And this was done
by Saint Epiphanius Bishop of Cyprus, by Phylastri^s Bishop of Brescia, who are
both cited to this purpose by the incomparable Saint Augustine, in his Treatise
de haeresibus ad quod vult Deum. Where himself also makes an exact Catalogue
of all the heresies which had sprung until his time; and where, by the way, I
must needs observe in a word, that he recounts diverse heresies which are held
by the Protestant Church at this day, and particularly that of denying prayers
and sacri^ices for the dead; and then he concludes in the end, that whosoever
should hold any one of them, were no S. Augustine (...) not, He is no
christian Catholic that should hold any one of them in weakness, s^^king the
Truth; for he says the cont^ar^, Epist. 162. But his words are, Every
christian Catholic should not believe these. And so we say, that no error
should be believed: Omnis Christia^^^ Catholicu^ is^a non d^bet credere, sed
non omnis qui ista no^ c^edi^, cons^^uenter debet s^ C^^istianum Cath^li^^m
(...) ad quod (...).
Christian Catholic.

But here I must challenge this Champion, first, that he deals not fairly
with us in putting in these words, In disobedience to the Church: For let the
world know that this is not our holding; That a different opinion being held in
a purpos^d disobedience to the Church is safe, or comp^tible with unity of
charity: but that some different opinions in points of doctrine, by darkness
of understanding or weakness of faith, not apprehended or bele^ved, yet not
without a purposed disobedience to the Church, may be compatible with unity and
salvation. Secondly, if it were true which he says, that unity were broken by
the obstinate belief of any one doctrine joined with disobedience to the
Church, how does not this make against Rome, which maintains her universal
Supremacy, and other errors directly against the Canons of the Church? Thirdly,
we deny Rome to be that Church which the Fathers speak of. Fourthly, this
Authors allegations make directly against his own end, and overthrow the
authority of Rome, which he goes about to establish: For, let him speak upon
his conscience and reputation; Were all those heresies, mentioned by Epiphanius
and Augustine, adjudged and condemned for heresies by the Church of Rome? If
not, then it seems, there may be heretics without any judgment of the
Church of Rome; and there may be heretics that hold some errors not adjudged
heresies by the Church of Rome: But if so, then what is become of this Authors
heresy described to be the obstinate belief of any one doctrine in
disobedience to the Church, the Church, in the Authors sense, being no other
then the Church of Rome?

How was this Church disobeyed in those things which she had not decreed? and
even his particulars of Purgatory was not yet built by any Papal or Church
Decree, nor Transubstantiation, much less Prayers and Masses for the delivery
of souls from the Purgatory, which had no being: But the prayers which were for
the dead, Dionysius (whom they call Areopagita) shows to have been requests
for that which they know already to be granted: and so Test^monies of the
happiness of them that had lived holily.

Quocirca petit d^vinus Pont^f^x ea quae a ^^o promiss^ s^nt, ei que grata
sunt, and plane conc^denda: in quo and animi sui constitutionem, quae ^onitatis
Divinae sp^ciem prae se serat, D^o, cui boni chari sunt, declarat; and ii^ qui
adsunt ut interpres, munera and bona quae sanct^s eventura sunt, exponit.
D^on^s. Ar^op. de E^^l^s. Hier. cap. 7.


prayers and sacrifices for the dead? Had the Church of Rome adjudged these at
this time to be points of faith? He cannot say it. How plain deceit then is
this, to seem to prove these to be heresies, because held in a disobedience
to the Church, when the Church in his Romish sense had not decreed the
doctrines to be believed which are contrary to these supposed heresies? Let us
now come to his particular citations, and see yet more particularly, how they
make not against us, but mostly against himself: He begins with Saint
Irenaeus, lib. 1. cap. 3. The Church having received this word preached, and
this faith as was showed before, and having spread the same over the whole
world, does diligently preserve it, as inhabiting one house; and does likewise
believe those things which are taught thereby, as having one soul and one
heart; and in the same conformity she preaches, and teaches, and delivers it,
as possessing but one mo^th. For though there be in the world different
expressions and tongues, yet the virtue and power of Tradition is but one and
the same: And neither those Churches which are found in Germany, nor those
others in Spain, nor those in France, nor they which are in the Eastern
parts, nor they which are in Egypt, nor they which are in Lybia, nor they which
are in the middle parts of the world, do believe or make tradition of doctrine
any otherwise in one place then they do in another: but as that creature of
God, the Sun, is one and the same in the whole world, so is the preaching if
the Truth. And those Prelates of Churches who have most power and grace of
speech, will deliver no other things but these; for no man is above his Master,
neither will such an one as has meaner Talents in speech make this doctrine
and Tradition less; but (since Faith is but one and the same) neither does he
enlarge it, who is able to speak much of it; nor that other diminish it, who
speaks less. I answer* that this place is produced improperly, in regard of
the Point; deceitfully, in regard of the Reader: For Irenaeus, in the second
Chapter next preceding, had set down a form of Faith, and a sum of chief
Articles agreeable to our Creed. And then in the third, whence this allegation
is taken, he says, that the Church, having received this faith, does
uniformly preach it, and with one Mouth through all nations; neither does the
more learned increase it, nor the less learned diminish it: Now this being
spoken of the principal points of faith, ^oth rather prove our unity in
fundamentalls, but not prove our Champions entire unity in inferior points;
therefore it comes not home to the Authors mark, but indeed he goes about to
deceive the Reader, when he brings it in as a proof of that which it proves
not.

Secondly, this place makes mightily against the Papacy, and that Confederacy;
for in the faith which Irenaeus sets down in the foregoing chapter, there is
not one Article concerning the Popes Supremacy, nor worshipping Images, nor of
praying in an unknown tongue, etc. These therefore being now decreed by the
Pope, are inlargements of faith; wherefore the Popes that thus enlarge the
faith, are by Irenaeus censured, not to be these Prelates of Churches, who
have most power and grace of speech; yea, not so good as the others of less
grace: but withal he censureth them, that they are above their master; and
their master being Christ, it fits right with the saying of Paul; That he sits
as God, and exalts himself above all that is called God.

Tertul. de praes. adversus Hae^^t.
He comes next to Tertullian. Tertullian shows plainly, that whosoever denies
any one doctrine of the Church, rejects all; for thus he says upon occasion,
Valentinus approves some things of the Law and the Prophets, some things he
disallowes; that is, he disallowes all whiles he approves some. The Author
here also imposes upon his Reader, if we may believe Tertullians (learned but
Romish) Adnotator, Pamelius: For (not to insist on this that the words are
Omnia improbat, dum quaedam reprobat, he disallowes all, whiles he refuses
some,) from Pamelius we learn, that these words are not spoken of all points
of faith proposed by the Church; much less if the Church be taken for the
Papacy; but of the books of the Law and the Prophets, which Protestants do by
no means reject. For this is Pamelius his sentence, immediately after these
words: Quod usque ad^o verum agnoverunt alii scriptores, ut disertis verbis
scribant, (and inter caeteros Damascenus) quod vetus Testamentum reprobaverit.
This by other writers is said to be so true, that they expressly write, (and
Damascen among others) that he refused the old Testament. And indeed he that
did deny the old Testament, did deny more then one doctrine of the Church,
(which is the Cavaliers point to be proved by this place,) for he denies many
doctrines, and fundamental ones, of the Law and the Prophets, yea of God
himself.

The next place does much accuse the Cavaliers need of Allegations, and yet
withal excuses him not from an endeavor to deceive his Reader: The place
alleged by him is this: Quod apud multos etc. That which is found to be one
amongst so many, is not to be thought to have crept in by error, but to have
been commended by Tradition. The place cited is this, Quod apud multos unum
invenitur, non est erratum sed traditum: That which is one among so many, is
not an error, but a thing delivered.

The question in hand was concerning the rule of Faith or the Creed; as the
Reader may see by comparing the thirteenth chapter, where the Creed is
rehearsed, and the end of the one and twentieth, where he says, That it
remained for him to show, whether the doctrine in the former rule came from the
delivery (or, if you will, Tradition, so it be not a Tradition beyond that
which is written, for there is no such in this rule of faith) of the Apostles:
And having refuted these objections, That the Apostles delivered not all; and
that they knew not all, he comes after to this objection, That the ^hurches did
not purely retain what the Apostles delivered, and thus he refells this
objection.

Age nunc, omnes erraverint, deceptus sit and Apostolus de Testimonio reddendo:
Nullam respexerit Spiritus sanctus, uti eam in veritatem deduceret; ad hoc
missus a Christo, ad hoc postulatus de Patre, ut esset doctor veritatis:
neglexerit officium Dei Villicus, Christi vicarius, sinens Ecclesias aliter
interim intelligere, aliter credere, quod ipse p^r Apostolos praedicabat.
Ecquid verisimile est, ut tot ac tan^a in unam Fidem erraverint? Nullus inter
multos eventus, est u^us exitus: Var^asse debuerat error doctrinae Ecclesiarum,
^aeterum quod apud multos unum invenitur, non est erratum, sed traditum:
Whereof the sum is this, that though the Holy Ghost the The Pope was not yet
Christ's Vicar, in the days o^ (...).
Vicar of Christ, had not looked to his office of leading the Church into
truth, yet there is no likelihood that so many Churches had erred into one
Faith: But the Faith, wherein there is such unity among many, should not be an
error, but a Truth delivered by the Apostles.

Now, this place is so far from saying that all Churches agreed in sin, all
points beyond and besides the Creed, that it speaks only of their agreement in
the rules of Faith, and doctrine of the Creed: And he says, that such an
agreement comes not by error which commonly is diverse; but by one uniforme
delivery and doctrine of the Apostles: So the Cavalier is still to seek for a
necessary unity in every small doctrine, and in points without the Creed.

Cyrill is mainly for the Protestants, Cyrill. Hier. Ca^.
even as himself alleges him; For we agreeably affirm That to be the
Catholic Church which teaches, without defect, all things necessary to
salvation; And, in the doctrine of faith, such things necessary to salvation,
are points fundamental.

Cyprian comes, Cyp. de Unit. Ec.
or is rather drawn in next, against his will and meaning; and thus the Author
produces him: The Church being stricken through by the light of our Lord, does
send her beams throughout the whole world; But yet that light which is cast so
far abroad, is but one and the same: She spreads her branches over the whole
earth, after a plentiful manner; She extends her flowing streams with great
abundance, and to a great distance: But yet is She one Head, and one Root,
and one Mother, who is fruitful by such store of issue. Now I think it were
needless to help a Reader to take this place from the Author: For it is
plain, to every eye, that this place speaks not of the unity of the Church in
all points of doctrine; but of their unity in one Love, and one mystical Body:
So that this place is not only unserviceable to the Author, but serves much
against him, and his lady Mother who cuts off noble and excellent members of
the Church from her; or rather her Peccatum vero quam magnum tibi exaggerasti,
quando te a tot gregibus scidisti^ excidisti enim teipsum, noli te fallere:
Siquidem ille est vere Schismaticus, qui se a communione Ecclesiasticae
Unitatis apostatam fecerit. Dum enim putas omnes a te abstinere posse, solum te
ab omnibus abstinuisti. Firm. in Epist. ad Cyp. sic Papam alloquitur.
self from the Church, if they do not submit to her universal Tyranny.

Cyprian it seems has not said enough, and therefore he must say more, but
indeed less: Let us see how the Cavalier rather teaches him, then suffers
him to speak: The same S. also, speaking of the sin of Core, Dathan, and
Abiram, implies that the one Church must not only be entirely believed, but
followed also in all her doctrines and directions: For he says, that though
Core, Dathan, and Abiram did believe and worship one God, and lived in the same
Law and Religion with Moses and Aaron, yet because they divided themselves from
the rest by Schism, resisting their Governors and Priests, they were
swallowed up quick into Hell.

Here, first, we may observe, how he tells his Reader what he would have
Cyprian say; for he says, not that Cyprian does speak it plainly, but the
S. implies: and what does he imply? That the Church must not only be entirely
believed, but followed also in all her doctrines and directions. But did Core,
Dathan and Abiram differ from Moses and Aaron in doctrine? His own place
denies it, which says; They did believe and worship one God, and lived in
Moses his Law and Religion with Moses and Aaron: And the place further assigns
the true fault; Division by Schism: They denied the authority of those whom
God had placed to be Governors over them.

Just the same sin into which Pope Pius the fifth drew the English Papists by
his Bull: so that this place makes exceedingly against Romish doctrine of
rebellion against Princes; such as those of the North, and in Ireland. But let
me give the Author one question at parting? Was Aaron to be followed in all
his doctrines and directions? what does the Author think of this doctrine
concerning the Calfe? Exodus 32.4.
These be thy Gods O Israel, which brought thee up out of the Land of Egypt.

S. Basil.
Saint Basil is next produced, thus speaking in Theod. They who are well
instructed in holy writ, permit not one syllable of divine doctrine to be
betrayed or yielded up; but are willing to embrace any kind of death for the
defense thereof, if need require: Hereupon the Author thus commenteth, That man
of God had been solicited by some to relent for a time, and to yield, though
it were but to a little; he refused in such sort as you have seen, and he did
it with much disdain to be attempted in that kind. Now let the Reader see
here the fairness of our Author; He speaks of Basils not yielding to a
little; and what was this little? Denying the son of God to be God of one
substance with the Father: Is this a little? Surely he should be a great
Heretic that should deny this little; So that this being not a little but a
great point, S. Basil does not speak against us but for us, who says, that in
these great points there should be no difference: Now it might be called little
by some, not for the little weight of the point, but for the litte odds in the
sound of the word; so that in the little difference of a syllable, the great
point lay affirmed or denied. And indeed it were better that death were
embraced, then any such point of divine doctrine should be betrayed. Besides,
^s there a desire on our side of betraying or delivering up any lesser points
of divine doctrine; but rather a charitable hope that men may be saved, though
differing in opinion concerning some lesser matters, by not knowing that they
be divine doctrines, or not reaching to them by a weak and inferior degree of
a faith? But who so will truly judge our maine quarrel with Romists, he
shall find it to be a defense of divine doctrine against humane fictions and
traditions. And Romists most grossly offend against the words and example of
S. Basil, who permit many syllables of the divine doctrine in the second
Commandment, forbidding worship of im^ges, to be left out of their
Catechismes; and the divine doctrine of half a Sacrament to be denied and made
void to the people; and the divine doctrine of praying in a known tongue in the
Church to be actually betrayed.

-- Saint Gregory Nazianzen is next, who (as our Author says) thus delivers
himself; Nothing can be more dangerous then those heretics, who* when they
run straight through all the rest, do yet with one word, as with some drop of
poison, infect the true and sincere faith of our Lord.

If this Champion had gotten this place by his own knowledge, he could not
well but take notice, that the sincere faith whereof Gregory speaks, is the
faith contained in the Nicene Creed, which Creed is set at the head of the
Tractate: and accordingly, the one word of which he speaks, as being dangerous
to the faith, is the word that gives not to Christ one Substance with the
Father. (...).
This word Nazianzen often names in this discourse; so that the Cavalier could
not well oversee it if he had seen the place; yea, he says plainly,
Haeresim Arianam subtili co^pendio brevi jam sublato hoc nomine intromissam.
Greg. Naz. de fide Orat. 51.
that it lets in the Arian heresy. And if it be thus, this Champion is yet far
from his Conclusion by this Antecedent, which must thus lead the way; It is
most dangerous to differ in one word of the Creed which concerns a point
fundamental, even the Deity of Christ; therefore it is most dangerous to
differ in points out of the Creed, which are extra-fundamentall, and of the
Popes decreeing. But let Romists look whether this place do not fight against
them, who thrusting the word Roman after, or into the word Catholic, have
drawn the souls of too many to believe in the Pope (or Popish Church) in
stead of God, and so have changed the very foundation of their faith.

Saint Hierome must have the same answer; no man denying but that for some one
word or two contrary to the faith or Creed in points fundamental, many
heresies have been, and ought to be cast out of the Church. It follows, Saint
Leo says, That out of the Catholic Church, there is nothing pure, According
to that of the Apostle, Whatsoever is not of faith is sin. But what does this
here, where the question is not, Whether they sin that be out of the catholic
Church; but, Whether they be out of the catholic Church that differ in any
small point of doctrine from some other members of the same Church? But because
this place wants help, he adds a second; If it be not one, it is no faith at
all. We acknowledge there is but one saving and fundamental Faith in Christ
Jesus, Ephesians. 4.5. Jude 3.
as but one Baptism; and this faith was once delivered to the Saints, and the
Saints still do so uniformely receive it, as that they who have any other
fundamental faith, have none at all. But if Romists will have faith to be one
in all points, then by this Popes doctrine they have no faith; for their faith
is not one in all points with the one faith once delivered to the Saints, nor
with the faith in the time of Leo; for in that one faith there was no worship
of Images, no universal Monarchy of the Pope, no worship of Bread.

The Cavaliers first place of Augustine I am loath to bring forth, to spare both
the Cavalier and the Reader: It is somewhat long, but very short of the
Cavaliers mark; it proves against the Donatists, That the Church in earth, and
the Church in heaven are not two Churches, but one. But who denies this? yea,
who denies the true Church on earth to be but one? and this is the Protestants
maine business to keep it one, though differing in some lesser points of
doctrine: And it is our Authors business to break this unity, even by this
place which he produces under a show of proving unity: but not proving by it
such an unity as by it he may make a division, he is feign to set a second
Buttresse to support his wall of separation: Thus he reareth it:

To show moreover, by the judgment of Saint Augustine, that the Church in her
doctrine was to be truly one he spoke thus of the Donatists, who called upon
the same God, preached the same ^ospel, sung the same Psalms, In exp^^catione
(...). 54.
had the same Baptism, observed the same Easter, and the like; in those things
they were with me, yet not wholly with me: in schism not with me, in
heresy not with me, in a few not with me; but in regard they were not with
me in a few, their being with me in many could not help them.

If the Cavalier had gone on in his Allegation, the very next words would have
given him an answer to the objection which he drew out of the former; for
those words say, that the Etenim fratres videte quam multa enarravit Apostolus;
unum dixit, Si illud defuerit, frustra sunt alia; Si linguis hominum loquar and
Angelorum, etc. Quam multa enumeravit? His omnibus multis desit una charitas;
illa numero plura sunt, haec pondere major est: Ergo in omnibus Sacramentis
mecum; in una charitate non mecum. Aug. in Psalm. 54.
one thing wherein they were not one was Charity. And the want of this he
proves out of Saint Paul (1 Cor. 13.) to make all the rest unprofitable. But
our question is not of want of charity, but of differing in some small point of
faith. True it is that this uncharitableness was backed with an error which
he called an heresy; That the Catholic Pertinaci dissentione formata in
haeresim schisma verterunt, tanquam Ecclesia Christi, etc. de toto te^ rarum
orb perierit, ubi futura ^omissa est, atque in Africa Donati part remanserit*
Au^u^t. ad quod vult (...)
Church was only in the part of Donatus; and so (as Saint Augustine infers)
that the Church was not catholic: But let our Author remember, That this
voucheth an Article of the Creed as denied by the Donatists; but with the
denial of any such Article he cannot charge us.

But yet, that their error did not kill nor cut them off Sunt igitur sine dubio
fratres. Opt. lib. 1. Non enim potestis non esse fratres, quos iisdem
Sacramentorum visceribus una matter Ecclesia genuit; quos eodem modo adoptivos
filios Deus Pater excepit. Id. l. 4. Sed qui sententiam suam quam vos falsam
atque perversam, nulla pertinaci, animositate defendunt, praesertim quam non
audacia suae p^aesumptionis pepererunt; sed a seductis, atque in error^m lapsis
parentibus acceperunt, quae^unt autem cauta ^ollicitudine veritatem, corrigi
parati cum invenitur, nequaquam sunt inter haereticos deputandi. Tales ergo vos
nisi esse crederem, nullas fortasse vobis literas mitterem. August. D^minis
dil^ct^ssimis, and merito praedicandi^ fratribus, Glorio, Ele^sio, etc. sed
Donaristis; and de quibus in hac Epistola: Nostrae communionis non estis.
Epist. 62.
all from being truly of the Church, except the error were accompanied with the
want of that one thing, which was true charity, we have great probabilities, if
not proofs out of Optatus and Saint Augustine; the former of which commonly
calls them brethren, and the later denies not but some of them might be saved.
But how dangerous or deadly soever their faults were, they fall directly on the
Popish faction, both in point of heresy and schism; for they hold the like
heresy to the Donatists, That the Church is only in the Popes party; and
accordingly, by uncharitable schism they cut off all those from their
communion, that are not of this party. And now he comes back again to
Irenaeus, as if he had found some new matter in him; Nay, Irenaeus (whom I
named before) implies, not only that it is necessary for a true Christian
Catholic to differ in no one point of the doctrine or faith from other
Christians; but he must withal not believe any thing after a different
manner; that is to say, upon a different motive from that for which it is
believed by other Christians.

But what does Irenaeus say, being thus called back again? He says nothing:
for our Author only says, that he implies; just as St. Cyprian before was
made to comply: But what does he imply? That it is necessary for a true
Christian Catholic to differ in no one point of the doctrine or faith from
other Christians. But is there any such sentence or implying in this Chapter?
Surely I doubt this Cavalier dealt too much upon trust, and he whom he
trusted, too much upon deceit. I have read over the Chapter, and can find no
such implying: But I find that which we often object against Romists
Traditions, Q^ale enim est Prophetarum and Domini and Apostolorum relinque^tes
nos voces attendere his nihil sani dicentibus? Ir. lib. 2. cap. 3.
Why should we leave the doctrine of the Prophets, the Lord and his Apostles,
and hearken to those men when they tell us their errors.

The other inference from Irenaeus, That a Christian must not believe by a
different motive from that by which it is believed of other Christians, is a
point that is mortal to Popery: For they, making the Popes word or authority
the motive of their faith, herein do differ from the motive of faith received
by the Christians in Grecia, Armenia, and AEthiopia; and so transgress most
dangerously, and, I doubt, fundamentally against this rule produced and
approved by the Author, as from Irenaeus, though there I cannot find it. And
now after a just examination of these Allegations, I cannot but infer, that,
There appears a manifest loss of the cause, when the places produced for
proof of it prove it not.

So that the Authors conclusion being no way made good by his allegations, it
is left still solitary, forsaken, and unproved: And whereas he says, For the
present it may suffice to have proved the necessity of perfect unity in the
Church; we must needs reply, That he has most imperfectly proved the
necessity of so perfect an unity. And for the other piece of his conclusion;
That indeed no reason can be given why, if there be allowed any more true
Churches then one, there should not be admitted as well two thousand as two: I
acknowledge with him, that not only no reason can be given of this, but also
of the Cavaliers speaking of no reason in this point: For it is not denied by
us that there is but one true Church; and if you make two, you may make two
thousand.

But we deny that every little difference makes two Churches of one; and this
neither the Author has proved, neither do his citations suffice to prove; but
let him here look to himself, and his fellow Romists, whether they be not in
danger of making two thousand Churches, who have made a second Church, called
the Church vertuall, the Pope, yea a third Church, the Pope and his mystical
body (for he is a mystery also, but of iniquity) which two Churches many
eminent members of the Catholic Church deny to be that one true Church
whereof they are members. In the mean time Romish uncharitableness in damning
Protestants remains still as a proved truth, seeing this Authors proofs for
an imaginary perfect unity, by which he undertook to prove it an untruth, do
not prove this unity; and no such unity proved, no untruth proved: so they are
still uncharitable, and Protestants do yet speak truth when they affirm
their uncharitableness.

CHAP. VII.
A consideration of the Cavaliers fifth Chapter; wherein (to the great danger
of the Papacy) that is proved by Scriptures and Fathers which we do not deny;
That out of one true Church of Christ no salvation is to be found.

SECT. I.
This ground yielded, does not produce any discharge, whereby the Romists may
be freed from uncharitableness in damning Protestants.

THe Cavalier fights on our side, and against his fellows; we are yet left in
the Church notwithstanding any thing he has said or alleged; and he has yet
left salvation to us, and uncharitableness to his own Papacy: And now we
being left in the Church, he goes about to prove, that out of this Church there
is no salvation; So, upon the matter, he proves that out of the Protestants
Church there is no salvation. But then what will become of the Papacy, which
will not be of one Church with saved Protestants? And indeed except it were to
speak for us, and against the Papacy, what need is there of these proofs for
a point not denied by us? For, we give him this at first only for the asking,
That out of the only true Church (the body of Christ) there is no salvation.

Yet will he needs go on to fight for a point which we confess; yea, withal
to fight for us against himself: And indeed even where he would seem to fight
against us, he does it so loosely and far-off, that it is hard to discern how
his blows do concern us.

Let us see his first onset, Since the Church of Christ our Lord is so truly
one, and but only one, it follows easily enough that no salvation can be had
out of this Church, and that every Heresy or Schism is sufficient to deprive
any soul thereof; but yet nevertheless to the end that men may be wholly
left without excuse, or rather that they may be the better warned to take heed
in time of those miseries, which otherwise they are to feel for all eternity:
I will strengthen also this truth by the Authority of some few Scriptures and
Fathers of the Primitive Church; for so by degrees it will easily and of it
self appear, that we Catholics are not faulty in that wherewith we are so
much charged. I confess it is hard to find out this Authors order and way;
his end or drift we know, but the way by which he would come to it is hard to
be seen: I am sure hitherto he has not made good his first steps in it, and
yet he would seem to proceed, as if he came nearer to his end by degrees,
when yet he is still on his threshold: for first, though the Church of Christ
be but one, and it do follow that no salvation can be had out of that one
Church, this (as has been noted) is no degree to the clearing of Papists
uncharitableness in damning Protestants. Again, it does not follow, that
every Heresy in the Popish sense, is sufficient to deprive any soul thereof;
and so Protestants may still suffer a false charge of Heresy to be laid on
them by Romists, and yet be sure enough of salvation. And thus not any degree
is yet made good toward the freeing of this charge of uncharitableness, justly
laid on the Romists; So that the matter stands still, though the Author moving
his pen thinks that the matter moves with it.

And for the Allegations that follow, which seem to labor for these two
points, That out of the Church is no salvation, And that Heresy and Schism
do put men out of the Church; these being proved no way hurt us or help the
Romists, but help us and hurt the Romists; among whom we have found most
fearful and bloody Schism, and we may discover damnable Heresies: but they
can never prove that Protestant doctrine maintains either Heresy or Schism;
but by that which they call Heresy, as relying wholly on Christ's merits and not
our own for redemption, and worshipping God in spirit and truth, and not
worshipping Images, etc. we serve the God of our Fathers.

SECT. II.
The Allegations of Scriptures and Fathers, made by the Cavalier, are more
forcible to exclude the Papists out of the Church then the Protestants against
whom they are produced.

THat being yielded which this Author endeavors to prove, I know not what to
do with his Allegations, but only to turn them against Romists.

Therefore we very well allow the place alleged out of Esaias, Esaias 60.12. Gens
enim and Regnum, etc.
and say it makes against the Pope, who does not submit himself to the Church
in a general Council; and so does the place of Matthew (formerly alleged and
answered) upon the same Reason: And we very well allow those places of Paul to
Titus and Timothy, Tit. 2.
as making much against the Pope and his adhaerents, and say that they give us
just ground of avoiding him, being Heretical and Schismatic after many
admonitions. But this Author did wisely in not naming Timothy in his margent
but Titus, though he allege these words out of 1. Tim. 4.1, 2. That they
attend to doctrines of Devils, and spirits of Error: That they are Liars and*
Hypocrites, lest the Reader looking to the place might find this which
follows, Forbibbing to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats; which
we know that Protestancie does not: but if Papistry do, then who are now his
Heretics, Hypocrites and Liars, excluded from the Church, and so from
salvation? He did also very discreetly in his namelesse alleging some pieces
out of 2. Tim. 3. where is mention of Iamnes and Iambres -- and to make use of
the verse foregoing, having the form of godliness, and the verses following,
That they are ever learning, but without attaining to the knowledge of the
truth; but left out the middle verse, which is this, Of this sort are they
which creep into houses, and lead captive silly Women laden with sins, and led
with diverse lusts: which words being notable marks of seducers, for what
reason the Author left them out he best knows; but if we may believe their
own Women gospellers the trumpetors of their praises. Watsons Quodl. preface.
And Quodl. 2. in the margin.

A reason why some Catholic Gentlemen that live about London were
discontented, when wanting their wives three or four or more days, they must
be forsooth. in the holy exercise, etc.


Priest, it does rightly hit with some Romish proselite-makers; so that the
simple Reader, if he had seen this place wholly alleged, might perchance have
thought he had seen, in these, the very Iamnes and Iambres of these times.

His last Scripture is out of S. Paul to the Galathians, where striving to
prove that the word Sects in Latin, is Heresies in the Greek, he (somewhat
Heretically I doubt even when he speaks against Heresy) leaves the decreed
Latin to follow the Greek: But this being taken for a fault in the Latin, let
the word be as it is in the Greek, and then to the shame of the Papacy we
read indeed, that Heresies are works of the flesh, which certainly those are
most likely to fall into that strive to set up a fleshly monarchy, and to
abound in the glory Vides omne^ Ecclesiasticum zelum servere sola pro dignitate
tuenda: honori totum datur, sanctitati nihil aut parum. Ber. de Confid. lib. 4.
cap. 2.
and wealth of the world: For such men will sell heaven, and truth, and the
Gospel for a mess of Pottage, even for base and transitory vanity; It is the
sentence of Gods spirit, that where is the love of the World, there is not the
love of God; and where is not the love of God, there cannot be the love of the
truth; 1. Ioh. 2.15. Ioh. 8.42.47. 1. Ioh. 5.6. 1. These. 2.10.
and where is not the love of truth, there is a giving up to strong delusions
to believe lies, that they all may be damned who believed not the truth. Now
among innumerable examples of the Papacies love of the world, and preferring
temporal greatness and wealth above the truth, let the lamentable conference
between The Cardinal of Volterra tells Pope Adrian, that no reformation could
be made that would not notably diminish the rents of the Church: Pope Adrian
said the condition of Popes was miserable, that they could not do good though
they d^si^ed and endeavored to do it. Hist. Con. Trid. lib. 1. Nec aliud
quicquam etiam nunc obstar, quo minus Ecclesia in pristinum nitorem restituatur
quam ambitio and avaritia. Ferus in Iean. 11.
Adrian the sixth and the Cardinal be a lively proof and spectacle; where the
poor Pope (and herein not a Pope, and therefore he did well soon to be
gone) speaking of the necessity of reformation; There was no consideration of
the truth of this necessity, but a plain confutation of whatsoever truth there
was in it, by the Popes Audit and Exchequer, even by worldly profit.

But the Scriptures thus being lost, except only in making against their own
Papacy, he comes to Fathers; not so much to hurt with them, as to be hurt by
them.

Tertullian (says he) affirms, That Heretics cannot be accounted
Christians: But of what heresies does he speak there? Of any Protestant
opinions? He does not say that any Protestants are heretics: He repeats there
a rule of Pamelius calls it Regulam, aus Symbolum. And again, Nostrae Religionis
Articuli vocantur hic Regula. De Praescript. cap. 14.
faith, as it were the body of a Creed, consisting of diverse Articles; Do the
Protestants deny any of these Articles? True it is, that of this rule of faith
he says, Nullus habet apud nos quaestiones, etc. There are no questions among
us of this rule, but those which Heresies make, and do make Heretics. But we
do not make question of this rule, and so are not made heretics by it: But
they do rather question this rule, that bring in another faith; the Popes
Oracles, Those of Pius the fourth.
and new Articles. For, whereas Tertullian here says, Fides in regula posita
est: The faith is set down in that rule, which before he rehearsed; the
Romists faith is not in that rule: For, there was not one word of the Pope, nor
of Christ's being under the form of bread by Transubstantiation; but, In Coelos
ereptum, sedere ad dextram Patris; misisse vicariam vim Spiritus Sancti qui
credentes agat: Being taken away into heaven, he does sit at the right hand of
his Father; and he has sent his Vicar (not the Pope, but) the power of the
Holy Ghost, which should lead those that believe.

And in the 33. Chapter, making an Inventory of certain Heresies, amongst
others, he names this, which, I doubt, is some kin to the Papacy; Timotheum
instruens, Nuptiarum quoque interdictores suggillat: He says, That S. Paul
instructing Timothy, does condemn the forbidders of marriage.

Saint Cyprian is next brought in to say that thousand times produced sentence,
that, Out of the Church there is no salvation: Hereunto is added, that There is
no reward of any suffering whatsoever; neither is he a Christian that abides
not in Christ's doctrine and faith. But in all this he does not say that the
Protestants are not in the Church, neither that they remain not in Christ's
Doctrine and Faith; but it may rather concern the Papacy, which has made a
new Church against the Church of Christ; and a new Faith, by adding twelve
Articles more to the former. It does also plainly show them that they,
suffering for Treasons of Powder, Rebellion, etc. cannot expect thereby a Crown
of faith, but a punishment of perfidiousnesse.

Saint Augustine is next alleged, and he uses the like or very same words,
and so the like or the same answer might serve. But indeed Augustine so
punctually speaks against the Papacy, and pierces it through, that no one
place can well be lost, because every one is serviceable against the Papacy
for which it is produced; These are the words first alleged out of Saint
Augustine, Would you have men so blind and deaf as not to hear or read the
Gospel, where they may know that faith our Lord left to his Apostles concerning
his Church? Now, what the Papists will answer to this I know not, who make many
men so blind, as not to read at all, and so deaf, as not to hear the Gospel
but in Latin: And secondly, he says that Saint Augustine puts himself to
show, That this is that Church of Christ which is spread over the whole world.
Who can more plainly say, that the Roman Papacy is not this Church, whose
universal power and extent is denied by other Patriarchs, and is unbeleeved,
yea, and unknown in a great part of the Christian world?

The last place out of Augustine, seconded with the consent of Cardinal
Perron, he turns to this use, That Catholic is not only a name of belief
and faith, but of charity and communion; which whosoever should want, should
also want salvation. But withal I must say, that long before I knew this
opinion of Perron, I believed this truth; and I also believed that it did make
mightily for us, and mightily against the Papacy. That it makes mightily for
us, I have showed in the first Chapter, who do embrace a catholic love with
the whole body of Christ, which is his Church. That it makes mightily against
the Papacy, I have showed in the second Chapter, because it excludes from love
and communion many eminent parts of the Church; even so much of the Church and
body of Christ as extends beyond subjection and obedience to the Papacy: And
indeed, this Champions allegations do so fight for us against his own
Papacy, that a suspicious Reader may doubt he has been hired by us.

But by the next allegation, perchance, he thinks his suspicion may be
somewhat cleared, where thus he commenteth in the behalf of his mother:

Saint Hierome writing to Pope Damasus, says (not only of the cathol^ck
Church indefinitely, but denoting that to be the Roman) that that Church is
the Arc, out of which whosoever lives, shall be drowned in the deluge; and,
that that Church is the House, out of which whosoever should eat the Lamb,
were a profane person. But does Hierome here denote the catholic Church both
for breadth and length to be Roman; and no Church to be catholic which was not
Roman, that is, under the Roman subjection? this was far from his meaning:
He meant that at that time the Roman Church was, Ecclesia Occidentalis sive
Romana, etc. Catholicae Ecclesiae non contemnendum membrum. Cass. de Off. pii
viri.
by one faith, the same with the catholic Church, an^ in union with it as a
member of the body; and that out of this one Church, wherewith Rome was then
one in faith, there was no salvation.

Secondly, He did not say that that Church shall be the Arc out of which
shall be no salvation: but that Church is the Ark^; showing what it then was,
and not what it shall be.

Indeed, the Papacy, (even the Man of sin, the Head and his members in the
Mystery of iniquity) now call themselves the Church of Rome: But Rome at the
best had never Religion and the Church faster tied to it, then Jerusalem; and
therefore we may take leave to say of Rome as it was said of Jerusalem, Esaias
1.21.
How is the faithful City become an Harlot? It has been manifestly proved,
that this Mystery of iniquity or Papacy is far different from the ancient
Church of Rome; and Saint Hierome himself has taught us, that Rome should be
the seat of Antichrist: and he did not mean, that when Rome is the seat of
Antichrist, she should be taken for the Arc out of which no man should be
saved: Therefore this place that made for Rome then, while she was a pure part
of the catholic Church, makes against her now, when she is the seat of the
Man of sin, or Antichrist; and they that might be invited to come to her then,
as an eminent part of the Arc and catholic Church, may now be driven out
from her by a voice from heaven, Rev. 18.4.
Come out of her my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye
receive not of her plagues.

There follow two places out of Lactantius, whereof the first indeed says for
us, and against these Romists that are divided from us and our Church: That
they that enter not into the Temple of God, or depart out of it, shall be
deprived of the hope of salvation. But the second place, I know not how it may
serve for the point in hand, but it otherwise is an wholesome exhortation for
Romists; and I wish it may do good to the Author: No man must flatter himself
with an obstinate kind of contention for the questions here, about salvation
and life; which, if it be not watchfully and diligently provided for, it will
be extinct and lost.

The Cavalier ends in a tempest, which he pulls down on his own head; S.
Fulgentius has this dreadful saying, wherewith I will conclude this point,
etc. where he brings in Fulgentius saying, That neither Baptism, nor Alms,
nor Martyrdom can be of any benefit toward his salvation that holds not unity
with the Church. A place indeed that ought to be dreadful to the Romists, for
their Schism described in the second Chapter; but no way dreadful to us, for
our catholic Charity expressed in the first.

SECT. III.
The Cavaliers endeavor to prove that the Protestants and Papists cannot be
both members of this one Church, does not absolve the Papists from
uncharitableness.

ANd having thus concluded the Allegations, he thus gives a reason of his
conclusion; Nor will I so much distrust either the attention or the discretion
of my Reader, as to think that I need press this point any further. A saying
good at last, but much better at first; for if there had bin at first no
distrust of the Readers discretion, there had been no need of any one of
those Allegations, which have been brought forth to prove a point not denied:
There is but one Church, out of which there is no salvation. But let us see
what immediately follows: So that now in the next place it will only remain
to be considered and resolved, whether or no both the Catholics and the
Protestants can be truly said to be parts and members of this one and self
same Church. For if they cannot, the case in question is already judged, and
there will be no color of Reason, why either of us should hereafter be charged
with want of charity, for affirming that the other is not saveable without
repentance of his Religion. Behold a knot of strange things knit together by an
invisible cohaerence, or a visible incohaerence. For first, whereas he says,
that in the next place It will only remain to be considered, whether the
Protestants and Romists may be truly said to be parts and members of this one
Church: For my part I am utterly of opinion that this does neither in the next
place, nor at all remain to be considered toward the Authors end, which is
the saving of Rome from uncharitableness in damning Protestants.

For Protestants may be members of the true Church wherein is salvation, and
Romists may be out of it; and yet Romists may be uncharitable for damning
Protestants, who are in the Church wherein is salvation. But since he is out
of the way, I will thus show it to him: His way of clearing Rome from this
charge of uncharitableness, has been hitherto by proving it an untruth; and
his way of proving it an untruth, by proving that Protestants are truly in the
way of damnation: And to prove this again, he has showed, that there is but
one Church in which is salvation, and from which men are excluded by Heresy
and Schism.

Now as I think, in the next place, to go on in his way he should prove that
Protestants are guilty of such Heresy and Schism as separate them from this
one Church, and so from salvation: For then had he slain them outright with
a true damnation, and had saved his mother Rome from S. John's truly mortal
uncharitableness. But it seems we are clear in these points, and therefore
the Author would not go against his conscience in a false accusation;
wherefore let his silence be taken for a consent and confession: But then it
seems the question is at an end, we are absolved, and Rome is condemned.

And indeed so it should be; but he is resolved still to say on, though not
to the purpose; For to what purpose is this, that the Protestants and Romists
are not one Church, toward proving Protestants to be in the state of
Damnation, whereby only Rome can save her self from uncharitableness in
damning us? Surely, this is so far from proving Protestants to be in the state
of damnation, that it is more likely to prove them to be in the state of
salvation, and Romists in damnation. For Protestants being parts of the true
Church, by true faith and love are sure to be saved; and Romists not being of
this Church wherein Protestants are saved, are by his own Allegations in
danger to be damned: So Romists are both brought into the danger of damnation,
and the charge of uncharitableness laid on the Romists may still stand true,
because they falsely damn Protestants for being in the state of salvation.

A second strange position is this, That if the Protestants and Romists, be
not of one Church, then there will be no color of reason, why either party
should be charged with want of charity for affirming that the other is not
saveable without repentance of his Religion: For there is neither reason,
verity, nor charity in affirming that Protestants who may be saved by their
Religion, are not saveable without repentance of the same Religion. But this
vanity if not impiety, has been blown away in the answer to his third
Chapter. But if this unreasonable position be taken out of the way, which is
made the ground and reason of the future discourse (concerning Protestants and
Romists being of two Religions) then the discourse built on it falls to the
ground* for indeed to what purpose is it to prove that Protestants and Romists
are of two Religions, except the Author may hereby save Romists from
uncharitableness, in falsely condemning the Protestants for being in a good
religion, different from their own bad Popery? For that is his errand, and
this errand has he lost in losing this last monstrous position, which he
made for a bridge to his errands end.

So, for ought I see, this Cavalier is at the end of his journey in the midst
of his way; and the rest of his walk is a wandering, and this voyage a sailing
up and down from his harbor.

CHAP. VIII.
Wherein the sixth Chapter of the Cavaliers is brought to examination, which
has this title, that Protestants and Catholics (meaning Papists) cannot be
of one Religion, Faith, and Church: in two Sections.

SECT. I.
First, diverse untruths of the Cavaliers are discovered touching the difference
of Doctrine, Sacraments and Discipline, which are between Protestants and
Papists. Secondly, an objection taken away, that Protestants have made a
reformation without ordinary Mission and Miracles. Thirdly, the censures of
Lutherans against other reformed Churches, not sufficient to prove either of
them out of the Church.

ROme is left bleeding in her uncharitableness, the bridge being broken down
by which the Authors suppy should have come to her rescue; so the business
seems to be ended, and therefore as of the tumult at Ephesus, so of the throng
of words that follow, it may be said, Acts 19.40.
There can be no cause given of this concourse: For though the Author have his
purpose, and Protestants and Romists be not of one religion, yet Rome may be
uncharitable for condemning Protestants who are of the true religion: Yea,
Rome, by the Author being cast out from the Church, if Protestants be in it,
may be in the state of damnation, for the Authors own title and ground, even
because there is but one Church and salvation, whereof Protestants and Romists
cannot be both partakers. And now what would this Cavalier have his Antagonist
and Answerer to do? would he have him to prove for Romists, that they are in
the Church, when himself proves that they are not? surely I confess, that
though there be some untruthes by which he would prove that Romists are not
of the same saved Church which Protestants, yet there are some truths that I
cannot answer, but must confess that they prevail against me in putting
Romists out of this Church.

I will first take notice of his untruths, To make a Religion so entire as may
make men to be of one Church, says the Cavalier they must believe the same
doctrine, partake the same sacraments, and be obedient to the same discipline
and Prelates. Here, first I deny that there must be an entirenesse in all
points of doctrine; and if he will look back, he may see that he has
labored to prove it, but has lost his labor. Again he has been told, that
if all have not just seven sacraments, yet they may be saved. Thirdly, if they
be not under the Pope, and in that regard not under the same prelates, they
may be of a very good religion, and of the one saved Church; For so are the
Greek, Armenian, and Abissine Christians.

A second untruth is his inference upon a catalogue of differences; For, says
he, we differ in prime points, etc. Hereupon his look tells us he would
infer, that we are in some danger for differing in these points: But I
refer him for the proof of our safety to Examen pacifique de la doctrine des
Huguenotes: translated into English under the title of the Catholic Moderato^.
one that shows himself a far truer Roman Catholic then this Cavalier,
whose business is clean contrary to this Cavaliers, even to prove that
Protestants are not damnable, nor of a different Church, for their differences
from Romish Catholics. And until the Cavalier have refuted his Arguments, I
shall hold these his objections of differences to be but dead words, already
vanquished and slain. And let him take this with him as a note, that the title
Que les Catholics and Huguenotes ^^accordent tellement en^ qu^^ls doctrine
sont d'une mesme Foy. and Religion.
of the first chapter of that Book is the plain affirmative whereof the title
of this chapter is the^ Negative. The truth is, the points which this Champion
names are Popish errors, and bring the danger on their side; and we are the
more safe for differing from them, and they the more unsafe for differing from
us; and withal unsafe again for uncharitable censuring us. And indeed their
danger is so great in the point of justification, (one of these prime points)
and making their works their Saviors, that they who hold this error, and
thereby withdraw their trust from Christ Jesus, if they be in that which is
called the Church, they are but in it as chafe in the Barn mixed with the
corn, but to be blown away with the fan into an unquencheable fire. And
whereas he expresses this difference thus; We differ about the justification
of souls, and the value which the death and grace of Christ our Lord has
imparted to the works of the Children of God: He is here again chargeable,
with an untrue and an unsound expression: For we differ from right Papists
about the disvalue and unworthiness which our persons and our Vide autem ne
hic cristas ^rigas, ac opera tua plus aequo extollas, jamque merita tua
enumerare incipias, que^admodum hypocritae faciunt, ac si debitorem sibi Deum
operibus suis constituant; cum certum sit, opera nostra desicere in numero,
pondere, and mensura; quae, si appendant in statera Dei, inveniuntur minus
habentia: unde David: Non intres in judiciu^, etc. Ferus in Epist. ad Romans cap.
2. Been aute^ observa verbum gratis, quia nihil ope^^tes, neque vicem
reddentes, justificamur, qua^doquid^m antea peccatores and inimici eramus. Id.
Ib.
corruptions impart to the works which have otherwise some goodness in them as
they come from the grace of Christ: so that in regard of the imperfection which
they have from our corruption, we dare not stand upon them before the Justice
and Judgment of God for our justification: But we think it most safe to set
between Gods Justice and our souls a perfect Righteousness, even the
Righteousness of Christ Jesus our Head: For Christ is the end of the Law (and
a true commensurate Satisfier of the Divine Justice) for every one that
believes. And in regard of our own works, we may say with one that had more
good works, and works more good then the best of the Romists: Enter not into
judgment with thy servant, O Lord, for no flesh is righteous in thy sight;
this Saint was Gods servant, yet he desired that God would not enter into
judgment with him: These then that will have God to enter in judgment with
them, it is very likely they are not the servants of God; but whatsoever they
be, they may be sure by this Text, they shall not be justified in his sight.

He comes to a third point; and therein he has also many and manifest
untruths: His point is this, That it is the Pride of the man in his
disobedience to the Church, and not the importance or weight of the doctrine,
that makes the Heresy. And this he would prove, because Saint Augustine
accounts some things heresies which are points of small importance; and because
the Donatists are accounted heretics for that which in S. Cyprian was not
heresy; and again, because Saint Cyprian says, (nothing to the Cavaliers
purpose) that the doctrine of Novatianus was not worth the inquiring, because
he was not of the Church. Here are diverse untruths met together; a first is the
Position it self* That it is Pride and Disobedience to the Church that makes
the heresy: A second, that if it were disobedience to the Church, yet it is
not disobedience to the Cavaliers Church, the Pope and his Adherents: Thirdly,
It is not true, that those places and proofs produced by him do prove his
point of Pride to be heresy. But before I come to a more exact consideration
of these particulars, I cannot but deliver him back again his scornful
objection which he threw at us in passing to this point, as nothing accusing
us, but him that gave it without reason; That the Protestants have taken upon
themselves to be the Reformers of the world, without ordinary Mission or
Miracles. That our Ministers have not ordinary Mission, is an untruth so
strongly refuted, that there needs a great deal of impudence or ignorance to
affirm it, without new and more proof: And for Miracles to make good a
Reformation, I never heard that the very Priests of Baal did require them of
Iehu, nor the idolatrous Jews of Hezekiah and Josiah. And indeed, they might
well think there should be no absolute need of new Miracles to them that
brought in no new Law, but reformed the Church according to the old, which at
first was delivered as it were in a cloud of Miracles. Neither is it necessary
that our Reformation not bringing in a new Gospel, but reforming according to
the Gospel once delivered to the Saints, and at first confirmed by signs,
should be now again confirmed by Miracles. But we leave Romish Miracles to be
the Remove antur ista vel figmenta mendacium hominu^, vel portenta fallacium
Spirituum; aut enim non sunt vera quae dicuntur, aut si haereticoru^ aliqua
mira facta sunt, magis cavere debemus, quod cum dixisser Dominus, quosdam
futuros esse fallaces, qui nonnulla signa faciendo etiam Electos, si fieri
posset, fallerent, adjecit, vehementer commendans, and ait, Ecce praedixi
vobis. Aug. de unit. Eccles. cap. 16. Omnem potentiam Antichristi ostensura est
in signis and prodigiis mendacibus. Agobard. Sermon. de Trinit.
marks of the Man of sin, and his deformation of the Church, whose coming
must be with signs and lying wonders; and accordingly we think when Lipsius
wrote a Book of the wonders of Montague and Hall, he did by that Book prove,
That the Pope is Antichrist.

But now to come to his false Position, That it is pride and disobedience to
the Church that makes the heresy; I must tell him, that he has diverse of his
own Romish Doctors, and those not ignoble, that hold the contrary; and
therefore he must not blame his Reader if he believe them before a Cavalier:
for some hold, Nonnulli Authors non ignobiles, aliquid diversum inter
haereticum and haeresim commenti sunt: ^pinantur enim haeresim proprie
appella^^ posse quemcunque e^^orem fidei opp^situm secun^u^ se, absque aliquo
respectu and habitudine ad proferentem; and ideo conced^nt haeresim posse
asseri ab eo qui haereticus non sit. In hac sententia sunt Turrecremata,
Cas^ro. Simancas, Co^arruncas, Gabriel, Cordu^a. Albe^^^nus, Lo^ca 22. Sect. 1.
Disp. 38.
That not the pride of the person makes the heresy, but that an heresy may
properly be called any error contrary to faith considered in it self, without
any respect to the deliverer of it. And for this opinion are brought forth
these great ones, Turrecremata, Castro, Simancas, Couarruncas, Gabriel, Corduba.

Secondly, a Proposition may be heretical, as some Romists say, though the
contrary has not been decided and decreed by the Church. Accordingly we
read again, Non tamen hae solum assertiones haereticae sunt, quae definitae
sunt a Conciliis, vel a Pontifice, sed plures aliae; quod patet, quia haec
Prositio, Deus non est Trinus and Unus, etiam ante co^demnatione^ Arrii
haeretica fuit. Lorca Ib. Disp. 39. n. 6.
That those are not only heretical assertions which are defined by Counsels
or the Pope, but many others; which is plain, because this Proposition, God is
not Three and One, was heretical before the condemnation of Arrius. The like
he affirms of the heresy of Nestorius: yet again, to make the matter more
plain, he says, Quicquid in sacra Scriptura express co^tinetur, ut nulla
obscuritas sit in sensu verborum, assertionem contrariam haeretica^ efficit,
etiam ante definitionem Ecclesiae. Id. Ib. n. 8.
Whatsoever is expressly contained in Scripture, so that no obscurity be in
the sense of the words, does cause the contrary assertion to be heretical.
And accordingly, Propositio vero Scripturae vel Ecclesiae definitioni contraria
vocatur haeretica. Vasq. in 1. Disp. 6. n. 8.
Vasques says not only such a Position is called heretical, which is
contrary to the definition of the Church, but that which is contrary to
Scripture. And that we may come to Saint Augustine, we shall find that this
contrariety to Scripture was that which Saint Augustine accounted heresy, and
not contrariety to the Pope and his Decrees. For thus he says in the small
matter produced by the Cavalier, called by him Putting off shoes in prayer:
Est alia haeresis nudis pedibus semper ambulantium, eo quod Dominus dixerit ad
Moysen, vel ad Iosue, Solve calciamentum de pedibus tuis: et quod Propheta
Esaias nudis pedibus jussus fuerit ambulare. Inde ergo haeresi^ est, quia non
propter corporis afflictionem sic ambulant; sed quia TESTIMONIA ^a^ter
intelligunt: Aug^^t. ad quod vul^ Deum. de Haeres.
There is an heresy of those that ever go bare foot, because God said to
Moses, or Josua, Put off thy shoes from thy feet: and because the Prophet Esaias
was command^d to go bare foot. But this is an heresy, not because they go
thus for the humbling of the body; but because they thus understand the
Testimony of Scripture. So we see that the Author is plainly told by S.
Augustine, that it was the falsifying of divine Testimonies, even the alleged
places of Scripture, that gave their error the name of an heresy. And it were
pity to put the Cavalier to prove that at this time the Pope had decreed and
decided, That men should not put off their shoes in prayer. But the truth is,
the Fathers take this word heresy Quicquid con^ra veritatem sapitl a^esis est,
etiam vetus consu^tudo. Tertul. de Virg. vel. cap. 1. Haereticus est qui
alicujus temporalis co^modi, and maxim gloriae principatusque sui gratia,
^alsas ac novas opiniones gignit, vel sequitur. August. de utilit. cred. ad
Honorat. cap. 1. Haeresis Grae^e ab Electione vocatur; quod scilicet
unusquisque id sibi eligat, quo^ melius sibi esse videtur, etc. Isidor. Etym.
lib. 7. cap. 3.
sometimes in a large sense, accounting that an heresy which was an erring
against any truth of Scripture: but heresy in the most proper, full, and
killing sense, has been taken to be an error Regula quidem fidei una omnino
est, sola immobilis, and irreformabilis ^^e^endi, s^ilicet in unum Deum, etc.
hac lege fidei manente, caetera j^m disciplinae and conversationis admittunt
novitate^ correctioni^. T^^t. ^e vel. Virg. cap. 1. Haeretici ve^ itatis exules
sani and verissimi Symb^l^ desertores. Optat. lib. 1. Haec Reg^la a Christo, ut
probabitur, instituta, nullas habet apud nos quaestiones, nisi quas haeretici
inferant, and quae ha^^reticos faciant. Tertul de praescrip. c. 1^ Al^xand^r
ait eum qui ignorant^r credit aliquid contra ea quae sunt i^ sacra Scriptura,
non pertinens ^^ A^ticulos fidei, non esse haereticum. Vasq. in 2. Disp. 120.
cap. 2.
against the Rule of Faith, even such an error as puts men off from the
foundation; for a soul being put off from the foundation, which is God in
Christ Jesus, cannot possibly be saved. Yet it cannot be denied, but that if
lesser errors be so plainly discovered to be contrary to the Scriptures, that
this contrariety is made manifest to him that erreth, this error being
afterward maintained may be a damnable heresy; and the reason only be this,
Because such an heretic erreth in the foundation of Faith; for he does not
believe that God is true; and not believing Gods Truth, he cannot believe the
truth of his promises in Christ Jesus. And because such lesser errors were
sometimes plainly (at least, as some holy men thought) convinced to be
contrary to Scriptures, therefore these errors by them might perchance be
called heresies. But yet it cannot be certainly affirmed by any man, that
what himself sees to be manifestly against Scriptures, and has delivered
this, which seems manifest unto himself, to another, that the other to whom
he has delivered it, does see it also to be manifest; therefore no man,
merely upon such a manifestation, can say directly and positively, That such
an one does wilfully not believe the Truth of God in the Scriptures. Wherefore
these smaller errors, though they might be called heresies at large, in regard
that they were errors showed to be contrary to the Scriptures, and so there was
a possibility that they might be held wilfully against the known truth; yet
because there is also a possibility that it might not Qui ignorans e^^at,
hae^eticus non est. Lorca in 22. Sect. 3. Disp. 47. n. 24. Magis co^munis and
probabilior sententia in hac re in duobus posita est: Unum est, Nullum errorem
contra fidem ex igno^antia etiam culpabili, modo non sit affecta, esse
haeresim. Vasquez quo supra. Item cap. 3. Non satis est ad pertinaciam, si quis
admoneatur a viris gravissimis -- Zelosi sunt, qui non ex superbia and
obstinatione, sed ex quadam ignorantia, falso persuasi sunt suam sectam
veritati ac Evangelio consentaneam esse -- Hujusmodi zelosi, quia non peccant
ex malitia, sed ignorantia, fae^e a Deo mis^ricordiam consequuntur. B^can.
Manu. Praelud. 1. Constat multos viros ac foeminas esse in Germania, qui quidem
habentur Lutherani; sed tamen quia pertinaces non sunt, non debent cense^i
haeretici, sed errantes. Non enim advertunt doctrinam Lutheranam, cui ab
infantia addicti sunt, contrariam esse Ecclesiae Catholicae, quae vere
Catholica est. Id. lib. 5. cap. 13.
be known to those that erred, that their error was contrary to the
Scriptures, the sentence of killing and damning on such cannot certainly be
pronounced. For indeed, no Father nor Divine can affirm, That one erring not
wilfully, but by weakness or ignorance, in such a point as praying bare
foot, cannot believe in Christ Jesus, or, so believing, cannot be saved. But
howsoever, in all this which he has all^dged, there is nothing that makes for
the Cavalier, but rather all against him. For it is still an error contrary to
the Scriptures that makes the Heresy; and not pride and disobedience against
the Pope and his decisions. And indeed this truth was so strong, and so
prevailed against the Cavalier, that it forced him to speak some part of it,
even against his own proposition: For he says thus; The Pride wherewith they
presumed to abuse Scripture, and to impose such a fond law upon men's
consciences, and a resolution not to leave it when they were commanded by the
Church, was that which made it Heresy in them: Where the abusing of Scripture
is indeed the chief if not only cause of giving it the likeness of Heresy.
For imposing it as a law upon men's consciences, I hope this Author will not
take for Heresy, but rather for a virtue, seeing he has often told us, that
those who suppose their religion to be true, are not to blame if that they tell
others that they are in danger by holding the contrary. Howsoever I am sure
this is not the life of Heresy, as the Cavalier presently tells us in the next
page; But maintaining a doctrine and discipline contrary to the judgment and
commandments of the Church. But how he could know by the art of divination
that these his barefoot Heretics, had a resolution not to leave their errors
when they were commanded by the Church, the Church being taken for the Pope and
his adhaerents, I cannot divine; for it is very possible that they, seeing the
Popes glorious Pantofle adorned with the Cross, might perhaps think it more
holy (by the example of him whom they call his Holiness) to wear shoes of
that fashion.

The Cavaliers mis^haps still increase, and the more comfortless, because they
are drawn by himself upon himself: For this next proof is from the Quarto
Decimani, the life of whose Heresy he would make to be, the holding of Easter
at another time then was ordained by the Church. But if the Pope be (as he is
said to be) the Church vertuall, let the Cavalier remember that this Church
vertuall was chidden Victor Romanae Ecclesiae Episcopus pertinac usagens,
p^ssim totius Asiae ac vicinarum provinciarum Ecclesias ^ communionis societate
abscindere nititur, tanquam in haeresin declinantes, and lite^es mittit, quibus
omnes simulabsque discretione ab Ecclesiastico foedere segregaret. Sed hoc no^
omnibus placebat Episcopi -- Na^ and Irenaeus cum caete^is quibus praeerat
Galliarum Episcopis, conformat quidem ut in ^^^inica die resurrectionis, Domini
mysterium celeb^etur: Victorem ^^men ^^guit quod non recte fecerit abscindere a
corporis unitate tot and (...) Ecclesias Dei quae mo^em sibi antiquitus
traditum custodirent. E^seb. Ecclesiast. H^st. lib. 5. cap. 24.
by S. Irenaeus for excommunicating the Eastern Churches because they differed
from him in observation of Easter; So at that time, neither the different
observation of Easter, nor disobeying the Popes command was accounted an
Heresy.

He is also alike unhappy in his Heresy of Rebaptization; where he says, In
Saint Cyprian it was but error, because the Church of his time had not
absolutely condemned it; but growing after to be condemned in the Donatists
time, it was Heresy in them not to forsake it; which drew Vincentius
Lirinensis to make this exclamation, O admirable change of things! The Authors
of an opinion are held Catholics, and the followers of the self same are
judged Heretics: For the Cavaliers matter is hereby overthrown. For Eusebius.
Eccl. Hist. l. 7. c. 24. Firmiliani epistola inter epistolas Cyprian. Constat
ex Eusebio Corneliu^ papam cum Nationali concilio omnium Episcoporu^ Italiae
sta^uiss^, non deberi hae^eticos rebaptizari, and eandem sententiam postea
approbasse etiam Step^anum p^pam, and jussisse ut^ Haeretici non
rebaptizarentur: Et simul constat Cyprianum contratium sens^se, and mordicus
d^fer disse. Bell. de Con. lib. 2. cap. 5.
the Bishop of Rome and his council having condemned the error of
rebaptization, Cyprian must be an Per peculi^rem assistentiam Spiritus sancti
dirigentis mente^, and lingua^ pontificis, ut in publico fidei judicio infall
bi^i e^ veritatem fidei determinet, cum potestate c^e^cendi omn^s ad cred^ndam
de Fide Catholica, veritatem Fid^i ab ipso determinata^. Genesis in. 1. Disp. 2.
n. 32. Doctrina Ecclesiae continetur, etc. in decretis conciliorum and
pontificum -- Quae in conciliis vel a ponti^ic^ definita sunt, hoc habent
speciale, ut omnis propositio definita sit m^nifes^e fide, and contraria sit
Haeresis. Lorca. (...). 22. Sect. 1. Disp. 39. n. 7
Heretic who disobeyed the Bishop of Rome and his council thus having
condemned it, yea having condemned the maintainers of it. But if S. Cyprian was
hereby no Heretic, then the life of Heresy does not consist in disobeying the
Church speaking by the Pope.

Again, if S. Cyprian escape at this door, I do not see but that, for ought
the Cavalier says, the same door stands open for the Donatists; For his
reason by which he would keep in the Donatists, is, Because their error grew
after to be condemned. But we see their error was condemned before, by
Cornelius and Stephen Bishops of Rome, even in the time of S. Cyprian: And
therefore if there be no other reason the Donatists may escape the note of
Heresy with S. Cyprian.

But indeed there were other reasons that might aggravate the error of the
Donatists beyond S. Cyprian, and make it look more like Heresy; A first may be
a maintaining of their error after much evidence and conviction by Scriptures:
A second, because Qui sunt Haeretici nisi qui relicta Dei Ecclesia, privatas
eligerunt societ^te^. Isid. sen^. lib. 1. cap. 19. Nos quantum in nobi^ est
propter haereticos cum collegis etc episcopis nostris non contendimus, cum
quibus divine concordiam and domini^am pacem ^^^^mus. Cyprian. Stepha^o ^ra^i
^p^st. 72.
they made this error a ground of an other error, That it was a just cause to
divide from the Church, because the Church differed from them in their error:
This Cyprian never did; for though Cyprian yielded not obedience to the Pope
having decided the point, yet he held union with the Church, even with those
who differed from him in this point of re baptization: which may be spoken to
the shame both of the old Donatists and the new, even the Romists that tear
the Church into pieces for every little difference. Thirdly, the Donatists were
thought thereupon to raise another In haeresim schisma verterunt, tanquam
Ecclesia, etc. de toto terrarum orb perierit. Aug. ad. quod vult D. Ep. ad
Emeritum. 164.
error contrary to an Article of the Creed, That the Church was not Catholic:
and this the Cavalier might have seen in this very Treatise of Saint Austin,
ad quod vult Deum, from whence he fetched his former objections.

Lastly, if any man will see the reason of Lirinensis whom this Author
produces, he may thus receive it, and add it for a Corollary:

The Absolvuntur Magistri, condemnantur Discipuli, etc. Quoru^ ego nequitia^
duplici odio digna^ judico, vel ^o quod haerese(...)? venenum propinare aliis
no^ pertimescunt; vel eo etiam quod sancti cujusque viri memoriam tanquam
sopitos jam cine^es* prophana manu ventilant, and quae silentio sepeliri
oportebat redivivam opinionem diffamant; seque^tes omnino vestigia authoris sui
Cham, qui nuditatem venerandi Noe, non modo operire neglexit, verum quoque
irridendam caeteris enuntiavit. ^^ncen^. ^i^in. adver. haer. cap 11.
Masters are absolved, the Disciples are condemned, etc. whose wickedness I
judge to be worthy of double hatred; both because they fear not to deliver
unto others the poison of Heresy, and because with profane hands they toss
the memory of holy men, as ashes which were quenched; and spread abroad a
revived opinion, which should have been buried in silence: following herein
the steps of their Father Cham; who not only neglected to cover the nakedness
of reverend Noe, but also showed it to others to be derided.

As for the answer of Cyprian to him that made the question concerning the
doctrine of Novitianus, it does not show that they that obey not the Popish
Church are Heretics, but that Heretics are cast out of the Church for their
Heretical doctrines: And such doctrines, whose Authors and Abettors are for
them worthily cast out of the Church, are not worth the enquiry.

The Cavalier, having passed through many untruths, now comes to an
impertinence fraught also with untruths; He would His business is to prove us
Heretics, for differing from the Popes decrees in small matters, and he brings
in, for proof, Protestants accusing one another for differing in great
matters; but some of them are such as the Cavalier himself cannot well
believe, much less an impartial Reader.
feign prove, that, because there are some quarrels between some Calvinists
and some Lutherans, therefore Protestants are damnable Heretics for disobeying
the Pope in small matters: But he knows not how to tie this together, scarcely
with the Jesuiticall cart-ropes of vanity and fraud, called Equivocation and
mental Reservation: For neither of them do charge the other with Heresy for
disobeying the Pope, yea not for disobeying the Church; but (as they would
persuade others, in their disputing vehemence) for not rightly conceiving some
passages of Scripture: and I dare so much trust the Cavaliers honesty, that he
will not say, that himself believes some of those slanders which himself
produces from Lutherans against Calvinists; Such are corrupting the Scriptures
concerning the glorious Trinity, the Deity of Christ, and the Holy Ghost. And
he knows, or might know, if he have but begun with Bellarmines
controversies (whom he names) what Gre^zer speaks of Hunnius (one of the
Cavaliers chief Authors that casts scandalls upon Calvinists) in his Epistle
prefixed to Bellarmines controversies: For there he says, Genus scribendi
ingressus fuerat Hunnius plane Lutheranum, hoc est Thrasonicu^, jactabundum,
furiosum, ferme dixeram cervisiarum -- Lutherani praecones ita disputationes
suas instituant ut super timetu^ and zythum, and quae ex utroque nascuntur
convitia maledica, and vesaniam halare videantur. Gretzer. epist. Bellarmin.
praevi.
That Hunnius began a kind of writing right Lutherane, that is, Thrasonicall,
vainglorious, and furious, I had almost said drunken: yea he goes from the
man to the kind; and says, The Lutheran Preachers do set forth their
disputations as if it were upon Meade and Beer, and so that they may seem to
smell of that which arises from both; railing-slanders, and madness. Now if
this testimony of Gretzer be true (and whatsoever it be I think this Cavalier
will not give this Father of his the lie) then I wonder he would produce
testimonies of such, whose Disputations (as says his Father Gretzer) smell of
rayling-Slanders and madness. So that indeed this argument seems not to be so
much a matter of earnest, as of mirth, even to make himself and his Romish
Readers infernally merry with the bitterness and contentions of christians:
yet it were not hard to show patterns of such vomits of Gall, brought up from
Romish stomachs; and indeed here they lie in sight, but I had rather they
should be covered with ashes, then be stirred to annoy my Reader and my self
with the savor of them: Only I will give this Champion some animadversions;
one is, that this is a stale objection, long since dissolved by that reverend
and learned prelate, ^. ^ewels Defense of the Apology. Page 318. and seq.
the ever honored Bishop Jewel. And this Bishop has so torn this objection
to rags, that I wonder this Cavalier would stoop so low as to take up such
rags, which can never be well sowed together again, and cloth his book
with them. A second, that it were far more like the spirit of Moses, to say,
Why do ye strive seeing ye are brethren? then to gather this uncharitable
and false Inference, Because ye strive, ye are not brethren.

I am passing from this Champions Untruths to his Truth: See page 45, 48, 49.
but I cannot pass over an abominable, fearful and manifold Untruth, not so
much bounded in one part of this Chapter, as arising from the whole: For his
maine drift and plot is, and his words do tell it us, That let a point of
doctrine be never so fundamental and necessary to salvation, if his Popish
Church do not decide, propound, and command it to be believed, it is not
heresy not to believe it: But be the point never so small, if the Popish
Church decide, and command it to be believed, then must it be believed upon
pain of damnation. Now, what can be said more to put the Pope above God to
make him Antichrist, and his followers Antichristians? That which God says may
be unbeleeved without note of heresy, though it be this maine point, Mat. 3.
This is my beloved Son in whom I am well-pleased: But if the Pope decide and
command to be believed, that Council. Trid. de reform. Matrim. Sess. 8.
Gossips are such kin, that they cannot marry without incest; not to believe
this is certain Si quis dixerit Ecclesiam non potuisse constituere impedimenta
matrimonium dirimentia, vel in ^is constituendis e^rasse, Anathema sit. Council.
Trident. Sess. eadem.
damnation: fearful blasphemies; and unhappy Christians whose God is less
then their Pope, and whose Pope is above the highest God. But as this makes way
for the Mystery of iniquity; so it leads fitly to the next point, which is
this Champions Truth, wherein this Mystery will be more fully revealed.

SECT. II.
The Idolatry of Papists, 1. In making the Pope the foundation of Faith. 2. In
giving Divine worship to the Sacramental Elements, and to Images. 3. In
attributing the merit of salvation to their own works, is such as may sink
many of them into a damnable estate; though it may be charitably hoped of
others, that they are saved who avoid the mortal infection of these points:
and what caution must be used to preserve this Charity from crossing with Truth.

HAving discovered many Untruths, in at least four maine points of this
Chapter, we are come to a fifth point, whose truth is so powerful, that it
overcomes me, and makes me to acknowledge with the Author, That it divides
Protestants and right Romists so far as salvation and damnation.

And I must clear either side from uncharitableness, in saying that these who
fail in this point are in a state of damnation. And it is very true that he
promises, That this Reason strikes at the root, which is taken from the
nature and property of Faith: The point is this; That whosoever does give his
faith and assent to all the Articles of Christian doctrine, yet if he do it
not upon the right and infallible motive, he has no saving Faith. Now
hereunto we subjoyne, That true and right Papists or Romists do not believe
upon the true and infallible motive; Therefore they can have no saving Faith.
And indeed, though they have many and pernicious errors, yet this is the great
and general error that makes up the Mystery of iniquity, which we call the
Papacy, and the Papists call the Church. For the ordinary motive of faith in
those who are the right and natural members of the Head of that Mystery, is
to believe the Articles of Faith, because the Church, whose mouth, head, and
spirit is the Pope, propounds and commands them to be believed. And this
Author says, that the only true and infallible ground is, The Revelation of
Almighty God, and the proposition and direction of the Church. Wherein first
he joyneth the Church with God in this ground of Faith; and so gives as it
were half of the ground of Faith to the Church from God, and makes it half
unsafe and damnable: But even this half he seems elsewhere wholly to take
away, and so to leave men wholly to be damned by a Faith wholly grounded on a
Objectum formale ( fidei) est prima veritas Testificans; aut ergo Ecclesia est
objectum ut diversum quid a Dei testimonio, aut ratione ipsius: Si diversum,
erit testimonium hominum and alienum a fidei infallibilitate and certitudine;
si ratione Dei, eo ipso non est objectum formale, quia formale objectum per se
primo, and non per aliud est objectum. Lorca in 22. Sect. ^ D^sp ^.1^9*
motive which cannot raise a saving and supernatural Faith: for he says,
Char. Mist. p. 45.
That if the Church has not decided, propounded, and commanded a doctrine to
be believed by her children, a man may think and do as he sees cause,
without incurring the crime of heresy. Thus we see that the Revelation of God
is not a motive of Faith of it self, but the Church is the motive of believing
Gods Revelation: so, first, we see the Church to put God aside, and to take
place of him; and knowing who is the Head, Heart, if not the Whole of this
Church, we find him just in his own place, and that is, lifting himself up
above all that is called God: And secondly, we see the deadly motive and
ground of Faith, proposed by Papists to Popish souls, even the word of a man,
and a Man of sin; on whom whatsoever Faith is finally grounded, it can give
nothing but damnation. Neither are we put by other Papists to lay pieces
together to prove this their damning motive of Faith; for, besides the common
voice of the people, that they believe as the Church believes, we have before
(...).
heard, that the Rhemists acknowledge the Popes to be an Order of Governors to
whom we are bound to cleave in Religion, and to obey in all things: And
thereupon they infer, that A Papist is a Christian man, a child of the Church,
and subject to Christ's Vicar: So the Christianity of a Papist, and his being a
child of the Church, depends on his cleaving to the Pope, and obeying him in
all things. But yet again we may see it more acknowledged in their Writers.
Una est qua^ tuetur M^c^ael de M^dina l. 5. de rec^a in Deum F^de, c. 11.
affi^mans Ecclesiae Testificationem esse partem objecti formalis: quo fidei,
and adeo esse, ut ultima fidei resolutio in Ecclesiae authoritatem fiat. --
Esse tamen Ecclesiam rationem credendi, in quam ultima resolutio fidei fiat
proba^i videtur, quia in ea sistit solutio quaestionis, quare credimus:
Interroganti enim quare credis Deum esse Trinum and Unum, si respondeatur, Quia
Deus dicit; u^ gere potest, Unde scis Deum dicere? non est alia responsio, quam
quia Ecclesia dicit; quo pacto respondere docemur in ipsa Christiana Catechesi,
and rudimentis doctrinae Christianae, sicque respondent docti and in^octi.
Lorca in 22. Sect. 1. Disp. 3. n. 3. Fundamentum fidei vobis aliud est and
ulterius, Pontificis nimirum Romani judicium: Iste vere petra vobis fidei;
super illam petram fidem omnium dogmatum, obedientiam omnem, and in fide, and
in moribus aedificatis. -- Petrus, inquit Bellarminus, and quilibet ejus
Successor est petra, and fundamentu^ Ecclesiae-Pontificia potestas, ait
Skulkenius) est velut cardo, and fundame^tu^, and (ut uno verbo omnia
complectar) su^ma fidei Christianae. -- Per Ecclesia^, inquit Gretserus,
intelligimus Pontifi^e^ Romanu^ qui pro tempore Ecclesiae navicula^ moderatur
-- Fundame^tum fidei nostrae tam infallibile est quam ipse Deus. Tota enim
Scriptura est divinitus inspirata. Coelu^ transibit, and montes co^movebuntur;
verbu^ aute^ Domini manebit in aeternum. Fundamentu^ fidei vestrae tam
fallibile est, tamque falsum, qua^ est bestia illa, seu Antichristus, cui datum
est os loquens blasphema; and seducit incolas terrae. -- Cum fundamentum hoc
restru^ haereticum sit and Antichristianum: venenu^ hoc suu^ transmittit in
omnes omnino fidei vest^ae artus and arterias, parts, particulas, and
Articulos, eos ad unum omnes ha^reticos vobis facit and Antichristianos. --
Trinitas, Christi Inca^natio, Passio, Resurrectio, and similia, vere creduntur;
quando ideo creduntur, quia in sacris Scriptu^is, ut vero fidei fundamento
traduntur. Si vero quis horum quodvis idci^^o credat, ut vel Deum esse, vel
Christum esse Deum, quia homo, quia demon, aut Antichristus illud credendum
dicit, ab ^o qui ratione ista ad ^redendum inducitur, non vere and
infallibiliter, non infusa aut divina fide creduntur, sed credi solu^ putantur:
and quia talis hominis fides, testimonio hominis, daemonis, aut Antichristi, ut
suo ^undamento innititur; ideo acquisita solu^ fides est, humana, daemoni^^^,
(...) Antichristiana. Materiale hic fidei sanum est; vitium omne ^st in
formali, seu ratione credendi, quod est forma fidei; Forma autem dat Nomen and
Esse. D. Cra^^nthor^ Defens. Eccles. An^l. cap. 47.
Lorca brings forth Medina affirming, that The Testimony of the Church does so
far partake of being the formal object or motive of faith, that the utmost
resolution of faith is into the authority of the Church, and the proofs
produced for it are to be heard in the common language of Romists: If it be
asked why thou beleevest the Trinity in Unity, and thou answer, Because God
says it; It will then be demanded of thee how thou know that God says it;
thou have no other Answer left but this, Because the Church says it; and so
are they taught in the Catechism, and so answer both the learned and
unlearned. Behold the common answer, and common faith of Romists. Now this
object of faith being man, and not God, it cannot raise that supernatural and
saving faith, whose object is the prime Verity, even God speaking to the
souls of his servants. And seeing this humane faith has so possessed Romists,
that their Prophets do make the obeying and cleaving to the Pope in his
doctrine the very Character of a Christian and child of the Church; this
Church consisting of these children thus adhering to the Pope, is against such
truly affirmed not to be the Church; and so may the Homily of our Church
clearly be interpreted, which denies the Church of Rome, that is, the Pope
and his Adherents, to be the true Church; for thus to adhere unto the Pope,
and to lay belief on him is so far from making a true child and member of
the Church, that it makes a member of the Papacy, and so of Antichrist; it
makes a Synagogue for Satan and Hell, and not a Church for Christ and
salvation.

And whereas this Author both in this Chapter, and the beginning of the eighth,
objects it to us that we condemn their doctrines, and account the Church of
Rome to be the Seat of Antichrist, and the Synagogue of Satan; He has here
seen one reason of it; and it is a reason of his own and his fellows, even
because the Romish Doctors and Champions tell us, that the Church of Rome is
made of those children which believe in the Pope: And this faith being humane,
cannot make a Church to Christ, but to the Pope; and thus the Pope stands in
the place of Antichrist, for putting Christ out of his place, and stepping into
it, whiles thus he makes his sheep to hear his voice, before Christ's; yea,
both herein, and often* otherwise against Non Deo, aut Scripturis propter Deum,
sed Deo and Scripturis propter papa^; Christo propter Antichristum creditur.
Hinc sit, ut licet Deus diserte vitia omnia prohibeat, and virtutes o^nes sequi
mandat, tamen ut Bellarminus te docet ( lib. 4. de pon. cap. 5.) si papa
praecipiat vitia, and virtutes prohibeat, tenetur Ecclesia vestra credere vitia
esse bona, and virtu^esmalas, nisi velit co^tra conscientiam p^ccare. Idem.
Ibid.
Christ.

But a second Reason may be given of their calling the Church of Rome the
Synagogue of Satan; the Church of Rome being taken in a larger sense, even for
all those parts of mankind, that have reference to Rome: For they find this
Church of Rome overspred, not only with this false and Antichristian faith,
but with other mortal errors and abominations; such are gross and almost
universal Idolatry in the worship of Images, and especially of the Sacrament,
confidence in works for justification and merit; and a gross ignorance, even
a not knowing of Christ, which before has been touched. Now many seeing a
field overcome with these deadly and killing weeds, and so overcome, that they
seemed to cover the face of the field, they took it to be a field of Weeds
and not of Corn: And because the usual manner of speaking is to say, that a
horse is black and not white that has but a few white hairs on him, they
thought they might say, the Church of Rome was the Synagogue of Satan, and not
a true Church, because there is such a multitude of Ignorants, Antichristians,
and Idolaters, and so few true worshippers and believers.

But, be it that the Church of Rome (being understood in this wide sense,
wherein it comprehends all that any way look toward Rome) in regard that there
was once sowed good corn in it, and some of it comes up in some corners of it,
shall be called a field of corn from that which is most excellent in it; surely
it concerns Protestants wisely to manage their unity with it, and the
division from it. When we pursue the unity of charity, we must take heed that
we lose not saving verity: and when we pursue saving verity, we must take heed
that we offend not against charity: we must so converse with that Church as
with a City overcome with the plague; we should be very wary of infection, in
regard of the universal pestilence of it; and (if we may) choose some places
and company that are healthy. But from those that live the life of Grace,
though never so few, affection may not be with-drawne, but to them belongs both
our pity and prayers: Yet, while we extend our charity to them, let us take
heed that we lose not our selves; and that our charity do not swallow up
verity, and make great sins too small, nor allow too easy a communion
between Christ and Beliall; nor make salvation larger then the Scripture does
make it: For first, the Some errors in the Church of Rome, that are in
themselves damnable to them that believe as they profess, according to that of
the Apostle, 2. These. 2.11. They that beleeve^^ly may be damned.
Believers in the Papacy, which make the Papal Church, are by their humane
faith infected to death, except there be a healing of their error by
repentance: These are Idolaters for worshipping the Pope, and making him their
God, and rock of their faith.

Neither will it excuse them, that they believe what they profess; for, the
more they believe by this carnal and killing faith, the more they are slain,
and the deeper they are in damnation. Secondly, there are In peccatis quae
co^tra Deum committu^tur, quae tame^ sunt maxima, gravissimum esse videtur,
quod aliquis divinum honorem creaturae impendat, cum hac ratione, quantum in se
est, alium deum in mundo faciat, divinum principatum minuens, and primu^ quod
in fide est, sc. credulitatem Dei omnipotentis, creatoris coeli and terrae,
destruens, etc. Say. Cas. Con. l. 3. cap. 4. Worshipping of Christ's Image is
Idolatry; and the worship of Images, detested in the Church of Christ, is
heresy. B. Bilson. Christ. sub. p. 4.
worshippers of Images and consecrated bread, which are Idolaters in the common
and known sense of Idolatry. And the Manifestius est qua^ ut multis verbis
explicari debeat, Imaginum and Simulachroru^ cultum, nimiu^ invaluisse, and
affectioni seu potius superstitioni populi plus satis indultum esse, ita ut ad
summam adorationem, quae vel a paganis suis Simulacris exhiberi consuevit, and
ad extremam vanitatem, quam Ethnici in suis Simulacris effingendis and
exorna^dis adm^seru^t, nil a nostris reliqui factu^ esse videtur. Cas. Con. de
Imag. and Simul.
common sort are exceedingly possessed with this Idolatry, and slain to death
with it; and I doubt it will be a difficult matter to save many of the Doctors
whom this plague has infected: For though they believe this Idolatry, which
they pofesse to be lawful, yet Idolatry has been damnable to many, which
both thus professed and believed it: Yea, they that believe and trust in Idols,
are the more damnable for thus believing. There is nothing so wicked and
absurd, but a Romist can defend it: neither is any thing so true, but he can
^utface it, witness, among other, the adoration of Images. The same is an
impiety so apparently condemned in the Scriptures, that neither Blasphemy it
self, witchcraft, adultery, or any sin is more plainly detested and
prohibited. B. Whit. orthod. p. ^37. and seq.
Besides, many places of Scripture show, that saving grace and the true fear
of God, does not commonly dwell, especially with dwelling and reigning
Idolatry. For Grace does commonly turn out such gross sins when it enters
into the soul; and accordingly Saint Paul describes the conversion of the
Thessalonians, to be a turning from Idols to the living God, 1 These. 1.9. And
so some of the Corinthians were Idolaters, but they were washed by regeneration
(1. Cor. 6.) so that they are not now that which they were before. I would have
charity to save as many as she might, but I know she cannot save them truly
without verity; Now the verities of Scriptures seem to withstand the easy and
ordinary salvation of Idolaters, and I am sure have made it damnable to many
who believed it to be the worship of God, and therefore they should be
cleared, before charity can know that she has her desire in true saving of
Idolaters: And this I propose not to increase damnation (which I abhor in my
opposite, the Romish Champion) but to increase salvation; even to save some
with compassion, by pulling them out of the Rev. 21.8. Rev. 19.20. Spe vitae
eternae solis puris Dei cultoribus promissae, novos istos Idololatras ex verbo
Dei arcent: donec stipulationis in Baptismo memores, ad unius Dei cultu^ per
unicum Mediatorem Jesum Christum, abjectis Satanae cultibas, redierint. Clau.
Ap. Mist. duorum Testium. Exodus 32.4, 5.
fire prepared for Idolaters, and to save others from falling into it.

To this end let us behold in the Scripture of truth, how Idolatry, though
professed and believed, yea though mixed with some knowledge, yea seeming fear
or service of God, has drawn the wrath of God upon Idolators.

Israel, to whom were anciently given the Promises, and newly the Law, while
Moses was in the Mount, made a god of Gold, but, in that, worshipped the God
that brought them out of Egypt, and proclaimed a feast to him; and we find
that presently Gods wrath was ready to wax hot against them to consume them;
yea though Moses was the meekest man on Earth, yet his meekness was so
incensed against this sin and these sinners, that he commands every man to
slay his Brother, Companion, and Neighbor. And when he goes to God for a
pardon, he does it not with an extenuation, but an aggravation of this sin:
For he says, Verse 31.
Oh, this people have sinned a great sin, and have made them gods of Gold: He
does not tell God, that it is a venial or not damnable sin, or that their
breeding in Egypt might excuse them, the cause that made them believe that
which they here act and profess; That an ox which eats grass might
represent the Deity, Psalm. 106.20.
and be worshipped for it: But laying aside all excuses and extenuations, he
calls it a great sin, and thinks that a blotting out of Gods book belonged
to this sin, and therefore he offers his own soul to this punishment for
their ransom: But behold how fatal a sentence God pronounces on the sinners
of this sin, V^. 32, 33. etc
so showing it to be damnable, Him that sins will I blot out of my book: and
it presently follows, In the day wherein I visit, will I visit their sin
upon them.

Exodus 34.9, 10
Again, in a chapter nearly following, this Idolatry, wherein Moses is earnest
with God for a pardon, and God seems to be so far entreated as to lead them
by his Angel to Canaan, yet is he still so strange to them, that he calls them
still not his own people, but the people of Moses; Thy people, and, the people
amongst whom thou art* But withal he injoynes them to destroy the Altars of
Idolaters, to break down their Images, and to worship no other God: and let
the reason be observed, for it is highly observable, For the Lord whose name is
Jealous, is a jealous God. Surely this Jealousy of God is not sufficiently
considered by those that are over easy and favorable to Idolatry: They
consider not duly the Nature of Jealousy, nor the height and breadth of a
Jealousy of an Almighty God, nor that it is so inward and essential in God,
that it is as it were God himself; For his name (says he) is Jealous; Now
Jealousy is the rage of a Man; and, a man says Solomon (thus enraged, Pro.
6.34.
) will not spare in the day of vengeance. What then is the jealousy of God but
the wrath of God, and what is God when he is angry, Deuteronomy. 4.23, 24
but a consuming fire? And such he testifies himself to be, particularly
against this sin. Jealousy in a man may pass by many faults in his wife,
but it will not endure Adultery; for Adultery causes a divorce, which many
other crimes do not: accordingly God often calls Idolatry by the name of
Adultery, Hosea 1.2, 6. and chap. 2.2.
and thereupon threatens a divorce to his people: And in that commandment
alone which forbids this Spiritual Adultery, does God only mention his
Jealousy.

Again, if a man be jealous, let a stranger be never so like him, his
jealousy will not suffer his wife to love that stranger as himself; yea, he
will not endure it though she say it is for his sake, and for likeness to to
her Husband: How much more should the jealousy of God arise, when his worship
is given to things infinitely inferior to himself, and so far below, that it
is a kind of blasphemy to name them in a comparison? Accordingly God casts it
off with a scornful indignation; Esaias. 40.18.23. and 46.5.
To whom will ye liken God? If this jealousy of God could not endure that
Dagon should stand in one place with the Arc, shall we think that the same
jealousy will endure an Idol to dwell quietly with him in the soul of that
man which is truly the Temple of God? 1. Cor. 16.19. 2. Cor. 13.5. 2. Cor. 6.16.
What agreement (says S. Paul) has the Temple of God with Idols? For ye are
the Temple of the living God: And if Saint Paul ask this question, as if it
could not receive an answer, How dare men to answer this question, at least
with such facility to dissolve it, how dare they say, Yes, S. Paul?

It has been seen very generally that the Temple of God, even ignorant
Christians, have had agreement with Idols; for if Christians knew not but that
the Idols ought to be worshipped with divine worship, they, believing this,
might give divine worship to idols; and this Idolatry is not damnable. Surely,
if such an answer may thus get safe passage through this Text by some narrow
way, to make Idolatry to agree with God and salvation; doubtless, it seems by
Saint Paul's question, the common and ordinary relation between them is
disagreement, and there is some great difficulty, or some great rarity in this
agreement: And this great danger and difficulty should be greatly pressed; at
least, not less then the narrow way of escaping.

And indeed, to express this danger and difficulty is my business at this
time; and for a further expression of it, let the words of Joshua be
considered; Josh. 24.19, 23
Ye cannot serve the Lord, for he is an holy and a jealous God; He will not
forgive your transgressions and sins, except ye put away the strange gods
which are among you. 2 King. 17.33, 34.
I might add from many places of Scriptures, That they who feared the Lord, and
served their own gods, did not fear the Lord. And in the days of good Josiah,
Zeph 1.5.
God would Cut off those that worship, and swear by the Lord, and swear by
Malcam; And that Idolatry is generally clothed in Scripture with the title of
Abomination, Ezekiel. chapter 6. and chapter 8. and chapter 16. etc.
and it is not easy nor usual with God to dwell with Abomination. But,
referring the Reader to his own reading, I conclude with that piercing and
affrighting speech of Saint Paul; 1 Cor. 8, 7.10.11.
There is a brother, and it is a weak brother, and this brother, out of his
weakness, eats things sacrificed unto Idols, with conscience (of religious
honor) of the Idols: the same weak brother, seeing a strong brother eating in
the Temple of Idols, is strengthened in his making conscience, and giving
honor and worship to the Idol: and yet of this weak brother Saint Paul
says, that He perishes. No doubt this weak brother making conscience of the
Idol, believed this honor which his conscience gave to the Idol was due and
lawful; yea, he believed it the more, as Saint Paul says, by seeing a strong
brother in the Idols Temple, whom he thought to have made the same conscience
of the Idol; yet this brother for whom Christ dyed, thus weak, thus
believing, and upon such a tentation (if we believe Saint Paul) perishes by
this Idolatry.

There is yet a third dangerous, yea, Gratiae Dei detrahunt, and Christum
abjiciunt: seipsos perdunt qui fiduciam in opera ponunt. Ferus in Epist. ad
Romans cap. 3. Cave, cave ne in tua opera fiduciam salutis ponas, alioqui
Christum negasti. Id. Ibid.
deadly infection of Rome, in the Idolatry of Merits, of which souls should
be wary: for Ie m'asseures qu'entre dix mill Catholics il ne s'entrouvera
pas un seul, qui entende que signifient les oeuures teintes du sang de Christ
Mais que simplement sans autre addition ils diront, quils esperent meriter le
ciel pur leurs oeuures.

Exam. pacifique chap. 1.


generally, those merits are by by them made Saviors, while they think that
they are able to justify, or stand in judgment before Gods Justice, and that
they deserve life eternal; yet Christ Jesus, who is God blessed for ever,
could only perform such merits for mankind. As for us, when we speak most
of our good works, Let us say with that holy man, Remember me, O Lord,
concerning this, and spare me according to the multitude of thy mercy: and
then put this clause to it from our Savior, When we have done all, we are
unprofitable servants. Let not this Idolatry seem small to us, which the
chief of them dare not maintain when they dye, though the Papal profit makes
it pleasant whilst they live: But let it be as one of the botches of Egypt,
which kill the souls of thousands with death eternal.

Thus have we seen errors deadly and damnable to many that professed them in
the Church of Rome, and believed what they professed; wherefore the safest way
by which charity joined to verity may more clearly save some in this Church,
Neh. 13.22. Luke 17.10.
is to find some that are clear from these errors. And these being produced,
may serve for patterns to others to drive them from these errors. And
accordingly it is possible to find some within the Romish territories that have
been clear from these Idolatries; yea, some that have been Teachers and
Writers, and no doubt they have begotten some Auditors and Readers like to
themselves.

And first for the killing error of making the Pope or his Church the god and
utmost foundation of faith, there are not a few of the late Writers, as Lorca
tells us, that Altera sententia docet Ecclesiae authoritate^ and testimonium nil
refer ad assensum fidei, nec ut pars objecti, nec ut conditio sine qua non;
sed concurrere ut omnino accidentarium, esseque unum ex credibilibus, sicut
alia fidei documenta; quod no^ propter se, sed propter divinam Authoritate^
creditur. Quam sententiam prosequitur Canus, and amplectuntur non pauci ex
recentioribus; Quae suit sententia Calvini. -- Respondent Canus and Cal^inus,
mutuatis fere verbis, Augustinum nihil aliud voluisse in hac sententia, quam
Ecclesiam e^^e aptum principium, vel isagogem, qu^ convenienter aliquis qui
penitus ignarus fidei est, inducatur ad ipsam; non tamen ut aliquo modo sit
ratio credendi. Lorca in 22. Sect. 1. Disp. 3.
wholly deny it, The authority and testimony of the Church does nothing pertain
to the assent of faith, neither as part of the object, nor as a condition
without which faith cannot be; which opinion of Canus not a few of the later
men do embrace: (to this he adds) which was the opinion of Calvin. And to
make this yet more clear, that often objected place of S. Augustine, I would
not believe the Gospel, except the authority of the Church did move me. Lorca
says, Canus and Calvin answer with the very same words; That Augustine meant
nothing in this sentence, but that the Church is an apt beginning, and as it
were an introduction, by which a man wholly ignorant of the faith is fitly led
unto it; but not that the Church should be the reason of believing: for that
is, Because God speaks in the Scripture, and it is an infallible instrument of
the divine Testimony.

And Lorca Respondetu^, Q^estione^ quare ^redis, ultimo and direct in Dei
Testimonium resolvi; adaequata enim ratio respondendi est, quia Deus dicit. Id.
Ibid.
afterward affirms, That the resolution of this question, Why you believe, is
lastly and directly resolved into the testimony of God; and this is the
adaequate reason of believing, Because God says it. Thus are there some, and
not a few of the Church of Rome, as Lorca tells us, that avoid the shipwreck of
souls, which is visually suffered by faith in the Pope, or testimony of man,
even the Man of sin.

Secondly, for that Idolatry which gives divine worship to Images, though it
be an evil that has too largely overspread Dr. AEgidius a Preache^ at Sivill,
censured for denying the worship of Images; and Bell^rmi^^^ names many Doctors,
which teach that they are to be worshipped with divine worship. Bell^rm. de
Ec^l^s. Trid. lib. 2. cap. 2^ Azor. Mo^. I^st. li^. 9. c^p. 6.
the Romish dominions, and the denial of it in Spain has been censured for
heresy: Yet there are diverse of the Romish communion that have not thus bowed
to Baal, in so much, that Papyrius Massonus thus writes in his Preface before
Agobardus; and of him, He Gr^corum ^^rore^ de imagin^^^^ and picturis,
manifestissime detegens, negat eas adora^i debere; quam sententiam omnes
Catholici probamus. Papyr. Masson. praes. in Agob^rd.
manifestly discovers the errors of the Greeks concerning Images and Pictures,
and denies that they ought to be worshipped; which opinion all Catholics do
approve. So it seems he thought it a Catholic opinion not to worship Images,
and those not Catholics which do approve this worship. And Si de usu imaginum
proponatur quaestio, quomodo illae in Decalogo sunt prohit^^, nempe ne
adorentur, his verbis explicat etc. (...) imagines, s^d non adorar^, quod (...)
Pamelius dares tell the Pope himself, That if the question be proposed
concerning the use of Images, How they are forbidden in the Decalogue; which
is, that they be not worshipped: Tertullian shows it in his Book against
Marcion; and after in his Notes upon Tertullian's Apologetick: Tertullian says
not that Christians did hate Statues and Images, but that they did not worship
them; which certainly (as the Fathers of the seventh Synod, Damascen and Jonas
do often inculcate) none of us ever attempted: I mean not with the worship of
latria, which is due to God alone. But though his speech be somewhat too large,
when he excludes all Romists from giving this worship; (as hereafter in
another Chapter will more plainly appear^) yet it is possible that this all
might (...) l^^arned ones wherewith he (...) for I doubt the common (...)
understood the distinction between doulia and latria; yet thus it is likely
we may find some (at least, of the Learned) that are clear also of this
pestilence.

In this rank also of Idolatry may be mentioned the worship and adoration of
the Sacrament, which is likely to be the more universal, because it seems
backed with a Council which some think universal: But indeed all do not
take it to be universal, Exam. pacifiq. cap. 5.
as the Author of the Examen Pacifique does plainly show. And of this Idolatry
we may well believe, that there are some free in the Romish Territories: For
Urget dubium quomodo potest quaecu^que Eucharistia adora^i absolute and sine
condition, ^u^ non sit omnino ce^tum consecrationem ri^e pe^a^^am ^^se. Quidam
hoc tempore docu^^^he names in the (...). and l. 3. de Adora.) Sacramentis,
Imag^nibu^ and aliis rebus sacris nullam d^beri ado^ation^m aut venera^^^ (...)
tendat in ipsa^, and vere, and ex a^imo eas (...) g^lequuntur) ut Qu^d* sed
(...) ea^um adorationem transi^e ad exempl^^, and ad eum (...) sunt. Ex qua
doctrina putat facile po^se ^^dd^ rationem (...) nis quam Eucharistiae
ubicunque e^ hibemu^, quia ^um (...) in Sacramentum ipsum, sed tran^e^t ad
Christum, nullum est (...) adorationem exhibendi cu^ non debetur. (...) 22.
Sect. 1 (...) 10. Adoratores h^j^s Sa^ramenti Spi^itu suo, solum (...) Ch^is^um
ipsum. (...) 3. Tom. 3. Disp. 179. ^. 28.
we find that, because without the Priests Intention Romists do acknowledge
that the Bread is still but Bread, and withal, that the worship of bread is
abominable Idolatry; It h^th been thought safest by some, to direct all the
Sacramental worship to Christ Jesus sitting at the right hand of God, where
he is sure to be found. This is the doctrine of Vasques; and I could name a
Lady in England, who professed so to worship Christ in the Sacrament, and I
hope she is not without followers.

Another Romish Idolatry is turning merits into Saviors: This we have seen is
too common among the vulgar; yet by some they are removed from this office, and
especially at the time of death; for even persecuting Gardener thought it good
doctrine for them that were dying to put their whole trust in the merits of
Christ. And Cardinal Bellarmine in his last will, desires to be crowned by
God, not as a Regarder of merits, but as a Giver of mercy. And Bernard, Thomas
de Kempis, Cassander, and Ferus (who have many Readers, and I hope herein some
believers) appear sound in their Writings, both from this and other
Idolatries. Briefly, the catholic Apology brings forth diverse Authors of
theirs, that have taught their Readers Doctrine contrary to the mortal and
damnable errors which we complain of, for massacring souls in the Kingdom
of the Pope. So that though a pestilence has generally overrun his
Territories, yet there are some healthy and living souls therein: though there
may be millions that bow unto their many Baals, yet there may be thousands
that bow not unto them: And though we be not of one Religion with the
Idolaters, yet with those that serve God in spirit and truth, and keep
themselves from Idols, we have one Religion in Essentialls and Fundamentalls;
and so both may be saved. Let us conclude in the words of one of them upon the
conclusion of S. John's Epistle, and in him see what saving Religion is taught,
and, I hope, learned by some of them; Filloli, custodite vo^ a Simulachris:
Ha^c appe^dice^ non inco^grue nec sine causa annexuit Epistolae suae; quia enim
do^uerat unum and solum veru^ Deum esse, qui and scipsum in E^lio suo
manif^stavit, and pe^ eum nos d^^uit, quod veru^ D^i cultus in fide, spe, and
charitate, itemque puritate and sanctitate vitae consistat, necessario nunc
monet, ut in ea fide and very Dei cultu (...) and abo^ni Idololatria caveamus.
Sic igitur in tota hac Epistola Joanne^ (...) haec docere voluit, quod
videlicet unus tantum est verus Deus, and una ta^tum vera Religio. Jesus
Christus cum Patre and Spiritu sancto unus and verus est Deus, Christiana autem
Religio verus and unicus est cultus Dei; ea enim Religio and Deo omnem glo^iam
per Christum ascribit, and nobis per eundem Christum vitam and salutem adsert.
Ferus in 1. Joan. 5.
Babes, keep your selves from Idols: This Corollary S. John not unfitly nor
without cause annexed to this Epistle; For, seeing he had taught that there is
one only God, who has manisted himself in his Son, and has taught us by
him, that the true worship of God consists in faith, hope and love, and in
purity and sanctity of life; he does now necessarily admonish us, that we
remain in that faith and true worship of God, and beware of all Idolatry. So
John in this whole Epistle would teach us two things, That there is but one
true God, And one true Religion* Jesus Christ with the Father and the Holy
Ghost is that and one true God; and Christian Religion is the only true
worship of God: For this Religion g^veth all glory to God by Christ, and by the
same Christ brings to us life and salvation: Behold that one Religion which
we all so profess.

Yet* for a caution to be annexed to the conclusion, I think that true zeal
and charity, though they take such for living souls which are safe in
fundamentalls, yet they pity other gross errors which make the soul sick
though they kill not; and a true lover of souls resembles the head both of
souls and of love, and desires to present unto God souls without spot and
blemish: And because they love them, as on the one side they acknowledge the
life that is in them, so they desire to add growth to this life, and to bring
it onward toward perfection. They do not tell them that they are well enough,
because they live; for that is rather to build their contentment on their own
safety, then on the full pleasing and serving of their Savior. Therefore they
call on them for the washing away of other errors, which are blemishes in the
eye of the Heavenly Bridegroom; that thus the Bride, being all glorious
within, may be ready and prepared for the day of her gladness, even her
marriage in eternal and consummate felicity.

CHAP. IX.
Wherein diverse objections are reinforced against the Romists, concerning
those divisions amongst them, which the Cavalier in vain seeks to reconcile
in his seventh Chapter.

SECT. I.
Wherein is showed, First, that Protestants in submitting to the holy word and
spirit of God, have therein a true ground of unity, actually in those things
wherein they agree; intentionally in other things wherein they differ.
Secondly, that their Romish submission to the Pope, though it produce a seeming
unity in many points, yet it leaves diverse irreconcilable differences amongst
them.

THe Cavalier in his last chapter has rid on, much out of his way: and in this
he rides apace, and the faster the more out of the way. He was out of his way
when he traveled to free Romists from want of charity, by proving Protestants
and Romists not to have one saving faith, seeing Protestants having that saving
faith, the Romists show want of charity in damning those who are saved: He was
again out of the way in bringing his own Romists into schism and damnation,
by dividing them from Protestants which have that one saving faith: And now he
goes further out of the way, in removing the reasons that may make for unity,
though by unity with Protestants Romists may avoid uncharitableness, schism,
and damnation: so, it seems, he is so earnest for division and disunion,
that to attain it he will hazard both charity and salvation to his own
fellow Romists as a high price, and far above the value of that which he
would purchase, though it were the richest jewel in the world.

Yet on he goes upon this adventure; And whereas differences amongst Romists
are brought forth to make Romists more equal to differences among Protestants,
or to some differences between Protestants and Romists; and likewise to make
Romists think there may be a spiritual unity notwithstanding some
differences, because, notwithstanding their own differences, they affirm
there is an unity among themselves, this the Author thinks too peaceable, and
therefore strives to take it out of the way.

Toward this, he is willing to deny that there are such differences amongst
Romists, and he strives to show that they agree even in those things wherein
they differ; But differ they do, and strong evidences we have for it, which
may hereafter be produced: Neither indeed their Poetical Head of unity, the
Pope, nor any one man on earth, can make the whole Church to be inwardly of
one mind and soul, but only that Lord and maker of Spirits by his own
Spirit, his true and only Vicar.

For that one Spirit, enlightening and guiding the spirits of men, with one
faith of one word, delivered by the ministry, directed and enabled by the same
one spirit, can only make a true, real, internal and spiritual unity: And
accordingly S. Paul leading us to the unity of faith, thus rightly orders his
words toward unity; One Spirit, Ephesians. ^.
one Lord, one Faith: And thus he goes on, and shows how this one spirit of
one Lord which inwardly works this unity of faith in the Lords body, outwardly
also concurres to the working of it by the gifts given to the ministry; For
this working without in the ministry, and inabling them to teach one and the
same doctrine of saving faith; and inwardly working in the hearts and souls of
Christ's members, these members are brought into the unity of faith and so into
one body of Christ: and, as in this body of Christ there are different members
of different measures and capacities, by the different gifts of the spirit; so
these different capacities do not reach or contain one measure of divine
truth: Christ the Foundation and Head is made known to all his members, for by
this knowledge they become his members, and so have they all unity in so much
divine truth as knits them to Christ: But by reason of their different
measures, some attaining such holy truths of which others are short, there must
needs be a difference in the apprehension of those truths to which some
attain, and others do not come; yet in all is a settled desire and purpose to
believe the whole truth revealed by God, if it be also revealed to them that it
is the truth of God: And so whatsoever force was in the Champions speech, That
true spiritual faith believes the whole Body of divine doctrine, makes not
against us but for us, and much more for us then for them. For we upon the
right motive, which is God speaking in his word, do believe plainly whatsoever
we conceive, and what we do not conceive we believe in purpose and intention;
And thus have we perfect unity, while in the fundamentalls we have an actual
unity of faith, and in the lesser points an unity of purpose and will: But in
this true and kindly unity, one Spirit, not one Pope does cause inwardly one
faith. And again, that one spirit giving gifts to men, not to one man,
outwardly brings to the inward unity of faith. And indeed that none but the
spirit, the true vicar of Christ, can make this solid, spiritual, and
internal unity, it appears by the confession of the very Romish craft, which
has coined the Pope to be the head of unity. For, that they might make and
prove him to be such, they have put him into the place of the holy Ghost, and
made him the Vicar of Christ: accordingly they say that the holy Ghost speaks
by him, and so the speech of the holy Ghost, being infallible verity, is a
right ground of unity: A foul error and without ground of Scripture, which
never, since the departure of Christ from earth, tied the holy Ghost to one
man, so that from him the whole Church should fetch Oracles and resolutions.

But indeed it is a high and blasphemous imposture, which puts the Pope in
place of the holy Ghost: And when this man speaks, it pronounces of him as
the people of Herod; The voice of God, and not of Man. And how little this
differs from Montanisme, I wish Romists would consider, who reduced the promise
of sending the Comforter ( Christ's Vicar as Assistentia Spiritus sancti
promissa est specialiter Romano Po^tifici (Joan 14.) Spiritus sa^ctus docebit
vos omn^ ve^i^ate^ (...) 1. Disp. ^. n. 34.
Tertullian calls him) to be performed in Montanus.

And the very same place do the Romists apply to the Pope which was applied to
Montanus; but yet thus it appears, That even they that err in the
application, yet hold truth in the position; That the holy Ghost is the true
root of union, though erroneously and blasphemously they put the Pope into his
room, and make the voice of the Pope to be the voice of the holy Ghost.

And surely the Pope himself plainly shows, that he doubts his own
spiritual power of making unity, and therefore he flies to the gross and
material instruments of unity, the Sword and Faggot. And so calling down fire
on those that obey him not, if he have any spirit, it seems it is not that
spirit which Christ said was the Evangelicall spirit of the Apostles, but
rather of him which is called the Destroyer.

And indeed, this device of man to make unity of faith by one man, called the
Pope, being thus thrust into the place of the Spirit of God, as it proceeded
from the spirit of error, so has it made unity in error (as the last, best
of Popes, Gregory the Great did in a manner prophecy) but it never will make
unity in solid and universal Faith and Truth: for the believers in this
counterfeit head of unity have both gotten from him an unity in many errors,
and have been left in many great and weighty differences, whereof there is
little hope of resolving them into union: the sight whereof turns our eyes
from this humane and fictitious Head of unity, to the true root and means of
unity, set forth by the Apostle.

And, because this Author strives to put away from men's eyes the differences
which arise under this false Head of union, let us show him a more full
spectacle of them, which may serve to prove that disunion which he goes about
to confute, and to confute that union which he goes about to prove.

SECT. II.
Wherein several heads and springs of division amongst the Papists are opened:
1. The controverted Supremacy of the Pope, or Councels. 2. Their affected
ambiguity in deciding controversies. 3. The great number of Questions purposely
left undecided. 4. The opposition betwixt the Preachers and public Professors
of that Church.

IN the view of this division, we may first take notice, That there is an
opposition and division even between this supposititious Head of unity and his
members; and even in this radical and head-point, Whether he be the Head of
unity or not: for the Head is divided from much of the Body; and the Body
within it self, even about the Head. The Pope he will be above the Council,
and the Council is thought by many to be above the Pope: And this has been
decided by Councels, and by them the Council was set above the Pope; which
indeed agrees much better with the Council in the Acts, and with Saint Paul to
the Ephesians lately alleged; yea, it was made heretical to deny this
Supremacy of the Council above the Pope: And if that the Head of unity be
divided into two, how can two Heads bring men oneness? yea, how can two Heads
but divide the Church into two Bodies? It is an undeniable truth, That two
Masters, opposing each other, can never cause unity in their servants; he that
is at unity with some fellow servants by cleaving to the one Master, is at
division with others that cleave to the other: And they that ma^e the Council
the Head and root of unity, as the Council of Synodus in Spiritu sancto
congregata legitime Generale Concilium faciens, Ecclesiam catholicam militantem
representans, potestatem a Christo immediate habet; cui quilibet cujuscunqu^
statu vel dignitatis, etsi Papalis existit, obedire tenetur in his quae (...).
Constant. S^ss. 4. and 5.
Constance, and Basil, and many that followed them (especially in France) how
must they not needs differ from those that make the Pope to be Head and Lord of
unity, by a controlling power over the Council? And accordingly in those
points which the Council decrees as by a supreme power, and the Pope again
dissolves as by a supreme power, how can Romists be at unity that are divided
in the different beliefes of these two Supremacies? Even in that point resolved
in Basil, Primo, quod veritas de potestate Concilii generalis supra Papam, est
veritas Fidei catholicae. Secundo, veritas haec, etc. Tertio, quod veritatibus
praedictis pertinaciter r^pugnans, est c^nsendus haereticus.

Council. Basil. Sess. 33.


That it is heretical to believe the Pope not to be subject to the Council,
how is it possible that Romists should be at unity, of whom a part believes,
and a part believes it not; yea, each seem Heretics thereby unto the other?
And thus, if in the root of unity there be division, how great is this
division? and who can show how ever this division can be reconciled by
Romists? For, if there be a free Council, no doubt such a Council will decree
the Pope to be subject to it; as they have good reason from Scripture and
Antiquity. But if the Pope be free, and may command the Council, who can
expect but that the Pope shall judge for himself, and subject Councels to his
headship and infallibility? Behold the great City divided into great parts;
and division growing even from their root of unity. Again, many members of
this Head of unity are at division about the Popes earthly Supremacy; some hold
that he may only excommunicate Kings, and then can do no more, his power
being merely spiritual: others hold, that after excommunication he can depose
Kings; yea, cause their subjects to kill them: a weighty controversy, and
hardly to be decided amongst Papists, but only by the unity of Kings agreeing
together to depose Popes. Again, in some things he takes power to dispense;
and in the same things his Doctors say he has not power to dispense: A pattern
of which opposition we may plainly and actually see in the Popes Bull of
Dispensation to Henry the eighth, for marrying his Brothers wife, and the
Testimonies under Universitie Seals of the Doctors denying him the power of
this Dispensation. These and the like questions concerning the power of this
Head of unity, make division between the Head and members, and make division
between the members themselves.

Secondly, we see divisions do again arise from this Head of unity, because
this Head leaves many things of controversy so doubtfully decided in Councels,
that their very decisions breed controversies: And what unity is to be expected
from such a Head, who by decisions gives occasion of dissentions, and leaves
division when he sits of purpose in his Chair under pretense of making unity?
So we know These two opinions (of Ve^a and Soto in their Commentaries on some
Articles on the Council of (...)) do not only differ in all the Ar^i^les;
but, in many of them, are expressly contrary. -- I could never find whether
that Assembly did agree in one sense; or whether there was unity of words
only. H^st. Trent. lib. 2. In this contrariety of opinions both ( Catharinus
and Soto) writing a^fi^matively to the Council, either of them did not only
say that hi^ opinion was the opinion of the Synod; but afterward wrote also*
and printed Apologies and Antipologies, etc. It does raise a diffic^ltie, what
that Synod was that determined the Article, unto which Soto and (...). did
write and appeal to, each thinking it was on his side: so that it was
necessary that e^ther one of them or both should be deceived. -- Perhaps he
should hit on the truth, that should say, that debating the contrary opinions
in f^aming the Decree, every part did refut^ words contrary to hi^ opinion; and
all rested in those which h^e thought might be fi^ted t^ hi^ own meaning: so
that the expression o^ the ma^ter becam^ capable of diverse interpretations. But
this would (...) se^ve to ^esolve the doubt, what the Council was: because it
is (...) give it unity of word^, and contra^iety of meanings. Id. Ib.
Vega and Catharinus (against Soto, and upon the Popes Decree in the Council
of Trent) entered into mighty Controversies: and no wonder; for it was a
special craft in that Council to use such general words as might be large
enough to hold two differing opinions in them, and so leave the controversies
not reconciled, but still at liberty and distance. And now again, where is
that vain shift, or rather blasphemous abuse of Scripture, in saying that
Papists, by submission to the Popes Church, do captivate themselves to the
obedience of Faith, and so keep unity, when the Pope having judged, and they
submitting to his judgment, are yet in division? What is this, but, by
submitting to their means of unity, to be still at division? If the Head of
unity by deciding make division, how endless and incurable is that division?

Thirdly, This Head of unity leaves diverse controversies wholly undecided; so
that, as it has not been untold by some of his own, he does as it were leave
strife and division to them.

In their School* writers be far more differences then disputations;
because diverse in one disputation, and perchance in one near a thousand
disputations; yea, in some points four of five several opinions, each
confuting one another; and these not of light matters only, but of many, if not
of all the Cavaliers prime points, The catholic Church, Justification of
souls, Communion of Saints, Purgatory, Indulgences; Yea, Doctor John White in
his way to the true Church, Digr. 24. undertaketh to demonstrate, that there is
no one point denied or affirmed against us, wherein Papists do not vary
amongst themselves; and of these differences he gives there diverse patterns:
And many more are to be seen in Bishop Mortons catholic Apology. And this
division has bin so deadly, that we read that the Dominicans have charged the
Franciscans with heresy: and the Franciscans at length had the burning of
four Dominicans. Let us hear a strong Dominican, and a cathedral Professor
describing the differences of these Romists, Frequenter contingit unu^
Theologum constantissime asserere se habere Theologicam demonstrationem de
aliquo dogmate, and illud deducere per evidentem consequentiam ex sacris
literis and traditionibus patrum: Alium vero per oppositum certissime affirma^e
se habere demonstratione^ Theologicam, quod illud sit hae^^esi^, aut erro^ in
fide, and oppositum ^jus deduci ex sacri^ literis per evidentem consequentiam.
U^de ipse dicit de illo, quod er^at in fide, and al^as idem retorquet in istum;
imo non (...) hoc conting^t inter duos singulares Theologos, sed inter u^am
Scholam cum altera. Gonzales in 1. Disp. 2. n. 34.
even to the charging one another with heresy: It often falls out, that one
Divine does most constantly affirm, that he has a Theological demonstration
for some point of doctrine, and that he deduceth it by evident consequence
from the sacred Scriptures, and the traditions of the Fathers: But then another
on the contrary does most certainly affirm, that he has a Theological
demonstration that this is heresy, and an error in faith; and that the
contrary is deduced from scriptures by evident consequence. Hence he says of
the other, that he erreth in the faith; and the other retorts the same against
him: yea this happens not only between two particular Divines, but between
one School and another.

And indeed these dissentions, even to the imputation of heresy, do shame
the Pope, this infallible judge of controversies, for not resolving them; and
do almost plainly confess that he mistrusts his own infallibility, and that
he doubts it is scarce trusted by others; for it is likely the fears either
that he shall not rightly resolve, or that both sides will not quietly submit,
but that some of those who have that burning zeal which consumed the
Dominican, will be inflamed against him for his resolutions.

Fourthly, even against decision there is opposition, and so are they at
division, and particularly in that great and weighty point of Idolatry: For
that which the Romists call the second Council of Nice, and acknowledge to be
a lawful Council, says plainly of Images thus, Constans est Theologorum
sententia Imaginem eodem honor and cultu honorari, and coli, quo colitur id
cujus est Imago. Azor. Tom. 1. lib. 9. cap. 6.

Our faith gives them not Latria (or divine worship) which only belongs to the
divine nature. Pseud. Nic. 2. Act. 7.


Illis salutationes and honorariam adorationem tribuant, non tamen secundum
fidem nostram veram Latriam, quae solum divinae naturae competit. So that The
strength of all these testimonies consists in this, that some reverence is
expressly granted to Images, but Latria is expressly denied.
Lorca, after the producing of diverse testimonies of this Council, thus
infers, Vis autem omnium testimoniorum consistit in hoc quod Imaginibus
express conceditur adoratio, and express etiam eis negatur Latria: And soon
after, The Council does not only exclude Latria, but expresses the kind of
adoration* for it says that they should be adored (...) 3. Disp. 94. n. 30.33.
Concilium non solum excludit Latriam, sed explicat speciem adorationis; dicit
enim adorandas esse honoraria adoratione, and sicut Liber Evangeliorum. And
hereunto agrees Pamelius speaking of this Council, as has before been
alleged. Yet Latria, or divine worship being thus plainly, and, as Lorca
(...), expre^sly denied to Images by the C^un^^ll, great and learned Romists
plainly say that Latria, or divine worship is to be given to Images, even the
same worship which is due to the pattern. So says ^^zorius; and D^ Eccl. Tir.
lib. 2. cap. 20.
Bellarmine acknowledges that this was the doctrine of Alexander, Aquinas,
Caj^t^ne, Bonaventure, Marsil^us, Almaine, Carthusian, Capreolus, and others:
And accordingly we read Dr. ^gidia^ in the discovery o^ the Spanish
inquisition, and Suar. in 3 Disp. 54. Sect. 4 Stephanus sextu^ magno od^o
persecutus est, Forn^osi nomen, cujus and ordinationes omnes (...) and
damnavit^ Jam enim tunc caeperat pontifica^ and virtus and integritas deficere,
Romanus 1. unive^sa Acta Stephani improbat and abrog^^ ^^annis 18. vive^t^
Gregorio, Silvester 3. vivente Benedicto, Gregorius ^e^tus vivente Benedicto
pontificatum adepti, etc. Ca^. And if we may believe an anciem Pope, to the
Popes of these days belongs the main^ guilt of this Idolat^y; which is now
maintained contrary to the Council o^ Nicea For they ^een^e to teach error
(said anciently (...)) who hold their peace when they should ^eprove it. (...)
qui (...) ^llis taliter^l qui; In talibus (...) tacitu^^^as, quia occu^^eret
veritas si falsi^^^ displicere^ (...) ^^lentio faveai^^us (...).
of a Doctor of Sivill questioned of Heresy for agreeing with the council in
denying Latria, contrary to these Doctors.

Upon that which has been said, I infer, that our objection of Romish
disunions yet stands firm, because there are maine disunions objected by us
against Rome which this Author has not touched, and so stand still strong
against him: among which is eminent that incurable difference of headship it
self, between the Pope and the Council; to which some add the fearful
division of the Popedom, when in a schism the Papacy is two or three headed,
two or three sitting at once as heads of the Church; and others add the
division of successive heads, the one denying and annulling the acts of the
other.

SECT. III.
The weakness of the Cavaliers answers are manifested: First, for Romish
differences are not only of such points as are left at liberty by this Church.
Secondly, their pretended religious orders are so many different Sects and
Fashions in the Church. Thirdly, the distinction of explicit and implicit
faith does fortify the Protestants objections and no way salve them.

WHereas to our first objection of difference, concerning variety of opinions
in some points found in their Books, he gives this first answer; That
wheresoever they find our Doctors to be of a contrary opinion, they shall
also find those points in question not to have been defined by the Church,
but left at liberty to be debated and disputed as men see cause: This is
plainly overthrown by that which has been produced in our fourth observation
of Romish differences: For there we see a point oppugned and denied by Romish
Doctors which has been defined; yea, the power of the Council above the Pope
has been defined by Councels, and is denied by Romists: To which I may add,
that the Popes Constantinopol. and Chalcedon. expressly set down in the sixth
Council thus: Renovantes quae sanctis patribus 150. qui in hac Regia urbe
conveneru^t and a ^30. qui Chalcedone co^veneru^t co^stituta sunt, decernimus;
ut thronus Constantinopolitanus aequalia privilegia cum antiquae Romae throno
obtineat, and in Ecclesiasticis negotiis ut illa emineat. Secundus, post illam
existe^^^ post que^ Alexandrinoru^ metropolis numeretur thronus. Deinde
Antiochiae, and post eum Hierosolimitanae civitatis. Council. Constant. cap. 36.
Patriarcha graeca lingua summus pater interpretatur, quia primum, i.
Apostolorum, retinet locum, and ideo quia summo honor fungitur tali nomine
censetur, sicut Romanus, Antiochenus, and Alexandrinus. Isid. origin. lib. 7.
cap. 12. And accordingly Gregory the Great says to the Patriarch^, Scio quis
sum, qui estis; Loco enim mihi fratres estis, moribus patres. Greg. mag.
Eulogio Ep. Alex. lib. 7. Ep. 30.
power has been bounded within the limits of a Patriarchate by diverse
Counsels, which yet Romish Doctors do not only dispute against, but utterly
deny. Besides, when they object one to another de Fide, The meaning of it in
plain English is this; They tell their fellows that they hold a point
contrary to the definition or doctrine of the Church: And whereas he speaks
of unity by referring themselves to the future definition of the Church, this
is no answer for the differences of those who do dispute and deny those points
which by the Church are already defined; for it were absurd to say, that they
who do now not submit to the definition of the Church, are ready to submit to
it hereafter.

Again, for those points which have not been defined, certain it is that for
the present they are at very hot contention and difference: and their resolving
to obey the future definition of the Church, does no whit prove their present
unity, who are presently at division while the Church does not by defining make
unity between them: Two that have a question, and a quarrel upon the
question, and upon this quarrel kill one another, may as well be said to
agree, because they both would refer themselves to the next man that comes;
Which man not yet coming, nor reconciling the difference, they in the mean
time, notwithstanding this supposed future agreement, do presently fight, and
truly kill one another: Except by this Popish slight we may truly say that
these men being at full agreement and unity were divided, and upon this
division, which was indeed an agreement, did fight and kill one another: True
it is that it is the more shame for the Pope who has known these
controversies of the Dominicans and others of a long time; And, for a while Cum
post quad^ie^nale silentium sine suggillatione and censura alterius opin^onis,
disputandi and scribendi nobis per summum Pontificem potestas jam facta sit.
Vas. Epist. dedic. primo Tomo praefixa.
(as Vasques says) did forbid them, but most wisely, (though not like an
infallible Head of unity) deferres to resolve them, and so to set them at
unity, but gives them leave still to dispute and differ; being afraid
perchance on one side to run against the chief Disciples of Evangelicall
Thomas, and on the other side to lose the profit that comes by the many
precious consequences of free will.

Besides, when they be not agreed which is the Church that has supreme power
to decide controversies, whether the Pope be above the Council or the Council
above the Pope; and if the Pope be of one opinion and the Council of another,
how does he that submits himself to the Church, by this submission put himself
into a way of unity, or not rather of division? And if such a submission make
an unity, the Protestants are at unity much better then Romists; for they
submit themselves to the one and undivided word of God truly opened by Apostles
and Pastors, endued with gifts from on high by the same spirit which endited
it, and was given of purpose to cause unity of faith. And whereas he gives a
second plaster to that first objection of differences of points not defined,
that they do not break unity of peace, nor erect Altar against Altar; I say
this plaster is much shorter then the sore; for first there has been showed
a sore called difference in points defined, and points de fide: And, by the
Authors rule, they that hold any one point of faith contrary to Romish
definition, are not of Romish faith nor Church; therefore if they be of a
diverse faith or Church, their Altar is against the Romish Altar. Secondly, for
their peace, notwithstanding these differences, I desire to know whether that
should be called peace, when a Dominican is burned by Franciscans; and a Canon
in Sevill is condemned as an Heretic for a point either not defined, or
defined for him, by the second Council of Nice? And again, The fourth
Article, Whether any of them have published in printed books, or openly and in
private conference taught any thing contrary to the belief of the Catholic
Roman Church? Answer they have, and that every way; in printed books, in
written copies or ma^uscripts, and (but most of all) in private conference.
Priest Watson Quodl. 2. It follows that they must either renounce the
Catholic Churches authority in crediting these false-hearted seditions, and
erroneous Jesuits, or else renounce the said Jesuiticall doctrine. Ib. Art 7.
Item, the seculars will be when not one Jesuit shall be left alive in the world
(unless they amend their lives and reform their order) but all damned for
Heretics, or thrust out of Gods Church, as Apostates and Atheists. Ibid.
what peace is that between the Priests and Jesuits, when the Priests call
them Heretics, Traitors, etc. Surely hereby it seems the peace that is among
such, is but a war under the name of peace, and this name or title is forced
by fear of the forged, but fiery and burning head of unity; for even the
infernal kingdom it self has some bond of unity, though not of verity and
charity. And accordingly the Papacy agrees under a head called Abaddon, and
Apollyon: And indeed this Author himself has showed us that where there is a
difference in any point of faith, upon such a difference one should be to
another as Pa* 110.
Cerinthus to Saint John: So that if they hold communion still, it seems by
his rule, it is not a spiritual but a carnal communion: And lest it should
be thought that saints fall not foul but only upon such Heretics as deny
the very prime Articles, etc. Charity mist P. 110.
not a communion of Saints, but a communion that is faulty; and whose fault is
this, that it is a communion?

But I say again to this Author, that his own Answer will be turned against
him as an unanswerable objection: For if Romists, being at such differences in
opinions, can yet hold communion one with another; why do they not hold the
like communion with other Christians that maintain the like differences? But
herein lies a mystery, and it is the mystery of iniquity. And if the Reader
know it not, I will bring him one that shall teach him; Quemcunque articulum
neget, non censetur haereticus, donec Ecclesiae doctrinae rebellis and contumax
sit. Lorca in 22. Disp. 3. n. 13.
Lorca plainly tells him, that he is no heretic that believes contrary to any
Article of faith, so he do not rebel against the Church: So the Pope (the
Church vertuall) is the whole matter of Popish religion, and Popish unity;
Believe the Pope, and obey him in what he says upon his word, and though you
believe not Christ's word in any Article of faith, you have both faith and
unity; Disobey Christ's command of believing the very Article of Christ's
Incarnation, if you believe the Pope, and be the Popes good subject, you shall
not be an heretic. Accordingly it is said of the Divines of Consentiunt autem
Canonici Colonientes, alias p^i and Catholici (and in margin) Colonienses
Canonici, aliqua ex part consentiunt haereticis. Vasques in 12. Disp. 20^. n.
3.
Coleine; they held an heretical opinion (in that point which the Cavalier
magnifies by calling it the Justification of souls) yet they were not
heretics, but godly Catholics. And of Est ins^gnis definitio Concilii
Tridentini, ubi non solum damnatur error Lutheri, sed etiam statuitur doctrina
de certitudine justificationis nost^ae; quae opinio quoque Catharino mi^i^i^e
resellitur. Yet a little after he says thus of Catharinus: Quamvis viro
catholico, docto, and pio, etc. Vasques in 12. Disp. 200. n. 39, 40.
Catharinus; he held contrary to the Council in the point of assurance, yet
was a catholic Bishop: And others before named by Bellarmine, contrary to the
Council of Nice in the point of Image Worship; yet in being good Papists, they
are good Catholics; So the Pope is the sum of Popish religion and unity: And
is it our unhappiness, that, because we believe not in the Pope, but believe
in Christ, our belief in Christ will not serve our turn for religion, unity,
and salvation?

But now in his Answer to the second objection, somewhat like a right Cavalier
of Rome, he runs at Tilt against Calvin, and thus he breaks his Lance on him:

The next objection is yet more stupid then the former; and I wonder how
Calvin's rage against the Church could put him so far out of his wits, as that
he would ever take it into his mouth: For it is he who (being pricked with
our noting their want of unity toward their fellow Brethren) thinks to retort
it back upon us, by saying that we are not in case to object any such thing
against them; for as much as that forsooth we have as many Sects among us, as
we have several Orders of religious men; and then he reckons up Benedictines,
Carmelites, Dominicans, Franciscans, and whom he will. Wicked man, who well
knew that none of these holy Orders does differ in any point of doctrine from
any of the rest; and are so far from breaking communion with them, as that
still they prevent one another in all honor and good respect.

All this we must take upon his bare word, and his title also which he gives
to Calvin, wicked Calvin: yet well fare the honest Belgicks purgers; for when
Calvin was named, they, in stead of Calvin, did put in studiosus; so, upon the
matter, they called him not wicked, but studious Calvin: But why wicked Calvin?
because he knew that no one of those Orders does differ in any point of
doctrine. Did Calvin know this, or does any man, yea, the Author himself yet
know it? We come but now from the differences of Jesuits and Priests,
Dominicans and Franciscans, etc. And this Author himself confesses there,
that each opposes the contrary opinion by all arguments that occur. Besides,
it is no new nor strange objection, that diverse covents have their several
Masters whom they follow. Again, look on the Jesuits doctrine of killing
Kings: do all Friars agree in these doctrines, upon which much more justly may
be cried out, wicked Mariana, wicked Friar Clement, wicked Barradius, wicked
Garnet? doctrines, in my opinion, plainly contrary to the faith; since the
faith is plainly taught by the Scripture in this point: And I think more
heretical it is to deny and contradict such a point, being thus plainly
taught in the Scripture by David, Solomon, Peter and Paul; then to deny what
the Pope has decided by letters sent from Rome unto Trent.

But will you see this Authors ingenuity? he accuses Calvin, 1 Samuel 26.9.
Eccles. 10.20. Romans 13.1, 2. 1 Pet. 2.13, 17. Inst. lib. 4. cap. 13. n. 14.
but produces not the place whence he takes his accusation: the nearest
place that I find is not for the Authors purpose; for there Calvin retorts not
the want of unity of faith among the Friars, by the diversity of Sects among
them: But Calvin shows, That the Friars, by dividing themselves from others in
the Sacraments and public Assemblies, did dissolve the Communion of the
Church, and depart from it, and excommunicate themselves: And he says, that so
many Ministeries as there be of this kind, so many Assemblies of schismatics
(he says not heretics, as differing in faith) which, troubling the Order of
the Church, are cut off from the lawful fellowship of the faithful. And, that
this departing should not be secret, they have given to themselves diverse
names of Sects: Neither were they ashamed to boast of that which S. Paul does
so much detest; In stead of Christians we hear some called Benedictines, some
Franciscans, some Dominicans. So that here we find neither mention of
Carmelites, nor indeed of differing in points of faith; but of a schismatic
separation from other Christians by different sects, expressed by different
names. And to them he might have added Jesuits, who by a more near separation
have divided Jesus from Christ, and so themselves from Christians; though, as
it has been told them (and as it is said by a Pope from S. Paul) all
Christians are called ad societatem Jesus Christi, to the society both of Jesus,
and of Christ, 1 Cor. 1.9. But surely, if this be the Authors place in Calvin,
it is likely he has either forgotten Calvin, or was not trusted with the
reading of Calvin; and some one that was trusted, but not trusty, told him it
would serve his turn, and deceived him.

As for the wonderful wisdom which this Author speciously sets forth in the
differences Habitus and tonsura modicum conferunt; sed mutatio morum, and
integra mortificatio passionum verum faciunt religiosum. T. Kemp. de Imit.
Christ. lib. 1. c. 17
of those Order; That wisdom is here come to pass which Solomon condemns,
when he says, Salvatur secularis per fidem in Christum, per eandem and
Religiosus. Non te salvabit quod Minoritanus (...), sed quod Christianus. Ferus
in Romans 3.
Be not wise over much: for humane wisdom has so far wrought herein, that
Orders have been multiplied far beyond the gifts of continency; yea, above the
good both of Church and Common wealth. And so far were they (as this Author
says) from stripping themselves from earthly incumberances to fly fast into
heaven, that too much they stripped both Lai^y and Clergy of earthly
maintenances, and therewith have made to themselves fleshly incumberances. But
of this wisdom before has been given to the Reader such a representation,
that I think it appeared to him not to be spiritual, but carnal, earthly, and
divelish, if not in the invention, yet in the execution; and therefore for
brevity thither I remit the Reader: Only I wish the Author would prove what he
says by some place of Scripture; That God inspired the Founders of Orders with
several spirits, and that there is a special spirit with which an Order was
first endued; especially if that Scripture were rightly applied by Abbot
Whitgift, See the life and death of Archbishop Whitgift.
That Monkery was a plant which the heavenly Father planted not, and therefore
should be pulled up by the roots: Which Prophecy was soon after fulfilled in
this Land.

The Cavalier comes now to dismount a third objection of Protestants concerning
Romish difference, which arises, as he says, in regard of the differences
between learned and unlearned men: which he assayeth to take away by a
distinction of explicit and implicit faith, in this manner; A man is said to
have explicit faith of any article or doctrine, when he has heard it
particularly propounded to him, and has some particular knowledge thereof, and
gives particular assent thereunto: But as for implicit faith of any article or
doctrine, a man is then said to have it, when he believes that concerning it,
which the Church teaches them explicitly who are capable thereof, although
for his own part he have not perhaps so much as heard of it in particular; or
if he did, he has forgot it; or if he did remember it, he has not capacity
enough to apprehend or understand it. And when he has showed this distinction,
he labors with great vehemence to prove it, and affirms, That without this it
would be wholly impossible to maintain any Church in any unity of faith at
all: and finally concludes, That this sword of ours is turned into a buckler
wherewith to defend them.

First, for the pains he takes to make good this distinction, he takes it to
make good our objection, and so labors for us, and against himself; for upon
this distinction being grounded we ground our objection, and say; that this
distinction leaves even the like differences amongst Romists for which they
accuse and damn us, and leaves no better unity among them then it leaves among
us. And if thus, then it is both a sword in our hand to hurt them, and a
buckler also to defend us against them: neither have they any buckler to defend
themselves against this sword; much less will this sword that wounds them,
become a buckler to defend the wounds which it self gives. But the only safe
way is, with that King who comes with the weak side, to send Ambassadors for
peace to the stronger.

Now to show that this distinction being strengthened does strengthen our
objection, and so is a true sword against Romists; I say, That in those points
of faith which are beyond the explicites or fundamentals, and are called
implicites, there are differences among Romists as well as among us; and these
differences are not only such as are discovered by the ell, by which the faith
of the unlearned is found shorter then that of the learned, but the Cloth it
self within the measure of the learned is torn into pieces, and the learned
themselves do differ in the belief of the said points among themselves as
well as from the unlearned: And this has bin showed before, and is indeed a
part of D. Whites undertaking formerly mentioned: I may instance in a point or
two, Audito nomine transubsta^tiationis, ta^ta inter recentiores aliquos
scholasticos de natura illis exorta fuit co^troversia, ut quo magis se ab ea
extricare conati fuerint, eo majoribus difficultatibus seipsos implicaverint.
Vasq. in 3. Dis. 181. ubi Andabatarum pugna graphice depingitur. vide etiam
Suar. in 3. Tom. 3. Disp. 50. S. 4. Propter hanc difficultatem Theologi in
explica^da hac action, and termino ejus valde divisi sunt. prima sententia
est, etc.
Transubstantiation is an Article of their new faith, and not usually reckoned
among their explicites; the one part of the learned has believed that the
substance of Bread being abolished, the Body of Christ is brought to the place
of it; another part believes that the substance of Bread is changed into the
substance of Christ's Body; (which I nothing doubt was the first meaning of this
new doctrine) each confutes either: And an unlearned man that stands by may
easily (being over-weighed with the reasons of both) either believe neither, or
somewhat else of his own. And indeed I my self have asked one of their See
the like in Anti Machavels preface of part 2.
Proselites whether he would chew or tear the body of Christ with his teeth;
and he told me that he did not think that their Alii tradunt corpus Christi
essentialiter frangi and dividi, and tame^ integru^ and incorruptibile
existere: quod se colligere asserunt ex confessione Berengarii, qui co^fessus
est cora^ Nicolao papa non solu^ sub sacrame^to, sed in veritate manibus
Sacerdotu^ tractari and ^ideliu^ de^tibus atteri. ^om. 4 D. 12.
Doctors would say it; so also in the point of Image Worship, a matter of deep
consequence, and much concerning life and death, yet by them left among
Implicites: One side of the Doctors holds a plain worship of the Image of
Christ with Latria, or divine honor; and others hold this honor given
properly to Images to be Idolatry, and either give it improperly, or give an
inferior reverence, or no religious reverence at all. But the Quis ergo
dubitat ho^u^ Imagines co^secratas vulgus orare and public colere, dum opinio
and men's Imperitorum artis co^cinnitate decipitur, auri fulgore perstringitur,
Arge^ti nitore, and candore eboris nebetatur. Min. Foel. in Octavio.
unlearned man when he sees the Image set in Churches covered with gold,
turning his head and eyes, weeping, and working miracls, says, with the
Lycaonians, Gods are common to us in the shape of men: and thinks he cannot
worship God too much, and therefore does it with all his soul and all his
might, even with a perfect Idolatry.

Now, are not these differences of moment among them in their Explicites? many
more such there are which it were, too tedious to repeat; and indeed their
differences must needs be much more then ours, because many of their learned
Explicites are errors, and in errors there can never be a full agreement;
for, if any one has that good spirit which maks discovery of them, he commonly
is opposed and contradicted by the others error; as here, the not worshippers
of the Image with divine worship, is opposed by the worshipper. Besides, he
that is in the dark, and sees not what to believe, if he believe any thing, he
can but believe an imagination of his own, and not a real ttuth; and so must
needs differ from him who sees the truth, and believes it being seen: As for
their unlearned who walk most in the dark, though sometimes it may happen two
blind men may stumble upon one path, yet it is impossible but that mostly they
must differ in their opinions concerning that which they know not.

And whereas our Author would feign make these differences to be an agreement
by a resolution to believe what the Church teaches; we have already showed that
this resolution does no way make the^ actually to agree that actually do
disagree. And the Canon of Sivill, I think, would scarcely have believed the
Inquisitors, if they had told him, We agree with you about Image Worship,
because we both resolve to believe as the Church teaches, though we condemn
you for an Heretic because we do not agree.

And indeed there is no possibility of making an actual agreement in those
lesser points, because of the different capacities and degrees of faith: And
God in the Scripture has not promised such an actual agreement to all the
members of the Church in all lesser points of doctrine; for he has not
promised a full and uniforme discovery of them to all: Yea, Stapleton
pr^fesseur de controverse^ a Do^ay, un de plus doctes Catholics de nostre
te^ps, and qui plus exactement a escrit cest argument tientque l^ S. Esprit est
Promis d'assister aux conciles seuleme^t es chooses necessaire^ and qu'es autres
ils pe^uent error. Ex. pacif. chap. 3.
it has been showed out of your own great Doctor Stapleton, by a Roman
Catholic, that in the discovery of small points the Church is not infallibly
directed: And even therefore I conceive that this distinction was first framed
to give leave for that difference which necessarily follows humane ignorance,
and which (even by the Cavaliers confession) cannot be avoided in different
capacities, and measures of faith: And yet having acknowledged such a necessity
of this distinction, he both labors to deny the differences on his own side,
for which this distinction was necessarily made, and which the very making of
it does acknowledge; and he labors to accuse our differences which this
distinction would excuse as well as his own: So it is still a sword against
Romists to confound them whilst they deny their own differences; neither can
the forge of Rome ever turn it to a Buckler to defend them in this denial:
But it is a Buckler to us to defend us from their objecting of differences
against us, seeing this distinction does both acknowledge a necessity of some
lesser differences, and so excuses us.

And thus may we come to a sight of the unity of faith in the Church; For in
the explicites, that is, in fundamentalls of absolute necessity which knit
unto Christ the foundation, there is and ought to be an unity; and this
substantial unity may cover the incurable differences in the lesser implicit
points being held by Infirmity, and not with Contention, Scandal, and Schism:
For unity in fundamentalls does take away the damning censure of differences in
lesser points when there is a will of believing right in these points, but a
want of power to attain this belief. And so these differences in lesser
points not being put upon account for the will of unity in them, and for the
real unity in fundamentalls, this real unity in fundamentalls is accounted an
entire, or at least a solid and saving unity: So that the unity is not to be
reckoned from this, that all do actually agree in this belief of all lesser
points, (for in diverse of these points diverse do necessarily differ;) but
because their unity in fundamentalls, and a will of unity in these lesser
points wherein they differ (the imputation of smaller differences being thus
taken away) are accounted to them for an entire, or at least for a sufficient
unity. And this truth is in not much unlike Terms to be seen in Tertullian:
Tertullian de velandis virgin. cap. 1.

The rule of faith is only unmovable. And de Praes. c. 12. Quaeramus ergo in
nostro and a nostris and de nostro, idque du^taxat quod salva regula fidei
potest in quaestionem devenire. Let us inquire or dispute of that which may
come into question without hurting the rule of faith.


Regula quidem fidei una omnino est, sola immobilis, and irreformabilis,
credendi scilicet in unicum Deum, omnipotentem mundi conditorem, and Filium
ejus Iesum Christum, etc.

But hereof more must be said in the following Chapters, wherein the Author
brings us to fundamentalls, being himself indeed necessarily brought to them
by this former distinction of Explicites and Implicites; yet he goes about to
fight against that unity which is established by this distinction, and against
the distinction which himself has established, and so will be accounted a
Trespasser by destroying what he has built; but indeed this distinction
being resisted by him, will resist and overthrow him.

In the mean time this stands still firm and unremoved, That the Romists have
great, sharp and weighty differences among them, as weighty, if not far
weightier then Protestants; and therefore they want charity to Protestants in
damning Protestants for such differences, while for the like or greater
differences, even de fide, they are bountiful to give salvation each to other:
and this they do because they are servants of one Master the Pope; whose
service we wanting should indeed be no more hated for this freedom, then
Israel for being delivered out of the bondage of Egypt: Exodus 14.5.
Yet both then and now we see the Egyptians make after us with violence and
malice, hating us for no other fault but for our freedom from Egypt: But God
that then began, and after made good his work of deliverance, I hope will do
it also for us, and he will be above them, even in that wherein they were proud
above us; Ex. 18.10, ^^.
and cover the Sea of Rome, the mother of uncharitableness, with a Sea of
confusion.

CHAP. X.
Containing an answer to the Cavaliers eighth Chapter, wherein he quarrels at
the distinction of Fundamental, and not Fundamental: and is divided into
three Sections.

SECT. I.
First, Shows the Protestants separation from Rome to be reasonable, though
it be true that some in the Church of Rome may be saved. Secondly, That the
Papists are the faulty causes of that separation.

A City generally infected with the plague, and a few persons only being free,
will it be thought a reasonable question to be proposed to some that fly
from this City, Why do ye fly, since you know and acknowledge that all are
not infected to death, but some live in this City? But if the King of that
City should banish all that should say that the Plague were in the City, yea,
would put them to death; were it not yet a far more unreasonable question to
ask those who had given out such a report, Why do you fly that are banished?
and, Why do you fly that must die if you fly not? Yet such are the questions
of this Author in the head of this Chapter, of which, it seems, that the
repetition might serve for a confutation. It is the acknowledgement and
complaint of a Cass. Consult. Art. 7. Praecipuam causam hujus calamitatis and
distractionis Ecclesiae, illis assignandam qui inani quodam fastu
Ecclesiasticae potestatis inflati, recte and modeste admonentes superbe and
fastidiose contempserunt and repulserunt. Quare nullam Ecclesiae pacem
sperandam puto, nisi ab iis initium fiat qui distractionis causam dederunt,
etc. Item in libello de Off. pii viri. De correctione admonentes, and ad
curationem exhortantes, operamque suam ad id efficiendum offerentes, non modo
reji^iunt, and ab Ecclesiae societate depellunt; verum etiam multis in locis
crudeliter interficiendo censuerunt: quae res huic miserabili schismati
occasionem dedisle videtur.
son of the Church of Rome, The chief cause of the calamity of the Church
is to be ascribed unto them, who being puffed up with the vain pride of
Ecclesiastical power, have proudly and contemptuously despised and driven away
those who rightly and modestly admonished them, etc. And again, Those who
speak to them of amendment, that exhort them to be healed; yea, that offer
their help to effect it, they not only cast out, and drive from the fellowship
of the Church; but also in many places have judged them miserably to be slain:
which thing seem; to have given the occasion of this wretched schism.

See here Rome diseased, and her healers cast out that tell her of her
diseases, yea, cruelly slain. And now, if the Author be not ashamed, let him
ask why Protestants fly from Rome; yea, let him ask of Saint John the Divine,
why men should go out of Babylon, that they may not be partakers of her sins,
nor of her plagues; and of Christ himself, if they persecute his members in
one City, why should they fly into another; and of the blind man in the
Gospel, why do you stay out of the Synagogue when you are cast out? Surely,
when the Author uses these questions, what will his Readers think, but that
he is very unreasonable to have Protestants stay where they are cast out, or
where they must be spiritually or corporally slain for staying? This
unreasonablenesse of his puts me in mind of a Captain, who espying his enemy
going up Ludgate hill faster then he could follow him, having drawn his sword,
called out to him, and swear that if he did not stay, he would kill him; but
the other believed that if he had stayed he should be killed, and therefore
went away the faster: So this Cavalier, when the Pope drives out Protestants
before him with excommunications, pestilence, fire and sword, he cries after
them that they shall be damned if they stay not, whereas they doubt that they
shall be damned and killed if they stay: indeed, this was a great fault of
theirs, that they did not stay to be killed, that, by taking their death
patiently, the Pope might go on with selling Indulgences and his other
merchandises quietly. Yet may you hear the Cavalier even choleric in such
unreasonable questioning; With what color could certain single, base, and
filthy men have presumed to depart from the visible Catholic Church of Christ
our Lord, and to erect their conventicles as they did, if they had not at least
professed that they could not find salvation there? Where first we
acknowledge the titles to be of the Authors mere bounty, out of a Romish
Treasury of charity mistaken; and because they bear the superscription of
Rome, we send them back to Rome, as being theirs and not ours. But secondly,
we deny that they departed from the catholic Church; for, in the second
Chapter, we have showed that Protestants have still communion with the
catholic Church; they fled not from health, but from the plague; not from
salvation, but damnation; not from the whole, but from the sick: Neither did
they fly only, but were cast out and banished; and not only cast out, but in
danger of death if they stayed, except they would deny that the plague of Rome
was a disease. The remnant that has salvation there they pity, and love as
their living brethren in a deadly Pesthouse, or Israel in Egypt, sweating under
the burdens of brick, and under the whips of Egyptian and Romish Taskemasters.
And whereas the Cavalier speaks of Conventicles, to his grief, he sees that
they are not shut up in private Conventicles, but have obtained large
Congregations: And being excommunicated from the Romish Synagogue, as the blind
man from the Jewish, Jesus has found John 9.35. The word found seems to
import, that Jesus sought him being cast out, and seeking found him. So Ferus
out of Ezekiel. 34.16. I will s^ck that which was lost.
them, and vouchsafed his communion to them; and he not only converseth with
them, but teaches them: he has taught their Teachers by giving them gifts
from on high, and he has taught the hearers by writing his Laws in their
hearts; he has given them the spirit of prayer and praise; and they have
prayed heartily against Babylon, her Idolatries, Invasions, Treasons; and being
heard, they have given praises for the ruins of Babylon, and the deliverances
of Sion: and having such encouragements from Jesus, can you blame them if they
meet in Congregations where Jesus thus meets with them, and is in the midst of
them with his grace and blessings? As for this Nation (whom this Authors words,
by the language he writes in, should chiefly concern) we have a true Church,
and an orderly Reformation, Cassander, a better Romish Eos damnare non possum
qui in fundamentis Apostolicae doctrinae persistentes, studio sincerae
Religionis cum aliqua correctionis indigere ab eruditis and piis viris admoniti
intelligant, in aliqua Ecclesiae part, praeunte summa authoritate, accedente
co^muni illius Ecclesiae consensu, in doctrinae genere aliqua repurgarunt. Quis
enim membro vitio vertat, si reliquo corpore laborante, and sui curam
negligente, ipsum sui curam suscipiat? Cassander de Offic. pii viri.
Author, being Judge.

And whereas the Cavalier accuses at once both our straightness and our
largeness; That being fallen into straights, we become so bountiful and
large, as to affirm, that the differences between us concern not the
fundamental points; and that Romists may be saved. I think that the Author
may misleade his Reader both in our straights and our largeness; for we are at
large where he counts us in straights, and we are straighter then his words of
our largeness would seem to import: for few Protestants, that I know, do say
without limitation, That Romists generally may be saved; yea, our Author
himself will not suffer them to be saved, though they hold fundamentals: for,
if they hold them by a humane faith, because the Pope, their friend, tells them
so, his own doctrine will not suffer them to be saved. But indeed, for those
that believe fundamentals by a supernatural faith, we do say, that they may
be saved by this faith. But of this in the former Chapter we have spoken more
fully; only let this Author know, that we do it not for any straights (as
he would persuade) but out of largeness, even largeness of verity and
charity; and I may return the saying of Saint Paul to all true believers,
even in Sodom and Egypt, Ye are not kept straight in us, but in your selves:
2. Cor. 6.12.13.
for a recompense, be ye therefore enlarged; for we justly expect a return
of the like acknowledgement of our salvatiom from all true members of Christ,
and say, That the denial of it, according to the Authors words, Lays an
heavy charge of uncharitableness upon the denyers.

SECT. II.
The Cavalier is angry at the distinction of matters fundamental or not
fundamental: 1. Because some Popish vanities are thereby excluded. 2. Because
the Popes power to make slight matters fundamental is denied.

He goes on both to clear and condemn us in this which follows: This
discourse of theirs, and their standing so much upon fundamental points of
faith in the sense which they use, is a mere Chimera; but it is frequented by
them through an high kind of craft: For, though it be most true, That some
doctrines are in themselves of far more importance then some others, because
the knowledge thereof may be necessary for the performance of some duty which
is required at our hands; or else because they may contain the very heads, and
first grounds of Christianity more then others do, and therefore do exact a
more explicit belief at the hands of Christians, and consequently may be
accounted in some respests more fundamental, etc. Here, though they seem to
accuse us of an high craft* and of a Chimera; yet withal, thus far he
acknowledges our Truth, and clears it from being a Chimera, That some
doctrines are of far more importance then some others, containing the very
heads and first grounds of Christianity more then others do, and therefore
do exact a more explicit belief, and consequently may be accounted, in some
respects, more fundamental. This I desire the Reader to observe, because this
confirms that which has been formerly spoken concerning the agreement
between Fundamentals and Explicites, and must serve hereafter for a Confutation
of his own objections against Fundamentals. In the mean time, that which
pains him for the present is this, That we do not believe every Decree or
Error of the Pope, as well as these important grounds of Christianity: for
thus he presently subjoyneth, There is no doctrine at all concerning Religion,
the belief whereof is not fundamental to my salvation, if the catholic
Church propound and command me to believe it. So the Cavaliers quarrel
against us is this, That we do not make the worship of Images, kindred of
Gossips, and such popish vanities, fundamental to our salvation, as the
Articles of the Trinity, and Christ's Incarnation. A fearful blasphemy, and
which should make his heart hate his hand for writing it: but they well deserve
to be given up to the belief of such impious errors, who receive not the
love of the truth revealed in the word with du^ estimation: For such will
easily equal the word of Man to the word of God, and will not suffer the word
of God to stand for a sufficient saving verity, nor a sufficient ground of
unity, except man give his word for the word of God, and Man add his word to
the word of God: For* if the Pope give his word for a doctrine contained in
Gods word, then his Popish disciples must receive it; and until that they may
without heresy not believe it: and if the Pope add his word to the word of
God, Gods word is not a sufficient ground of unity, but the unity made by that
word is to be torn in pieces, if withal we do not join the word of the Pope
in one belief with it. Thus is the Pope made Christ's Rival, and takes the
faith of the spouse from her husband to himself. And so, whereas he would
accuse us of an high craft, our craft is no other then that simplicity of S.
Paul, by which he did labor to espouse the Church as a chaste Virgin to one
Husband which was Christ: 2. Cor. 11.2, 3.
But this Romish doctrine is the very craft of the old Serpent and Dragon,
which goes about to seduce Eve (the pattern of the Church) from her Husband,
Iste seipsum praedicat non sponsum, and idcirco pellendus est de interiori
thalamo, quia Adulter est foris. Agab. ad Clericos.
and to marry her to the Pope, or rather to make her his Adulteress. But let
him remember, Whoremongers and Adulterers (especially such great ones) God will
judge; Yet this would he approve by that which follows: For there is no
error in faith, which may not be made damnable by the manner of holding it,
when it is done so obstinately as that in defense thereof a man denies the
authority of the Catholic Church. But briefly I answer; First, that the Church
cannot make a point of faith of that which is none. Secondly, Stapleton tells
us that the Church has no promise to be infallibly directed in the decision
and resolution of small or light points, and so the Church not having this
infallible direction, cannot have authority to make such points fundamental,
nor to command faith to them where she has no infallible direction in them.
Thirdly, the Church in these lesser points not having this authority, he does
not disobey the authority of the Church who believes not these points which
she has no authority to command as points of faith. Fourthly, if the Church
were this foundation, and could make a point fundamental, yet the Pope, and
his confederacy for whom this Author fights, is not the Church. Fifthly, the
same Popish Church has taught and propounded many gross errors and untruths
for points of doctrine, which are so far from being fundamental to
salvation, that they shake the very foundation, and so are rather fundamental
to damnation. But here I cannot but complain of this Author in that he uses
craft, which himself accuses; for, while he goes about to lay the Pope (the
Chimera of Rome) for a foundation of faith, he names him not in his whole
book, but still tells us of the catholic Church, let him come forth plainly
out of his Covert, and show us his catholic Church, even the Pope and his
adherents, if he be not ashamed of them; and not thus draw disciples to a
fancy, and a piece of Poetry, under the real and reverend name of the
catholic Church. But this may serve as a caveat to the Reader, that the
Cavalier tells us of the Church, when the Pope is his errand. Another point
whereof he seems to be ashamed is the worship of Images, which he never
reckons among the doctrines of difference; but, if it please him, he may now
fitly conjoyne them together, and then his discourse may run thus: If the
Pope decree the worship of Images, it may be fundamental to salvation, if with
the denial of Idolatry the Popes authority be denied: Yet our Author having
spoken that which is proved to be fearfully untrue in his sense, (that what the
Pope and his conspiracy under the name of the catholic Church do propound,
and command to be believed is fundamental) he is bold to say, This (untruth)
is unanswerably proved by the mere catalogues of heresies which have been
made by several Fathers of the Primitive Church, and especially by S. Austin,
in his Treatise ad quod vult Deum: which I have touched before, and which I
earnestly exhort my Reader to peruse at large. This is so far from being
unanswerable, that it has been answered; and our Author can never make it
good that those points, which he acknowledges to be of little importance in
themselves; were there declared to be fundamental, for being obstinately
maintained against the decision and command of the Pope and his Council,
e^ther private, or public; so that the Author only makes up with boldness
and undertaking, what he wants in evidence and proof.

And, as in the following piece he preferres his Reader to the sixth and fifth
Chapters, so I also refer him to the answer of those Chapters; and there,
besides other solutions, he may see that the example of Saint Cyprian makes
mightily against the Popes authority, since it plainly appears that Saint
Cyprian did hold the Popes fallibilitie, when he plainly held the contrary to
that which the Pope had decided.

And thus, being put besides his premises, he is also deprived of his
conclusion: The distinction of points of faith into fundamental and not
fundamental does stand still in such full truth and power; that the unbelief
of points not fundamental does not presently forfeit salvation, though the
same points be decided by the Pope, and his conspiracy; much less do worship
of Images, Prayer in an unknown tongue, salvation by merits, the Popes
supremacy (especially taken for a foundation of faith) though decided and
commanded by the Pope, cause damnation by being unbelieved, but rather by being
believed.

SECT. III.
The Papists as much bounden to declare their Explicites, as the Protestants
their Fundamentalls. This distinction may be rightly used for the
manifestation of our union with the Fathers, to prove the perpetual
visibilitie of the Church, professing the same Fundamentalls with us; but
unjustly objected as a ground of our severitie against Papists, who are
punished here as Traitors, for overthrowing the foundations of State; not as
Heretics for contradicting the foundations of Faith.

He goes on: I should be glad to know of the Authors of this distinction,
what points of their faith which are controverted between them and us, or
between the Lutherans and them, are fundamental, and which are not
fundamental; Then he says, That a fundamental point being such, that
whosoever believes it not cannot be saved; there is nothing which more imports
a man exactly to learn, then what is fundamental, and what not, and yet there
is absolutely no one thing which has been so frequently and so importunately
desired, as that they would give in some exact List or Catalogue of all and the
only fundamental points of faith; and yet there is no one thing wherein we
are so little satisfied, and which upon the matter they do so absolutely
refuse; And yet (as has been here expressed) if according to their grounds, a
man should fail of believing any one fundamental point of faith, by his not
knowing (through their fault) that the point which he believed not was
fundamental, he must be sure to perish, and that for ever.

First to his question, what are fundamentalls, and what not, he ought to give
an answer himself; for he himself has told us, Page 74. That some doctrines
are of far more importance then others, because they may contain the very
heads and first grounds of Christianity more then others do, and therefore
exact a more Explicit belief, and consequently may be accounted in some
respects more fundamental. It being then acknowledged by him, that there are
such doctrines of far greater importance then others, that exact a more
Explicit belief, and are more fundamental; why does he not answer himself
concerning that which himself affirms, and yet withal questioneth? Let him
truly tell us, or himself if he please, which are those doctrines of more
importance, that contain the heads of Christianity, and are more fundamental,
and give us a List of them, and we may tell him or he may tell himself an
answer to his question: And then also may he by this List, as by a Touchstone
and Rule, find what differences between us and any others are fundamental
and not fundamental. So that he being herein engaged himself, either he
has spoken that whereof he cannot give an account, or else asks of us an
account of that which he knows, and wherein he can answer himself. And
indeed the Quantum ergo ad prima credibilia, quae sunt articuli fidei, tenetur
homo explicit credere, sicut and tenetur habere fidem: quantum aute^ ad alia
credibilia, no^ tenetur homo explicit credere, sed solum implicit, vel in
praeparatione animi in quantu^ est paratus credere quicquid divina Scriptura
continet, etc. Aq. 22. q. 2. A. 5. See more hereafter in the diversity o^
Explicites.
Authors own partners or rather leaders, have laid the foundation of these
fundamentalls in their Explicites: for their Heads, Articles, and Grounds of
Religion to which they require an Explicit belief, are such as those which we
call fundamental; yea, not only we but the Author himself calls such
points more fundamental, and his own Priests The Priest T.W. as I find him
alleged by B. White in his Orthodoxe Page 134. And the Priest Master Smith
asks Mr. Walker whether the Church of England may err in points fundamental:
and the Council of Trent, Sess. 3. calls the Creed Fundamentum firmum and
unicum.
call them positively fundamental. Besides, the very rules of faith mentioned
and rehearsed by De praescript. cap. 14. Certe, aut non obstrepant, aut
quiescant adversus Regulam. Nihil ultra scire, omnia scire est.
Tertullian and Irenaeus lib. 1. cap. 19. Cum teneamus Regulam veritatis; id
est, Quia sit unus Deus omnipotens, etc.
Irenaeus, and other Fathers In his vere completur Prophetia qua dicitur verbum
consummans, and brevians in AEquitate -- Istud indicium posuerunt, per quod
agnosceretur is qui Christum vere secundum Apostolicas Regulas praedicaret.
Ruffin. in Symbolum. Sigillum integrum, id est, Symbolum Catholicum. Optat.
lib. 2. adversus Pa. Symbolum est breviter complexa Regula fidei. Et, totius
Catholicae legis fides Symboli colligitur brevitate. Aug. de Temp. S. 119.115.
Regula fidei pusillis, magnisque communis. Aug de fide, etc. Est autem Symbolum
per quod agnoscitur Deus, quod quique proinde credentes accipiunt ut noverint
qualiter contra Diabolum fidei certamina praeparent. In quo quidem pauca sunt
verba, sed omnia continentur Sacramenta, etc. Isid. de off. Eccl. lib. 2. c.
22. Patrum consensio non in omnibus legis divinae quaestiunculis, sed solum,
certe, praecipue, in fidei Regula. Item in iis duntaxat praecipue quaestionibus
quibus totius Catholici dogmatis fundamenta nitantur. Vincent. Livin. cap. 39
and 41.
, the Symboles and Creeds of Nice* other Councels, and of Athanasius, and
Lirinensis his precipua Capita, or chief Heads (yea, he has the word
fundamental) are sums and acknowledgements of such fundamentals. And now how
can this Author either be so far uncatechised as not to know such grounds
of Religion, or call Protestants the authors of this distinction? and how can
he object any thing against Protestants, or require any thing of them, but
object the like against his own Teachers; yea, against the Fathers of the
Church, and require the like of them? Accordingly, how can he ask an exact
List and Catalogue of Fundamentals of Protestants more then of Fathers, yea, of
his own Doctors and Masters? And indeed, let him bring an exact List and
Catalogue of all the only Articles of Faith contained in the Fathers rules of
faith, and an exact List of all and the only Explicites of the Romists; and
he may quickly receive a Catalogue of our Fundamentals. But this Author is
here again exceedingly out of his way, and that the Title of his Chapter might
tell him by the wariness of it; for his business is not to deny a distinction
of fundamentals and not fundamentals, in regard of greater or lesser importance
of the Articles themselves; but, this being granted, to adjoyne and
superedifie; that, though this distinction do stand, yet even points of lesser
importance, and in themselves not fundamental, may be made fundamental by
the command and authority of the Pope: So that his quarrelling at this
distinction is not only a quarrel from his errand, but a quarrel against the
Fathers, and a quarrel against himself, and against his fellow-Romists: and
if he make quarrels against himself and his fellows, why may we not leave
them and him to make up their own quarrel among themselves?

And accordingly, whereas this Author makes a fearful noise how dearly it
concerns men to know which are fundamentals, we might turn him to get an
answer for this outcry from himself and his fellow-Romists, yea, from the
Pope himself; for Romists say, that the Explicites are such points, that he
who does not know them cannot be saved: Then the Authors terrible words do
thus warfare against himself (putting Explicites for Fundamentals) That there
is nothing in all Christian Religion which imports a man more exactly to
learn, then what are these Explicites, without the knowledge whereof none can
be saved: And an exact List and Catalogue should be given of these Explicites,
which yet the infallible Pope has never given to his Papists: So that if a
Papist should fail of believing an Explicit, by not knowing it to be an
Explicit, he must be sure to perish, and that for ever.

Yet the Cavalier (in wrath and war against unity) proceeds further in
fighting against his own confessed and undeniable distinction of Explicites
and Fundamentals; and he so proceeds, that it may easily be seen that his
anger puts out the eye of his judgment, or carries him beyond the kenne of it:
For thus he says, Whereas, if either they framed not the distinction of
Fundamentals at all, or else would clearly let men know which points alone were
fundamental; then this would follow, That whenever we should convince them
in any particular Doctrine which is denied by them, and which yet was believed
by the ancient Fathers, they would be obliged to confess, that either that
point was not fundamental, which would dis-able them from railing at us for
believing the same; or else that the Fathers were of a different Religion in
fundamental points from them, and that in their own opinion those very
Fathers could not be saved: which would put them to much prejudice another
way. Here leaving to the Author his own term of railing, (wherein I wonder
he should delight, but that I see elsewhere he takes pleasure in the
mentioning of scurrill and blasphemous Invectives) I say, that some errors be
not fundamental which are found in the Fathers, and now maintained by Romists:
yet we are not disabled by this distinction to reprove Romists for them; for
we do not say in this distinction, that no errors should be reproved but
those which are fundamental, for even lesser errors are to be reprehended;
but we say, that these errors in lesser points do not break the unity which
by greater and more fundamental points is made between Christ and his
members, and between the members themselves.

And secondly, we say, that Romists are much more to be reproved if they hold
any errors of the Fathers now in controversy between us; for these
controverted errors have been now by the Scriptures more evidently discovered
to be errors; and it is a thing far more worthy of blame, if a man should
run into a ditch by day, then if he should stumble into it by night.

But whatsoever exactness this Author may require or imagine in this
distinction, this exactness being granted, it will never make it to appear,
that we differ from the unanimous belief of the Fathers in the maine points
mentioned in their rules of faith, now called Fundamentals. And for his
Argument concerning the Lutherans, it does not endanger us; for, if the
Lutherans should be found by this distinction to differ from us in these
fundamental points which should unite them to Christ, it is no hurt to us to
renounce the communion of those who renounce communion with Christ. And on the
other side, if by it they be found to differ from us in points not
fundamental, it would be no danger nor just disreputation to us to avow those
points, wherein we differ, not to be fundamental: but we will much rather
disavow the quarrels which are made where there is no fundamental difference.

The period which follows, as far as it is a true Narration of our way of
making peace by this distinction with the Fathers and the Lutherans, is a
commendation both of the distinction, and our peacemaking by it. But, by the
way, I deny, That Romists have brought us from denying via facti; That the
Fathers taught the doctrine of Praying to the Saints, or for the dead, in the
sense and manner of Rome; for the Fathers did not unanimously teach praying to
Saints; I am sure Saint Profecto quod sacer Psalmus pe^sonat verum est, Quoniam
pater meus and matter mea dereliquerunt me, Dominus autem assumpsit me; Si ergo
dereliquerunt nos patres nostri, quomodo curis nostris and rebus intersunt? si
autem parents non intersunt, qui sunt alli mortuorum qui noverint quid agamus,
quidve patiamur? Ib^ ergo sunt spiritus defunctorum ubi non vid^n^ quaecunque
aguntur, aut eveniunt in ista vita hominibus. August de cura pro mortuis cap.
13.
Augustine, who was above 400. years after Christ, does deny Saints to know
ordinarily the affairs of the living which happen after their decease. And for
prayers for the dead in Purgatory, the Cavalier cannot show a good pattern
for more years then the former.

As for the difference in the number of Canonical Books (which it seems this
Author is sorry that it is not avowed to be fundamental) it is not
altogether new, but ancient; and we see it at this day in the Syriack: and it
were pity to cut off from salvation all the Churches and Fathers which ever
differed in this number; yea, Major difficul^as est circa posteriora Capita
ejusdem libri ( Esther) ab illis verbis, Cap. 10. Dixitque Mordochaeus, a Deo
facta sunt omnia. Haec enim non esse veram Scripturam, neque pertinere ad
librum Esther Canonicum, opinati sunt ante Concilium Trident. Lyranus, Dion,
Carthusianus, Hugo Camotensis, and Caj^tanus; and post Concilium, Sextus
Senensis, Lorca ^ract. de locis Cathol. lib. 1. Dis. 3. membr. 3. n. 23. Liber
Baruch: Hunc librum a Canone rejiciunt nonnulli ex haereticis; and ex
Catholicis Dri^do. Idemque sentit Call. in fine libri Ester, qui nullos libros
admittit praeter eos quos Hieronymus expres^e Canonic^s vocat. Id. n. 27. and
similia passim in seq.
he must damn many Romists, if he will make this difference fundamental:
They that believe all necessary saving truths, though they be not fully
persuaded that just so many Books were wholly indicted by some one of the
Apostles or Evangelists, I know now how this Author may damn them, if these
saving truths being believed do save them: sure I am, that in their own
Explicites, or points of importance, which we call fundamental, and they say
must be known and believed under pain of damnation, they do not mention any
names, much less the number of Canonical Books: So, it seems, by their own
doctrines, the names and full number of the books of Scripture are none of
their own Explicites and Fundamentals; but other points believed may serve to
save such believers: And, if such may be saved though they know Etiam quando
aliqui dubitabant, libri isti erant Canonici, licet illi probabili ignorantia
excusantur, negaren^. Id. n. 38.
not the set number of Books; why would you have us to break unity for a
point, the not explicit knowing and believing whereof, in your own doctrine,
does not exclude salvation?

He goes on, and objects a second good use that we make of points
fundamental, which is a proof of the visibility of our Church. And true it
is, That if there have been still a visible Roman Church, which has held
points fundamental, until the Reformation begun by the Protestants, then is
that visibility since that time still continued by us. The former we leave to
the Romists to prove for their own sakes; and the later we can very easily
prove for our selves: And whereas he repeats (but confutes not) that some of
ours have said, that there is no necessity that the Church must have been
continually visible: I tell him, that if this were an absurd Doctrine (as he
terms it) they were led to this absurdity with a great show of reason. For (not
to run out at large into the common place of visibility) when Universum Romanum
Imperium funditus concussum and emotum est. Vin^. Liri. cap. 6.
Lirinensis says at the deluge of Arianisme, The whole Roman Empire was
fundamentally overthrown and removed: And we read elsewhere the Liberius,
Sozom. lib. 4. c. 14. Cum his vero simul projicit a sancta Dei Catholica
Ecclesia, similiterque anathematizari praevidimus: Et Honorium, qui fuerat Papa
antiquae Romae, ^o quod invenimus per scripta quae ab eo facta sunt ad Se^gium^
quia in omnibus mente^ ejus secutus est, and impia dogmata con^irmavi^. Con^.
6. Act. 13.
Pope himself was turned Heretic, where was the visibility of the Cavaliers
Romish Church it self? But I need not to dwell much on the defense of this
doctrine, because he only confutes it by the Epithet Absurd; and because that
which follows next most concerns the present business; though this also is a
rehearsal and not a confutation: Some few of them affirm (when they are urged
by us to show that visible Church of theirs) that theirs and ours do make but
one true Church, and so in showing the visibilitie of ours, they do withal
(as they say) show their own to have been visible. And these men tread in
this way, because they well know that no other Church but ours can indeed be
showed to have been visible through all ages since Christ our Lord. But I must
here deny his repetition, if by the word Church he mean the Pope, and those
that have made him the foundation of their faith; for these and ours, we say
not to be one Church with us, because they have changed the foundation: But if
you mean those that by believing fundamentalls have fastened their faith on
Christ the true foundation, we allow That our Church has been one with them,
and has been visible in their visibilitie; yet avoiding this, That he can
ever prove that other Churches have not been as truly and continually visible
as Rome; for it will still trouble the Author to show that the Churches of
Greece and Africa, have bin less truly visible then Rome, since the Primitive
times of their first conversion.

And now this Autho^, being past our use of fundamentalls for visibility, yet
walks on, though beyond his right business: but he that is out of the way in
his maine matter of making division to excuse Romish uncharitableness, may
well walk into by-ways in his prosecution of it: yet I cannot deny that he
has two Errands; one to bring forth a jest upon our Fox and his followers,
under the names of Fox and Geese: But, if it had pleased this Author duly to
follow this Fox in the reading of his Martyrologie, he might have found out the
true Fox that follows, and tears, and destroys those whom our Author by a
new Metamorphosis, and Romish transubstantiation has changed into Birds. His
second Errand he thus expresses; I find, when they are put to name their
particular Professors of former ages, they do but muster up those several
single false doctrines which have bin held by other heretics by Retaile, during
ten or twelve (...) since Christ our Lord: many of which doctrines togeth^r
themselves do now profess in gross; for what other men of former times did
they ever or can they ever name, as men of their Religion, but such as believed
some one or two of those heretical doctrines which now themselves embrace, and
wherein they are contrary to us. But all this, as it is not very pertinently
brought in, to excuse Romish uncharitableness, so it is not very truly
objected; for we can prove our doctrines (which he calls heresies) by the
Fathers and Scriptures, and the Scriptures he cannot deny have been believed
above twelve ages. Besides, Popish Authors do acknowledge that the Waldenses
agree with Protestants in more See the History of the Waldenses, lib. 1. cap.
8. when it was said by a Jesuit, that the Waldenses, and the Ministers of
Calvin agree in twenty seven Articles, viz. About the Popes Supremacy,
Purgatory, Prayers to Saints, worship of Images, marriage of Priests,
sufficiency of Scriptures, etc. which are more then one or two points, Ibid.
part. 3. and lib. 1* ^b. 6. It is very likely their doctrine came from the
Apostles, and agreed with them; for Reynerius the Inquisitour says, Some hold
so: And again, They live justly before men, and believe all things well of
God, and all the Articles contained in the Creed; only they hate and blaspheme
the Romish Church. Speeds Chronic. Fox Martyrolog. a^ Ann. 1160. The
Confessor of L^wes the twelfth, being sent by him to examine some of the
Wal^enses, at his return wishe^h that ^e we^^ so good a Christian as the worst
of them. Histor. of the Waldense^, ^^b. 1. cap. 5.
then one or two doctrines; for they are said to be more then twenty wherein
we agree with them: And though afterward this Cavalier affirms it, yet he
proves not that for other points these were express heretics in the
Protestants opinion; neither do we hide any fundamental errors in them which
we object against Romists. But if these had not been in the world, it is most
true that the maine point of Popery, which is the Popes tyrannical headship of
the Catholic Church, the very root of Idolatries, errors and divisions, has
in See the Mystery of Iniquity, by Philip Momay L. of Plessis.
all ages been denied since it was first broached. But our Author is still much
displeased with fundamentalls, because by them we have unity with those who
have heretofore differed in some doctrines from their Papacy; for says he, If
it were not for this distinction, no man could be of the same Religion with
any other that is not wholly of the same Religion: so far forth at the least
as that he must not obstinately deny any one doctrine thereof, whether it be
important more or less, when once, as has been said, it is lawfully and
sufficiently propounded and commanded to be believed by the true Church; as it
is true and certain when Luther rebelled from the Church of Christ our Lord,
nor in any age before his time, there was in the whole world any one Kingdom,
or Country, or City, or Town, or Family of men, or Pastors, or Flock, yea or
any one single person so much as of Luthers own, and much less of the now
Protestant Religion, which is now forsooth so far refined beyond his. Here,
the Cavaliers true Church being that confederacy whereof the Pope is the head,
he would feign dissolve that solid unity which is made by fundamentals in
Christ Jesus the true head, to make a fictitious unity in the Pope: But if he
should cast off this only true and substantial ground of unity, which knits
together all the sound Churches that are at this day, or ever have been through
all Nations on the face of the earth since our Savior, to make an unity by
agreeing, under pain of damnation, in all points propounded and commanded by
the Pope and his Church of Rome, whether important more or less, he shall not
only by this means break the unity of all the true Churches on earth into
pieces, but of Rome it self: For (to return almost his own words) Since the
Pope, who has rebelled against Christ, and usurped the Headship of the Church,
first coined and established a Religion in Trent, neither then, nor in any time
before, there was in the whole world any one Kingdom or Country, or City, or
Town, or Family of men, or Pasture, or Flock, yea or any one single person,
who by a supernatural Faith, which this Author only approves, did embrace
the whole body, and every Article of the Trent Religion. Yea even at this day
it is not received in diverse parts that bear the name of the Church of Rome,
much less in Greece, Armenia, Syria, Ethiopia, most of which either know not,
or acknowledge not this Council, nor the Popes Supremacy. All these therefore
refusing any of these Articles, must be torn in pieces from the body of
Christ, and cast into Hell fire. Thus the Scarlet Whore, drunk with the blood
of the Saints, speaks in the right voice of the Harlot, If she may not have the
whole child, 1 Kin. 3.26.
let it be cut in pieces: Let the Church be distracted and damned, if the Pope
may not be her Lord and her Tyrant. And so whereas Christ was a head that gave
himself to death, to save his body from damnation; is not he an Antichrist
that throws the body of Christ into hell and damnation, to make himself the
head?

But in a third place he objecteth not an use of ours, but an abuse of his
own: For he abuses his Reader in saying to him, That the making of this
distinction between Fundamental, and not Fundamental points of Faith, and
the resolving not to declare which is which, does save them with a great part
of the ignorant world from the imputation of rigor in their proceeding with
us. For how could they persecute as they do, without extreme note of cruelty?
But neither the making nor hiding of Fundamentalls is the cause of prosecuting
Romists in this Kingdom, but the cause of their punishment has been their
own making of Treasons, miraculously revealed by Gods goodness,
notwithstanding their hiding, even in the vaults and depths of the earth. And
though there were no Fundamentalls of Religion, but only Fundamentalls of
State; the Fundamentalls of State are very plain, and cannot well be hidden,
which justify the execution of Rebels and Traitors. But of this some proof
has been given in the beginning of this Book, and the Author will call for
more toward the end.

As for that which follows, Yea, or even, how could they dissent without
apparent impiety from our belief and practice of those Doctrines wherein we
have had, and still have prescription of so many ages, if the contrary thereof
should be confessed by themselves not to be Fundamental? It is so weak, that I
wish that some child, and not the Cavalier, had spoken it to save his
reputation: For, will any man say that it is impiety to dissent from others in
ancient errors, though these errors be not Fundamental? Tertullian might
have taught our Author much more wisdom, who, upon the custom of an error
not very Fundamental, thus says, Hunc qui receperunt, veritatem consuetudini
anteponunt. Tert. de vel. virg. cap. 1. Consuetudo ^ine veri^a^e v^tustas
erroris est; propter quod relicto errore s^quamur verita^e. Cyp^. ^p^st. 74.
They that have received the holy Ghost, prefer truth before custom.

SECT. IIII.
Shows the differences amongst Popish Divines about their Explicites or
Fundamentals; with some reasons of those differences: and directions for
discerning fundamental points from others.

THe Cavalier thus goes on: It is more then probable, that one reason why they
are so unwilling to give in any Catalogue of the fundamental points is,
Because they know so well how ridiculous they would make themselves by the
infinite variety of their Catalogues. For, if it be so familiar with them to
be of different minds concerning particular doctrines, how much more would
they be so in this, which is a root of many branches, or rather a monster of
many heads; and so there can be no doubt, but that some of them would not be
more resolute in restraining the fundamental points into a narrow compass,
then others would be in enlarging them into a broader. The Author here goes
about to make the Fathers, yea, himself and his own partners ridiculous; for,
if variety in the Catalogues of Fundamentals, or chief heads and grounds of
Christianity be ridiculous; how shall the Fathers escape the merriments of
this Author? Yea, how shall himself and his own partners not be mocked by
himself? For it is plain, that neither Irenaeus nor Tertullian, in sundry
patterns of the rule of Faith, do enumerate Articles just of the same number
and breadth. Neither do the three usual Creeds hold equal measure by the
Authors ell; yea, let the Author himself, who confesses that there are such
Heads and Grounds of Christianity more fundamental, make a Catalogue of these
Heads, and he can never agree with all his fellows, who agree not among
themselves. And thus, if he will look into this glass, he may see himself
laughing at himself: And indeed, if the Reader will peruse the Romists where
they write of their Explicites, they may see the same variety wherewith the
Cavalier here makes himself merry; some contracting them into a narrower, some
enlarging them into a broader compass: And to save labor to the Reader, I
will here give him a Model of this variety: Quaedam in doctrina Christiana tam
fidei quam morum esse simpliciter omnibus necessaria ad salutem, qualis est
cognitio Articulorum Symboli Apostolici, december Praeceptorum, and nonnullorum
Sacramentotum; cae^era non ita necessaria, ut sine eorum explicita notitia, and
fide, and professione, homo salvari non possit. Bell. de verbo Dei. lib. 4.
cap. 11.
Bellarmine says, That there are some things in Christian Doctrine, as well of
faith as of manners, which are simply necessary to all unto salvation, as the
knowledge of the Articles of the Apostles Creed, ten Commandments, and some
Sacraments; other things not being so necessary, that without their explicit
knowledge, and faith, and profession, a man may not be saved.

But In Symbolo Apostolorum and Niceno, ^liqui praeter illos contin^ntur, quos
rudes non debent ex praecepto scire, nec fideles communiter; fed si quis audiat
eos in Symbolo contineri, debet credere: nam Communionem Sanctorum non omnes
sciunt; imo, etiam inter homine^ literatos non paucos invenias qui ignorant
quae sit haec Communio Sanctorum; Articulus autem de Ecclesia multis viris
doctis videtur difficilis ad docendum, and putant rudes in illo communiter
errare. -- Caeterum adhuc ego non dubitarem concedere esse non paucos rusticos
inter Christianos qui absque culpa ignorant aliqua mysteria ex iis quae
necessa^ia sunt. Vasques in 12. Disp. 121. n. 2.
Vasques thus differs from Bellarmine in some Articles of the Creed; There are
(says he) some Articles in the Apostles Creed, and the other of Nice, which
the ignorant are not commanded to know, nor commonly the faithful: for all do
not know the Communion of Saints; yea, you shall find not a few learned men
that know not what the Communion of Saints is; and the Article of the Church
seems hard to teach, and learned men think that the ignorant do commonly
err in it. Yea, he comes at length to this short measure of faith; I would
not doubt to grant that there are not a few Country people, that without fault
are ignorant of some of those mysteries which are necessary.

Azorius Quisque fidelium crede^e explici^e debeat omnes Articulos fidei, vel
qui juxta numerum Apostolorum duodecim in Symbolo continentur* vel qui juxta
Th^ol^gorum sententiam q^atuordecim proponuntur. -- Quaeritur, An quisque,
etiam vulgaris and rudis, credere explici^e debeat aliquid praeter praedictos
fidei Articulos. Sunt qui ita affirmant, e^ ratione permoti, quod unusquisque
expressim credere debeat, immortalem esse anima^ hominis; item, esse peccatum
originis, etc. -- Q^^rundam est opinio, unumquemqu^ fidelium debere credere
quicquid express in Symbolo Apostolorum continetur, and ob id minime sufficere
^i singul^ credant explicit qua^uordecim Articulos fidei, prout a Theologis
propununtur, quoniam quisque praecepto ac lege compellitur ad credendum
expressim descensum Christi Domini ad inferos, unam sanctam Ca^holicam
Ecclesiam, Sanctorum communionem, peccatorum remissionem, perpetuam Deiparae
Vi^ginitatem, de quibus singulis nihil explicit quatuordecim fidei Articuli
praescribunt. Mihi ^amen videtur dicendum, satis ^sse ad salutem cuique
fidelium credere explicit quatuordecim Articulos fidel, vel Symbolum
Apostolicum. -- Quaeritur, An si quis adeo hebeti and obtuso sit ingenio, ut
ipsos Articulos secundum substan^iam capere nequeat, fidei praecepto
satisfaciat si aliquos clariores Articulos explicit credat; reliquis vero quos
non as^equitur, credat implicit, etc. Respondeo satisfacere. -- Quar^, si quis
Trinitatis Articulum nequeat per^ipere, satis est si credat explicit alios
clariores, nimirum Ch^istum D^i filium, natum ex Vi^gine, passum, cruci
affixum, m^^tuu^, and sepultum, ex mortuis resu^rexisse, and in c^elos
conscendisse. Az^r. Tom. 1. lib. 8. cap. 6.
the Jesuit speaks of other differences and varieties, differing also
himself from others. First, he says, That every Believer ought explicitly
to believe all the Articles of faith, either as (according to the number of the
Apostles) they are accounted twelve, or according to the sentence of Divines,
they are reckoned fourteen: But then he adds, That some affirm, the
unlearned must believe more then these Articles, because they must believe the
immortality of the soul, original sin, etc. Again, he says, Some hold
that both the twelve Articles and the fourteen must be believed; but himself
thinks that it is sufficient to salvation if a man believe explicitly the one
or the other. Yea at length he comes to show, That if a man be so dull that
he cannot perceive the Article of the Trinity, it will suffice if he believe
explicitly some other plainer Articles; as that Christ the Son of God is
borne of a Virgin, that he suffered, was crucified, d^ed, and was buried, that
he rose again from the dead, and ascended into heaven.

Canisius, as we have seen before, says, That the sum of faith* or of all
things to be believed, is the Apostles Creed. And whereas T. Aqu ^2. Q. 1.
Art. 8. Lorca Expos. Art. Conclusio est; conveniens est and sufficiens
distinctio and numeratio Articulorum, qua v^l du^decim, vel quatuordecim potius
numerari ^olent. -- For tas^e men's Ecclesiae in hac summa Articulorum non fuit
comp^ehend^re omn^s Articulo^ qui vel speci^lem d^^sicultatem continent, vel ab
omnibus f^delibus explicit credendi sunt. Ib.
Thomas Aquinas concludes, that the Articles to be believed (of Christ's
Divinity and Humanity) are fitly numbered either twelve or fourteen; Lorca,
after this acknowledgement, adds, Perchance the Church did not intend in this
sum to comprehend all these Articles which contain any special difficulty,
or ought explicitly to be believed of all the faithful. And when he comes
to speak of those Explicites, he confesses plainly, Omnes concedunt
minoribus necessarium esse credere aliqua explicit, licet non obligentur ad
omnem latitudinem fidei. In assignanda tamen R^gula qua diffiniatur quae
credere teneantur, dissentiunt, and diversas Regulas statuunt. Communis Regula
fere ab omnibus Theologis ^radita est, Omnes fideles d^bere credere explici^e
Articulos qui solenni ritu celebrantur in Ecclesia, and sufficere sibi ^i ^os
credant. Hanc Regulam tradunt S. Thomas Art. 7. and ali^ Schol^stici in 3.
distin^i. 25. etc. Hec tamen Regula quibusdam insufficiens apparet tam excessu
quam defectu. Sco^us quaest. 1. Art. 2. indicare videtur praeceptum commure
fid^i solum constringere, ut credantur ^aciliora, quae ipse vo^^t ^rossa.
Qu^dam ex juni^^^^us ( Suarez. in 3. Tom. 2. d. 43.) affirmant, sufficere
communi pl^bi si credant A^ticulos qui in Symbolo continentur. His ergo Regulis
omissis, asserendum est omnibus fidelibus inesse praeceptum, expli^it^ ^ide
credere haec; Primo, Articulos fidei tam secundum illam numerati^nem qua
quatuordecim numerantur, quam ^os q^^ in Symbolo Apostolorum exprimuntur.
Tenentur p^^^terea credere Decalogum, and communiora praecepta quae ad
Decal^gum reducentur, doci^^nam etiam de septem Sacramentis, and de Oratione,
de authoritate (...), and Pralatorum Ecclesiae. Haec omma (...) ^ideli (...)
docet (...). in Summa verbo, Ignora^tia. (...) Ignorantia. Lorca in 22. (...).
That in assigning the Rule by which it may be defined what the vulgar should
believe, Divines do differ, and do put diverse Rules: the most common Rule is,
That they should believe those Articles which are by Solemnities celebrated in
the Church; and that it suffices if they believe these. But this Rule seems
insufficient to others, both in excess and defect. Scotus seems to say, That
the common precept of faith does only bind to the belief of the easy (which
he calls gross) points. Some of the later (as Suarez), It ^ufficeth the
common people if they believe the Articles in the Creed. But Lorca himself
goes beyond all that hitherto have been mentioned, and says, These Rules
being laid aside, it is to be affirmed, That it is commanded to all the
faithful explicitly to believe, first the Articles of faith, both the
fourteen, and the twelve in the Creed; They must also believe the Decalogue,
and the more common Precepts which are reduced to the Decalogue, the doctrine
of the seven Sacraments, of Prayer, of the Popes authority, and the Prelates.
Behold a great variety in Romish Explicites.

Yet, I confess, that I find not my self so merry hereat as the Cavalier, (at
our supposed differences in Fundamentals) but will rather strive to excuse
them, and to find reasons for their variety: for the reasons seem to be
serious, as the matter which they go about is weighty and profitable; even
the proposal of those grounds whose knowledge is necessary to salvation. So
far is it from being a monster, as this Author terms it, that his calling
of it by this Title is so much the more monstrous, as it is true that himself
acknowledges that there are such Heads of Christianity, which himself thus
calls monstrous. Behold a Truth of the Authors own bringing forth, and then
mocked by him for a monster: but I will go on to speak for his Truth, and
against his Monster; even against him, to plead for him and his fellows. True
it is, that there may be a different enumeration of the Articles in the
Fathers Rules of faith, in the Creeds, and in the Explicites of later Writers,
as well as our Fundamentals; and that for diverse reasons.

One may be this; Because some Catalogues may put in more Articles for more
full unfolding and expressing of other Articles; so it is said by the Council
of Chalcedon, that the Additions in the Creeds of Constantinople E^ag. l. 2 c.
4.
concerning the holy Ghost, was only that the Essence and Godhead of the holy
Ghost might thereby be more cleared and expounded: And Propter nonnullos
haereticos addita quaedam videntur, per quae novellae doctrinae sensus
videretur excludi. Ruff. in Symbol.
Ruffinus speaks to the like effect.

A second reason of this variety might be the Variatu^, fides augetur, vel
diminuitur ratione dispositionis hominis; nam fides potest esse major in uno
quam in alio, non ratione primae veritatis, quae, cum sit unica. and
simplicissima, non diversificatur in credentibus, sed est una in omnibus: Tamen
ea quae materialiter credenda proponuntur, sunt plura, and sic ex part
credendorum, personarum, and temporum, potest fides accipi major and minor.
Reyn. Pant. de Fide, cap. 1.
various measure of capacities. Some measures of understanding and faith are
small; and it is not to be denied but that some Articles, which are now
necessary to be particularly known and believed, were then known only and
believed in gross, without danger of salvation. And that there is now no
toleration of less degrees in this kind, for weakness of faith, or
shallowness of capacity, I think wise men scarce dare to affirm.

A third reason of this variety may be the various affection and intention of
the designers of these heads: For one perchance would be sure not to exclude
any man from salvation, that has any true, though never so little interest in
it, by the knowledge of never so few fundamentalls; and therefore this man
contracteth them. Another he fears, lest by the lessening of them, thereby to
include the salvation of some, others may be excluded from salvation, by not
knowing or not believing those points which are lessened, and therefore
enlarges them.

Now these reasons being given, to defend this Author and his fellows against
himself, I will add essays of some certainty upon this variety.

A first, That certainly so much must be known and believed of God in Christ
Jesus, as may unite us to him, and so make us partakers of his death and
resurrection unto remission of sins and regeneration: And therefore
ordinarily his Romans 4.24, 25. Romans 10.9. 1 Cor. 15.1, 2, 3, 4. In absoluto
nobis ac facili est aeternitas; Jesum suscitatum a mortuis per Deum credere,
and ipsum esse Dominum confiteri. Hilar. de Trinit. lib. 10. where he calls it
also, Religionis portum. Itaque sine ista Fide, hoc est, sine Fide unius
Mediatoris Dei and hominis, hominis Christi Jesu, sine Fide inquam
Resurrectionis ejus, quam Deus hominibus definivit; quae ut que sine
Incarnatione ejus, ac morte non potest veraciter credi: Sine Fide ergo
Incarnationis, and Mortis, and Resurrectionis Christi, neque antiquos justos,
ut justi essent* potuisse munda^i, and Dei gratia justificari verita^
Christiana non dubitat. Aug contra Pelag. and Coelest. lib. 2. cap. 24.
Incarnation, Death, and Resurrection are certainly to be known and believed.

Secondly, That so many Heads and Articles as conduce to this union, may be
called Fundamental, because they knit and unite us to Christ the foundation.

Accordingly, more of these points being known to one then to another, and the
more points working the union in one, and the fewer in the other, the more may
be called Fundamental to the one, and the fewer to the other; so a great house
built on a rock, and by more stones knit unto the rock then a lesser, may be
said to have more fundamentalls then the lesser; yet both have as true an union
with the rock each as other.

Thirdly, it is good, in teaching, to enlarge the points as much as may be; The
most fundamental is the Incarnation of the Deity. For the foundation it self
is God with us. For there is no Rock but God, Psalm. 18.31. And all the Church
is built on this Rock unto salvation, Mat. 16.18. Therefore Arians, or any
others that build not their faith on the Godhead of the Son, are not built on
the Rock, but on the sands. And the Judge himself has made known his
judgment on them: They shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on
them, John 3.18, 36. So also John 20.31. 1 Timothy 3.16. 2 Corin. 5.18, 19. Colos
2.8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. 2 Cor. 4.3, 4. Wherefore, Ignorantes eum qui ex Virgin
est Emanuel, privantur munere ejus, quod est vita aeterna. Iren. l 3. c. 21.
so to give a full measure of fundamentals, for the largest measure of
knowledge and capacity, that no measure may want his fullness: But in censuring
to damnation, it is good to contract the measure as much as truth will possibly
give way to charity, that the least measure of saving knowledge and faith be
not damned.

Fourthly, as the Teacher should enlarge his teaching, so let not the Learner
voluntarily shut or contract his learning, knowing, nor believing the grounds
of Christianity; but go on as far as his measure will give him leave, until
he have found Christ Jesus dwelling in his soul by his Spirit, and by that
Spirit witnessing to his soul, that he is a Son of God, even an heir
annexed with Christ: For then, and only then shall thou have a comfortable
certainty of the sufficiency of thy fundamentalls, when thou feel thy self
an habitation of God by the Spirit. Besides, if God intend to lay in thee the
foundations of a palace, do not thou contract them into the foundations of a
cottage.

CHAP. XI.
In opposition to the Cavaliers ninth Chapter, containing a vain Challenge of
Protestants, for not daring to declare their Fundamentalls, divided into three
Sections.

SECT. I.
Wherein are confuted his Cavills against the Apostles Creed, as not containing
all points Fundamental.

THe title of this Chapter, and the Chapter it self are at some discord: For
the title says, That the Protestants neither do, nor dare declare what are
their fundamental points of Faith: and the Chapter, even in the first words,
says this, It is usual with many to affirm, that the Apostles Creed
contains all fundamental points of Faith. So it seems that Protestants do
declare, and do not declare their fundamental points; and the Title beats
them for not declaring, and the Chapter beats them for declaring: Thus the
Protestants must be beaten howsoever, not indeed for declaring, or for not
declaring, but because they are Protestants. A right mark of faction, which
commonly makes an ill construction of all, even of the good actions of those
against whom it is factious. But let us see how he chastises us for our
declaring: These men, when they are pressed, grow soon ashamed of that
opinion; when they are told, that in the Creed there is no mention made at all,
either of the Canon in holy Scripture, or of the number or nature, yea, or so
much as the name of Sacraments. But let this Author consider, whether he
ought not to be ashamed, who thus casting shame on Protestants, casts it also
on the Fathers. For, do the Fathers in their rules of Faith make mention of
the Canon of Scripture, or the number, or of the name of the Sacraments? Let
him survey them in Irenaeus, Tertullian, etc. and he shall see, that they do
not. And yet Tertullian says of the rule of Faith, Nihil ultra scire, est
omnia scire. Again, do you not thus cast shame on your own fellows? For do
not many of your own Doctors in their Explicites (called by your self, more
fundamental) leave out the Canon of Scriptures, and the number, yea, the
nature and name of Sacraments? If therefore they do say, that it is a mortal
sin, not to know explicitly these important points, which are more
fundamental, then may they be ashamed to leave their Disciples in mortal
sin, by not naming the Sea before Romish Authors alleged, who say, that
twelve or fourteen Articles (whereof these of the Canon and Sacraments are
none) do suffice to be explicitly believed; and diverse Romish Authors
alleged by Lorca, that differ in the number of the Canonical Books.
Canon or number of the Sacraments explicitly to be believed: And if you
clear them, you shall clear us also. But withal, give me leave to ask, even
in defense of these your fellows: Do you think that no man can be saved that
does not know the number of Canonical Books, if he believe the fundamental
points contained in those Books? Or do you think that one who was baptized in
his infancy, not knowing then the virtue and use of the Sacrament of Baptism,
and dying before he come to the knowledge of the use of the Eucharist, may not
be saved by believing in Christ, and being regenerate by this faith? Your own
Jesuit Si finis Sacramentorum esset excitare fidem, Baptismus non prodesset
infantibus; sed iis ^otius qui p^aesentis sunt-. Ito^, illi dicunt, Sacramenta
ideo instituta esse, ut excitent fidem; ex quo sequitur effectum illorum esse
fidem, (...) ja^^ re^uta^i --. Becan. Manu^^. c. 11. n. 3^.31. and seq.
Becanus may stop your mouth, when he says, That Faith is not so stirred up by
the Sacraments, that it is the effect of them; and that otherwise the
Sacraments would not profit children. And Vasquez brings in diverse great
Doctors, that distinguish between the mysteries of Faith, without the knowledge
of which a man cannot be saved; and Baptism, and other Sacraments.

Ex his tamen Doctoribus, Alexander, Bonaventura, Gabriel and Adrianus loquuti
solum videntur de ignorantia Fidei circa mysteria, sine quibus salus non
contingit alicui; caeteri vero de ignorantia cujuscunque praecepta divini
positivi, quale est Baptismi -- Cum praedictis Doctoribus concordat Corduba;
quod attinet ad fidem mysteriorum, quae ad salutem necessaria sunt, non tamen
in eo quod spectat ad praecepta positiva Dei, qualis est Baptismi, and aliorum
Sacramentorum. Vasquez m. 1.2. Disp. 120. cap. 1.


So till you answer him, do not require of us to bring in Sacraments as
fundamentalls of that faith, which is denied by your own to be an effect of
them. But you are soon weary, and I hope ashamed of this point; and therefore
wander to another, not much more of kin to the point, then the Chapter has
been hitherto to the Title. You say there are great differences between the
Protestants and you, about the understanding of the Article of the descent of
Christ into Hell, and the other of the holy Catholic Church, and the Communion
of Saints, etc. But what do you here talk of differences in understanding
fundamentals, where the present question is, Whether the Protestants do
acknowledge their fundamentalls to be contained in the Creed? For, if
Protestants declare that their fundamentals are contained in the Creed, then
your Title is gone, which says, That they do not, nor dare not declare them.
And surely it will ask a greater strength, and a far bigger volume then
Charity mistaken, to prove that Protestants do not rightly understand the
Articles of the Creed. But secondly, the Authors objection is grounded not
only upon a new, but upon a false supposition, if his fellow Romists may be
Judges: For his supposed proposition is this, That all the Articles in the
Creed are Fundamental. Now this is different from the first proposal of our
opinion, That all fundamental Articles are in the Creed. It is also denied by
his own fellows: For, though all fundamental Articles be there, yet they
say, that some Articles that are there may not be fundamental, or explicitly
to be known upon loss of salvation; as before has been showed out of Vasquez
and Azorius: Therefore to stand upon a different understanding of those
Articles, which are denied by your own men to be Explicites (or doubted) is
besides the matter. But thirdly, Do we differ from you in understanding those
points? What is that to the point undertaken in the end of the last Chapter and
promised to be showed in this, That we differ among our selves in the number
of Fundamentalls. You are now gone ^^om our ridiculousnesse, by differing in
the number of fundamentalls; and are come to a ridiculousnesse of your own, by
your differing from us in the false understanding of some Articles of the
Creed, which all your own Prophets do not account Fundamentals. But you add:
It is to little purpose to know or confess, that the Creed contains all
Fundamentals, unless there were some certain way to understand them right.
This is again a ranging from showing our differences among our selves, or that
we have not these Fundamentals: Yet I answer, We have a certain, and the
best way of understanding them right; we have a learned Ministry endued with
gifts from on high, which teaches and preaches these Fundamentals, and the
right meaning of them. And the right meaning thus taught, the Spirit in the
hearers does so discover and certify the truth of them, that the hearers see
the Articles to be Gods truth and not man's: And accordingly, their faith thus
believing them, rests on God as the sole Foundation of their faith; and this
teaching of the Catholic Church we use, commend, and allow. But that The
single Article of the holy Catholic Church should contain the reason of all
our faith fundamentally, seems to me an high kind of Blasphemy. And this
blasphemous doctrine, as we have before showed, is the very spirit of Popery
or Antichrist, which sets up the Pope in Gods place, and makes his believers
truly Papists or Antichristians. And this great offense and mystery of
iniquity carries Papists by throngs into the Land of darkness; and into this
secret of theirs the souls of the saved may not enter: True it is, that God
uses the service of the Ministers, or, if you will, of the Church, in
publishing the Articles of faith; but no other Foundation of supernatural
faith there is but God himself, though speaking by man unto man; the
Fundamentality of our faith passes through man that is the instrument, and
rests wholly upon God. But says he, If we understand it otherwise, the
Scripture it self speaks of particular errors, which are damnable in them by
whom they are embraced; and yet they are not at all against any express
Doctrine of the Creed: As namely, where Saint Paul calls it a Doctrine of
Devils to forbid marriage, and meats, etc. I answer, first, That the Author
hereby proves that which we deny not, and disproves not that which (he says)
we affirm: For the point is not, Whether there be any damnable errors
besides those that are against some express doctrine of the Creed: But,
Whether there be in the Creed those fundamental points, which being truly
believed, will cause unity with Christ the Head, and unity with his Body the
Church. Other errors against other Truths in Scripture not fundamental, we
acknowledge there are many, and proceeding from the Devil, the Father of Lies,
and in themselves damnable to such as hold not the true Foundation, Christ
Jesus, by believing Fundamentals. And it is to be feared, that such are many
of those true Papists, whose foundation is the Pope: But otherwise they may be
rather It is a Romish distinction, Reatus simplex, and redundans in personam.
damnable in themselves, then actually damning to those who by Sequitur, illum
solum amittere f^dem, qui peccat contra fidem sciens and prudens; errans
voluntary, aut dubitans. Ille tamen qui peccat ignorantia, quamvis crassa, and
culpabili culpa mortali, sicut non est haereticus, sic etiam nec fidem perdit;
ut satis clare S. Thomas Articulo illo tertio ( q. 5.) docuit illis verbis: si
enim non p^^tinaciter dissentit, non est haereticus, sed solum errans. Lorca in
22. Sect. 1. Disp. 33.
infirmities hold them, and by believing fundamentals are in Christ Jesus, to
whom there is no condemnation. Secondly, not only Fathers in their Rules of
faith, but the Romists themselves do not place the lawfulness of meats and
marriage among their chief Heads of Christianity, or Explicites and
Fundamentals, and therefore this Author does ill require of us that which he
cannot obtain of his fellows. Wherefore, let him first make this objection
against them, and when he has their Answer, then let him take it for us.

But being unhappily, as well as impertinently fallen into the mention of these
damnable errors, he saw, that as soon as they were brought in, they looked,
at least asquint, on the Church of Rome, and claymed kindred of her: And
therefore he thought that there was need of an Apology to put off this
kindred and acquaintance: Which by the way is not to be understood of the
chastity and fasts of the Catholic Church (as Protestants do most perversely
affirm) which knows that those things are lawful; but that yet it is most
grateful to God, when his servants for his love deprive themselves of those
del^ghts: But of the Heresies of the Manich^es, as Saint Augustine does
expressly declare, who forbad both marriage and meats, as being abominable
and impure through the institution thereof; which they said was derived from a
certain second ill conditioned god of their own making. But this, nor all the
water in the Sea will wash away all the kindred between Romists and these
errors: For though Saint Augustine may apply this Prophecy to the Manichees,
yet may he not also apply them to the Montanists, Semel in totum macellum in
Apostolo admissa detestatione eorum, qui sicut nubere prohibent, ita jubeant a
cibis abstinere a Deo conditis; and ideo nos esse jam tunc praenotatos in
novissimis temporibus abscedentes a fide, etc. Tert. de Iejun. adver. Psychios,
Tertullian himself acknowledging that they have been taxed out of this very
place? And if to the Montanists, why not to those Romists, who, with Durandus,
maintain a curse, and so an impurity of flesh, and cleanness of How shall a
spectator believe that flesh is not thought unclean, when he sees a Fast to
exclude it, and yet to admit all delicate and incendiary fishes, conserves and
wines? Licet libere saepius vinum. Navar. Man. cap. 21. n. 13. In more positum
est, ut in diebus jejuniorum piscibus, leguminibus, fructibus, and vino
similiter utamur; and omnes communi consensu testantur, id quod solum in potum,
non in ^ibum sumitur, cujusmodi vinum etiam est, jejunium minime relaxare.
Azor. lib. 7. cap. 10.
fish: who also forbid marriage to Priests, which this place plainly
condemns? And whereas this Author talks of voluntary deprivation, it is
certain, that many (whatsoever this Author says) have not deprived
themselves voluntarily of marriage; but have taken it upon them as a yoke and
burden, which neither they nor their Predecessors were able to bear, many
sinking under it unto the very pit of Hell. And let them labor with their wits
and pens so much as they can, they will never by reason, nor by the lives of
their Priests disprove Christ's truth, That all men cannot receive it; nor prove
their own Est verum, omnes qui volunt posse continere. B^llar^. de Mona^bis
cap. 31. Yet we read in the History of Trent, lib. 7. many reasons were given
for Priests marriage, whereof one wa^, Want of continent persons fit to
exercise the Ministry. And the chief reason of forbidding it, is there
expressed; It would turn the Priests affections to their Families, from the
Popes Hierarchy.
untruth, That all men can receive it: And surely, the Fornications,
Adulteries, Murders, and pollutions that have issued from this Law of
Coelibate, I doubt not, cry aloud to heaven against Rome (as once against
Sodomitium scelus ex Coelibatus rigore eas radices in Clero Romano defigit, ut
Petrus Damianus eremum petere coactus, librum conscribat cui Titulus,
Gomorrhaeus, in quo omnes ejus species edisserit* quales tum a pud eos
bacchabantur, eumque L^oni n^no inscribit, cujus adversus tanti mali diluviem
opem implorat. P^ess. M^st. Iniquit. ad annum 1060. In the year 1563.
Proclamation was made within the Province of Sivil, that whosoever knew or
heard of any Monks or religious persons that had abused Auricular Confession to
abominable acts with Matrons and Maidens, they should come in within 30. days,
laying great penalties on the refusers. Presently there came in such a number
of women, only inhabitants within the City of Sivil, that twenty Notaries, and
as many Inquisitors would not have sufficed to take the complaints. Wherefore
the Inquisitors gave 30. days more. The Monks, Friars, and Priests go up and
down very melancholy; and as great a plague was feared as the persecution
which was then hot against the Lutherans. But the Inquisitors fearing to bring
their spiritualty into hatred and obl^quy, and especially to discredit their
Auricular Confession, contrary to all men's expectations, made a stay therein,
though the Court was orderly seized. Discov. of the Spanish Inquisition.
Sodom) for that sore to which it is condemned.

He adds further: In like manner Saint Peter says, That Saint Paul in his
Epistles had written certain things which were hard to be understood, and
which the unlearned and unstable did pervert to their destruction: Saint
Augustine declares upon this place, that the places misunderstood concerned the
doctrine of Justification, which some misconceived to be by faith alone, by
occasion of what Saint Paul had writ to the Romans; and of purpose to
countermine that error, he says, that Saint James wrote his Epistle, and
proved therein, that good works were absolutely necessary to the Act of
Justification. Hereupon we may observe two things; the one, That an error in
this point alone, is by the judgment of Saint Peter, to work their
destruction who embrace it. And the other, That the Apostles Creed which
speaks no one word thereof, is no good Rule to let us know all the
fundamental points of faith. To this I answer, First, That this Author goes
on still upon a false ground, as if we said that all errors in faith that may
damn men were fundamental, and expressly against some Article of the Creed.
Whereas, we have often affirmed, That any error, though not fundamental, may
damn men that by a lively faith hold not rightly the fundamentals, and so are
without Christ. And it seems, that these men were not well grounded and
founded by fundamentals in Christ Jesus, whom Saint Peter calls unlearned and
unstable, and their error the error of the wicked; A generation of vipers
turn wholesome food into poison, and abuse Scriptures to their own
condemnation.

But secondly, That faith does not justify, but that good works are
absolutely necessary to the Act of Justification, is most untrue, and against
Saint Augustine himself: Untrue; for, a man is justified by faith in Christ,
and not by his own merits; which, in your language, are good works, as diverse
of your own Authors Pighius, Contarenus, Colonienses, Ferus, etc. And the
very Council of Trent says, That Justification is free, and not merited by
faith or works. Nihil eorum quae Justificationem praecedunt, sive fides, sive
opera, gratiam promeretur. Council. Trident. Sess. 6. Cap. 7. And therefore
Becanus, Sequitur ipsa Justificatio, id est, acquisitio, seu infusio justitiae
inhaerentis. Cujus justitiae duplex est effectus formalis; Alter expulsio, seu
remissio peccatorum: Alter sanctificatio and renovatio interioris hominis;
uterque, respectu nostri, gratuitas. And he cited this Chapter of Trent. Bec.
Manu. lib. 1. cap. 16.
affirm. And a man in the instant of his Justification may dye before he has
had time to do good works, and yet his Justification may be good. And it is
against Saint Cum ergo dicit Apostolus arbitrari se justificari* hominem per
fidem sine operibus Legis; non hoc agit ut praecepta ac professa fide, opera
justitiae contemnantur: sed ut sciat se quisque per fidem posse justificari,
etiamsi Legis opera non praecesserint; sequuntur enim justificatum, non
praecedunt justificandum: unde in praesenti opere non opus est latius
disputare, praesertim, quia modo de hac quaestione prolixum librum edidi, qui
inscribitur de litera and spiritu. August. de fide and operibus, cap. 14. Per
ipsam (Gratiam) quippe justificatur gratis, id est, nullis suorum operum
praecedentibus meritis; alioquin gratia jam non est gratia, quandoquidem ideo
datur, non quia bona opera fecimus; sed ut ea facere valeamus. August. de
spiritu and litera, cap. 10.
Austin even in the same place, whence the former saying of Saint Peter is
taken, where you may find that commonly known sentence of his, Opera sequuntur
justificatum, non praecedunt justificandum; Good works follow justification,
and do not go before it: So that whiles this Author observes two things, he
gives more then two scandalls to his Reader. For first, he charge falsely not
Saint Austin only, but Saint James with holding this error, That good works
were absolutely necessary to the act of justification. And then secondly he
will make him to say, that the not holding of this error, is an error which
may work their destruction that embrace it: Yea thirdly, that the Apostles
Creed is no good rule to let us know all the fundamental points of faith;
because it speaks no one word, to teach us that the Cavaliers error is a
fundamental point of faith.

Lastly, his own Doctors do bring into their Explicites, our faith in Christ's
Quem commissio peccatorum diabolo subdidit, remiflio pecca^orum per sanguinem
Christi data a diabolo eruit, ut sic justi^ia vinceretur diabolus, non
po^entia. Sed qua justitia? Jesu Christi: Et quomodo victus est ea? Quia in ea
nihil dignum morte inveniens, occidit eum tamen. Et utique justum est, ut
debitores quos teneba^, liberi dimittantur, in eum CREDENTES, quem sine ullo
debito occidit. Lombard. (ex Aug.) lib. 3. did. 20.
passion, and resurrection for justification, but not this his Article, That
good works are absolutely necessary to the act of justification. And if they
do not, why does he require it of us in our fundamentalls?

SECT. II.
Wherein his Exceptions against the 39. Articles of Religion established in
this Church are answered.

BUt having quarrelled in vain with the Creed, to prove the insufficiency of
it for fundamentalls, now he comes to the Articles; where he thus begins:
Others say that the Book of the 39. Articles declares all the fundamental
points of Faith, according to the Doctrine of the Church of England; but this
also is most absurdly affirmed: For, as it is true, that they declare in some
confused manner (which yet indeed is extremely confused) what the Church of
England in most things believes; so it is true, that they are very careful,
that they be not too clearly understood. And therefore in many Controversies,
whereof that Book speaks, it comes not at all to the main difficulty of the
question between them and us, and especially in those of the Church, and
Free Will. While the Author speaks of a confused manner, and which is
extremely confused, his words do return upon himself, and his own discourse:
For, that he may make his discourse confused, it seems he makes use of this
doubtful word Declare. For if we say, That the Book of Articles declares our
fundamentalls of faith, we do not say, it declares all the knots of questions
which are between us and the Romists. For it is well known there are diverse
controversies between us and the Romists, which are not of fundamentalls. And
neither the Fathers in their rules of Faith, neither Romists in their
Explicites do declare the knots of questions which may arise even concerning
fundamentalls themselves; if the fundamentalls be so expressed, that their true
and saving sense may be received and believed by the working of that Spirit,
which makes Christ's sheep to hear Christ's voice. They that thus believe, shall
be saved, though they know not all the knots which cunning and erring men do
make. They that write rules of Faith, Explicites, and Fundamentalls, do not in
the same undertake to write all knots of controversies which concern them. And
the Cavalier does not find them in his own Doctors among their Explicites:
wherefore the answer which he makes for them, let him take for us.

Secondly, for his particulars of the Church, and Free Will: First, for the
Church; Does our Church hold, that the visibility and inerrability of the
Church are fundamentalls? And if she do not, how can this Author accuse her
for not showing fundamentalls; because she shows not those points which she
does not hold to be fundamental? The Sciendum est quod Ecclesiam credere, non
tamen in Ecclesiam credere debeamus, quia Ecclesia non Deus, sed domus Dei est.
August. de tempore, s^^m. 181.
Church is not the foundation of the Church, but she her self is built on that
only foundation Christ Jesus. And even your own men are not agreed about
making the Article of the Acknowledged before by Vasqu^z, and by those who hol^
(...) fourteen Articles to suffice for Explicit faith.
Church one of the Explicites; or at least agree not in declaring these points
of controversies concerning her to be explicitly believed.

And for Free Will, I might ask first: Does this Author find in any of his
Doctors this knot of Free Will for an Explicit? But secondly, Does the
Council of Trent it self, called of purpose to end controversies, so set
down the knot of this controversy, that your own Romists are agreed of it
among themselves? True it is, that the maine body of the Papacy dotes upon
Free Will, according to their Leaders, who, as this Author well affirms,
have many (profitable) Doctrines; as that of Merit, Supererogation, etc.
depending upon it. But yet there are among them some that hold the efficacy of
grace on the will, which the Protestants do teach; and so the Authors confused
manner does now light on the precious Synod of his dear Mother, whose Champion
he is; but not without prevarication: For, while he condemns a confused
speaking of Free Will, he is become that son of Solomon, who shameth his
mother: For she has taught, and, as he calls it, Declared Free Will, in such a
confused manner, that her own children cannot agree about her meaning.

And now he sets down the words of the tenth Article concerning Free Will,
and concludes, That this is true Catholic Doctrine, which we believe better
then they. A man would have thought here, that we had been almost friends; but
let not the Reader be mistaken: for the work of mistaken Charity, is not to
make peace, but division. Therefore after a confessed agreement, a disagreement
is to be picked out; They declare not (says he) whether or no a man have
freedom of will to do a good work, or not to do it, when first he is
inspired and moved to it by God Almighties grace; which we affirm, and they
deny: which is the only knot of our question, and the point upon which so many
other Catholic Doctrines depend. I desire the Reader to take special notice
of these words of the Cavalier, That upon the Doctrine of Free Will many Romish
Doctrines do depend: For hence may arise a caution to those that affect this
Doctrine of Free Will, since here they see it confessed by the Cavalier, that
on this Doctrine many Romish Doctrines do depend; so it concerns them to
beware how they admit this Doctrine, which has so much Popery in the belly of
it.

But now to the maine knot of his question I give this answer, That in untying
this knot there is yet left unfolded the chief pleat of the knot: For the
chief fold of this knot is not, Whether the will, being inspired and moved by
God, there be freedom in it to will, or not to will; but whether the will be
not at any time so moved by grace (especially in conversion) that though it may
will, or not will; yet it will certainly and infallibly move that way, to which
Gods grace enclines it. For indeed the freedom which these men speak for, is
a freedom of the will from the grace of God. For they would have the will so
free from Gods grace, that grace should not actuate and work it to will and to
do. For other freedom of the will we acknowledge, even the most excellent
freedom; affirming, that when the will is thus moved by God, it wills freely
that way to which Gods grace moves it; yea, most freely, because most
willingly. For this is the sovereignty of power issuing from the highest cause,
that it works in second causes according to their own natures: and therefore
it works in the will of man, by making it most freely willing. Accordingly
grace does so work in the will, that the will determines it self that way to
which grace does incline it. And thus (as it has been well observed) The fear
of overthrowing Free Will is removed, Hist. Trent. lib. 2.
since things are violently moved by a contrary cause, but never by their own:
And God being the cause of the will, to say it is moved by God, is to say it is
moved by it self. And indeed this is the chief freedom of the will which we
maintain, when the will does freely move, being moved by the highest cause,
whose service is perfect freedom: Only, because the word has been abused,
Vocabulum ambiguum in altero sensum verum and bonum, in altero falsum and
perniciosum. Bellar. lib. 4. de lib. ^rb. cap. 6. ex Calvin. Instit. lib. 2.
cap. 2.
we do abstain from that term, which by this abuse is likely to be
mis-understood. But this highest and most excellent freedom we truly
maintain, even that by which the will is free, when God works it freely to
will: Yet many Romists complain, because no other freedom will please them,
but that the will may be freed from God, and not be wrought by him to will as
he will. But thus do they mainly fight against Gods glory, and man's safety:
For first, great glory is got hereby unto God, that he can turn the wills
that are most averse from him, and make them willingly and gladly to will what
he wills: Even Saul breathing out threatenings and slaughter in his natural
will, he can change into Paul, in his new and spiritual will, Act 9.1, 6. and
21.13.
ready not only to be bound, but to dye for the Name of the Lord Jesus. And
thus he that glories, can only glory in the Lord. Secondly, it gives God the
glory of performing his promises: God has promised a Seed to the woman, Rev.
12.17. Gal. 3.16, 28.29.
even Christ mystical, as well as Christ personal; and he has promised a
Seed to Abraham out of all Nations. Now, by this effectual power on the wills
of men, does he perform his promises: Therefore the Psalmist, when he
speaks of Gods establishing Christ's Kingdom, says rightly, Psalm. 110.2, 3.
Psalm. 2.8.
The people shall be willing in the day of thy power: and accordingly,
Abraham, having received the promise of this Seed, Romans 4.21.
is said to believe, that what God had promised he was able to perform: He
did not believe in the wills of men left free from Gods ruling and effectual
grace, that they would perform Gods promise; for indeed so he might have
been deceived: but he believed in God and his power, that he would perform
this promised Seed; and accordingly the Seed of promise is borne like Isaac,
Romans 9.7, 8.
by the will and power of the Promiser. And in thus believing it is said, That
Abraham gave glory to God. Wherefore, this being Abraham's faith, and this faith
of Abraham giving glory to God, Romans 4.11, 34.
Let men first consider, whether they can be the Seed of Abraham that have
not this faith of Abraham. And next, If this faith of Abraham give glory to
God, Let men be afraid by a different faith, even a faith in man's free will
for the performance of Gods promises, to rob God of his glory. Thirdly, it
gives God the glory of our prayers; for therefore we pray unto God that his
Kingdom may come, and his will may be done, because we believe that Gods
effectual grace does set up his kingdom in our Wills, and cause them to will
the Will of God. Therefore we pray to God for this doing of Gods will, which
we could not pray for to God, if God did not produce this effect: for
otherwise the Free-will-prayer must run thus; Lord give me only such free
will, that I may choose whether I will do thy will or no; and not, that thy
will may be certainly done. But for the certain and sure doing of Gods will,
they must pray to their own free wills, which they believe do bring the
possibility of doing Gods will into effect. But this is many ways abominable;
One abomination it is to pray to God that I may do his will, and yet not
believe that God works the will and the deed for which I pray. Another, not
to pray indeed that Gods will may be done, though Christ has commanded it,
but to pray that it may not be done, as well as be done. For if I pray only
to God that he may merely leave it to my will whether his will shall be done
or not, I do not pray certainly that his will may be done, but that it may
stand in an even balance, whether it shall be done or not: and then it is
very possible, yea likely, (as woeful experience has too often showed) that
his Will will not be done. But howsoever, sure it is, to God they cannot pray;
but (which is another abomination) must pray to their own wills that Gods will
may be surely done, the certainty of doing Gods will being suspended only on
their own wills, and not depending on Gods effectual grace. How much better
does our Liturgy imitate this pattern of Christ Jesus, and fulfill his
direction? It prays for the King, Collect of Christ his Circumcision. First
Sunday in Lent.
That he may always incline to Gods will, and walk in his way: and for the
people, That they may lead a godly, righteous, and sober life; that they may
in all things obey Gods blessed will; First Sunday after Trini^y.
that they may ever obey his godly motions in righteousness and true
holiness; that they may please God both in will and in deed; 17. Sunday.
That his grace may prevent and follow us, and make us continually to be given
to all good works. And indeed, these prayers, and especially the Lords prayer,
being so soundly good that the souls of men cannot but approve and use them,
it does seem to evince, that those who do use these prayers, though otherwise
they seem to favor this Romish free will, yet do not heartily believe that
free will which crosses and denies these prayers: Q^idam non credendo
credunt. Tertul.
as on the other side, it would be a mighty accusation, if they should so
believe free will, that they could not say the Lords prayer. Lastly, It takes
from God the glory of praise and thanks for our obedience; and especially, for
our differing from others: for the free-will-men cannot praise God so well as
the Pharisee, who yet was not justified; for, they cannot say, Father, I thank
thee that I am not like other men; but they must say, Father, I thank thee that
I was like other men, and had the same free will and grace which they had; but,
That I am not like other men, I thank my own free will, which, by a different
use of the same grace, wherein by thee I was made like other men, has made me
unlike to them. To conclude, This opinion of free will, as it robs God of his
glory, so it robs man of his safety; for it hangs man's safety upon man's free
will: God and his grace do not keep man, but man's free will keeps grace, and
by grace keeps man; grace depends on the will, whether it shall be kept it
self, and whether it shall keep man or lose him: But thus the will, grace,
and the man are not safely Natura h^^mana etiam si in illa integritate in qua
est condi^a permaneret nullo modo scipsam* Creatore suo non adjuvante,
servaret. Council. Ar. Ca. 19. 1 Pet. 1.5*
kept by the power of God unto salvation. Man is brought back again into the
state of free will which the old Adam had, and lost; but with this
disadvantage, that he has now a mighty law Romans 7.23*
in his members, rebelling against the law of his mind, which the old Adam had
not: And now shall man, with all his imperfections issuing from this body of
sin, stand by free will, wherewith Adam in his full perfection fell?
Whosoever thinks so, has need to think better of his imperfect self, then of
perfect Adam: But, for my part, I see great cause to be afraid of that free
will which has undone him. Again, Is there no more stabilitie issuing from
the second Adam, Christ Jesus, who is God and man, then there would have been
by descent from the first Adam, who was only a man? Does Regeneration from
Christ give no more stabilitie with his seed, then with Generation should have
been communicated to us descending from the old Adam, if he had stood in
perfection? Yet of Christ that is said which could never be spoken of Adam,
nor can be spoken of free will; He is that Rock on which the Church being
grounded, The gates of Hell cannot prevail against her: Mat. 16.
And of the Seed of God given through this second Adam, Joh. 3.9.
we read, It is a remaining Seed, which keeps us from reigning sin.
Briefly, as we are borne of promise, so God gave to the promised Seed a Land
of promise; and the bringing that Seed unto the Land of promise is sure to this
Seed by the effectual power of God the Promiser, as the promised Seed was
surely given by his promise: And accordingly, for the establishing our hearts,
we do often hear of the 1 Cor. 1.9. 1 Cor. 10.13. 1 These. 5.14. 2 These. 3.3.
Heb. 10.23.
faithfulness of God who has promised. In God therefore is our safety, and
not in our own free will; He is our Shepherd, therefore we do not fear;
his grace keeps our wills and us, and our wills fundamentally and finally keep
not this grace and us. And thus Gods glory and man's safety are joined together
by Gods powerful grace; and therefore we may close up this Point in the words
of Saint Paul, God shall preserve us unto his heavenly Kingdom; to him be
glory for ever, Amen. Yet may we add this Lesson as a Corollary from the joint
consideration of Saint Paul's Conversion and Doctrine, That they who have felt
most the effectual power of Gods grace in their conversion from the kingdom
of Satan unto God, will be most earnest in teaching this grace, and in giving
glory to God for that effectual grace by which they have been converted.

Yea, let us hereunto join that memorable Cass. Art. 18. ex Bonavent. Hoc
piarum mentium est, ut nil sibi tribuant, sed totum gra^iae Dei; unde, quantum
cunque aliquis det gratiae Dei, a pietate non recedet, etiamsi multa tribuendo
gratiae Dei, aliquid subtrahat p^testati Naturae, vel li^e^i arb^t (...): cu^
vero aliquid gratiae Dei subtrahitur, and Natu^ae t^ibuitu^ quod gra^^^^ est,
ibi potest periculum intervenire.
Caution, which may serve for a Lodestone to direct those that sail in the
deep of this Controversy to the harbor of safety where they would be, That
in all doubts and difficulties they incline to that opinion which gives most
glory to God: For, as it has been well taught, This is the disposition of
godly minds, to attribute nothing to themselves, but all to the grace of God;
whence it will come to pass, that though a man should give never so much to
the grace of God, and thereby take away somewhat from the power of Nature and
free will, he shall never depart from piety: but when something is taken from
Grace and given to Nature, thence danger may arise.

He goes on: So also do they play at fast and loose, when in the sixth
Article of holy Scripture, they enumerate all those Books of the old Testament
which they allow to be Canonical; wherein, by the way, they are rather Then
was a Saint of Rome and a Cardinal rather Jews then Christians, by the
Cavaliers censure; for thus says Lorca, Gravior Controversia est de his
li^ris, quos a Canone ^ejiciunt, non solum hae^etici recentiores, sed etiam
sanctus Antonius and Caj^tanus. Tract. de loc. Cathol. lib. 1. Disp. 3. Mem. 3.
ubi de libris Tobiae, Judith, Eccl^siastici, Sapientiae, and Maccabaeorum
disputat.
Jews then Christians* for not admitting the Books of Judith, the Maccabees,
and diverse others in the Canon. This Author is still busy in bringing in the
number of Canonical Books for fundamental; (as before in the Creed) when his
own Masters put it not among their Explicites and Fundamentals.

But yet, if the number were on all sides taken for a Fundamental, our Church
has sufficiently expressed her meaning to men whose eyes are single, and not
troubled with the fiery humor of uncharitableness and contention: For first,
for the number of the old, they enumerate (as himself confesses) all the
Books of the old Testament which they account Canonical; so then, if the
number of Canonical Books be a Fundamental, the Articles have showed this
Fundamental concerning the old Testament: Yet thus he is not pleased, but is
still angry with the Articles, to his own hurt, and runs against them with a
sword, whose point he turns against his own soul, and the head against our
Church: For he says, They are rather Jews then Christians, for not admitting
the Books of Judith, the Maccabees, etc. But the Author endangereth himself
in this point, to be censured as neither good Jew, nor good Christian. Rom 3 1,
2.
For Saint Paul, who was an excellent both Jew and Christian, says, That
whereas great was the preferment of the Jew, yet herein it stood chiefly,
Because that unto them were committed the Oracles of God. So that if that was
the chief preferment of the Jew under the Law and Old Testament, that the
Oracles of God were committed to them; what shall we say of that Christian,
that takes this chief preferment from them, and scandalizeth them and others
for following them, even in that wherein the holy Ghost by Saint Paul gives
them a chief preferment? Again, if those were the Oracles of God which were
committed to the Jews, and these of Judith and Maccabees were not committed to
them by God as his Oracles, and accordingly not received by them; either these
are not Gods Oracles, or Saint Paul's word will be denied, that Gods Oracles
were committed to the Jews. So that the Author has herein good matter, not
for penance only, but for true and hearty repentance; for shaming the Jews
and us for following them in that very point, wherein Saint Paul says, that
their preferment or advantage chiefly consists. Again, the Romists
themselves hold the Church of the Jews to have been the true Church in the
time of the Law; and the high Priest an unerring head of that Church, as our
Author before has taught us. Now is it not against these Romists own grounds
to say, That the Church of the Jews, when it was unerring, did err in the
number of Canonical Scriptures, a fundamental of this Author, or else an
impertinency? Therefore Lorca more warily allows Nec tamen concedendum est,
hos libros antiquae Synagogae, ante adventum C^risti ignor^^ ^uisse, and ex^ra
Canonem^ quoniam ^^^l^sia ab e^s pr^ Ap^stoli^is (...).
(though in danger to be censured for a Jew) That those Books were anciently
given to the Jews. Howsoever, if the high Priest had not then the
infallibility to discern Canonical Scriptures, how has the Pope now that
infallibility? For our Author brings in the infallibility of the individual
high Priest, to prove (as it should seem) the present infallibility of the
Pope; so that the high Priest either had this infallibility, and so the Author
is put to shame, for shaming the Jews in their discerning and numbering the
Canonical Scriptures; or he had not this infallibility, and so he is put to
confusion, in his proving the Popes infallibility by him that was fallible.

But he goes on, and talks of Trifling, and not only talks of it, but does
it: They trifle also (says he) when they tell us that they understand those
only Books both of the Old and New Testament to be Canonical, of whose
authority there was never any doubt in the Church. For they know as well as
we, that the Apocalypse, the Epistle of St. James, Saint Jude, and one of Saint
Peter's, were not acknowledged, till proofs were made, during the space of
three or four hundred years after Christ our Lord. But if a Romist had written
the same words which our Articles do, no question he would have found'out some
gentle construction, to have made it sound and good; perchance he would have
said, that there was never any general doubt in the Church, and that the
universal Church never doubted them: (For we know, that the most ancient
Fathers received them, and used testimonies from them) Or, upon the word,
Doubt, there was no just sound, or sufficient doubt of them, no doubt that was
worth the name of a doubt. But indeed, this Article (as it seems) mainly
looking to the Apocryphals of the Old Testament, wherein alone stands the
doubt, and difference of number between us and Rome; it might hold it
sufficient to use such words as concerned that difference, not mentioning or
regarding ancient differences in that of the New Testament, wherein between us
and Rome is present agreement. But yet more trifling and frivolous is our
Authors inference: Th^s^ men have been pleased out of th^^^ great grace to
admit them, though the Maccabees must be rejected, because they speak of prayer
for the dead. For we, or rather the Scripture has showed before, why the
Maccabees are not received as Canonical; because, contrary to this Author,
but agreeabe to Saint Paul, they were not committed to the (...) Scriptu^am
quae app^llatur Maccab^^^rum, ^udaei non h^bent sicut Legem, and Prophetas, and
Psalmos, etc. (...). Epi^^. Gau^en^. l. 2. ca. 23.
Jews as the Oracles of God. So we Non oportet libros qui sunt extra Can^nem
l^gere, nisi solo^ Canonicos Novi and Veteris Testamenti. Q^^e a^tem opo^^^at
legi, and in authoritatem recipi haec sunt, Gen^sis, (...). A^ Macca^^^o^um
lib^i in ho^ Catalogo nusquam legu^tur. (...). L^odicen. in s^xta Sy^odo
confirma^um.
found them left out of the Canon, and do not thrust them out: But they are
Romists that bring in the Maccabees to be Canonical, to prove prayers for the
dead; because they have no proof for them in the Canon. If the Canon prove not
prayers for the dead, being beneficial to the Papacy, the Papacy must make
Canon, to prove prayers for the dead. For surely, if Apocrypha had not been
made Canon, there had been no Canon to prove their Apocryphal prayer for the
dead.

But now concerning the Books of the New Testament, the Author has
discovered an Elephant in an Atome: Observe, says he, what this book of
Articles says concerning the Canonical Books of the New Testament; it says
only this: All the books of the New Testament, as they are commonly received,
we do receive, and account them for Canonical. But why do they not
particularly enumerate all the books which they acknowledge to be of the New
Testament, as they had done them of the Old? A strange wonder, and one that
deserved observation; and an observation that well deserved a question: but the
question scarce deserves an answer; especially seeing the Author answers
himself before he makes the question. For first, who does not see, that in the
books of the New Testament, there being no differences between us and the
Romists, it was sufficient to say, That those are received for Canonical,
which are commonly received?

And secondly, this Author himself so far answers his own question before
he makes it, that he acknowledges, the Page foregoing, That these men have
been pleased, out of their great grace, to admit Saint James, Saint Jude, etc.
Yet now he takes a deep exception for not naming St. James, which is so
admitted, that he himself can by name say that we admit him. So it seems we
had no great depth in hiding the name of Saint James, which our Author, as
shallow as his pen runs, did so easily find. But I confess, I am sorry both
for him and my self: for him, that he is troubled with working such Cob webs;
and for my self, that I have the labor of sweeping them away. Yet will he
needs go on in such industrious vanities: But abstracting from all these
insincerities, wherewith that book of Articles is full fraught, they do not
so much as say, that the Articles of Doctrine which they deliver are
fundamental, either all, or half, or any one thereof, or that they are
necessarily to be believed by them, or the contrary damnable if it be believed
by us. But they are glad to walk in a cloud for the reasons which have been
already touched. Our Author commends the book of Articles, while he calls the
Insincerities of it, These Insincerities; that is, these which before have been
showed to be invisible, and no Insincerities; Insincerities only in the eye of
the Author, which did cast the shape of them on the book, when he read it.

But, says he, They show not which are fundamental, and which are not:
Neither did they ever promise you that they would do so. The fundamentalls are
said to be there, but no man said, for ought I know, that there it was showed
which are fundamentalls, and which are not. Your selves hold points of
importance, which are more fundamental, and to be explicitly known* and
does every Romish Council tell you which are these points, and which are not?
And if it does not, why do you demand it of our Church in her Synod, more then
of your own? Or if you can excuse your own, why do you quarrel with ours? It
was not the intended, much less promised business of our Church, there to
distinguish fundamentalls from superedifications; but to set down both
fundamentalls, and superedifications. And these being taught to her children,
the Spirit of Christ the foundation, will discover the fundamentalls to his
members, and thereby settle them on Christ, and further build them up by the
superedifications, according to their appointed measure. And I have before
showed how our fundamentalls may be discerned, though I may say somewhat like
to that of our Savior to the Jews, Why of your selves discern ye not that
which is right, and rightly fundamental? For if you know how to find out these
grounds of Christianity, which must be explicitly known, which your selves
acknowledge to be more fundamental, you may easily find out our fundamentalls;
so that all this is but an empty outcry, to affright the Reader with noise
without reason: thus to call for a designment of fundamentalls, where none was
undertaken, and where in like case your selves do it not; and to quarrel with
fundamentalls, which your self and yours do acknowledge. Yet when Romists have
agreed of the set number themselves, let them send to us their Catalogue
defined by a Synod, and it may be we may deal with them upon exchange.

The Cavalier goes on: Master Rogers indeed in the Analysis which he makes of
those nine and thirty Articles, speaks loud enough by way of taxing the
Doctrine of the Church of Rome, as being contrary to that of the Church of
England; and he gives it (...) many ill names as his impure spirit can devise;
and affirms, among other things, that many Papists, and namely, the
Franciscans, blush not to affirm, that S. Francis is the holy Ghost, and that
Christ is the Savior of men, but one mother Jane is the Savior of women: a
most execrable aspersion of Postellius the Jesuit; with a great deal of such
base trash as this: And yet his Book is declared to have been perused, and by
the lawful Authority of the Church of England permitted to be public: But
yet even Master Rogers himself is not so valiant as to tell us in particular
which point of their doctrine is fundamental to salvation, and which is not.
True it is, that Master Rogers does very clearly and audibly speak against,
and condemn diverse errors of the Church of Rome, as being not only contrary
to the doctrine of the Church of England, but to the Word of God, with which
commonly he confronts the errors which he brings forth to judgment. And
among them he shows some errors of a high nature, which make Saviors of
Merits and Masses, and Popish Pardons; yea, which carry the faith of the soul
from God unto man, the Pope and his Councels. And, for ought I see, he does
not give worse names then the purest and holiest Spirit gives to the Pope, who
calls him, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
the Man of sin, and son of perdition, etc. And the impurity which this
Author at his own costs, and upon his own word lays on him, Mr Rogers lays
on Rome by proofs and allegations, as in diverse places, so particularly in the
nineteenth Article, Propos. 7. whereof the Title is this, That the Church of
Rome most shamefully has erred in life, ceremonies, and matters of faith: But,
for that to which this Authors spirit gives the ill name of base trash, it is
brought in as the filth of his own Associates, and testified by other Writers;
and therefore the baseness of it most justly should light on them that are the
first Authors of it. Neither is it strange amongst Papists to make creatures
to share salvation with our Savior; Tu per Thomae s^nguinem, etc. La^ Matris
misce^e volo cum sanguine Nat^. Ave salus (...) s^cul^, Arbor (...). Item, In
Cruce Christi ponimus spem salutis; Cantat enim Eccl^^^^, O C^u^, a^e spes
u^ica, etc. Aquia. 3. ^^ast. 25. Art. 4.
the hymns concerning the milk of the blessed Virgin, the blood of Thomas,
the virtue of the wooden Cross, singing it aloud in the ears of the world.
Filthiness and baseness, most abominable, and that deserves to be swept out
of the Church with detestation, and to be carried out as the Filthiness out
of the holy Place in the Reformation of Hezekiah: 2 Chro. 29.5.
And why, in an equal judgment, should not Master Rogers his Books much
rather be permitted to be public for naming such filthiness with
detestation, then Rome allowed to be Catholic, though using such filthiness
with practical approbation? Lastly, The want of valor in Master Rogers to
tell us which point of our doctrine is fundamental, and which is not, I think
is no just accusation; because, for ought I know, he did not undertake this as
his business; neither had any Romish Cavalier yet challenged him upon this
quarrel.

SECT. III.
Wherein is discovered the vanity of his boasting, That the Protestant Church
is unlikely to define which are the fundamental differences betwixt them and
the Papists, since they scarce dare avow any difference at all.

He goes on; Much less is there any appearance that ever the Church of
England should do it; since even now we have seen, that it dares not, in
diverse points, so much as declare in public manner, that it professes the
express contrary of what we held: Nay, we are not likely to see the
fundamental points of faith, whereof they talk so loud, to be avowed by so
much as either of the Universities; yea, or yet by any one College or Society
of learned men amongst them. This Author is exceedingly troubled for want of
more division, and complains there is not opposition enough between us and
Rome; yet, when we express a contrariety to the Tenants of Rome, then he
cries out, There is such a crossenesse between us, that we cannot be one
Church: and when we do not express it, then We dare not so much as declare
it in public manner. And now he calls for Fundamentals, as Goliath for
Combatants, Give me a man that we may fight together; and yet a man would
think, that one trained up in the School of Rome to such an eminence, as to
take him to be her Champion and Cavalier, should so know the first grounds of
Christianity, which himself calls more fundamental, that he should not make
it a quarrel against us, that we do not teach him: Yet, before has been
showed, how a man that has not much more skill then himself, may guess with
as much certainty at our fundamentals, as at his own Romish Explicites. But if
he lack work for his Cavalier, and to that end desire plain points of
Controversy, our Church has evidently declared her judgment against the
Papal Supremacy, Transubstantiation, Worship of Images, Merits, Purgatory,
Prayer in an unknown tongue, Sacrifice of the Mass, and diverse other points:
And I wonder how this Author got leave either of his judgment or modesty, to
say, that she who da^es in these points to declare her opposition to the
Synagogue of Rome, dare not do it in others, if she pleased: For, to omit the
other points, she that dares declare her opposition against the Popes
Supremacy, has dared to oppose the very Head and Heart of Popery; and if she
dare oppose the Head, why should she be afraid of the Limbs and Branches?
But, both in the Head and many Branches, our Church has declared her
judgment; and therein may he and his fellows exercise their valor, if they
do so much overflow with it, even to complaining of want of quarrels: And when
they have dispatched these Controversies, and quit themselves in them like
Cavaliers, then let them call for more, and find fault with want of
differences. And now if I would answer a wise man according to his wisdom, I
would use his own words, and make them speak against himself and his
fellows; We are not likely to see their Romish Explicites, whereof they talk
so loud, avowed by their Universities, Colleges, or Councels, etc. Yea, we are
not likely to see the point of worshipping images with Latria; nor the Popes
power to depose Kings, determined by any Council: and yet of these points
Papists speak aloud, and for them fill the world with Treasons against God in
heaven, and Gods Deputies on earth. And I might, with very little exchange,
adjoyne his own following words; The reason of their Reservation is plain:
for, if a Council should be convinced of errors, their maine Cause would
receive a mortal wound. But now, when some particular men defend these
errors, they may say as Master Heart did to Master Reynolds, Reynolds and Hearts
conference, Chap. 2. did. 2.
I care not for the judgment of Andradius, or Cajetane, or any other private
man, though you could bring an hundred of them. But I am weary of waiting on
his words, which either have no weight, or weight to press himself to the
ground. But a swelling, yet most empty vanity, is that saying which our Author
imagines to be great with reason; I have heard some Catholics affirm (and
that, to my thinking, with great reason) that they would hold it to be no ill
work for them, if the pretended College of Chelsey, or any other, were founded
by Protestants, expressly for writing Books of Controversy by common consent.
For, as I said before, Our Church by common consent has declared her judgment
in diverse points of Controversy already named, and the Romists have here work
enough to confute, if they can, what has been established by common consent,
Hic Rhodus, Hic saltus. This they have assayed hitherto with shame and loss;
and though they lose by the quarrels they have already undertaken, yet they are
not ashamed to call for more quarrels, that is, for more loss. Besides, this
vanity may be turned against themselves: For, why should not we also demand,
That the Pope and his Council should establish a College at Rome, or Rhemes,
which should write Controversies by a Pseudo-Catholcik consent? which when they
have done, then let them call for a College from us. I wish this Author would
try to speak something against us, wherein he might not speak against
himself. But our Cavalier is now like a Ship drawing near to the Harbor, and
his water is still shallower and shallower: yet has he descryed one Doctor, of
whom, if he do not make prize, all his Adventures are lost: But what if we
disclaim the Doctor, as Master Heart did Andradius and Cajetane? then is our
Author put to silence, for want of a College writing with common consent: Yet
saving to our selves these and the like exceptions, Let us see what he says;
and first, take notice of the Preface, which, like a Beadle, does usher and
make way for the Doctor; On the other side, at times they make eager Invectives
against us for declaring so many, yea, and all the Doctrines of our Church to
be fundamental; so far forth as that whosoever refuses obstinately to
believe any of of them, does forfeit the salvation of his soul. And in the
strength of this zeal of theirs, Doctor Dunne, in a Sermon made before his
Majesty at his first happy coming to this Crown, does bitterly exclaim
against the Catholic Roman Church, as making every toy to be fundamental:
And can you blame our Writers or Preachers to reprove you, that you will damn
so many souls for toys, yea, for errors? For herein they have God for their
pattern, and your pattern is that which God reproved in Jonah. For we, with
the Father of Mercy, would save many thousand souls, who by faith in Christ
the foundation are united unto God, and by repentance and regeneration do
strive and endeavor to obey him. But you, imitating the fault of Jonah, for
the Popes honor and supremacy, will have many thousands of such believing and
penitent souls to be damned (who know not the right hand from the left, in
many of your frivolous Doctrines) if the Pope do affirm it: For example; If a
man believe all the Truths in the Bible, and all those which are in the Romish
Decrees, and withal lives justly, soberly, and godly; yet believes not, that
it is unlawful for Gossips to marry, this man must be damned. And how may not
Preachers then say to the Romists, Now walk ye not charitably, when through
your vanities the brother must perish, for whom Christ died? Christ would have
saved him as a foundation of salvation; but the new and supposititious
foundation, the Pope, damneth him whom Christ would save. But the best is, he
who by a fundamental faith is built upon Christ the true foundation, can never
be damned by unbeleeving any Article of faith created and coined by the Pope, a
counterfeit foundation.

And here, while the Author does quarrel with the poornesses of the Doctor,
not being able to maintain a combat with his rich^s; it seems he does it
with a greater poorness: For what a poor quarrelling is it with the Doctor
for saying, That Papists will not let Protestants to be saved, though they
believe the same Creed, except they will believe the same Mathematics, and
govern themselves by the same Calendar: when thi^ Author knows his meaning,
and expressed it himself in the words nearly preceding, That the Roman Church
makes ^oyes fundamentalls? And might not the Pharisees thus have taken a poor
exception at our Savior for saying, that they strained Gnats, whereas they
strained not Gnats, but paid the tithe of Mint and Cummin? Besides, he does
not say, that it is really so done; but premising this: When every thing must
be called Foundation, we shall never know where to stop, where to consist. If
we should believe their Sacrificium incruentum, their unbloudy sacrifice in the
Mass; if we did not believe their Sacrificium cruentum too, that there was a
power in that Church to sacrifice the blood of Kings, we should be said to be
defective in a fundamental Article. If we should admit their Metaphysickes,
their transcendent Transubstantiation, and admit their Chimiques, their
Purgatory fires, and their Mythologie and Poetry, their apparitions of souls
and spirits; they would bind us to their Mathematics too, and they would not
let us be saved, except we would reform our Almanackes to their ten days, and
reform our clockes to their four and twenty hours; for who can tell when
there is an end of Articles of faith, in an arbitrary and occasional Religion?
So the Doctor only shows how such an unlimited making of fundamentalls, may
go on in a perpetual procession, it having already made things not so
profitable as Clocks and Kalendars, Articles of faith, and points fundamental:
Witness the Service in an unknown tongue, the Lords Supper without wine, etc.
But the Cavalier fights in earnest with this supposition, and tells us, that
Romists do rather govern themselves with the less perfect Calendar, which
now is used in this place: Yea, he gives a moral of this their deed; letting
the world see thereby how willingly we can accommodate to them in all things,
which belong not merely to Religion. The controversy of Kalendars, I leave to
the Critickes of time, to be decided and rectified in their emendatione
Temporum. But the argument of accommodation, taken from our Almanackes, is
retorted by a greater argument remembered in our Almanackes: For, when in them
we see the Papists Treason on the fifth of November, we are thereby put in
mind, that Papists do not accommodate to Protestants in all things that belong
not merely to Religion. For it is not merely a matter of Religion for a King to
sit in Parliament; and yet the Papists would have accommodated him, by blowing
him up with powder, thus sitting in Parliament.

But the Cavalier having thus spoken to ill effect, to amend the matter, brings
not forth the Doctors words, but his saying to this effect: But that the
Reader may be his own guide, and the Doctor the speaker of his own effect,
and the Cavaliers fair carriage may more plainly appear, I will here confront
the Doctors words with the Cavaliers. The Doctors words are these: Call not
superedifications, foundations; nor call not the furniture of the house,
foundations; call not ceremonial and rituall things, essential parts of
Religion, and of the worship of God, otherwise then as they imply disobedience:
for obedience to lawful authority is always an essential part of Religion.
The Cavalier thus repeats him, That difference in belief in points which are
not very important, is not to prejudice a man's salvation, unless by not
believing them he commit a disobedience withal. For, says he, obedience
indeed is of the essence of Religion. I think that the Cavalier, seeing his
face in this glass, finds that it looks red with blushing at the
mis-reporting of the Doctor. The Doctor speaks of ceremonies, the Cavalier
reports him speaking of differences in belief: The Doctor speaks of
ceremonies commanded by lawful authority; the Cavalier of points of faith,
commanded by the unlawful authority of the Pope. But if it please him to
remember what has been already told him, That the Church, much less the It
were good that the Cavalier would answer his own great Masters, Driedo, Castro,
and Vasquez, who say, that a Lawmakers cannot at his pleasure by his command,
make a sin venial or mortal. Materiae quae praecipitur gravitas and
utilitas tantae considerationis est, ut non pendeat ex voluntate Legislatoris
ad mortalem, aut venialem culpam obligare, posito semel praecepto, sed ex ipsa
majore gravitate and levitate respectu finis, cujus gratia praecipitur culpa
venialis, aut mortalis judicanda sit. Vasquez ^^. 12. Disp. 158. cap. 4. And it
seems it is not for the Popes honor to command points of small importance:
For Thomas Aquinas says of the Pope, Ad quem majores and difficiliores
Ecclesiae quaestiones referun^ur. 22. quaest. 1. A. 10. So it seems this Eagle
should not take Flies. But the Council of Ephesus, Decrevit sancta haec
Synodus alteram sidem; Nemini licere proferre, aut scribere, aut componere
praeter ^am quae de^inita fuit a sanctis Patribus apud Nicaeam urbem in Spiritu
sancto congregatis. And A^hanasius gives a reason for it: Nam fides quae mihi a
Patribus, secundum sacras Scripturas, and Confessionibus confirmata est, satis
mihi idonea ^^ticaxque videbatur ad omnem imp^^tatem emovendam, and pi^tatem
ejus, quae in Christo est, fidei (...) A^hanas. ad Epict. epist. Corinth.
Pope, has an Inerrability in points of small importance; and where she has
no Inerrability, she has no authority. Again, in respect of the different
capacities of the hearers, all are not capable of every little point and
subtlety of faith: and I think no Pope has power to command his disciples to
believe that, which their capacity is not able to understand. But lawful Rites
or Ceremonies, not being points of faith, but of action; and being easy to be
understood, the obedience to lawful authority in them may more concern the
essence of Religion, then obedience to the Pope in those small points of faith,
wherein the Pope has no unerring power, and no authority to make a lawful
command; for the people do not sinfully disobey, where the Pope has no
lawful authority to command.

The Author having thus lost his premises and proofs, yet goes on to a
conclusion, which cannot but be lost in the loss of his premises; so that his
concluding inferences, This shall serve for discharge both of what they object
against our unity in faith, and of what they allege in the behalf of theirs:
And, I conceive, that I have sufficiently secured these two maine grounds, upon
which this whole discourse is turned, are but commendations of a false
conception, and of a discourse, which is turned upon grounds over-turned: For
neither is his first ground sufficiently secured, That there is but one true
Faith, and one true Religion and Church, out of which there is no salvation;
the word Out being understood in the sense of the Author, that is, That if a
man be out of the faith professed in the Church in the least hair, part, or
degree, that there can be to him no salvation. Nor more secured is his second
ground, That Catholics and Protestants cannot possibly be accounted of that
one Religion, Church, and Faith. For, as it may be true that Protestants and
all Catholics do not agree in every small title and mite of faith; yet it is
most true, that true Catholics and Protestants are so entirely of one saving
Faith and Religion, that they are also of one Church. And from these
Catholics, I desire not to exclude all of the Roman Diocese: But indeed
Papists, whose humane faith is grounded on the Pope, as their foundation, being
ready to believe Idolatry, Treason, or whatsoever the Pope shall decree for a
matter of faith, these I know not how to account members with us of that true
Church, whereof Christ is the Head. They are not so truly Christians of Christ,
as Papists of the Pope.

But still I infer, that when the Author has his two grounds granted, That
if Protestants and Papists be not of that one Church wherein is salvation; yet
Papists are uncharitable for damning Protestants who are of that Church wherein
is salvation; so that neither are his grounds sufficiently secured, neither if
they were, are Papists secured sufficiently from uncharitableness. But after
his pretended sufficient securing of his grounds (either by way of
supererogation, or because he was not secure of his securing) he yet brings
in more proof, that we are of two Religions: And now for the final proof of
this last point, according even to their practice as well as ours; Let my
Reader but look upon the body of their Laws made against us, and especially
upon the Preambles thereof, wherein they plentifully show how hateful an
opinion they have of our Church; Let him look upon the several Acts of State
which have issued from my Lords of the Council: Let him look upon the
Proclamations which have been made and published from time to time: Let him
look upon the large Commissions which have been granted to Pursuivants,
whereby that scumme of the world has been, and is enabled both to ransom and
ransack us at their pleasure. Surely, thus far there is little said, but that
many of the late Traitors against the French King may take up for a proof
that they were not of one Religion with that King, because against them there
issued Acts of State, Proclamations, Messengers or Pursuivants (though all of
them perchance were not the scumme of the Country) to apprehend and ransack
them. But he goes farther; Let him look upon those speeches which have been
uttered in both Houses of Parliament, not only against Professors, but even
the Profession it self of our Religion; and how his most excellent Majesty
has been importuned by their petitions to add more weight to our miseries:
for thus it will easily be scene, how false, how rotten, how superstitious,
how idolatrous, how detestable, how damnable, and even destructive of all truth
and goodness they profess themselves to esteem our Religion: And in fine,
that we carry such a mark of the Beast in our foreheads, as must needs, in
their opinion, shut up the gates of heaven against us, and set open the gates
of hell to devour and swallow us up: So that, certainly, we are no more of
one Church with them in their opinion, then they are of one with us in ours.
Here indeed he has many good Epithites of Popery, rotten, superstitious,
idolatrous, etc. but I find one great one wanting, and that is traiterous; for
this Epithet had a great share in the Parliamentary Complaints and Accusations
of Popery. But, to answer his many words in few, (because they were answered in
that which last preceded) we deny not, but that which we call Popery, and
Papists call their Religion (that is, a beleeeving in the Pope, and obeying of
him commanding Idolatry, Treason, Rebellion, and whatsoever else he shall
please to decree for a point of faith) is a rotten, superstitious, idolatrous,
and traitorous Religion; And of this it is truly said in the prayers of the
fifth of November, This their Religion is Rebellion, their faith is faction,
their practice murdering of souls and bodies. But yet we charitably hope,
that there are some, though two few, who have not so bowed the knees of their
souls to this Baal of Rome, that they submit their souls and faiths to him in
all his idolatrous and traiterous Doctrines, Decrees, and Commands; but being
rather in Rome then of Rome, are Christ's and not the Popes; and therefore will
hear Christ's voice, and not the Popes, when the Popes voice is the voice of a
stranger, and an enemy to Christ.

CHAP. XII.
Wherein the Cavaliers tenth and last Chapter is annihilated, which he calls
a Recapitulation.

SECT. I.
The total of the Cavaliers many nothings is cast up in two short Conclusions,
contrary to all that which he has endeavored to prove: And some additionals
to that total examined; viz. The false remedies of his impertinent fear, lest
Papists should grow in love with the civility of Protestants.

THe Cavalier having said many nothings in his former discourse, he now sums
up these nothings, which being never so many, yet it is well known they can
amount but to nothing. Wherefore, not to make this work tedious by unnecessary
repetitions, I refer the Reader to the former several confutations and
annihilations of the particulars, out of which he would here frame this
Recapitulation: and instead of the Author's not inferred, but intruded
Conclusion upon forlorn and vanishing premises, this Conclusion still stands
right and strong for us, that since there is but one true Church, and one
saving faith, and the Protestants (notwithstanding any of this Authors hollow,
answerable, and answered objections, from difference in Sacraments, Traditions,
etc. do hold and believe this saving faith, and so are the true Church; the
Papacy and adherents thereof professing a difference and division from them,
so far as to be of another Church and faith, do excommunicate themselves
most heavily, even to damnation. And secondly, The Protestants being the true
Church, the Romists separating themselves from us, persecuting us and
pronouncing damnation against us, do herein exceeding uncharitably, while they
cut off, hate, persecute, and sentence unto hell and damnation the true Church,
even the living members of Christ Jesus: For indeed, Papists can never prove
against us any change of the Foundation, and therefore are uncharitable in
damning those who are lively stones, built on that only Foundation and corner
stone, Christ Jesus. But, as if Rome were not enough uncharitable, and though
the Title seemed to tell us that the Cavalier would but have recapitulated his
former uncharitable speeches; yet he breaks forth into new Capitulations and
Incentives of uncharitableness: He doubts (yea seems to be grieved) that
some of the Romish Communion, seeing the fair and just conversation of
Protestants, may grow into love with them and their Religion. But let the
Cavalier upon better consideration remember, that this is not the great and
most dangerous and suspicable fault of Popery, that it is so in love with
Civility, that for it it neglects Religion; but that Popery has so mightily
depraved and corrupted Religion, that Popish Religion has destroyed Civility,
and fairness of Nature: So that, whereas Religion should have advanced men
beyond natural candor and fairness; Popish Religion has destroyed this
natural fairness, and made them worse then men, whom true Religion would
have lifted up above men, unto Saints; an evident mark that it is not a true,
but a false and foul Religion: This appears plainly in those of the powder
Treason; diverse of which were men of candid natures, and ingenuous
dispositions; yet by Popish Religion turned out of nature, made worse then
themselves, and brought to the acting of the most unnatural of Treasons. A
foul Religion, that does black even the white of nature; yet the Cavalier
desiring, Romishly, to dye white into black, he prescribes Antidotes, and
Remedies of Love and Charity; and thus advises his Readers to hatred and
opposition against Protestants: See how Saint John carried himself toward
Cerinthus, and Policarpe to Marsyon, and Saint Anthony to the Arrians, and a
thousand others. And lest it should be thought that Saints fall not foul but
only upon such Heretics that deny even the very prime Articles of Christian
Religion, which concern either God the Father, or the immediate person of
Christ our Lord himself: Cast but an eye upon Saint Bernard, that mild and
merciful man of God, and see how he treats the Heretics of his time, who had
too much affinity with those of ours; Videte detractores, videte canes, etc.
See ye Dogs, see ye Detractors. Behold how he gives his Romists patterns
and presidents to make them fall foul with us; but indeed, his first
Presidents are impertinent, for they show a falling foul with such as we are
not: wherefore, because his first patterns were incongruous, and would not
serve the turn (those heresies of Cerinthus not belonging to us) he leapes
over many hundred years of the purer times of the Church, where, it seems,
he could not find grounds for his better falling foul with us, and at length
comes unto the times of Popish errors and superstitions; there he finds a
good old man, one, I think, of the seven thousand which belonged to Gods
Election, though not altogether without a glass on his eyes, party-colored by
the prejudice of his birth and education in those times of superstition: This
good man he sees angry with some of his time that derided the Baptism of
infants, Prayers for the dead, and the Suffrages of Saints; the former of which
did justly deserve a sharp reproof; and indeed, upon that he chiefly
insists in his confutation. But the later we impute to the superstitious
darkness of the times, and would have covered these sores of this holy man,
but that this Author will needs discover the nakedness of his father. Yet,
if he will but look into that very Sermon of Superstitionis impietat^m nomine
Religionis intitulant -- In operimentum turpitudinis continentiae se insigniere
voto. -- Hi adeo, aut bestiales sunt, ut non advertant qualiter omni
immunditiae laxat habenas qui nuptias damnat, aut certe ita pleni nequitia, and
diabolica malignitate absorpti, ut advertentes dissimulent, and laetentur in
perditione hominum. Toll de Ecclesia honorabile Connubium, and thorum
immaculatum, nonne reples eam concubina iis, incestuosis, seminifluis,
mollibus, masculorum concubitoribus, and omni denique genere immundorum? Elige
ergo utrumlibet, aut sal^a^i universa haec MONSTRA hominum, aut numerum
salvandorum ad continentium redigi paucitatem. Bernard. in Cant. sermon. 66.
Bernard, he shall see more just and weighty reasons to accuse his own
Romists for crimes, which draw Almighty God himself to fall foul with some of
their chief limbs and members. For here he disputes against that forbidding
of marriage which defiles the Church with adulterous, incestuous, and
unnatural sinners, whom he calls, The monsters of men; yet by Romes
forbidding marriage, such monsters have been too often found among those, who
yet are called Priests, Abbots, Monks, and Friars. But yet, that this Champion
may still nourish his root of wormwood and division, and that the Romish
palates may be still kept in distaste and loathing of us, he says of
Protestants, That they are cruel enough to such as they see not, and withal
their civility, and courtesy, and suavity in ordinary conversation, they can
find in their Heretical hearts at a clap to rob all dead men of the help and
comfort of the prayers of the living, and all living men of the prayers of the
Saints, who are in heaven; and the same Saints, of all the honor which
Catholics pay to them here on earth: to omit in this place their infinite and
innumerable detractions, and slanders, and reproaches of the whole Church of
God. But here is as little verity as charity; for the three Alls, are all three
untruths. For it is not true, that Protestants rob all the dead of the prayers
of the living: For first, those dead which are in heaven, are not robbed of
prayers by denying prayers to those that are not in heaven, but supposed to be
in Purgatory. Secondly, those prayers that belong to the dead, we give for
them; and that is, to join with them in their own prayers: even the prayers of
the souls of Saints under the Altar. Revel. 6.9, 10.
We pray that God would hasten the coming of Christ, and so their resurrection
and their consummation in glory. And to this end, that God will hasten the
judgment of the great Whore, Revel. 19.1, 2.
which has shed their blood, and avenge it on her. A second untruth is this,
That we rob all living men of the prayers of the Saints in heaven; I might
indeed say, that this building is of another stuff, and different from the
foundation, That we are cruel to those that we see not; for we see those
that are living: But, howsoever, it is also untrue; for we allow and embrace
the prayers of the Saints in heaven for the living; yea, we doubt not, but
that those souls who are in the triumphant part of the Church, and perfect in
charity, do love that part of the Church which is here militant, and pray for
her victory, and that it may be joined with her in triumphant glory. True it
is, that we find not in the Scripture, that the Saints departed have such
knowledge of the particular affairs of the Saints living, that we can believe
by a supernatural faith that they know our necessities, our thoughts, Romans
14.23.
and desires. And, what is without faith being sin, we dare not offer prayers
without faith, Eccles. 7.1.
lest they should be turned into sin. Thirdly, it is no less untrue, That
we rob Saints of all the honor which true Catholics pay unto them. The name
of the Saints is to us as a precious ointment, Psalm. 112.6.
and it is kept by us in everlasting remembrance. We delight to make mention of
their heavenly virtues, of their valiant actions, and constant passions, of
their wise counsels, powerful exhortations, excellent expositions of divine
truths in their sayings, sermons, and writings. We desire to follow their
examples, to be instructed by their knowledge to be inflamed with their
zeal, and enlived with their heats, who quicken being dead, as the dead
Prophet enlived the dead soldier. These honors we do them, and thus should
it be done to those whom God does honor. And if thus we do honor them, then
far from truth is it, that we rob them of all that honor which true
Catholics pay them. And lastly, where he speaks of infinite detractions,
slanders, and reproaches of the whole Church of God; this is a most unjust, and
unjustifiable slander. We reverence the whole Church of God as our Mother, we
love her peace; and to this end is that which is written in the first Chapter,
and to this end are these lines, which write against this slander. We reproach
not the whole Church; but a botch, a wen, a disease, and burden in the Church:
A faction, that disturbs and distracts the Church; and which, to set up a
counterfeit head, tears the true body of Christ into pieces: And this seems
also to be the business of this Champion in this work; and even at this
time, when by unjust accusations he both persuades to uncharitable divisions,
and strives by his clamours to terrify souls into the net of the Papacy. But
this Champion, while he lives, will never be able to prove, that the Papacy
(or the Pope and his faction) is the Church: And yet, until he prove this, all
his book is but a carcass, mere dead paper, without strength and life: In
the mean time, they are most guilty of detractions, slanders, and reproaches
of the whole Church of God, that lay the title of damnable Heretics or
Schismatickes on all the members of the whole Catholic Church, that are not
subject unto the Man of sin, which sits as God in the Temple of God.

SECT. II.
An absurd complement of the Cavaliers, attended with three gross slanders of
the Protestants Religion, That it is a profession suited to the pleasure of
superiors. Secondly, that the ground of it is sense and appetite. Thirdly,
that they labor more for conformity then unity, are all answered.

ANd now after his bitter pill of dissension, to take away the offense of it,
and that at parting he may flatter the taste of his Reader with a farewell of
sweetness, he puts this sugar to it: All which I have not said either by way
of aggravating their sins, or of alienating men from their persons, which I
esteem and love, and desire to serve with my whole heart. If the Reader will
make a due conjunction of this with the former, and make a right construction
of the whole, he may see it run into this confusednesse, The Romish faction
must be rigorous to Protestants, and avoid them, as Saint John did Cerinthus,
etc. Yea, they must fall foul upon them, though holding lesser heresies, and
call them Dogs; they must take them for cruel Robbers of the living and the
dead, for slanderers and detracters, and all this is well done, and may be
done without being alienated from their persons. But does this Author think
that there will be a separation, a falling foul, and an accounting of us for
Dogs without alienating of affections from our persons? Or would he have such
a not alienating from our persons, as, upon meeting with us, to part presently
from us, or to fall foul upon us, and to call us Dogs? Surely, whatsoever this
Author afterward speaks of his intent, his former words teach such a
separation, division, and hatred, that these later words do not take them
away; but only make a fair show by a mannerly distinction, teaching a
counterfeit art of falling foul upon men, without being alienated from their
persons. But will any wise man think it a charitable speech, if Catesby should
say unto Faulx, Be not alienated from the person of the King, nor of his royal
issue, nor of the Nobility, but only fall foul upon them, and blow them up
with gun powder? As for that following profession toward their persons so
diversely expressed, which I esteem, and love, and desire to serve with my
whole heart, I acknowledge them to be fair words, and of a very good
countenance: But perchance, by some other way there might have been given to a
doubtful Reader more solid satisfaction. For a scrupulous Reader may possibly
say, that these words by Travelers are vented often but as the froth of
complement, and by Romists are often eluded by a latent equivocation, or
mental reservation, and may now be doubted, because they do come in
suspiciously with very bad company; even as attendants on exhortations and
incentives, to separate from Protestants, to esteem them as Dogs, and to fall
foul upon them; yea, not to hold the Reader in doubt, but to let him see there
is no soundness in your distinction of not hating our persons, you have in
this book before taught, that he who does not obey your Church, Page 35*
be taken for no other then a Pagan, or a Publican, that is, a mere Idolater
in his Religion, and for a most infamous and base person in his conversation.
The Reader might have been more soundly satisfied, if in stead of all these
verbs, (esteem, love, and serve) the Cavalier had only said this single
sentence, with one adverb, I have heartily taken the oath of Allegiance.

As for his good intent, in showing us what Heresy is, and how odious, we
thank him for it, and do make this use of it, That because Heresy is so
odious, therefore we abhor the Papacy, which has in it sundry Heresies,
Idolatries, and Doctrines of Devils, and is not the Church, but a faction in
the Church; and desire by grace to continue true and lively members of the
Church, truly Catholic, consisting of all Kinreds, Tribes, and Nations over
the face of the whole earth, whereof Christ Jesus is the only and
unquestionable Head. And if by the Authors mis-perswasions we should remove
from this truly universal Church to become members of the Papacy, we should
remove from the Church truly Catholic, to a piece and portion in the Church;
and that not so much a piece of the Church, as a faction and disease in the
Church; whereof the taking away, and not the increase is a special, if not
only preservation of the unity and health of the Church truly catholic. And
toward this let the Pope hear his Tu quid Christo universalis sanctae
Ecclesiae capiti in extremi judiciidicturus es examine, qui cuncta ejus membra
tibimet conaris universalis appellatione supponere? Quis rogo in hoc tam
perverso vocabulo, nisi ille ad incitandum proponitur, qui dispectis Angeloru^
legionibus secum socialiter constitutis ad culmen conatus est singularitatis
erumpere, ut and nulli subesse, and solus omnibus praeesse videretur. Greg.
Mag. lib. 4. Epist. 38.
better, even a better Pope then any since him, making a question which he
cannot well answer but by removing his universal Headship; What will thou
answer to Christ the Head, who go about to subjugate all his members to
thee? And elsewhere Ego autem fidenter dico, quia quisquis se universalem
Sacerdotem vocat, vel vocari desiderat, in elatione sua Antichristum
praecurrit, quia superbiendo s^ caeteris praeponit. I^. lib. 6. Epist. 30.
Mauritio Augusto.
he says, that such a one is the forerunner of Antichrist. But such a one was
the Pope within twenty years after this was written. And if the Pope, a
thousand years since, was the forerunner of Antichrist, we may well think
that Antichrist is not all this time behind his forerunner.

And now, if the Popes universal Headship be an Antichristian error, and an
error unanswerable at the last day, it were good that the Author himself
being moved by his own motives, would withdraw his faith from this
Antichristian heretical Headship, and become a right child of the Church,
truly Christian and Catholic; wherein, and not in the Papacy, is salvation*
But how far from verity this is which follows, I think he cannot but see
when he comes to himself; his words or insimulations are these, What indeed
do they, but show by their whole course, that they desire, and resolve to
believe and profess according to the occasion, and to comply with the
superior powers of this world? But does the Author believe when he is awaked
what he spoke in this dream? Have the Protestants done thus? or does not this
Author know that they have not thus done? Whom do Papists esteem a superior
Power in the world above the Popes? Therefore they have blasphemed him into a
King John Tankerill, a Batchelour of Divinity, defended, that the Pope, Vicar
of Christ, is Monarch of the Church, and may deprive Kings and Princes, who
disobey his commandments, of their Kingdoms, States, and Dignities. For which
he being condemned to recant by the French, the Court of Rome spoke of the
French men as of lost sheep, who denied the Authority given by Christ to Saint
Peter. Hist. Trent. lib. 5. And yet Optatus says, Cum super Imperatorem non
sit, nisi solus D^us qui fecit Imperatorem -- Dixisti, Ego sum Deus; Ide^, quia
quam vis non sit usus hac voce, tamen aut facit, aut passus est quod defectum
hujus vocis impleret. Extulit corsuum ut nullum hominem sibi comparandum
arbitraretur and tumore mentis suae altior sibi visus est esse; quia quicquid
est supra homines jam quasi Deus est. lib. 3.
of kings, and Lord of lords. And did Luther, and the first Protestants comply
with this superior Power of the world? He Hist. Trent. lib. 1.
neglected both the threatenings of Cajetane, and the fair promises of
Vergerus. Again, in Queen Mary's days, did those whom you burned here comply
with the superior powers in point of Religion? Yea, look through
Christendom, and your own fires, which you have kindled to consume a world of
Protestants, will flash into your faces, blast them, and make them look red
with the shame of this scandal.

And that which follows is a like empty of Truth; but, indeed, that emptiness
is again filled up with malice: They desire to obey appetite and sense,
without being ever so much as told, if they can choose, that they must lose
heaven for their labor. You have had Scriptures, Fathers, and Reasons for our
Religion, which never yet were, nor never can be answered; and with these has
Popery been battered into pieces. Why then talk you of appetite and sense,
when your own smart and shame can tell you, that we have had stronger weapons
which have beaten you with sound blows? Rather speak of sense and appetite
when you see a Papist in his ^at days, before Ashwednesday, to make work for
the Priest, or speak of sense and appetite when a King is moved to go to the
dames of Paris, and then offered to have a Cardinal (a man of sense and
appetite) to be his Confessor, as Lewis the eleventh at the enterview told
Edward the fourth: rather speak of sense and appetite among the stalled Monks,
the fleshly Cardinals, the luxurious Popes, that may draw a world of souls
into hell both by doctrine and example, and who of you durst say to such a one,
What do thou? or in our Authors words, tell them that they must have hell
for their labor. But indeed, we justly take it ill, that Papists should tell
us, that when we are going to heaven, we should lose heaven for our labor,
only because we give not up our souls to this Man and Head of sin, by
schism and error leading millions of souls from heaven to hell.

He goes on, and says; The children in this are as like their Mother as they
can look: For, who perceives not that the Protestant Church does rather carry
a respect to outward conformity, then to real unity in matter of Religion; and
that indeed they are but as in jest, when there is speech of saving souls in
any one Church rather then in another? A large scandal cast on a whole Church,
(and, I doubt, once this Authors Mother) yet without proof, and against
proof; for no proof does he bring that our Church is in jest in matters of
Religion, or accounts all Religious alike: and even his own words next
following might have helped him to disprove his own false witness; It is true
that they make both Laws and Canons, whereby they obliged men under a world of
penalties to frequent their Churches, and to receive their Sacraments. For the
Laws and Canons which he mentions, do express a care for the believing her
doctrine, since they command a subscription to it, a teaching and preaching of
it (and preaching, Saint Paul says, Romans 10.14, 17.
is the means of believing), and lastly Excommunication against those that
affirm the contrary: But the Author, having spoken a broad scandal against
the whole Church, brings in a very narrow tax of some Ministers for a proof of
it: For I put the case, It is likely the Pope himself was of a contrary
opinion to the Cavalier, and doubted that uniformity would bring to uni^y, and
therefore forbad his Disciples this uniformity.
If a man who were known to be wholly affected in his heart of the Catholic
faith, should yet, for the saving of his lands or goods, resolve to comply with
their Laws, by going to their Churches, and by receiving their Communion; yea,
and withal, should declare in company the day before, that he was resolved to
do so the day after, for the only saving of his estate, and for the showing
of obedience to the Kings Laws; though yet withal he were persuaded that
their Sacraments were unlawful, and their Church impure: Would that It seems,
Ministers had need to look carefully to their carriage; especially, since
notice is given of a book written by Papists, of the lives of diverse, with
their names and actions.
Minister refuse to let him go to his Service, and for to communicate with the
rest? Infallibly he would not; and we see daily, that they do not in like
occasions; for that Church, as I said, aspires not to unity, but uniformity.
But here first let the Reader take notice, That the Cavalier brings in sons of
Rome as like the mother as they can look, and just the same which he reproved
before. For he speaks of a man who is wholly affected in his heart to the
Romish faith, and yet, for saving his goods, will come to the Church and
receive our Communion. Now let me borrow the Cavaliers words, and see how his
own words do fit with his own Catholics; They profess according to the
occasion, and comply with the superior Powers of this world, and obey the
motions of appetite and sense, and are as like their mother Rome as they can
look, who for a long time has fitted Religion to temporal ends, if we may
believe judicious and truth-telling Guicciardin.

But now, for the admitting of such a one to receive as shall profess his
believing our Church to be impure, and our Sacraments unlawful, I can hardly
think that this Author believes that our Church does allow it: Can. 3. Can. ^.
For the Canons do excommunicate, ipso facto, those that say our Church is not
true, and maintains the Apostles doctrine, or affirm part of the Articles is
erroneous: now, the doctrine of our Sacraments is a part of the Articles.
Besides, the Rubric before the Communion does order, That if any have done any
wrong to his neighbor by word or deed, the Curate having knowledge thereof,
shall call him, and advertise him in any wise not to presume to come to the
Lords Table, until he have openly declared himself to have truly repented.
Now, I think our Church is a very near and honorable neighbor, and that he
who professes that he holds her impure, does also profess, that he
exceedingly wrongs her; and then you may see what does follow: But that I may
somewhat speak for Romists; Though Rome, which is called an Harlot, cannot but
have a Whores forehead, yet I profess, that I know no Romist so impudent, I
never heard of one, and in charity, I can hardly think there is such a one,
that will openly profess our Sacrament to be unlawful, and yet receive it
presently upon the saying of it: for my part, if I were a Romist, though I
indeed knew such Romish Catholics, I should not boast of their shame to the
Protestants, it showing an extreme need of scandalous objections, when a man
must first cast the filth of a scandal at his own wholly affected (for so he
terms them) Catholics, that it may rebound from their faces and light on
Protestants. And, for our aspiring to unity, it is far more real and solid
then such a single and slight objection can dissolve or dissever; for we have
those mighty bonds of unity, Ephesians. 4.
One God the Father of all, one Lord, and one Spirit; one Baptism, and one
saving Faiht. Neither is our faith le^t loose to Libertinisme, but the doctrine
of it is contained in Articles agreed and subscribed to by the Clergy, and
enacted by the State, and (as has been showed) there is Authority and Law for
the punishment of those that cast scandals upon it.

SECT. III.
Wherein a vain boast of the Romists confidence in maintaining their Religion
by Excommunications is confuted: And an inconsiderate charge, That treason is
pretended against Papists Priests in this Realm, because we dare not avow the
punishing them for heresy, is retorted.

BUt I wonder no less, that this Cavalier should withal boast of his
Catholic Church, That she is so far from obliging a man that believes not
in his heart as she teaches, under pecuniary mulcts, to repair to her
Service and Sacraments, that she will by no means admit him thereunto, till
he have first cleared himself of that suspicion, and sufficiently showed
himself free from any such want of belief. For first, what kind of converts
are those, whom Rome from whatsoever heresy converteth by the Faggot, and
admits to her Sacraments? And is there not very just cause to suspect, that
they believe not from the heart all that she teaches, or at least do not
sufficiently show themselves free from any such want of belief, when they are
turned to their new faith, only by such wooden arguments? Secondly, it seems
this Authors Catholic Church is not the same Catholic Church whereof Sub
persecutore Floro, Ch^istiani Idol^^um cog^ban^u^ ad T^^pla. Sub M^ca^io (...)
(Donat^lae) compellebantur ad Basil^cam. Sub Horo d^^eb^tur, ut n^ga^etur
Christus, and Idola ^ogarentu^; contra, sub Macario commonebantur omnes, ut
Deus unus pariter in Ecclesia ab omnibus coleretu^. Optat. lib. 3.

Aliorum autem Imp^^atorum justitiam* l^g^sque quae veh^m^nte* adversus (...)
l^^ae sunt, qui* ignorant? In quibus una Generalis advers^^ omnes qui
Ch^istian^s s^ d^ci volunt, and Ecclesiae Catholicae non communicant, s^d in
sui^ separatim c^nventiculis congregantur, id continet ut vel ordinato^
Cle^ici, vel ipse ordinatus deni^ libris auri mulct^tu^. Locus vero ipse qu^
impia separatio congregatur, redigatur in F^^cum. (...) ^ontra Parm^^. lib. 1.


Optatus and Saint Austin were members. For Catholics of that Church did
compel men to Church by penalties, that did not altogether believe in their
heart as the Church taught. And we know, the Churches intent is to bring them
to hear, and by hearing to believe what she teaches, and so to fit them for
the Sacraments. Thirdly, Ecclesia paulatim progressa est, and ^m^ia rem^dia
expe^ta, primo solum excommuni^abat, deinde addidic P^CUNIARIAM mul^tam.
B^llar. de (...), cap. 21.
Bellarmine himself confesses, that the Church has used such means for the
reducing of Heretics; and in the very terms which the Author denies,
Pecuniary mul^ts. And whereas our Author eftsoons speaks of Ostiarii, set to
keep out men of contrary belief, what known Protestant in France is hindered,
or at least how commonly are they admitted by the imaginary Ostiarii to be
present at the Mass? And, in the Archdukes Court, Protestants have come to the
Mass, and known to be such by most notorious Papists, though they came in
only to see the acting of it. Secondly, what Ostiarii did put off Tu id sentis
de certitudine tollente omnem dubietatem, ac si divini^us nobis esset certo
propositum, id esse revelatum a Deo. Ego vero, and credo Cath^lici omnes,
auscultantes SANCTUM DECRETUM, id a^negamus. Dom. So^o. Apolog.
Catharinus for holding contrary to Trent, That a man by faith may be sure of
his salvation? Or Castro libro 3. contra haereses verbo. Baptismus haeres. 9.
sententiam Cajetani, ut haereticam damnare videtur. Suarez m. 3. T. 3. disp.
27. sect. 3.
Cajetan for holding, That infants dying without Baptism might be saved? Who
puts off the French, that hold the Council to be above the Pope; a point of
faith much differing from the present faith of Rome? That which follows, I
think at the first reading may appear to be the mere swelling of one that
has drunk the poisoned cup in the hand of the Scarlet Lady. This Church,
enriched and endowed with the holy Ghost, proceeds like a body, which knows it
self to belong to an omnipotent head, and fears not to avow both what it
says, and what it does. And, as on the one side she expresses all the suavity
which can be conceived, and is most ready to wrap up the most enormious
sinners of the world, and the most mortal enemies which she has, in the very
bowels of her compassion, if they will come to God in the way of Penance. For
can the Reader keep himself from laughter, when he sees the lofty description
of this Romish fortitude; and withal sees the low pusillanimity and meannesse
of the Pope, taking in an Excommunication denounced against the State of
Venice, without penance and satisfaction; and so neither avowing what it says,
nor what it does, to the plain disavowing of that which this Cavalier says?
Again, does not this Church proceed much rather like a body ruled with a head
possessed not with a seventh virtue, but with many of the seven deadly sins,
whereof a great one is Quod convocandi Concilii intentio satis sincera non
fuit, Romanae avaritiae artificiosa provisio patefecit. Multi enim evocati,
quibus iter cundi ad Concilium difficile vel intolerabile videbatur, interventu
pecuntae turpius exactae quam praestitae relaxari meruerunt. Neubridg. lib. 3.
cap. 2. Quando hactenus aurum Roma refudit? Bernard. de consider. lib. 3.
Covetousness. For, do we not read that (which may make a modest Romist to
blush, when he reads it) when the At (nuntius ille Rufi) priusquam abeam
tecum secretius agam: Mansit ergo ibi per dies plurimos -- munera quibus ea
cordi esse animadvertebat disperti^ndo, and p^llicendo. Deductus ergo a
sententia Romanus Pontifex est. Ladmer. lib. 2. Nec mirum, nam omnes
satisfactiones quae poenitentibus imponuntur a Confessore, juxta Ecclesiae
Romanae statuta possunt commutari in pecuniarias. Texeda Hispanus C 5.
Popes own soldiers and servants fight for his supremacy, a principal point
of their forged and fictitious faith, he by money has been brought from avowing
what he said for those servants, and their services.

It follows, She goes on so far, if she see cause to separate them in the
quality of Heretics from her communion, and proceeds not against them as
against Traitors to Princes or States, according to that poor shift of
Protestants, whose guilty consciences make them not dare (though their hearts
be well bent that way) to punish our Priests capitally, as for a corrupt
Religion; but they set upon them false and impudent pretexts of Treason. First,
We acknowledge, that the Pope does outgoe this Author with his
Excommunication; for he goes on so far, not only when he sees cause, but
when he sees no cause, to separate from his Communion, even without any proof
of heresy: for, what cause was there seen of excommunicating the King of
Navarre out of his Kingdom in the quality of an heretic, who was taken for a
Romist; especially since it is recorded, that the King of Spaine's conscience
in his deathbed was not satisfied with the Pope's eyesight of the cause; but
spoke as seeing cause of Restitution, where the Pope pretended cause of
Excommunication? And what cause had the Venetians given of Excommunication,
when their Restitution without penance shows plainly, that they were without
cause excommunicated? And what cause had the Pope for excommunicating Queen
Elisabeth, and giving away her Kingdom? And whereas you say, She proceeds not
against them as against Traitors to Princes or States; This is so true, that I
cannot confute it. But to make your truth yet more true, I must also add this,
That your Papacy proceeds against Protestants, because they will not be
Traitors to Princes or States; as appears by the penance of the Irish Pilgrim
formerly mentioned; and by the Bull of Pius quintus, where he curses and
excommunicateth those subjects that will not be Traitors to their Sovereign:
And indeed, by that Bull the Papists themselves were exceedingly troubled
between two fears; one of being tied with the cords of this excommunication
for want of Treason; and another, of being tied up for Treason, in obeying this
Excommunication: Which grief, with the remedy thereof, I find thus described
by Master Heart, a not unlearned Romist; Execution of Justice, page 16, 17.
The Bull of Pius quintus (for so much of it as is against the Queen) is
holden among the English Catholics for a lawful sentence, and a sufficient
discharge of her subjects fidelity, and so remains in force; but in some
points touching the Subjects, it is altered by the present Pope. For, where in
that Bull all her subjects are commanded not to obey her, and she being
excommunicated and deposed, all that do obey her are likewise innodate and
accursed; which point is perilous to the Catholics: for if they obey her,
they be in the Popes curse; and if they disobey her, they are in the Queens
danger: therefore the present Pope, to releeve them, has altered that part of
the Bull, and dispensed with them to obey and serve her without peril of
Excommunication; which Dispensation is to endure but till it please the Pope
otherwise to determine.

But whereas this Author says, That the guilty consciences of Protestants
make them not dare to punish Priests capitally, as for a corrupt Religion; I
leave it to the wisdom of State to consider how far such an imputation of
guilt deserves to be removed. And let his own fellows weigh with themselves
whether this Author has acted the part of a Cavalier both valiant and wise,
thus to provoke clemency armed with power, by putting the scandal and shame
of guiltiness upon it? And whether he has not brought a kind of necessity
of capital punishments for the removing of his own objection of guilt:
especially, since they who thus provoke patient clemency to turn into
severity, have also already made smooth the way for it; for they have
Scripturis iisdem confirmat quibus probat. D. Cypr. de exhort. Mart. cap. 5.
Quod sic Idololatriae indignetur Deus, ut praeceperit ^os etiam interfici qui
sacrifica^e and servire Idolis suaserint. Quo loco vide A^net^t. number. 27. and
latius in Epist. ejusdem 52. ad Antonianum. Pam^lius in Tertull. ad Scapul. n.
8. Quum autem jussu Divino debea^ occidi Idololatra Exodus 22. -- Moses talium
sanguine putavit Levitarum suorum manus consecr^tas iri, Exodus 32. quod and
Phin^ae ad justitiam reputatum est, usque in sempiternum, Number. 25. Psalm. 105.
Propterea princeps, ut been tibi sit, auseras Prophetas istos, etc. Quintinus
inter Adnot. Pamelii. Tertull. de Praescript. n. 254. The Idolatry of Popery
has been proved by many: and above many, by B. Bilson, Christ. Subject. part.
4. B. M^rton of the Mass, lib. 7. Dr. Reynolds de Idololatria Romana: And
confessed before by Cassander.
plentifully proved, That Idolatry should be punished with death; And the
other half have the Protestants mightily and inevitably evicted; That right or
very Popery is right Idolatry: And now what hinders, but that this Author may
have his desired conclusion of capital punishment for an Idolatrous Religion,
and not only for Treason.

But as here his valor was inconsiderate, so now his inconsideration is
valiant: For, not weighing the Treasons of Priests, nor indeed, the reasons by
which they have approved the Justice of Laws made against them; this Author
in a blind hardiness, to his own shame, does accuse Protestants of Impudence
and Falsehood. For, that many Priests have been actual Traitors, our
Chronicles too plentifully show; and their own I hold directly the affirmative
part, scil. That both her Majesty's laws and proceedings against all sorts of
Catholics have bin mild and merciful. Watson Quodlibet. 8. Act. 9. I said,
that ( caeteris paribus) her Majesty's proceedings had been both mild and
merciful, and that we are not so much to exclaim against the cruelty of the
Persecution, as to admire how that any of us are left alive to talk of
Religion. Id. Appendix to the Quodlibets.
Pens have witnessed to the world the justice of our Laws, even against those
Priests who have not bin taken in actual Treason. And now that this Author
may help us (as he usually does) toward his own confutation, he gives us a
sentence that is a sword for the slaying of his own Charity Mistaken: His
words are these; As the Catholic Church is most perfectly charitable, so
withal she thinks she cannot express the virtue better, then by clearly
distinguishing between truth and falsehood, and by exhorting men to embrace the
one, and to avoid the other: so far off is she from demeriting by letting
Protestants know, that if they dye impenitent in that Religion, they lose their
souls. Here is that truth which I told him long since, and which has already
served to overthrow a great part of his former discourse; That Charity cannot
be better expressed then by clearly distinguishing between truth and fashood,
and by exhorting men to embrace the one, and to avoid the other. For, herein
do the Romists exceedingly offend against Charity, and can hardly better
express the contrary (Uncharitableness) then by putting truth into place of
falsehood, and by exhorting men to embrace falsehood, and to avoid truth. And
until the Author has disproved this mistaking, our Accusation of Romish
uncharitableness still stands on foot, and his own plea for Rome lies still
unproved: And Rome though very meritorious, yet does much demerit, yea, sin
against Charity, for falsely telling Protestants, That they lose their souls if
they dye impenitent in a true Religion.

CHAP. XIII.
Wherein are discussed diverse false inferences from some Protestants doctrine,
urged by the Cavalier in the Conclusion of his Book, to seduce men to Popery;
and encountered with some true inferences drawn from Popish doctrines, the
better to persuade men from that Sect.

SECT. I.
The Protestants denial of Merit no principle of corrupt living.

THis Author having lost, or rather given away his cause in the premises of
his discourse, the conclusion suitable to such losing premises should have been
a mere surrender: and accordingly he should have said, That, notwithstanding
all improbabilities, it is very probable that Romists want charity to
Protestants, when they take them for odious persons, fall foul on them, blow
them up, burn them, and damn them. And secondly, That though it be true that
there is but one Church, and one Faith, wherein is salvation: yet Protestants
being of this one Church, and having this Faith, and so being in the way of
salvation, it is not an untruth but a truth, that they want charity who hate
and damn the Protestants which are saved.

Yet our Author goes on like Pharaoh, and to him (as to Pharaoh) may be said,
Know thou not yet that Egypt is destroyed? Does he not know the city, which
is spiritually Egypt and Sodom, is going to destruction? and the probabilities
and reasons are dead, by which (as by garrisons) this Egypt is maintained and
defended? Wherefore it were good, that both he and Rome would let the men go,
that they may serve the Lord their God.

But Rome still goes on in her purpose of holding the Church in bondage; yea,
she sends forth Soldiers and Cavaliers to fetch back those who are gone out
from her yoke, whereof this Champion is one. And now, that the sons of Rome
may imitate the infirmities of Saint Peter, wherein especially their Fathers
are his Successors, he comes with a piece of that pity wherewith Saint Peter
would have Christ to have pitied himself; but so, that (without pity) he
should have lost the salvation of the whole world; so would this Author have
Protestants to pity themselves, even to the danger of their salvation; and by a
deadly Apostacy to turn from the living God to Romish Idolatry: But he
doubts his pity will prove but a slight and empty persuasion, and therefore
to a vain pity he adds some reasons which want nothing more then truth to
make them forcible; He says, That Protestant doctrine (under his false Title
of heresy) is a Nursery of corrupt principles concerning life: and when he
has said it, he brings (as he is wont) proofs that do not prove it; yet
thus he begins even in his Conclusion; When they teach men that there is no
merit belonging to good works (though they be confessed by us to flow but
from the grace and goodness of Christ our Lord) what courage do they give men
to be frequent and cheerful in doing of good works? But is not this speech
unworthy of a noble Cavalier, much more of a Christian? For, were it not
ignoble in a Knight, when his Father commands him to do some valiant service
for his honor or defense, to answer him, he has no courage to do him
service, because thereby he cannot merit any thing from him, seeing he owes
all his service, and himself unto him? Thus, because his Father has deserved
all, therefore he will do nothing. Again, If a Father should tell his Son,
Do what thou can to please me; or as Isaac, Go kill me some venison, and
I will freely give thee a blessing, though the venison deserve it not: should
the Son wisely return this answer to his Father, Sir, I have no encouragement
by your free promise or gift of this blessing, except I can merit it from you
by my venison? But ingenuous Christians, Saints, and Sons of God, whose
understandings and wills are truly ennobled by the Divine Spirit, are far of
another mind; they have indeed the divine gift of Love, and thereby love God
as a Father, that has already so merited of them all that they are and have,
that his merit is to them a most sufficient motive to serve him heartily, even
with all that might and being which they have received from him.

Accordingly, the man according to Gods own heart calls upon all mankind for
their service, as due to God for making them; Psalm. 100.
Come let us kneel and worship before God our Maker. Again, the love of God
in redeeming us has deserved all our love and service; and accordingly the
Apostle raped into the third heaven, says, The love of Christ constrains us:
2 Cor. 5.14.2.15.
and why does it constrain? because we thus judge, that if Christ dyed for
us, we should live to him. Gods merits in creating and redeeming us are strong
motives to serve him, though we cannot merit of him: though Gods merit is so
great, that it has swallowed up all our merits; we are therefore to serve him
not the less, but the more, the more he has deserved beyond our requital. A
good Son would serve and obey this heavenly Father for that which he has
done, though he gave him nothing hereafter. And surely, if there were not such
an affection even in humanity, how should thee son of a poor father ever
do him service? But yet we do not stop here, because the bounty of our
heavenly Father does not stop, but enlarges it self further; for though God
has already deserved of us all that we can do, so that all that we can do
were but our duty: yet he goes on, and promises to give rewards even for
doing our duty: And does not this reward move us as much, being given by free
promise, as if it were gotten by the workers merit? yea, much more in a noble
worker: For, such a one will reason thus; My heavenly Father freely gives me
infinite rewards, even an excessively exceeding weight of glory for small and
moment any passions and actions; 2 Cor. 4.17.
he gives me that which he is not bound to give, he gives that which I can
never deserve; and shall I not courageously and affectionately serve him who is
so freely gracious and bountiful to me far beyond my deserts? But indeed,
much rather (and that contrary to Romish Divinity) out of a right consideration
of Gods great rewards, and our great unworthiness, (we being, if Jacob say
true, Genesis 32.10.
less then the least of Gods mercies) we may truly affirm, That we can have
no courage to good works, if we will not work without a true confidence of
Merits: Genesis 15.1.
For, if Gods rewards be beyond all merits (as it needs must be, since he
himself, whom all that we have and are cannot merit, is our exceeding great
reward) how should there be good works raised from the confidence in that
merit which is not? And though there be an excellency in the grace of the
Spirit by which we work; yet even that grace is a free loan, and we are
debtors to God for it, and how can we merit of him by growing in debt unto
him? especially, because the money wherewith we should pay those debts is of a
baser Alloy, by the mixture of our corruption, then that which we received,
and whereby we became debtors? And we cannot pay debts, much less become
meriters by paying ten borrowed Talents of pure gold, with ten Talents of the
metal of Nebuchadnezzars Image. Therefore the Saints Sancti totam spem
referunt ad misericordiam Dei.

Lorca m. 22. Sect. 2. Disp. 3. number. 12.

Summum malum est in operibus nostris and meritis confidere; hoc enim est me
itum Christi blasphemare, Ferus in Eccles. 4. licet renitente Indice Exp.
Sandonal. At Ferus etiam in Ionae cap. 2. Q^i in tentatione vel in scipsum, in
sua scilicet sapientia, consiliis, v^^^u^, justitia, vel in quacunque creatura
finaliter confidit, is vere vanitates observa^, in arenam aedificat, and
mise^ic^^diam suam frustia relinquit, hoc est, Deum, qui est Misericordia
nostra. --


trust perfectly in the grace of God, and not in their merits, and from that
grace, as from a boundless and bottomless Ocean, fetch most sufficient
motives of good works: While they have grace that enables them to work, and
grace that forgives the imperfection of their works, and grace that rewards
whatsoever goodness is in their works; yea, even the will for the deed, they
are mightily encouraged to continue in good works, knowing that Their labor
thus is not in vain in the Lord. 1 Cor. 15.58.
And herein their hearts agree with the heart of him that rewards them; For
his eyes are on them that fear him, Psalm. 33.18.
and trust in his mercy. They fear God, Facit Potentiam in brachio suo: In
quo animadverte, quod beatam se esse dicat (beata Vi^go) non proprio merito,
atque virtute, sed Dei in se habitantis element a Hi^ronymus advers. P^lag.
l^b. 1. Psalm. 147.24. Tum ergo justi sumas quando nos p^ccatores fatemur, and
justitia nostra non ex proprio m^rite, f^d ex Dei consistit misericordia.
Hieronym. Ib. Joh. 17.23, 24. Heb. 11.5.
and by good works keep his Commandments; but they trust not in the merits
of their works, but in Gods mercy: And in such God takes delight, and loves to
behold them; and if God love to behold them, he will also bring them to behold
him in a beatificall vision.

SECT. II.
Wherein are contained these two Tenets: 1. That the best works of Gods
children are mixed with some sin. 2. That no man does, or will perfectly
fulfill the whole Law; And yet (contrary to the Cavaliers lame Inferences)
there are encouragements sufficient to good works, and to use our best
endeavors toward the fulfilling of the Law.

BUt that which follows next, requires a patient Reader: For, if the Articles
of the Church of England be but compared with this Authors words, I doubt the
Reader will feel some need of patience; The Authors words are these; And what
cause can they assign why men should abstain from sin, when they teach them
that the best works which are performed by the greatest Saints in the world
are no better then sins, and they in their own nature mortal? The Articles
words are these; Art. 12.
Albeit that works which are the fruits of faith, and follow after
justification cannot put away our sins, and endure the severity of Gods
judgment, yet are they pleasing and acceptable to God in Christ. And the like
approbation of good works by the Church of Scotland, and foreign Churches of
Protestants is to be seen in the harmony of Confessions: Wherefore, I should
offend my Reader to say much against this, which appears so plainly to be a
scandal, even one of those coals of Juniper which comes from devouring
tongues; and I wonder it had not burned the tongue or the conscience of the
speaker. Briefly, we hold, that a good tree (made good by Regeneration, and
ingrafted by faith into Christ Jesus) brings forth good fruit, even this
fruit of good works: and these works, as much as they come from the sap of
the root of Christ Jesus, and partake of his fatness, so much are they good;
but as much as they partake of us, and our remnant of Yea, their own Conradus
Clinguis writes thus: Opera justificatorum, quam vis ex fide Christi, ad laudem
and gloriam Dei, atque dilectionem proximi fiant, quia tamen nos ex carne and
sanguine polluti sumus; hinc est quod opera nostra in sua bonitate, natura, and
dignitate considerata, sint i^pura and imperfecta, ex se and propria sua
virtute; Et quoniam omnia opera nostra, etiam post fidem facta, sunt
imperf^cta, and immunda, and involuntaria, ideo non possumus contendere cum
Deo, quasi nobis aliquid debeat, and teneatur ex condigno, sicut mercenarius
pro laboribus suis cum Domino. Et in eum finem dicimus quod opera nostra non
merentur vitam aeternam, sicut m^la and imperfecta moneta nihil ^mi potest.
L^c. Com. lib. 1. cap. 22. Heb. 11.26.
corruption, so much are they faulty. This faultiness has need of mercy, and
receives it through Christ, into whom we are ingrafted; but this being
removed by Christ, the goodness which the work has from Christ shall
eternally be rewarded. And this reward is a very good motive to good works
unto all those who, with Moses, have an eye of faith where with truly to see
the recompense of the reward.

He goes on, and asks, When they teach men that the Commandments of God are
not possibly to be kept by any man, even with the help of Divine grace, what
reason can they have either to exhort men to keep Gods Commandments, or to
reprove them for infringing the same. The Cavalier is here troubled, and
troubles us with an old Duo a te ( Pelagio) proposita sunt: unum posse hominem
sine peccato esse si velit, etc. sine peccato esse perpetuo, summae solius est
potestatis. Itaque, aut da exemplum qui absque peccato fuerint, aut si dare non
potes confitere imbecillitatem tuam, and noli ponere in coelum os tuum, ut per
esse and esse, posse, stultorum illudas auribus. Quis enim tibi conceder posse
hominem facere quod nullus unquam hominum potuerit? Hieron. in Prooem. lib. 1.
advers. Pelagianos. Si dixerimus quod peccatum non habemus, nos ipsos
decipimus, and veritas in nobis non est: Hoc qui dixit, sapienter se ad Dei
gratiam reservavit. Est enim Christiani hominis quod bonum est velle; and in
Deo quod been voluerit currere: sed homini non est datum perficere, ut post
spatia quae debet homo implere, rester aliquid Deo ubi deficienti succurrat,
quia ipse solus est perfectio, and perfectus solus Dei Filius Christus, caeteri
omnes semiperfecti sumus. Opt. li. 2. Qui autem rectissime sapiunt, intelligunt
quemlibet hominum, quam vis jam pro consortio societatis humanae non absurd
dici possit justissime vivere, non tamen posse esse sine aliquo vitio quamdiu
caro concupiscit adversus spiritum, spiritus autem adversus carnem. Aug. contra
Parmen. lib. 1.
Pelagian business of the possibility of keeping the Law, which S. Hierome
long since told them, was but to speak of a power which was never brought to
effect: For it is affirmed by the Fathers, and too much experience confirms
it, that how possible soever the keeping of the Law is; yet no man ever brought
this possibility to an actual keeping of the Law. To what end then does he
talk of this possibility, which gives such small encouragement by being
ineffectuall, that his own words may near be retorted against him? For what
encouragement do Romists give to the keeping of the Commandments, when they
speak of such a possibility of keeping them, by which no man yet did ever
keep them? So that a man may thus only encourage himself by this possibility,
that except he do that by it, which never man did before him, he shall never
keep the Commandments by it.

Besides, S. Paul says, Gal. 5.17.
That the flesh so lusts against the spirit, that Christians cannot do what
they would; which is as much as if he had said, They cannot be perfect if they
would: for even Q^ae potest alia major esse ^em^ritas qua^ Dei (non dica^
similitudinem sed) aequalitate^ vendicare, and brevi sentent^a omnia
hae^^tcorum venena complecti. -- Hoc est enim homine^ ex homine colere, and in
co^pore co^stitutum esse sine corpore, and optare potius quam docere, dic^nte
Apostol^, Miser ego hom^, qui^ meliberabit de corpore mortis hujus? --

Si quod non vult ( Paulus) operatu^, qu^modo sta^^ potest hoc quod dicitur,
p^sse hominem esse sine peccato si velit? Qua ratione potest esse quod velit,
^um Apostolus asserat se quod cupiat implere non posse? cumque ab eis
quaerim^s, qui sunt illi quos absque peccato putent; Nova stropha eluder^
cupiunt ve^itatem, se non eos dicere qui sint vel fuerint, sed qui esse
possint. Eg^egii Doctores dicunt esse posse, quod nunquam sui^le demonstrant,
dicente Scriptura, Omne quod suturum est, ita sactum est in priore tempore.
Hieron. ad C^^^^phon^. Apostoli una hora vigilare non possunt, somno, (...),
and carnis fragilitate superati; and tu p^tes longo tempore omnia peccata
superare. Id. advers. Pelag. l. 2.


Paul says of himself, Romans 7.18, 23.
That the good which he would do he had not power to effect, neither had he yet
attained a full Phil. 3.12.13, 14.
resurrection from the dead; and yet no doubt he improved the power which he
had beyond any Romist: For he says, he did reach forth, (a term of
straining, and mighty endeavor) yea, he did press toward the mark; yet,
notwithstanding all this he confesses, that he had not attained, he was not
already perfect. And now let Romists encourage their disciples by proposing a
perfection of righteousness to which S. Paul attained not.

And the question lies not in this, what the grace of God can do; but what man
can do, having grace only in measure, and withal a great measure and remainder
of concupiscence and law of the members. For, though the foot of grace would go
upright, yet the other foot of corruption adds a lamenesse; and so the best
Christian, like Jacob, goes halting. Neither therefore is it a just reason for
a son that goes halting, yet with halting is able to perform some messages of
his father, not to perform what he may, being commanded by his father: yea,
he may be hereby encouraged to endeavor the more to do his fathers Psalm.
103.14.
commands, because he has a father that knows his infirmity, and his striving
against it, and the more he strives, the more he will reward him. Qui ad
summum nititur, aliquoties in med^o subsistit; at qui medium destinavit nimio
saepenume^o residet. Eraesm. in Scholiis Epist. Hier. ad C^esiphont. Est
quoddam prodire tenus si non datur ultra. Item, Nam vitiis nemo sine nascitur,
optimus ille Qui minimis urgetur. Horat.

Arduos agressus virtutis suspice: etiam si decidunt, magna conantes. Generosa
res est, respiciente^ non ad suas, sed ad naturae (gratiae) vires, conari alta,
tentare, and mente majora concipere, qua^ quae ingenti animo adornatis effici
possint. Senec. de vit. B^a^. cap. 20.


A learner that cannot write so well as his copy, yet is to be encouraged to
write so well and so like it as he can. And surely, if it were otherwise, the
Cavaliers reason might discourage most Scholars from the study of Philosophy,
because they cannot be so good Philosophers as Aristotle. And it might have
discouraged the Cavalier from writing Controversies, because there was no
possibility for him to do it so well as Bellarmine.

S. Augustine has written a book de persectione justitiae, especially to
answer this Pelagia^ question. Ratiocinat. Pelagianorum 6. Cur praeciperetur
quod fieri omnino non posset? Respondetur, consultissime homini praecipi, ut
rectis passibus ambulet, ut cum se non posse perspexerit, medicinam requirat,
quae interioris hominis ad sanandam peccati claudicationem, gratia Dei est per
Jesum Christ. Dom. nostrum. Ratioc. 8. Tunc erit plena justitia, quando plena
sanitas; tunc plena sanitas, quando plena charitas, plenitudo enim legis
charitas; tunc autem plena charitas, quando videbimus eum sicuti est. Ratioc.
9. Quia peccavit voluntas secuta est peccantem, peccatu^ habendi dura
necessitas, donec tota sanetur infirmitas, and accipiatur tanta libertas, in
qua, sicut necesse est, permaneat beat vivendi voluntas; ita ut sit etiam been
vivendi, and nunquam peccandi voluntaria foelixque necessitas. Ratioc. 11.
Frustra non prohiberetur aut juberetur, quod vel caveri, vel impleri non
possit. Respondetur -- Ad hoc enim lex ista praecepit, ut cum in his implendis
homo defecerit, non se extollat superbia tumidus; sed ad gratiam confugiat
fatigatus, ac sic eum lex terrendo, ad Christum diligendum Paedagogi perducat
officio. Ratioc. 15. Si est aliquod peccatu^ quod vitari non posset, quomodo
justus Deus dicitur, si imputare cuiqua^ creditur quod vitare non posset?
Respondemus, Jam olim co^tra superbos est clamatum, Beatus cui non imputavit
Dominus peccatum, non enim imputat his qui fideliter ei dicunt, Di^itte nobis
debita nostra. Ratioc. 17. Dicit Apostolus, Non quia (...) acceperim, aut jam
perfectus sum, etc. Quotquot ergo perfect currimus, hoc sapiamus quod nondu^
perfecti sumus; ut illic per^iciamur quo perfect adhuc currimus. -- Cur ergo
non praeciperetur homini ista perfectio, qua^ vis jam in hac vita nemo habeat?
Non enim recte curritur, si quo currendum est nesciatur. Quomodo autem
sciretur, si nullis praeceptis ostenderetur? -- Testimonia, inquit, quibus
probatur praeceptum esse homini, ut absque peccato sit. Ad hoc respondemus: Non
utrum praeceptum sit quaeritur, quod valde manifestu^ est; sed hoc ipsum quod
praeceptu^ esse constat u^^um in corpore mortis hujus possit impleri, ubi caro
concupiscit adve^sus spiritum, and spiritus adversus carnem, ut non ea quae
volumus faciamus. -- Haec est nunc nostra justitia qua currimus, esurientes and
sitientes ad perfectionem plenitudinemque justitiae, ut ea postea saturemur.
But to give this point a more serious conclusion; This state of imperfection,
wherein with the new man begotten by grace, there is left a remnant of the old
man begotten by nature, does not lessen the power of Gods grace, but sets forth
the wisdom of Gods dispensation. God, whose Spirit blows where, and how he
lists, for many wise ends, and especially for his own glory, dispenses his
grace in this manner, and measure, and mixture. For first, the corruption
remaining with grace, does humble man before God, and cause him to have a low
conceit of himself, and an high estimation of Gods grace, of which he has
continual need; the sufficiency whereof alone can forgive his falls, and raise
him from falling, and enable him to stand, and walk in the paths of holiness
in such a manner as the same grace will accept. Secondly, This life being
appointed to the Church militant for a warfare, and the warfare for a way to
the Crown; this contrariety of the flesh to the spirit is not the least part
of this war; and to those that fight the good fight of faith, it serves for a
way of advancement to the Crown: For, the more combats of the flesh, the more
conquests of the spirit, and so the greater enjoyings of the celestial Crown.
And thirdly, God is mightily glorified, who by a little grace, even a grain of
mustard seed, opposed by a strong concupiscence, and that backed by a world of
tentations, and by those Tempters which are Principalities and Powers, (though
through many foyles, faintings, and failings) the little grain becomes a tree,
the smoking flax becomes a fire, and judgment is brought to victory. Though
we lose in some single combats, yet we are gainers in the whole war, and
we become more then Conquerours through him that loves us. And indeed, this
growing nature of the seed of grace, and especially the victorious success
which Gods grace gives to it, is a most strong encouragement to good works;
even such as all objected imperfection of righteousness can never overthrow:
for, though it be so little, either at first in the beginning of it, or
perchance after in some spiritual desertions, (for there are ebbs and floods
of grace) yet we are mightily encouraged to good works, because that seed is
not only a remaining, but a growing seed; the house of Saul grows weaker, and
the house of David stronger: we come still nearer to perfection, though we
do not fully attain it; we grow from babes to young men, from young men to
that measure of stature which is appointed to us in Christ Jesus. Lastly, our
state of imperfection does serve for an incentive, to spur up our desires
toward the state of perfection: For, when we draw up hardly and painfully
toward Gods holy mountain, with a weight of flesh pressing down, and a body
of sin cleaving fast, we pant toward heaven, and send up groans of the
Spirit, which speak in their language; when shall we come and appear before
God? We desire to be delivered from the body of sin, unto the glorious
liberty of the sons of God: our souls being wearied, and parched, and dried
up with the flames and vexations of tentations and sins, thirst for the
living God, and desire to satisfy their thirst in the River of pleasures,
which flows from his presence, whose streams are perfect holiness, and
perfect happiness.

SECT. III.
That the doctrine of denying free will does not abridge the doing of good, and
justice of punishment for evil doing.

THere is yet one question more, which must have an answer, rather for some
weakness which it may meet, then for any strength which is in it, When they
profess that men have not so much as free will to do any good work at all,
when they are first moved and assisted to it by the good grace of God, with
what sense can they encourage men to do any thing which is good? or with what
justice can they punish them for omitting the same? The Cavalier is deceived
himself, as it seems, and goes about to deliver over his deceit unto his
Reader; For, we do not say, That men have not so much as free will, being
moved by effectual grace; But, That they have not so little as free will: For,
we hold, that the will being moved effectually by grace, is more then free
will; for it is free will fortified, actuated, and animated by grace. So his
Reader is deceived by him, if he be persuaded by these words, that we do not
allow men actuated by grace so much as free will; for we allow them more. And
indeed, we allow them much more then Romists, and they quarrel with us
because we allow them so much: Yet the more power and efficacy we allow grace
in the will, the less efficacy has the Cavaliers objection; but the more
encouragement have men to good works: For the more God helps the will, the
more courageously may the will go on to working; and the more may exhortation
call for good works. Indeed, if God did not work in us to will and to do, but
left man to stand only on the motion of his own will, exhortations might have
but a cold encouragement, standing merely at the mercy of the creature for
success and effect. But when God gives what he commands, then may exhortations
call for the performance of Gods commands.

As for humane justice in punishing, he may know that our opinion does not
oppose but approve it. For even your own Hist. of Trent, lib. 2.
Vega, in the Council of Trent, acknowledges That Protestants affirm a
liberty in Philosophical justice, and in external works of the Law.

But of free will I may here say the less, because I have spoken somewhat of
it before, and elsewhere is more largely unfolded the truth of the point, and
the consent of our Church. Great Oracle, etc.


SECT. IIII.
That the Idolatry and blood which springs from the Religion of Rome, should
deter men from consorting with her.

BUt here I may give this return to the Romists: Upon the love of God and man
depends the whole Law; And in the love of God a principal place is given to
the worship of God in spirit and truth: And in the love of man a chief place
is given to the preservation of his life. Idolatry and murder being contrary to
these, are maine breaches of this royal Law of love: Now Rome permitting the
doctrines and practice of idolatry and murder, (the maine breaches of the Law
of God) with what face can she require the keeping of other laws and lesser
duties, that gives such encouragement to the breach of these greater ones?
Principale crimen generis humani, summus seculi reatus, tota causa judicii
idololatria: Nam, etsi suam speciem tenet unumquodque delictum, and si suo
quoque Nomine judicio destinctur, in Idoloterriae tamen crimine expungitur.
Tertul. de (...).
Tertullian proves idolatry alone to be a breach of every Commandment; and
besides, it will not be hard to prove that Rome, jointly with idolatry, gives
encouragement to the breach of every Commandment: but I especially fasten on
these two, whose eminent guilt is haunted with the continual outcry of the
Prophets, and at length avenged with heavy judgments by the Judge of the
whole earth: And indeed, commonly these sins are twins, the same evil spirit
first working by idolatry, as it were a not being of God in the faith and
worship of man, and then provoking man to destroy the Image of that God whom he
has formerly abolished. But most fearful sins they are, and their
hideousness may be seen in the horrid face of the judgments, which have been
the counterparts and representations of them. He that would behold painted unto
the life the lamentable countenance of these judgments, let him with an heart
of life and sense read over the Lamentations of Jeremy; Lam. 4.13.
And he that will see Idols and blood to have been the maine meritorious causes
of these judgments, let him read the words both of other Jer. 25.4, 5, 6.
etc. 2 King. 17.13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. 2 King. 21.10, 11, 12, 13, 16.
2 Chr. 36.14, 15, 16. Ezekiel. 36.18.
Prophets, and the same Jeremy. But if for these Jerusalem has been judged,
what shall become of Rome? For, Rome is the mother of spiritual fornications,
and in her is found the blood of all that are slain on earth: The power of
Rome crucified the Lord Jesus, it slew millions of the Martyrs of Jesus under
the heathen Emperors, it has added to these millions the multitudes of those
who have been slain under the beast with horns of a Lamb. Rev. 11.8.
And how loud is the cry of all this blood being united in one voice?
Wherefore, let my counsel be acceptable to you, (I speak to the children of
Rome, that they may be saved) Hear the voice of Gods Spirit, Come out of her
my people, before God hear the voice of this blood, and then ye be partakers
of her judgments: Rev. 16.6. Rev. 17.6.
For she that is drunk with the blood of the Saints shall vomit it up again,
and her own blood with it; she shall fall and never rise again, Rev. 18.21.
for the word of God has spoken it. Wherefore, do not join with that
idolatrous company of Mourners, which shall lament for her when they shall see
the smoke of her burning; but be found among the heavenly company of
Rejoycers, Rev. 19.
which sing Alleluia, Salvation, and glory, and honor, and power unto the Lord
our God. For, true and righteous are his judgments, for he has judged the
great whore, which did corrupt the earth with her fornication, and has avenged
the blood of his servants at her hand.

And thus the Man of sin, and all the enemies of Christ being made his
foote-stoole, we will hope that the kingdom of grace shall be speedily
changed into the kingdom of glory. And for the hastening of that glory, we
will pray for the speedy subduing of these enemies; For this glory being come,
we shall by the King of glory and peace be translated into that peace, where
we shall be free from the vexations of enmity. There shall be no controversies,
emulations, factions, and schisms for Religion, but without controversy the
great mystery of godliness shall appear unto us in a perfect discovery, light,
and glory: Yea, there the Church shall be made capable of seeing the highest
glory, and in this sight she shall be glorified: The Father and Fountain of
glory shall shine into her, and in his light she shall see light, and by his
light she shall be light; And he that fills her with light, shall also fill
her with joy; for the light of Gods countenance is the joy of the soul, and
yet with it will he power into the soul the new wine of the kingdom, the
oil of gladness issuing from his Spirit, which shall make up the joys of a
consummate marriage, and fill the Spouse with ecstasies, and overflowings of joy
unspeakable and glorious. And thus tasting how sweet the Lord is in the joies
of a most fruitive union, these joys shall inflame her loves, and her loves
shall kindle her joys; she shall taste and see God, who is the chief object
of her love; she shall rejoice in seeing and tasting him whom she loves, and
she must needs fervently love him, in whom she finds and feels such
exceeding joy. Thus shall she run in a circle of Love and Joy, and this circle
of Love and Joy shall be for all eternity: for the same God, who is to her a
Fountain of joy, shall be also to her a Well of life; and so shall she live,
and love, and rejoice for ever. An eternal God shall be seen, tasted, loved,
and enjoyed by an everliving Church in everlasting blessedness. Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

