MYSTAGOGVS POETICVS, OR THE MUSES INTERPRETER: Explaining The historical
Mysteries, and mystical Histories of the ancient Greek and Latin Poets.

Here Apollo's Temple is opened, the Muses Treasures discovered, and the
Gardens of Parnassus disclosed, whence many flowers of useful, delightful,
and rare Observations, never touched by any other Mythologist, are collected.

By ALEXANDER ROSS.

Et prodesse volunt, and delectare Poetae.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Whitaker at the Kings Arms in Paul's Churchyard.
M.DC.XLVII.

To the Right Worshipful Sr EDWARD BANISTER.
Sir,
FOr two reasons this Book addr^sseth it self to you for patronage; The one is,
because you are aff^cted with this kind of learning, which has the privilege
above other Studies, that it is delightful and useful too: neither is there
any Study that suits better with the disposition of a Gentleman, then ancient
Poetry; which, though it be accounted but an aerie kind of learning by such as
speak against it, either out of prejudice or ignorance; yet in the balance of
wise men's esteem these ancient Poets are not too light: But if these Censurers
please to cast an impartial eye upon this Book, they will find, that there
are no Books wherein so much learning is couched up in so little bounds, as in
these old Poets, who were indeed the only learned men of their times: I could
instance one, in whose rich cabinet are treasured up the jewels of all Learning
fit for a Gentleman to know; and that is Virgil by name, the king of Poets. The
other reason of this Dedication to you is, to express my gratitude to your
worth and goodness, and for your particular affection to use: I know the
native beauty of your virtues needs not the adulterating art of rhetorical
painting, therefore I will not use it, as being inconsistent with your modesty
and my ingenuitie: Only I desire that you will accept of this small present as
a token of his love, who will always be found

Sir, Your Worships servant to command, ALEXANDER ROSS.

In opus politissimum (Mystagogus Poeticus) ALEXANDRI ROSSAEI, viri omnimoda
scientiarum Panopl^a instructissimi.
HEus, heus Viator! ^a^d p^nitior
Introitus pedibus d^tur proph^nis.
Sororum sacrosanctius adytum
Ne vatum vulgo conculcabitur.
Musarum atriis pl^bs Po^tica
Stet, avidis hauri^ns auribus
Oracla, quae unicus ^dit Rosa,
Aonii Pontifex Maximus chori.
Hic, hic a Phoe^i manibus and Nonadum
(...), signif^r and triarius,
Vatibiu Hermes, Musarum sera,
Haud priu^ poti pincerna nectaris,
Orbis Optice literarii r^c^ns,
Cimmerii cujus auxilio scioli
Novas tuentur Scientiae Stellulas
Priscis optatas, and delicias posteris*
N^quicquam fallax art^s Antiquitas
Ambiguis vestiit involucris;
Nequicquam s^os ludunt sorores proc^s
Jocata credulos tripodali vocula:
Priscorum nebulae ROSSAEI radiis
F^gantur. Ille'velut Ariadne altera,
Pieriae turbae Labyrinthi^ emicat.
Macte. Coronis Mus^ quam gaudent Roseis!
Vitam dedisti Musis, and Musae tibi.
JOH. JONES.

To his reverend Friend, Mr. Alexander Rosse, In praise of his Mystagogus
Poeticus.
THe Be extracteth from malignant weeds
Such honey, as her self and others foedes;
But the Bees honey does no further good
Then please the taste, and nourish flesh and blood;
Thou from Parnassus weeds such honey have
Extracted, as delights the souls taste,
And does it nourish to immortal bliss,
Compared to which Ambrosia tastes amiss.
Thanks therefore for such honey, my dear Friend,
As is so sweet, so lasting, without end.
Another.
GReat ALEXANDER conquered only men.
With swords and cruel weapons, used then;
But Thou the MONSTE^S which Parnossus hill
Brought forth, have vanquished only with thy quill.
He in his conquests sometimes suffered loss,
Thou none, (my Friend) GREAT ALEXANDER ROSS*
HON. OXINDEN Of Barham

Ad venerandum Amicum Dom. ALEXANDRUM ROSSAEUM, in laudem Mystagogi Poetici.
MAgnus Alexand^r vi debellavit and armis
Imbelles Persas, tamen hino cognomine Magni
Gaudebat; verum quae mon^ Parnassus alebat
Horrida Monstra Libro ROSSAEUS perdidit uno:
Ergo sit HIC nost^r summo sed jure vocatus
MAJOR ALEXANDER, magno praestantior illo.
Sepius ille tulit damnum vincendo; sedecce,
HIC est qui nullum: nullo est certamine victus.
HIC est, sed cum quo nemo de semine vatum
Audeat ingenii contendere dotibus alti:
HIC ille est qui stravit humi malesana gigantum
Agmina, magnanimo quondam metuenda ^onanti,
A^quc iterum jussit tristes descendere ad umbras;
HIC tamen e pugna victor, tutusque recedit.
Ergo ducis sancti miras super aurea coeli
Sydera virtutes divini semine nati
H^^us ego extollam* dum spiritus hos reget artus.
Cui nec Roma ausit, Fabium, d^ct^mve Catonem,
Aut alios virtute duces componere vati,
Mantua Virgilium jactet p^perisse Poetam,
ROSSAEO tamen est ( CHRISTO ipso tests) secundus.
Alterum Alexandum jactet quoque Graecia magnum,
At tu MAIOREM cognosce Britannica terra
To peperisse ducem; qui MONSTRA natantia ponto,
Et quae fert late tellus, quaeque aethera tranant,
Mire expugnavit, nullo mortale juvante.
O DUX, O VATES sanctissime, gloria nostri
Orbis, and aeterni Patris charissime NATO!
Possid^^^ spatium quamvis in corpore parvum,
Magna tamen totum ROSSAEI fama per orbem
Praepetibus volitat super aurea sidera pennis.
HEN. OXINDEN de Barham.

A CATALOGUE of the Poetical Fictions handled in this Book.
A.
ACbates Achelous A^heron, see Styx Actaeon Adonis Admetus AE^cus, Minos,
Rhadamanthus Aegaeon Aenaas Aeolus Aesculapius Alphaeus Amphion Andromeda, see
Perseus Antaeus Apollo ^rachne Argonantae, see Jason Arion Aristaeus Atalanta
Atlas Aurora
B
BAcchus Belides Bellerophon Boreas, Boreadae, Harpiae
C.
CAdmus and Harmonia Castor and Pollux Centauri Cerberus Charybdis, see Scylla
Ceres Charon Chymaera Chiron Circe Coelus Cupido Cyclpes
D.
DAe^alus Deucalion Diana
E.
ELysium Endymio^ Erychthonius Eumenides
F.
FAun^s, see Pan Fortuna
G.
G^nymedes Genii Gigantes Glaucus, see Neptunus and Oceanus Gorgones Gratiae
H.
HEbe^ Hecate Hercules Hesperides
I.
Jason Io Janus Juno Jupiter
L.
LAres L^the Luna
M.
MArs Mercurius Minerva Musae
N.
NEmesis N^ptunus Niobe Nox Nymphae
O.
OCeanus Orion Orpheus
P.
PAn Parcae Penelope Perseus Pha^t^n Pluto Priapus Prometheus
R.
RHea
S.
SAturnus Scylla Sirenes Sysiphus Sol Sphinx Styx
T.
TAntalus Tereus Thes^us Tithonus T^tyus Typhon
V
VE^us Vesta Vlyss^s Vulcanus
ERRATA.
Page 10. l^n. 18. read set a wry, P. 33. l. 7. read heaven and day, P. 44. l.
7. r. Carne, P. 5. l. 8. r. Locrenses, P. 119. l. 16. r. Politii, P. 153. l. 9
r. S^lust, P. 139. l. 17. r. Mus^^rius, P. 140. l. 19. veil, P. 141. l. 13.
read Teretrius, P. 164. l. 11. r. horse, and l. 19. read Hermeraclae, P. 165.
l. 18. r. with Minerva, P. 167. l. 25. read Divae, P. 169. l. 3. r. their
temples, and l. 28. r. temperance, P. 177. l. penult. read Consus, P. 179. l.
6. read mother, P. 186 l. 22. read Lymniades, P. 146. l. 20. read ^ortes, P.
226. l. 26. read Pandora, P. 198 l. 23. r. septem discrimina, P. 199. l. 5.
read alone, P. 221. l. 2. read heal, l. 23. re^d Stygio, l. 26. read Parcae, P.
213. l. 25. read Arian.

CHAP. 1.
A
ACHATES.
He was a Noble man, the great favorite, and ins^parable companion of Aenae^^,
both in his prosp^rity and adve^sitie.

THE INTERPRETER.
1. AChates signifies care, or solicitude, from (...), ^o show that Princ^s
and great m^n are never without ca^^s: as Antig^nus told his son, when he was
g^zing on the riches of his Di^dem, If (says he) th^n kn^w^st with what cares
and v^x^tions thi^ Crown is stuffed, th^^ would not take it up if it were
flung to thee. 2. Achates was Aenaeas his go^d angel, or gen^^, which had a
continu^ll care of him, and still wait^d on him. For the Ancients held, that
^very man had either a good or a bad genius st^ll attending on him. Aenaeas had
Achates, but T^^nus had one of the Dirae, the daughter of Megae^a the Fury,
which transformed her self into the sh^pe of an howl to wait on him before his
death: so the evil genius appeared to Bru^us the night before he was slain:
and Saul we know was still h^unted with an evil spirit. 3. Achates accompani^d
Aenae^s both in prosperity and adversity; in him we ^ee the nature of a true
fri^nd, which is known in affliction: but false and coun^^rfeit f^iends, like
swallows, bear us company in the su^mer of prosperity, but in the winter of
adv^rsity ^o^ sake us. 4. Achates was A^nae^s his arm^ur-b^^rer, and st^ll
^u^nis^ed him with w^^pons as he had (...) F^^us quae tela ge^e^at Achates,
Aen. 1. Achares fuggere tela nula A^n. 2. So the good Angels are our (...) and
armour-bearers, our swords and shields, to defend us, and hurt our enemies. 5.
A^hates is commended in the Poet for his fidelity to Aeneas, therefore to him
Aenae^^ committed his secrets: as in all servants says and silence are
required; so especially in Princes favorites: which are the two ve^tu^s that
old Simo comm^nds in his s^rv^nt S^sia; In ^e semp^r intellexi ^sse sitas si^em
and ^acinonitat^m. 6. Achates (Aen. 6.) brings S^bylla the godd^sse of (...) to
Aenaeas: so a P^inces f^vorite should be wi^e, and still abl^ and ready to give
good counsel. 7. Aenaeas committed the care of his son, and the charge of hi^
a^ms to Achates: the two main thin^s of greatest cons^qu^nc^ in a kingdom are
the education of the Kings childr^n, and ^he managing of his Militia; with
which he ought to trust none but A^^ates, such as in care, fid^litie, silen^^,
diligenc^, and wisdom exceed ^ll others: and ^ho should th^s be but his gr^a^
Council? These ought to w^lk hand in h^nd, and be p^rtn^rs in the same care.
-- (...) fidus Ach^tes
Si^ co^^^^ ^^r partibus curis vestigia figat.
Aen. 6 8. When Ae^^^^ was wounded, and could not stand, he was supported by
his son Ascanius, and faithful Achates: -- Fi^us Ach^t^s,
A (...).
Kings. (...), ^ubject to e^rours and mortality; from mortality they are kept
by their children; from error, by their wise Council. 9. A^ha^es ^s the name
of a pa^tycoloured g^m. King Py^^hus had one which naturally ^epresented Apollo
and the nine Mus^s; to show us perhaps, that wisdom and l^arning should still
accompany Kings.

ACHELOVS.
He was the son of Sol and T^^ra, or of O^eanus and Terra; fighting with
He^cul^s for Deianei^a, he turn^d himself into a Serpent, then into a Bull,
whose right horn Hercules pulled off; which that he might red^em ag^in, h^e
gave to Her^ules the pl^ntifull horn of Amalthaea, and ast^rward for g^ief of
his ov^rthrow, choked himself in the River.

The INTERPRETER.
1. AChel^us was a River, and all Rivers are painted like men, with long hair,
and long beards, leaning on their elbow ov^r a great ^arthen pitcher of water:
the hair and b^ard may signify the weeds and sedges of the river: the leaning
on the elbow over a pitcher of wa^^r, shows that wat^r is h^avie, tending
do^nwards, and is supported by the ^^rth, and contain^d within the conc^vities
thereof: they are painted like men, because the supposed Deities of the rivers
appeared in the form of m^n: so did the god of Tyberis appear to Aenaeas,
Aenaeid. 8.

Populeas inte^ senior se a^elle^e frondes
Visus. --
2. Achelous was a river, which as all others, has its beginning and increase
from the Sun, the Sea, and the Earth: it was called a Serpent from the many
windings th^reof; and a Bull, from its noise and bellowing. 3. The two horns
are its two streams, the one whereof was cut off by Hercules, and divided unto
diverse brooks, by which the country was enriched; and Hercule for his pains
received the greater increase. 4. They that strive against mighty men had need
to be both Serpents in policy, and Bulls in strength. 5. They who turn
themselves into wanton Bulls, and spend their horn, that is, their strength, on
women and wine, are at last choak^d with melancholy and hydropicall humors. 6.
If great men lose their horn, that is, their power and honor, let them redeem
them with their wealth, for honor is better then money. 7. If God for thy
sins take thy power and glory away, or thy bod^es strength by sickness, let
the poo^ patake os thy plentiful horn, and choke thy sins in the river of
repentance.

ACHERON, See STYX.

ACTAEON.
He was a great hunter, who by mishap having spied Diana washi her self, was
by her turned into a stagge, and torn by his own hounds.

The INTERPRETER.
1. ACtaeon was a proud man, for he preferred himself to Diana, and bragged
that his skill in hunting exceeded hers; It Is a dangerous thing to speak
irreverently of God: neither is there any punishment fitter for a proud man,
then to be metamorphised into a beast; so was Actaeon here, so was
Nebuchadnezzar in holy Writ. He that will not honor God* shall not abide in
honor, but shall be like the beasts that perish. 2. Diana is the Moon, by
whose light influence, and motion the Sun works on sublunary bodies. Dogs
madness (by which they prove dangerous to their masters) is an effect of the
Moon; which rules much over the brain. 3. Curiosity is dangerous; pry not too
much into the secrets of heaven, lest with A^taeon, your understanding be taken
from you, and ye become a prey to the beastly imaginations of your own brain.
4. Cruelty is here forbid: he that takes delight in murdering of beasts,
proves sometime with Nim^ed ^ murderer of men; and such for want of humanity
may be said to be turned into beasts, and tortu^ed with their own dogs, that
is, by an evil conscience. 5. When men neglect their estates and callings, and
spend their patrimonies profus^ly on dogs and hunting, they may be said to be
dev^ured by their own dogs. 6. They who suffer themselves to be abused, and
their ^st^tes w^st^d by Parasites and slatterers, not unfitly may be said to be
a prey to their own dogs. 7. They who look upon women, and lust after them,
lose their reason, and are devoured by their own lusts. 8. ^f D^ani's
nak^dnesse seen unawares was the occasion of his ^^sfortune; how bl^me-worthy
are these women, who with n^ked br^asts, immodest looks, light beh^viour,
phantast^call attire, entice m^n to their d^struction, and of m^n, do
metamorphose them unto beasts?

ADONIS.
He was a beautifully y^uth, with wh^m Venus was in love; ^ut wh^lest ^ee was
(...), was killed by a boar, or by Mars in the shape of a b^^r, and (...) Venus
was ^u^ned unto a r^d sl^re^ called Aner^one, h^e was k^pt after death by Ceres
and Proserpina, six m^nths under gro^nd, and other six months by V^nus, above.

The INTERPRETER.
1. THe Atheni^ns had certain festival days called Adonia, in memory of
Adonis his untimely death: in these feasts the women used to carry upon bi^rs
or hearses the image of a dead youth to the grave, with much mournning and
shedding of tears: and therefore Venus was wont to be painted in the form of a
mournful woman shedding of tears, with a vail over her head, bewailing the
loss of Adonis. By Venus may be meant the earth, for this is the beautiful
and (...) mother of all living creatures. By Adonis may be understood the Sun,
who in winter is in a sort killed, when his hea^ and presence is lessened, then
the earth mourns, and loses her beauty; the shedding of tears is the
increasing of the springs and rivers, by great and continual rains. 2. If by
Adonis we understand wh^at, that lodges with Proserpina, that is, lies
buried in the ground six months in the winter; the six summer months it is
above in the air with Venus, by which the beauty of the year is signifi^d; by
the boar may be meant the cold, frosty and snowy season, in which the wheat
seems to be killed. 3. If with Macrobius, by Adonis we understand the San; he
may be (...) to lodge six months with Proserpina, in respect of his (...)
declination; the other six months with Venus, for then the creatures give
themselves to procreation: he is killed by the boar, and lamented by Venus,
for in winter his beams are of no force to dispell the cold, which is the enemy
of Adonis and Venus, that is, of beauty and procreation. 4. (...) in the form
of a bo^r kills him* (...) and hunting are masculine exercises, and not fit for
weak bodies and eff^minate spirits. 5. Adonis is from (...) to sing, for beauty
and music are friends to Venus. 6. Adonis may signify the good Government of
a Commonwealth, which is the beauty thereof, which is killed by Mars in the
form of a boar; for Mars and wantonness are enemies of all Government. 7.
Beautiful Adonis is turned into a fading flower; to show, that beauty quickly
(...). 8. Young and fair Adonis is killed by a Boar; so wantonness and
letchery are the destroyers of youth and beauty. 9. Our resurrection in this
may b^ typed out; for although death kill us, it shall not annihilate us, but
our beauty shall ^^crease, and we shall spring out of the ground again like a
beautiful flower in the Resurrection. 10. Though our bodies die, yet our good
name shall flourish, and like a fair flower, shall live and smell when we are
gone. 11 Myrrha of her own Father begot this child Adonis, which Myrrha flying
from her angry Father, was turned into a tree, and with the blow of her Fathers
sword was delivered of this child; because the Sun the common Father, begot the
sweet Gum Myrrh of that Arabian tree of the same (...); which Gum does cause
much delight and pleasure, for so in Greek Adonis signifies: In this Gum Venus
is much delighted, as being a help to decayed beauty, to a stinking breath, to
procreation, and the vitiosity of the matrix. 12. Let them remember, who hunt
too much after pleasure, that the devil is that great boar who lies in wait to
kill them.

ADMETUS.
HE being a suitor to Alceste, carried her away by the assistance of Apollo and
Hercules, in a Chariot drawn by a Lion and a Boar; afterward being like to
(...) was recovered by the voluntary death of his wife: whom Hercules delivered
out of hell, and restored her to Admetus.

The INTERPRETER.
1. ADmetus was King of Thess^lie, whose sheep Apollo fed: Every King is a
shepherd, who without Apollo, that is, wis^dom, can never rule and guide his
people. 2. Admetus was the husband of Alceste, which signifies strength; and a
King is or should be the husband of his Country, which is the Kings strength.
3. By the means of Apollo and Hercules Admetus procured his wife; so by wisdom
and power Priaces bring people to subjection. 4. He that intends to (...), had
need take the aid of Apollo and Hercules, that i^, of wisdom, and strength of
body. 5. A(...) is one that cannot be tamed, as many lusty young men are;
therefore it is good to marry with (...).
Alceste. 6. Many foolish women like Alceste, refuse many good matches, and at
last are carried away by a Lion and a Boar, that is, by one that is
lasciviously given, and who can put on the bold face of a Lion. 7. Fruitful
women are like Alceste, who cast themselves unto the jaws of death by
childbearing, that their husbands may live in the fruit of their womb; for
parents live in their children: But by the means of Hercules, that is, of the
strength of Nature, women are delivered from death. 8. Alceste is our hope,
with which we shall marry if first we can subdue the Lion of pride, and the
Boar of concupiscence. 9. Admetus, or the untamed spirit of Satan does carry
away the soul, which is the daughter of God, in the Chariot of vanity, drawn
with pride and fleshly pleasures; and in hell the soul should have continued
for ever, if Christ our Al^ides had not delivered it from thence.

AEACUS. MINOS. RADAMANTHUS.
THese were Jupiters s^ns, and Judges in hell; at the request of Aeacus when
the Hand of Ae^ina was depopulated with sickness, Jupiter turned the Ants into
^en; so was Gra^ia delivered also by the prayers of the same Aeacus.

The INTERPRETER.
1. NOne were admitted into the presence of these three Judges, but naked
souls, destitute of clothes, beauty, money, or any thing else that might move
these Judges to partiality: in this world we must not look for justice; when we
are stripped of all* then shall we have it, for here something will be found about
us that shall corrupt the Judge. And is it not a shame that there should be
more justice in hell then on earth? 2. Just Judges are the sons of God, as
these three were the sons of Jupiter. 3. The good laws of just Judges shall not
be forgotten, but when they are in hell, that is, when they are dead. their
laws shall be still in force. 4. These three Judges are the three effects of a
wicked man's Conscience, to wit* to accuse, condemn, and torment the sinner: and
in this sense, a man may be said to be in hell, whilst he is on earth. 5.
Aeacus by his wisdom causing the barbarous inhabitants to fo^s^k^ their caves
and holes wherein they dwelt; and to build houses, to leave their diet of roots
and fruits, and to sow corn; in teaching of them civility, and military
discipline, whereby they overcame the Pirates which us^d to mol^st them: for
these respects he was said to turn them from Ants into men. 6. In relieving
Grae^ia by his prayers from the plague, does show us, That the prayers of the
faithful avai^eth much. 7. Before Christ came, the Gentiles were but Ants, men
of earthly conversation, being sed with roots of superstition; molested with
spiritual pirates; but by the preaching and intercession of Christ, the wisdom
of the Father, and the Judge of all the world, they were made men, taught to
forsake the dark holes of Idolatry, and to build them an house in heaven, to
feed upon the bread of Gods Word, and to ^ight against their spiritual enemies.
8. These three Judges were so placed, that Aeacus and Rhada^nanthus being more
loving brothers, (...) always together, but Minos by himself; this is noted
for his cruelty, the other two for their gentleness and mercy: to show us,
that as there are two mild Judges for one cruel, so justice should be tempered
with mercy, but so, that mercy be always prevalent. 9. When Jupiter sent th^se
his three sons to be judges in hell, he directed them to take their journey
through a delightful meadow, called the field of truth; I wish all Judges would
pass through this field; for neglect in passi^g through this field in these
dist^^ct^d tim^s, many good and innocent men have been undone by false and
lying informations.

AEGAEON.
HE was begotten of the Heaven and Earth, or of the Sea; he assisted Jupiter,
when Juno, P^ll^s, and Neptune made insurrection against him, and would have
bound him; for whose good service he was made keeper of Hell gates, but after
wa^ds rebelling against Jupiter, he was overthrown with his thunder, and laid
under the hill Ae^^a, which always bursts out with sinoak and stones when he
(...); he had an hundred hands, and fifty heads, he is also called (...), and
En^^ladus.

The INTERPRETER.
1. AEGaeon, as the other Giants, were painted like (...) the waste, but like
serpents under; Comm^^us that blo^^y Emperor, when he would represent Hercules
with a Lions skin about his shoulders, and a club in his hand; caused some men
whom he meant to kill in sport be sent for. Now that he might seem to fight for
the gods against the giants, he would cause the legs and thigh^s of these men
to be set away, or wrest aside, that so they might seem to be like the giants,
and then with his club he knocked them down and bruised them. This was not
indeed to sight for the gods, but to satisfy his own cruelty and bloody
nature: there be too many that pretend they sight for God, when indeed they
sight for their own ends; and to make the matter the more plausible, they will
by traducing give the enemies serpents feet, though they have none, and make
them seem to be giants against whom they fight, though they be not such. 2. By
this many handed and many headed monster, is meant the Wind, the power and
(...) whereof are many and wonderful; it is begot of they (...) of the earth
and sea, by the heat and i^sl^ence of heaven, when Jupiter, that is, the heaven
is obscured, (...) bound up from u^ with thick mists extracted by Minerva, that
is, the Sun, out of Neptune or the Sea, and received by Juno, or the Air;
these three are said to conspire against Jupiter, then comes the wind and
blows away these mists; and so Jupiter is relieved, and the heavens cleared.
AEgaeon is said to keep hell gates, because the winds are often enclosed in the
bowels of the Earth and Sea. 3. AEgaeon sights against Jupiter, when the
Southwind obscures the Heaven with clouds, then with his Sunbeams, or thunder,
the Air is cleared, and the wind settled; and because Aetna never vomits out
fire but when there is wind generated in the hollow holes, and cavernosities
thereof, therefore AEgaeon is said to lie and move there. 4. G^ has made our
stomach and belly to be the receptacle o^ (...) vapors, which notwithstanding
sometimes (...) the heaven of our brain, and fight against our Jupiter, that is
our judgment and reason; but oftentimes are overcome and (...) back by the
strength of nature, and proper^. of the (...). 5. Juno, that is, vapors;
Neptune, that is, too much moisture; and Pall^s, that is too much (...) the
brain, and assault judgment and reason; but the h^lp of AEgaeon, or the
strength of the animal spirits do relieve the brain and make peace. 6. In 88.
the Spanish Juno, that is, their wealth; Minerva, their policie^; and Neptune
their Sea-god, I mean their great Fleet, which (...) the Ocean, conspired to
invade our heaven, that is, our Church and State; but AEgaeon, the stormy
wind, sent by Thetis, but by the power of the Almighty, scattered their forces,
and relieved our Jupiter. ^. Every pyratical ship, robbing honest men of their
goods, may be called AEgaeon, for they fight against God himself, and their end
for the most part is featful. 8. Arius and other heretics opposing Christ's
divinity, with AEgaeon fight against God; and being struck with the thunder of
Gods Word, without repentance they are sent to hell. 9. All seditious persons
rebelling against the Church and State, are AEgaeon fighting against God, and
they must look for this reward.

AENAEAS.
HE was a Troj^n Prince, son of Venus, by whose help he was delivered from
being killed by the Grae^ians he carried his old father on his (...) out of
Troy, with his household gods; he was seven years by the malice of Juno tossed
upon the seas, and kept back from Italy; who when he arrived thither, was
molested by a long war, caused by Juno and Alecto; having at last killed
Turnus, ended his (...) in peace and honor; he went down to Hell to visit his
father in the Elisian fields, who by the help of (...) and the golden (...) all
the dangers of hell; his acts are eternized by the Prince of Poets.

The INTERPRETER.
1. WHen AEnae^s went down to hell, the dog Cerberus barked against him, which
used to sawn upon others; even so, the Devil is an enemy to virtuous men, such
as AEnaeas was, but he is a friend to the wicked. 2. He was called the son of
Venus, because that planet was mistress of his horoscope, or because of his
beauty and comely proportion; and to show that love is the chiesest guard of
Princes, and that which does most subdue and keep people in subjection. 3. Juno
and AEol^s, the air and wind conspired against him to drown him; so sometimes
Princes are oftentimes vexed and endangered by the storms of civil dissension.
4. Neptune was his friend both in the T^^jan war, and to help him forward to
Italy; Vulcan made him armor, Mercury was his Counselor and spokesman; Cupid
made way with Queen Dido to entertain him; to show that a Prince cannot be
fortunate and powerful, without shipping, armor, eloquence and love. 5. The
golden Branch made way for him to Proserpins, and brought him to hell, and so
does the inordinate* love of gold bring many unto hell: Again, gold makes way
through the strongest gates, and overcomes the greatest difficulties; besides,
gold is the symbol of wisdom, without which no man can overcome difficulties:
Lastly, he that will go through the dangers of hell, that is, the pangs of
death with cheerfulness, must carry with him a golden branch, that is, a good
conscience; and perhaps this gold^n branch p^ay be the symbol of a Kings
(...), the ensign of government, wherein a King is happy, if his (...) be
straight and of gold, that is, ^f wealth, and justice, and wisdom go together.
6. A^naeas had not found the branch without the Doves, his mothers birds; so
without love, innocence and chastity, we cannot attain to true wisdom. 7. He
that would attain unto the true Branch, that is, Christ the righteous Branch,
and Wisdom of the Father, must follow the guide of the ^wo Doves, the Old and
the New Testament, they will show us where he ^s. 8. Aenaeas, by the help of
Sibyl, went safely through Hell; so by the assistance of Gods counsel (for
[(...)] Sibyl signifies so much) we shall overcome all difficulties. 9. His
companion was Acha^es, for great Princes are never without much care and
solicitude, as the word [(...)] sign fieth. 10. Aenaeas went ^he ^ow the
^a^gers of hell, sea and land, before he could have quiet possession in Italy;
so we must through many dangers enter into the kingdom of heaven. 11. Aenaeas
is the Idea of a perfect Prince and Govern^ur, in whom we see piety toward
his gods in carrying them with him, having (...) them from the fire of Troy, in
worshipping the gods of the places still where he came, in going to Apollo's
Temple as soon as he lands in Italy, in his devout prayers he makes to
Jupiter, Apollo, Venus, and other gods; piety also toward his old father, in
carrying him on his shoulders, in bewailing of his death, visiting of his
tomb, going down to hell to see him; his love was great to his wife C^eusa, in
lamenting, and casting himself into open danger for her; his love was great to
his son Ascanius, in the good breeding and counselling of him; to Palinurus,
Mysen^^, and others; his vigilance in gu^ding the ^^lm midnight, when his
people were asleep; his liberal^ to his soldiers; his magnanimity, (...),
wisdom^, fortitude, justice, temperance are fit by all Princes to be imitated,
and the Aeneads to be diligently read.

AEOLVS.
HE was Jupiters son, a King over diverse ^ands, and reigned in a City wall^^
with brass; he kept the (...) in a cave or holl^w hill; which at Juno's
request, and promise of a marriage with her Nymph (...), he let (...) against
Aenaeas.

The INTERPRETER.
BEfore that Aeolus was made King of the winds, they were very unruly, and had
amongst themselves diverse conflicts and encounters, so that not only ships on
the s^a, but castles and whole towns also on the land were overthrown by them:
even so, till Kings and Governors were chosen by the people to rule and guide
them, they were subject to con^inuall disorders, (...), and ^ivill broils,
oppressing one another; but a wi^e King, like another Aeolus, S^^ptra tenet,
mollisque animes, and (...);
Ni faciat maria ac (...)
Quippe s^^ant rap^di secum, (...).
2. He is called Jupiters son, (...) the w^nds are begotten by the influence
and motion of the heavens. 3. He was an Astronomer, and c^uld (...) storm and
(...), therefore it was thought he had the command of the winds. 4. His City
was (...) to (...) with b^^sse, because it was guarded with armed (...). 5. He
kept the winds in a hollow cave; because so (...) vapors, which sometimes
burst forth with violence. 6. He reigned over Islands, because they are most
subject to storms. 7. Juno could not sink Aenaeas his ships without the help of
A^olus; neither can the air violently work, if it be not moved by the vapors,
which are the winds, or ^lse without vapors, by the planets. 8. The marriage
between Aeolus and the sea Nymph, shows the relation that is between the wind
and the sea. 9. He may be called A^olus, and the God of winds, that can (...)
keep under anger, and other unruly p^ssions. 10. (...) a dangerous (...), when
Juno and Aeolus, that is, wealth and power band themselves against innocent men.

AESCULAPIUS.
He was the (...) of P^ysick, and son o^ Apollo and Coronis the Nymph, wh^m
Apollo (...) with his arrows, and cut out the child, (...), as some would
have it; (...) the pla^ue in the form of a Serpent, being brought from
Epida^^^n in a ship: he rest^^ed Hippolitus to life, therefore was killed by
Jupiters (...).

The INTERPRETER.
1. I Find Aesculapius painted like an ancient man with a l^ng b^ard, crown^d
with (...), having in one hand a knottie or knobbed staste, with the other he
leans upon a serpent, and has a dog at his feet, by which are represented the
qualities of a Physi^ian; he ^ught to be grave and aged, wise as the serp^nt,
vigilant as the dog, and should be a conquer^ur of (...), as his (...) garland
shows; the knobbed (...) sign^^ieth the d^fficultie and (...) of physic. 2.
As the Tyrant (...) robbed (...) of his golden beard, ^ffi^ming that it was
unfit he should have so (...) ^ beard, whereas his father Apollo was (...):
even so did Julian (...) Tyrant and (...) rob the Churches of Christians,
affirming that it was unfit, they being disciples* should be rich, whereas
their M^ster was poor, and that being poor, they shall be meet^r for heaven. 3.
Aes^ul^pius was brought from Epi^aurus in shape of a serpent to Rome, where he
drove away the pestilence; it seems the Romans had heard of the b^sen s^rpent
which in the defart h^aled all the beholders of their stings and wounds. 4.
Aesculapius is the mild temper of the air, as the word [(...) blandus]
shows, which is the effect of the Sun, or Apollo, and is the cause of health;
therefore Hygiaea and ^aso, that is, health etc cure are the children of
Aesculapi^. His mother is (...), [(...) misi^^ and ^^mpe^o] or the due mixture
and temper of the air; which because it depends from the influence of the Sun,
therefore Apollo is said to bege^ Aesculapius of her; but when he killed her
with his arrows, is meant, that the Sun with his beams (...) overheat and
in^^ct the air with a pest^lence. 5. I had rather understand by this fiction
the true temperament of a sound man's body, caused by Apollo and co^cnis, that
is, the due proportion of the natural heat and radical moisture, called
(...), and the true cause of health. Then (...) is killed with Apollo's arrows,
when the natural heat dege(...) into a feverish inflammation, and dri^th up
the moisture; but when the heat returns to its former temper, (...), that is,
health is recovered, and nourished by a goat, because goats milk is good to
seed and restore decayed nature. 6. By this fiction, I think, is represented to
us the properties or a good Physician; he is the son of Apollo and Co^enis,
that is, of knowledge and experience; knowledge kills experience, when the
learned Physician trusts not to experiments, but by art and knowledge he
cures; for indeed in physic, experience is little worth; for what experience
can one have of such infinite varieties of temperaments which are amongst men,
every man having a pecul^r constitution, which is also still differing from it
self? as (...) was nursed by a goat or (...), so, Physicians are maintained by
gluttony and Venery. Chi^on, Saturn's son, was Aesculapius Schoolmaster; for
time has brought the knowledge of physic to perfection; or because Chiron
being half a man, and half a horse, shows that a Physician must be a Centaur,
that is, a man in judgment, and a horse in courage: it is fit that Physicians
should be brought to Rome, that is, to great Cities infected with sickness:
the Serpent, Cock and Raven were consecrated to Aesculapius, so was the Goat
also, to show that a Physician must have the Serpents wisdom, the Co^ks
vigil^ncy, the Ravens eye and forecast, and the Goats swif^nesse; for delays
are dangerous, and if Physicians cure desperate diseases, they must not be
proud, and attribute the glory to themselves, or skill, but to God, lest they
be punished in his just anger, as Aesculapius was. 7. Christ is the true
Aesculapius, the Son of God, and the God of Physic, who was cut out, as it
were of his mothers womb, by the power of God, without man's help, and cured all
diseases; the true brazen Serpent, he only who was struck with the
thunderbolt of his Fathers wrath, and sent to hell, to deliver us from death
and hell.

ALPHAEUS.
He was a great ^unter, and fell in love with the Nymph Arethusa, who that
she might esape him, was by the help of Diana turned into a Fountain, and be
afterward sorrowing beca^e ^ River, which still runs after Arethusa.

The INTERPRETER.
1. ALphaeus was worshipped as a god, and his image was placed upon the same
altar with Diana, either because they both delighted in the same sport, to wit,
in hunting; or to signify the mutual relation the one has to the other:
Diana was the goddess of woods, Alphaeus was a River; b^t woods prosper best
that are nee^ to rivers: or Diana is the Moon; but the moon is a friend to
rivers and all moist things, which are begot, preserved and moved by the Moons
heat, light, and in^^uence. 2. Alphaeus is a River of Elis in Arcadia, through
secret passages running under the earth and sea, it empt^es it self in the
spring Arethusa, in Sicilie; which, though Strabo denies i^, it cannot be
otherwise, seeing so many witnesses confirm that whatsoever is cast into
Alphaeus is found in Arethusa. 3. As this water running through the Sea, loses
not its sweetness, by receiving any salt relish; so neither must we lose our
integrity and goodness by conver^ing with the wicked. 4. Husbands must learn
of Alphaeus to be kind to their wives, and to make them partakers of all their
goods, as Alphaeus imparts all it receives to Are^husa. 5. We must never rest,
till we have obtained him whom our soul loves; the salt sea of afflictions,
and the distance of place must not hinder our course. 6. Are^busa is from (...)
virtue, which we should still run after. 7. Alphaeus is from (...), a spot; we
are full of spots and sin, therefore had need to be washed in Are^husa, that
is, in the water of B^ptisme. 8. This water was held good to kill the Morphew,
called therefore Alphos, for which cause it was consecrated to Jupiter; and it
was unlawful to wash the altar of Jupiter Olympius with any other water; so
Baptism does wash us from original sin, and by i^ we are consecrated to
God. 9. Alphaeus is as much as (...), the light of truth, which runs after
(...), or ver^ue; to show that knowledge and theory should always be joined
with goodness and practice.

AMPHION.
He was Jupiters son of Antiop^; she flying from Dirce to a solitary
mountain, was there delivered, and the child was there brought up by
shepherds; he learned his music of Mercury, and received his Lu^e from him:
by the force of his ^^sick be caused the stones to follow him, with which the
wa^^^ of Thebes were ^uils; but afterward ^ut-braving Latonas children, and
(...) them for want of skill, was by her ki^^d.

The INTERPRETER.
1. WHereas there were three sorts of music, to wit; the Lydian, the Doric,
and the Phrygian; the first was mournful, and for funerals; the second
masculine, and for wars; the third esseminate, and for marriages: Marsyas was
the inventer of the Ph^ygian, (...) of the Dorian, and Amphion of the Lydian
music. 2. Amphion was Jupiters son, because music is from God; or because the
heavens by their perpetual revolution, show, that music without continual
exercise cannot be attained unto; or to show that there is in the heavenly
bodies an harmony, as well as in music: or if by Jupiter we understand the
ai^; as sometimes Poets do, then, as Jupiter gave life to Amphion, so does air
to music; for no found is either by voice, instruments, or water, without air.
3. Jupiter in the form of a Satyr begot Amphion; Satyrs were great dancers, and
dancing requires music. 4. Amphion was bred by shepherds; for these living an
idle and solitary life, were invited to invent music, partly by the singing of
birds, and partly by the whistling of the wind among the trees, or by the
running of waters. 5. He^ was born in a remote hill, because musical
inventions require quietness, and a private life far from troubles and
business. 6. Mercury taught him, and gave him the Lute; to show the
resemblance and equal power of eloquence and music; eloquence being a
speaking harmony, and music a speechless eloquence, the one by words, the
other by sounds working on the affections. 7. His building Thebes walls by his
music, shows what is the force of eloquence, to draw rude people to religion,
policy, and civility. 8. His out-braving of Apollo and Diana, does not only
show the insolency and pride of some men, when they have got some perfection
in an Art; but also, I suppose, may be meant the power and delight of Music,
that it no less affects and delights the soul by the ear, then the light of
the Sun and Moon does the eye: So that Music may as it were challenge the
Light. 9. Amphion may be said to be killed by Laton^, when musical knowledge
is lost by negligence and oblivion. 10. Our Savior Christ is the true Amphion,
who by the preaching of the Gospel has built his Church, and made us who were
but dead and scattered, living stones in this building; his Music has
quickened us, and his love has united us. 11. Amphion was said to build the
walls by the help of his Music, because perhaps he employed Musicians at that
time, who by their music encouraged the builders, and made them work the
better.

ANDROMEDA, See PERSEUS.

ANTAEUS.
He was a Giant forty cubits high, begotten of Neptune and the earth, with
whom when Hercules did wrestle, still as he was slung on the ground, his
strength increased; which Hercules perceiving, lifted him from the ground, and
squeezing him to his breast, slisled him.

The INTERPRETER.
1. ANtaeus was King of Tingitania, who compelled his guests to wrestle with
him, and then killed them. This is the trick of Tyrants, who make use of their
strength and power to undo and ruin the weak and meaner sort: and here we
may see what danger it is for means men to contend with Princes and great ones,
they can expect nothing but ruin: Polen^ioris iram sapiens nunquam provocabit,
Seneca. 2. The bigness of his body showed that earth and water were
extraordinarily predominant in him, therefore he was called the son of Neptune
and the Earth. 3. A covetous man is like Antaeus, the mo^e that his affections
touch earthly things, the stronger is his covetousness; till he be listed up
from the earth with heavenly thoughts, and then covetous thoughts die. 4. Satan
is like Antaeus, for the more he is beat down by the Herculean strength of
Gods Word, the more violent and fierce he grows; but being squeezed by the
breast plate of justice, he loses his force. 5. Satan deals with good men, as
Hercules with Antaeus; he flings them down by oppression and persecution; but
when he perceives, that by this means they grow stronger and more resolute,
he lifts them up by ^pride and prosperity, by which many are overthrown
which grew strong by adversity. 6. The Sun, like Antaeus, when he is come to
his perigaeum, or that point nearest the earth, he begins to gather strength,
which increases till he come to his apogaeum, or that point in heaven
farthest from the earth, and then his force begins to weaken. 7. He that will
cure a Fever with hot things, or an Hydropsie with cold and moist things, he
does as Hercules to Antaeus, increase the disease by applying things of the
same nature; whereas diseases should be cured by contraries. 8. Every thing in
its own element, with Antaeus, does gather strength and prospers; but being
put into another element dies, as fishes in the air, and beasts in the sea.

APOLLO.
He was the son of Jupiter and Laton^, born in Delos; he killed the Serpent
Python, the Giant Ty^ion, Marsyas the Musician, and the Cyclops that made
Jupiters thunder, with which his son Aesculapius was slain; for which fact
Jupiter banished him, and dr^ve him to feed Admetus his sheep, and to h^lp
Neptune in building of the wa^s of Troy: he was the god of Wisdom, of
Physic, of Music, and Arching.

The INTERPRETER.
1. BY Apollo may be meant God himself: for as they painted Apollo with his
harp, and tho three Graces in one hand, with a shield and two arrows in the
other; so by this perhaps they meant that God was not only a punisher of
wickedness, but a rewarder of goodness; as he had two arrows, so be has
many punishments: but yet he has the comfortable harp of his mercy to sweeten
them in the other hand; and having but two arrows, has three graces, to show
that he has more mercies then punishments: and therefore the same hand that
holds the arrows, holds also the shield, to show that even when his arrows
fly at us, yet with his shield he defends and supports us. God shot his
arrows at Abraham, when he raised so many Kings against him; yet at the same
time he forbids him to fear; for faith he, I am thy shield, Genesis 15.1. And
that by Apollo was meant the supreme God, is plain by the Alsyrians, in joining
the pictures of Apollo and Jupiter together, whom they painted with a whip in
one hand, and the thunder in the other, to show, that God has diversity of
punishments, according to the diversity of offenses, some gentle, some more
rigorous. For this cause the Egyptians represented him by a Scepter with an
Eye, to signify both his knowledge and providence, by which the world is
guided: And they painted him with wings, to signify the (...) of his motion;
by which it appears, that Jupiter and Apollo were with them one and the same
god. 2. I find that Apollo is painted with one side of his head shaved, the
other hairy; by which I think they meant, that while^^ the Sun shined to one
hemispere, the other was dark; for by his hair they meant his beams, and by his
baldness darkness, caused by his absence. 3. By Apollo is ordinarily
understood the ^unne, which as his (...) perdo* (...) salvo and solvo, (...)
quasi (...), a latendo.
name shows, is both the destroyer and preserver of things; he is the son of
Jupiter, because he is a part of heaven, or because he was created by God; he
was born of Latona, because God brought light out of darkness, and the Sun out
of the Chaos; born in Delos, which signifies manifestation, for the Sun
discovers all things; he killed Python the Serpent, because the Sun by his
heat disperseth all purrefied vapors, and clears the air from mists; for of
purrefaction venomous beasts are procreated; so he killed Jupiters
Thunder-maker, because the Sun cleers the air, and consumes those exhalations
and moistures, of which Thunder is engendered. When Apollo was born, Diana his
sister, who was first born, was the Midwife to bring forth Apollo; that may
signify that the Sun is freed from his eclipse and darkness, when the Moon
departs from him; he is still Beardlesse, to show his perpetual youth, his
long hair shows his beams; he feeds sheep, because his heat produces grass;
he is carried in a Chariot drawn with four horses, to show his motion, and the
four seasons of the year, or the four parts of the Artificial day, as his
horses names do show, Erythraeus, i.e. ruber, Actaeon splendens, Lampas fulgor,
Philogeus terram amans.
Atythraeus, Actaeon, Lampos, Philogeus; for he is red in the morning, clear
about nine of the clock, in his full splendor at noon, and draws to the earth
in the evening; he is the god of Wisdom, not by infusing the habit or essence
thereof, but by preparing and fitting the Organs for the use and exercise
thereof; therefore Southern people are more subtle, wise and ingenious, then
the Northern. And because from the Sun diverse predictions are gathered of the
alteration of Weather, and other Vide Virgil. Georg. 1.
sublunary mutations, he was called the great Prophet, and god of Divination;
he was also called the god of physic, both because Physical herbs have their
strength from the Sun, and oftentimes the spring cures the winter diseases,
and the summer the infirmities of the spring; he was called the god of music,
because he cleers up the spirits of all things; therefore the birds do welcome
his approach with their melodious harmony; therefore the Swan was dedicated to
him, and the grasshoppers also; and as in music, so in his motion^and
operations there is a harmony; and because he fits the air, which is the medium
of music and of all sounds; the Muses for this cause are in his custody;
which were enlarged from three to nine, according as the number of strings
increased in musical instruments; he was called an Archer because his beams
like arrows fly every where; His Tripos, which some will have to be a table
called also Cortini potens di^^us Apollo.
Cortina, from Pythons skin, with which it was covered, others a three-footed
vessel, others a three-footed chair, wherein they fate that prophesied; I say,
this Tripos may signify the three circles in the Zodiac, which every year he
touches, to wit, the Ecliptic, and the two Tropicks. They that died suddenly,
or of any violent disease were said to be killed by Apollo, because the Sun
with extreme heat does cause famine and infection^ Fevers. Thus he was said to
shoot with his arrows Amphi^ns children; to him were dedicated the strong Bull,
the white Swan, the quick-sighted Raven; to (...) di^^us Apollo a (...).
signify the power, and beauty, and piercing light of the Sun; which because
it detecteth obscure things, he was called a Prophet* the Olive, Palm, and
Bay Tree also were dedicated to him, both because the Olive and Palm grow not
but in hot countries; and because they are, as the Bay Tree, useful in
physic, and of an hot quality like the Sun, therefore he was said to be in
love with Daphne a (...).
Daphne, the daughter of the River Peneus, because on the banks of that River
are good store of Bay-trees: his shoes and garments were of gold, to show his
color; he with Neptune built the walls of Troy, to show, that without Gods
assistance no City or State can stand or be built. His love which he bare to
the flower Hyacinthus, is to show, that flowers do bud and prosper by the Sun,
and die with cold winds; therefore Zephyrus was the cause of his death: and
perhaps Apollo and Neptune were said to build Troys walls, because mortar and
brick are made by the help of heat and water; or because Laomedon either stole
or borrowed some treasure out of the Temples of Apollo and Neptune. 4. Our
Savior Christ is the true Apollo, both a destroyer of Satan's Kingdom, and a
saver of his people; for (...) is as much as to loose by paying the price of
redemption; he is the Sun of righteousness, by whose beams and arrows, that
is, his word, Python the devil is subdued: he is the Son of God, and the God
of Wisdom, the great Prophet, the Son of Latona, that is, of an obscure maid:
the true God of physic, who cures all our infirmities; and the God of music
too, for that harmony of affections and communion of Saints in the Church is
from him; he has subdued our Giants, that is, our spiritual foes, by whose
malice the thunder of Gods wrath was kindled against us: He is immortal, and
the good Shepherd who has laid down his life for his sheep; having for his
sheeps sake forsaken his Fathers glory; and he it is who has built the walls
of Jerusalem. Apollo was never so much in love with Hyacinthus, as Christ was
with the sons of men. 5. As the Sun amongst the Planets, so is a King amongst
his subjects; ^ King is Apoll^, the destroyer of the wicked, and a preserver of
good men; the light and life, and beauty of his people; a God of wisdom
amongst them, to guide them with good laws; a God of physic, to cut off
rot^en and hurtful members, to purge out all gross humors, that is, bad
manners, with the pills of justice, and to cheer up with cordi^ls or rewards the
sound and solid parts of the politic body; he is a God of music also, for
where there is no King or head, there can be no harmony nor concord; he is a
prophet, to foresee and prevent those dangers which the people cannot; he is a
subduer of Pythons and Giants, that is, of all pestiferous disturbers and
oppressors of the State: his arrows are his Laws and power, which reaches
through all the parts of his dominion: he is a good shepherd; and Kings are
(...).
so called; and a King thus qualified shall be like the Sun, still glorious,
immortal, youthful, and green like the Palm, Olive, and Bay Tree; but if he
does degenerate into a tyrant, then he is the cause of mortality, as the Sun
is, when he inflames the air with excessive heat.

ARACHNE.
She was a Lydian Maid, skillful in weaving and spinning, and by Minerva (for
her insolency, in provoking a goddess) was turned into a Spider.

The INTERPRETER.
1. THe cause of Arachnes overthrow, was the rejecting of the old woman's
counsel, into whose shape Pallas had transformed her self: then are young
people ready for ruin, when they will follow their own heads, and despise the
counsel of the aged, whose experience and gravitie should temper their
temeritie:

-- Seris venit usus ab annis.

2. This Arachne did learn of the Spider to spin and weave; for the beasts are
in many things our Schoolmasters. 3. It is not good to be proud and insolent
of any art or knowledge. 4. Subtle and trifling sophisters, who with
intricacies and querks entangle men, are no better then Spiders, whose captious
fallacies are no less hateful to the wise, then Arachnes web was to Minerva.
5. Partial Judges use their laws, as Spiders do their webs, to catch little
flies, and let the great ones pass through. 6. Covetous men are like Spiders,
they unbowel, that is they consume and spend themselves with care and toil, to
catch a fly; for wealth in the end, will be found little better. 7. Envy and a
slandering tongue is like a Spider, which does crack the purest glasses, so do
they poison the best men. 8. We should be Spiders in providence; they hang
their nets in windows, where they know flies most resort, and work most in
warm weather, for then the flies come most abroad; and like Mice, they
foretell the ruin of an house, by falling and running away, as Pliny shows.

ARGONAUT ^, See JASON and HERCULES.

ARION
WAs a skillful Musician, who having got great wealth, and sailing to Lesbos,
was robbed by the mariners, and appointed to be flung in the sea, who having
leave to play on his Harp, so charmed the Dolphins, that they received him on
their backs, and carried him to Tenarus, where the dolphin died that carried him,
being left on the sh^are, and was placed among the stars; the mariners were
taken and put to death.

The INTERPRETER.
1. WHen the Tyrrbenian mariners robbed Bacchus, he made them mad; for they
supposing the sea to be a meadow full of flowers, leapt into it and so became
Dolphins; which is the reason they delight to be near ships: the meaning may
be this; that drunkards who intoxicate themselves with wine, become mad, and
have their imaginations distempered: hence the sea to them is a meadow, and
nothing seems dangerous; but indeed, then do drunkards leap into the sea, when
by their intemperance they fall into hydropsies and then are they turned, into
dolphins, for they drink like fishes, nor is their thirst quenched: Crescit
indulgens sibi dirus hydrops. 2. This Dolphin was a ship (...), Thucid.
so called, from the image of the dolphin upon the stern. 3. Here also we may
see the force of eloquence, by which wild men are charmed. 4. No sin is done
in secret, but shall be revealed, especially murder, which oftentimes is
strangely discovered. 5. God does not let good turns go unrewarded, which is
signified by the Dolphin made a constellation. 6. Here we see Arions
ingratitude, who let the Dolphin die on the shore. 7. The love of Dolphins to
man, may teach us love one to another. 8. The Vid. Aelian. Plin. etc.
Dolphins never rest, not when they sleep; they are the swiftest of all fishes,
and most intelligent; pious to their own kind, in carrying out their dead
bodies to the shore. 9. When Satan drove us out of Paradise into the sea of
this world, the Dolphin, that is, the Church received us, and by the music of
Gods word we are saved.

ARISTAEUS
WAs the son of Apollo and Cyrene, a shepherd, a keeper of Bees, who first
found out honey and oil; he was in love with Euridice, who being pursued by
him, run away, and was killed by a serpent; therefore the Nymphs were angry,
and destroyed his Bees: He obtained of Jupiter and Neptune, that the
pestilentiall heat of the D^g-dayes, wherein was great mortality should be
mitigated with winds.

The INTERPRETER.
1. THe Minister ought to be Aristaeus, that is, the best man of the parish in
spiritual gifts, and holy conversation, as he is the best in respect of his
sacred calling. And he should pursue Euridice, and be in love with her, that
is, with right judgment: but she is fled from Aristaeus, and is stung by the
Serpent; right judgment has forsaken many of our Ministers, in these
troublesome times, and she is oppressed by that old Serpent the devil. 2. By
Aristaeus may be meant Wisdom, which is the best thing in man, as the word
(...) op^imus shows, which is begot of Apollo and Cyrene the daughter of the
river Peneus, because the moderate heat and proportion of moisture make a good
temper, and so the Organs are sitted for the exercise of wisdom; by which
honey and oil, things most pleasant and useful for the life of man, were
invented: by wisdom the heat of the Dog-dayes is tempered, because a wise man
knows how to prevent and avoid the inconveniences of the heaven, Sapiens
dominabi^^ astris: Euridice is a deep or large judgment, which is nothing else
but that act of the intellect in (...) la^us, (...) judicium.
determining what is right, what wrong, what to be chosen, what avoided; and so
the Will, whose office it is to choose or refuse, is di^ected and guided by the
Judgment. A wise man desires to enjoy a right judgment, and to regulate his
actions accordingly; but this Euridice does often fail Aristaeus, and is
wounded by the serpent of our corrupt nature; so that this failing, Aristaeus
loses his Bees, that is, fails in his inventions, and wants the sweetness
and comfort which he should take in his actions; this made Saint Paul
confess, that he did what he would not do, and what he would do, he did
not. 3. Aristaeus is a king, a shepherd, and the best man of his Kingdom, by
whose invention we have honey and oil, that is, delight and all things
necessary by his good government; whose wisdom does prevent the infectious heat
of Dogdayes; that is, of oppression, tumul^s and rebellion; but if at any time
Euridice, right judgment, being stung by serpentine flatterers who mis-inform
him, be wanting, the Bees perish, and the subjects go to ruin. 4. Aristaeus is
the celestial heat, the effect of the Sun, joined with moderate moisture, by
which, Bees, and Olives, and all things useful for our life are procreated and
cherished; by the secret influence of this heat those Northern winds in
Pontus, Egypt, and other places are raised, which after the Summer Solstice
blow and last forty days, by which the rage of the Dog Star is mitigated:
these winds are called Etesii, because every year they blow at the same
season; In Spain and Asia these Etesian winds blow from the East: this heat
working upon Jupiter and Neptune, that is, on the air and sea, does cause and
generate these winds: now as this celestial heat produces and cherishes
Bees; so Euridice, man's judgment, art and industry must be joined; otherways
by the Nymphs, that is, too much rain, or by many other ways the Bees may
fail, and if they fail, the same heat out of putrified matter may make a new
generation. 5. Christ is the true Aristaeus, the good shepherd, the best of
men, and the Son of God, by whom we have honey and oil, comfort and
spiritual joy, and all things else, at whose request the heat and Dog Star of
Gods anger was appeased; he is in love with our souls, as Aristaeus with
Euridice: but we run from him, and are stung by the Serpent the Devil; we
died with Euridice; we were destroyed with Aristaeus his Bees, until he
restored us again to life by the sacrifice of his own body.

ATALANTA.
SHe was the daughter of King Ceneus, so swift in running, that no man could
match her; only Hippomenes overcame her, by casting in her way three golden
apples, at which whilst she stooped to take them up, she lost her race; she
was the first that shot the Chaledonian Boar; and with the sharp point of her
spear brought water out of a rock; but for lying in Cybeles temple with
Hippomenes, she was turned into a Lioness, and he into a Lion, which drew
Cybeles Chariot.

The INTERPRETER.
1. HEre we may see how odious ingratitude is to God, which is expressed in the
person of Hippomanes, who neglected to return thanks to Venus, that had by the
means of her golden apples got him the victory over Atalanta; therefore she
made him so mad and eager on her, that he was not afraid or ashamed to
deflowre her in Cybeles temple. God suffers men to fall into grievous sins,
when they are not thankful for received favors. 2. Here we see what danger
there is in idleness; whilst Atalanta was employed with Diana in hunting,
she kept her virginity, and did help, yea, was the first that wounded the
Chaledonian Boar; but when she gave her self to idleness, she fell into lust
and profanesse. 3. Here we see how irreverence to God is punishable, when such
a fearful punishment was laid upon this couple, as to be turned into beasts,
and made ^aves to Cybele, for profaning her temple. 4. Here we have the picture
of a whore, who runs swiftly in the broad way that leads to destruction; if
any thing stay her course, it is wise counsel and admonition; for wisdom is
presented by gold. It is she that kills the Boars, that is, wanton and unruly
youths, wounding both their bodies, souls, and estates, and therefore has a
sharp spear, to draw water out of rocks; because many who at first were
senseless like stones, being deeply wounded with remorse for their former
folly and stupidity, fall to r^pentance, to weeping and lamenting, considering
what they have lost: and as Atalanta defiled Cybeles temple, so does a whore
pollute her body, which is the Temple of the Holy Ghost; so does the
whoremaster make his body all one with the body of an harlot; and so both
degenerate from humanity, and participate of the cruelty and lasciviousness of
Lions, and by this means become miserable slaves and drudges to Cybele, mother
earth, that is, to all earthly affections and lusts. 5. As Atalantas course was
interrupted by golden apples, so is the course of Justice oftentimes stopped
with golden bribes. 6. Here we see that one sin draws after it another,
worse then the former; fornication begets profanesse, and profanesse
cruelty, and miserable servitude to earthly lusts. 7. Let us with Atalanta run
the race that is set before us, and wound the boar of our wanton lusts, and
draw water from our rocky hearts, let us take heed that the golden apples of
worldly pleasure and profit, which Hippomenes the Devil slings in our way, may
not hinder our course; commit not spiritual fornication with him in the temple
of Cybele, lest God in his just anger, make our condition worse then the
condition of the brute and savage beasts.

ATLAS.
WAs the son of Japetus, and brother of Prometheus, or as others say, he was
begotten of heaven and the day; if this was not another Atlas, he was King of
Mauri^ania, and had a garden where grew golden apples, he was turned into a
mountain by Perseus, Jupiters son, upon the sight of Gorgons head, because he
refused to lodge him.

The INTERPRETER.
1. ATlas was said to be transformed into a mountain either because he was
confined to that hill being driven from his own country by Perseus; or else
because he delighted to be upon that hill, or because he called it by his own
name. 2 Atlas is the name of an high hill, which for the height thereof, being
higher then the clouds, was said to support heaven, and to be begotten of
heaven day, because of the continiall light on the top of it, as being never
obscured with mists, clouds, and vapors. 3. This is the name of him who first
found out the knowledge of Astronomy, and invented the Sphere; which some
think was Henoch, and for this knowledge was said to support heaven. 4. This is
the name of a king in Mauritania, who perhaps from the bigness, and strength
of his body, was called a mountain; and was said to have a garden of golden
apples, because of the plenty of golden mines in his Kingdom. 5. God is the
true Atlas, by whose Word and power the world is sustained; that mountain on
which we may securely rest, who only has golden apples and true riches to
bestow on us. 6. The Church is the true Atlas, a supporter of a kingdom, the
child of heaven, the hill on which God will rest, on which there is continual
light and day, a rock against which hell-gates cannot prevail, where is the
garden of golden apples, the Word and Sacraments. 7. A King is the Atlas of his
Commonwealth, both for strength and greatness; there is the day and light of
knowledge in him, which the people cannot see; Prometheus, [(...)] that is,
Providence, is his brother; by the means of his knowledge and providence the
Kingdom is supported, and his gardens are filled with golden apples, that is,
his treasures with money. 8. He deserves not to be called a man but a monster,
who will not be hospitable; for homo ab humanitate; and [(...)] Jupiter is the
god of hospitality, who pu^^isheth the violation of it. 9. As Perseus the son
of Jupiter, sought lodging from Atlas, but could have none, and therefore
turned him into a senseless hill: So Christ the Son of god, knocks at the door
of our hearts, whom if we refuse to let in, we show our selves to be more
senseless and stupid then the hill Atlas.

AURORA.
THe daughter of Hyperion and Thia, or as others w^^^e, o^ T^t^^ and the Earth,
the sister of Sol and Luna, drawn in a chariot, sometimes with four horses,
sometimes with two only; she u^eth to leave her husband Tithonus with her son
Me^^non abed in Delos; she made old Tithonus young again, by means of herbs
and physic.

The INTERPRETER.
1. AVrora was said to be the mother of Lucifer, and of the winds, because at
certain times the star of Venus is seen in the morning, and then she is named
Phosphorus, or Lucifer: and at sometimes in the evening, then she is called
Hespe^us, Vesper, Vesperugo. Aurora is said to be the mother of the winds,
because after a calm in the night the winds rise with the morning, as
attendant upon the Sun, by whose heat and light they are begot, if winds be
vapors; or if they be nothing else but the motions of the air, then they may
be called the daughters of Aurora; for the Sun with his heat and light moves
the air, Aurora or the morning b^ing nothing else but the first appearing of
the Suns light: and so perhaps aura a breath or wind may be derived from
Aurora. 2. Aurora is the daughter of H^peri^n, which signifies to go above;
for [(...)] it is from above that we have the light of the Sun, and every
other good thing, even from the Father of lights; her mother is Thia, for it is
by divine gift we enjoy light, and nothing does more lively represent the
Divinity then the light, as Dionys. Areopagit. shows at large: She is the
daughter of Titan, that is, the Sun, who is the fountain of light, and of the
Earth, because the light of the morning seems to arise out of the earth. 3. The
leaving of her husband abed with her son, is only to show, that all puts of the
earth do not enjoy the morning at one time, but when it is morning with us, it
is evening with those of the remot^st East-countries from us, whom she leaves
abed when she rises on us, and leaves us abed when she rises on them: for
all parts are East and West, and all people may be called her husbands and
sons, for she loves all, and shines on all; and by ^^r absence, leaves them
all abed by turns. 4. Her chariot signifies her motion; the purple and
rose-colour do paint out the colors that we see in the morning in the air,
caused by the light and vapors. 5. She has sometime two, sometime
four-horses, because she rises sometime slower, sometime sooner. 6. The making
of old Tithonus young with physic, may show that the physical simples which
come from the Eastern countries are powerful for the preserving of health and
vigor in the body. 7. Again, fair Aurora leaving old Ti^hon abed, does show
that beautiful young women delight not in an old man's bed: or by this may be
signified a virtuous woman, whom Sol^mon describes, who rises whilst it is
night, is clothed with scarlet and purple, who does her husband good, etc.
Prove. 31. 8. Last, our Savior is the true Aurora, who was in love with
mankind, whom he has healed from all infirmities, and has bestowed on them a
lasting life, which knows not old age; his light from the chariot of his
word, drawn by the four Evangelists, shines over all the world.

CHAP. II.
B
BACCHUS.
He was the son of Jupiter and Semele, who was saved out of his mothers ashes,
after that Jupiter had burnt her with his thunder, and was preserved alive in
Jupiters thigh; he was bred in Egypt, and nursed by the Hyades and Nymph^;
he subdued the Indians and other Nations, was the first that wore a Diadem,
and triumphed, and found out the use of wine.

The INTERPRETER.
1. BAcchus is painted sometimes with a bald head, with a sithe or sickle in
one hand, with a jugg or pitcher in the other, also with a woman's garment, and
a garland of roses about his head, which may signify to us these effects of
wine; It causes baldness, because being immoderately taken, it dries up the
radical moisture of the he^d, and fills it with waterish and adventitious
humors, which cause baldness. 2. The sithe shows wine-bibbing (represented
by the pitcher) to be the main cause of the shortning and cutting off of man's
life. 3. The woman's garment and garland of roses represent the effemin^tenesse
of drunkards, and that pronesse to Venery, to which wine and roses are strong
provocations. 4. By Bacchus is ordinarily meant wine, which is the fruit of
Semele, that is, of the Vine, so called, because it does (...) shake the
limins; for no liquour so apt to breed palsies, as wine; ashes, because hot,
make good dung for Vines; therefore Bacchus is said to proceed of his mothers
ashes, and to be cherished in Jupiters thigh, because the Vine prospers best in
a warm air, and in a soil most subject to thunder, which is caused by heat
which is most fervent, and thunders most frequent in July and August, when the
grapes do ripen. He was bred in Egypt, because an hot air and mellow soil,
as Egypt is, is fittest for wine; and because moisture is required for the
increase of wine; therefore he was said to be nursed by the Hyades and Nymphs.
5. He subdued the Indians, either because wine makes resolute soldiers, or
because most countries are subdued with excessive drinking and abuse of wine:
and indeed Bacchus may wear the Diadem, for he does triumph over all nations,
of all sorts of people and professions; there be few that with Lycurgus will
oppose him; his Thyrsus reaches further then any Kings Scepter, or the Roman
Fasces; if we would see his O^gia or sacrifices, his Priests or V^l Thyades
and M^mallones and Bac^h.
Maenades, his Panthers, Tigers and Lynces, with which his chariot is drawn,
the Satyrs and Sileni his companions, with their Cymballs and vociferations, we
shall not need to go far; he neever had greater authority over the ^ndians,
then he has over this Kingdom; he once slept three year with Proserpina; but
we will not let him rest one day. The Thebans tore Orpheus for bringing in
Bacchus his sacrifices among them; and Icarus was thought to have brought in
poison, when he brought in wine; but the case is other wise with us; if if any
discommend the excess of wine, he shall have Alcithoes doom, she for
discommending Bacchus, was turned into a Bat; and he shall be accounted no
better; yet I discommend not the moderate use of wine, which is Jupiters son,
or the gift of God; for it strengthens the body, comforts the heart, breeds
good blood; for which cause Bacchus was always young; for wine makes old men
look young, if it be moderate, otherwise it makes them children; for so Bacchus
is painted; he had also a virgins and a bulls face, he was both male and
female, sometimes he had a beard, and sometimes none, to show the different
eff^cts of wine moderatly and immoderatly taken; he was worshipped on the some
altar with Minerva, and was accompanied with the Muses, to show that wine is a
friend to wisdom and learning. Mercury carried him, being a child, to Macris
the daughter of Aris^aeus, who anointed his lips with honey; to show that in
wine is eloquence; and so ^ikewise the naked truth, therefore Bacchus is
always naked; and if Amphisbaen^ the Serpent, that is, sorrow or care bite
the heart, let Bacchus kill him with a vine-branch: wine refines the wit,
therefore the quick-sighted Dragon was consecrated to Bacchus; and to show that
much prattling was the fruit of wine, the chattering Pie was his bird. And
because wine makes men effemiuate, therefore women were his priests; he sl^pt
three years with Proserpina, to show that Vines the first three years art not
fruitful; he was turned into a Lion, to show the cruelty of drunken men; he
was ^orn by the Titans, buried, and revived again; for small twigs cut off from
a vine, and set in the earth, bring forth whole vines. He was called Liber and
Ly^ns i^em.
Liber, because wine makes a man talk freely, and freeth the mind from cares,
and makes a man have free and high thoughts; ^t makes a beggar a gentleman.
Dionysius from ^^amentem, and (...) pungo, stirring up the mind; he was the
first that made bargains, and so it seems to be true by the Dutchnen, who will
make no bargains till they be well liquored. ^. Bacchus is the Sun; who is both
Liber and Dionysius, ^ee from all sublunary imperfections, and freeth the ^orld
from darkness and inconveniences of the night, and pricks forward the minds
of men to their daily actions: he is still young, not subject to age and
decay; naked, for he makes all things naked and open to the eye of the author
of generation of all things, as well as of wine; the son of Jupiter, because he
is a part of heaven, and of burned S^mele, because they thought that the Sun
was of a fiery matter; he dies and reviveth again, when after the cold winter
he recollects his heat, strength, and vigor; his sleeping with Proserpin^
^^eweth his abode under our Hemisphere; the wild beasts which accompany him,
shows the extremity of heat with which beasts are exasperated; he is a
friend to the Muses, for by his influence our wits are refined; a destroyer of
Amphisbaena, that is, the winter, which stings with both ends; for at its
coming and going it breeds diseases and distempers in our bodies: he was
p^inted sometimes like a child, sometimes like a man, because in the winter
the days are short, and his heat weak, but in summer his heat is strong, and
days are long: he is clothed with the spotted skin of a Deer, to show his
swiftness, and multitude of stars with which he seems to be covered at
night; the travels of Bacchus do show the motion of the Sun. 7. Original sin,
like Bacchus, reeceived life by the death of Eva, who for her disobedience was
struck with the thunder of Gods wrath; and it has been fomented by Adams
thigh, that is, by generation; this unruly evil has traveled farther then
Bacchus did, and has an attendance of worse beasts then Tigers, Panthers, etc.
to wit, of te^rours, and of an evil conscience, and actual sins; it has
subdued all mankind; and as Bacchus turning himself unto a Lion, made all the
mariners in the ship wherein he was carried, leap into the sea; so this sin
turned us all out of Paradise into the sea of this world. 8. Christ is the true
Diomsius, (...), the mind of God, the internal word of the Father, born of a
woman without man's help, as the Graecians fable their Bacchus to be, and yet
they give (...) bonus silius; neme ^ Bacchi.
credit to their figment, and not unto our truth; he is Liber, who makes us
only free, the great King, who has subdued all Nations, whose Diadem is
glory. He has killed Amphisbaena the devil, the two headed Serpent, his two
stings are sin and death, with the one he has wounded our souls, with the
other our bodies; he triumphs over all his foes; his body was torn with
thorns, nails, and whips, and went down to hell, but he revived and rose
again; he is the true friend of wisdom and learning, and who has given to us
a more comfortable wine then the wine of the grape; that wine which we shall
drink new with him in his kingdom; his lips were truly anointed with honey,
grace was diffused in them, and never man spoke as he did; he is that Lion of
the Tribe of Judah, who has overcome the Giants, and the Pirates who would have
bound him, that is, the wicked Angels and Tyrants of this world; he is still
young, as not subject now to mortality.

BELIDES.
THese were the fifty daughters of Danaus the son of Belus, who killed their
husbands all in one night by the persuasion of their father, except
Hypermnestra, who saved her husband Lyncius: these daughters for their murder
are continually in hell, drawing water in a sieve, which is never full.

The INTERPRETER.
1. HEre we may see that incestuous marriages are unfortunate, and the end of
them for the most part fearful; for Danaus and Egyptus were brothers, the
fifty daughters of Danaus married with the fifty sons of Egyptus, too near an
affinity, and against the law of nature. 2. Whereas these women murdered their
own husbands, we see how little trust is to be given to many of that sex; and
that there is no security here, nor confidence, if the friends of our own
bosom prove treacherous. 3. Our mother Eva, for murdering her husband with
the forbidden fruit, has this punishment imposed on her and all her children,
that they are still drawing water in a sieve, which will never be filled; that
is, still toyling and laboring for that which will never fill and content
them* the covetous man is still drawing riches, the ambitious man honors, the
voluptuous man pleasures, the learned man is still laboring for knowledge; and
yet they are never full, but the more they draw, the more they desire; the
drunkard is still drawing liquor; but his body, like a sieve, is never full:
there be also sieves that we are still filling, but never full, unthankful
people, on whom whatsoever good turn we bestow is lost; hollow-hearted people,
to whom we can commit no secret, but pleni rimarum, being full of chinks and
holes, they transmit all; prodigal sons, for whom careful parents are still
drawing, but these sieves let all run out, and sooner then the parents could
put in; Preachers and Schoolmasters have to do with sieves, whose memory can
retain nothing of that they learn. 4. Let us take heed of sin, which has a
virgins face, but is secretly armed with a dagger to wound us. 5. Children must
not obey their parents in that which is evil, left they be punished in Gods
just judgments.

BELLEROPHON.
He being falsely accused by Antaea the wife of Praetus, for offering violence
to he^, was sent with Letters by Praetus to Job^tes his father-in-law, to be
killed by him, who being unwilling to kill him himself, sent him against the
people Solymi, Chimaera and Amazons; who by the help of the winged horse
Pegasus, which Neptune sent to him, overcame them all; afterward offering to
ride up to heaven, was by Jupiter thrown down.

The INTERPRETER.
1. THe Poets by the fictions of Bellerophon riding in the air upon a winged
horse, of Phryx^us riding on a ram over the sea, of Daedalus flying in the
air, of Phaeton riding in the chariot of Phoebus, of Endymion with whom the
Moon was in love; by these fictions, I say, they did encourage men to virtuous
actions, and to sublime and heavenly cogitations. 2. Here we see the malice of
a whore in the wife of Praetus, who not attaining her fleshly desire of
Bellerophon, goes about by false accusations to undo him. 3. Here all men in
authority are taught not to be too rash in giving credit to accusations, though
their own wives be the accusers. 4. Bellerophon was a good Navigator, who in
the swift ship called Pegasus, pursuing the Lycian Tyrant, who in the ship
called Chimaera (on whose snout was the image of a Lion, on the poop a Dragon,
in the middle a Goat) had done much mischief, gave occasion to this fiction.
5. Bellerophon is an A^tronomer, who finding out the qualities and effects of
the Stars, was said to ride up to heaven; but when they fail in their
predictions, as oftentimes they do, then their horse Pegasus may be said to
sling them down. 6. They that search too much into the secrets of
Predestination are like Bellerophon; they climb so high, till at last they are
overthrown in their imaginations, Caelum ipsum peti^us stultitia. 7.
Bellerophon may be the Sun, who by the help of swift Pegasus, that is, the
wind, which Neptune the sea affords, does overcome Chimaera, that is, the
pestilentiall air, and drives away infectious mists. 8. A wise man is
Bellerophon [(...)], who encountering with difficulties, joyneth with prudence,
the courage of an horse, and celerity of a winged horse, by which means
Alexander became such a conqueror. 9. By the example of Bellerophon beware of
pride, which will spoil all good actions in us, and at last will give us a
fall. 10. Mark here, that God is the miraculous preserver of innocence; a
clear conscience will at last overcome all false accusations, and like Pegasus,
carry us through all difficulties. 11. A good Christian must like Bellerophon,
fight against Chimaera, Solymi, and Amazons, that is, the devil, the world,
and the flesh; and then he must be always mounting upward in holy meditations,
and his conversation must be in Heaven. 12. If with Bellerophon we affect
heaven, we must take heed we do not look down upon the earth as he did,
whose head grew giddy, and so he fell; we must not put our hands to the plough
and look back, Remember Lots wife. 13. We see how hospitable and just the
Gentiles were, for neither Praetus nor Jobates would kill Bellerophon, because
they had entertained him into their houses. 14. Christ is the true Bellerophon,
the Wisdom of God, who brought to us counsel and wisdom; he was exposed to
all malice, but overcame all; he sub^ued the spiritual monsters, and rid^s
triumphantly on his word, as on a winged horse, and by the power of his
Divinity mounted up to heaven.

BOREAS, BOREADAE, HARPIAE.
BOreas being in love with fair Orithyi^, whilst she was gathering of flowers
near the fountain C^phisus, carried her away, of whom he begot two sons,
Calais and Zetis, who were ^o^n with long blew hair, and wings at their feet;
these with their wings and (...) away the Harpies, raveno^s and filthy birds
(which had Virgin^ faces, and Eagles ta^ons) from the table of blind P^neus,
whose meat was still polluted and devoured by the Harpies.

The INTERPRETER.
1. THe Harpies, Furies, Stryges, Lamiae are promiscuously sometimes taken one
for another; and they are painted with women's faces, and dragons tails: but the
Harpies are fained to have their abode on the earth, the Furies in h^ll, the
Stryges and Lamiae to domineer in the night, and to suck childrens blood:
therefore they were wont to pacify Corva, or the goddess of flesh, with
sacrifices, that these Stryges might have no power over their children: but it
seems these were naughty women, as our wi^ches are, who having commerce with
the devil, had power to hurt not onel^ beasts and children, but men and women
also. 2. Sinful delights are like these Harpies, they have women's faces and
dragons tails; their beginnings are delightful, but their end is poysonable
and ter^ible. 3. These had the faces of women, but their hands were claws of
ravenous birds, which they hid under their wings: such are hypocrites, who make
fair shows and pret^nces, but have foul and beastly actions; remove their
wings, and you shall find their paws. How many under the fair wing of
religion hide the foul paws of their wicked actions? 4. These Harpies are
flatterers, they are called also Jupiters ^ogs; hunting and flattering
parasites have undone many men's estates. 5. Many fathers are like blind
Pheneus, they are still gathering and providing wealth for rapacious children,
of whose riotousnesse they take no notice; who like Harpies, in a short time
devour all, and are still hungry, like Pharaohs lean kine, pallida semper o^a
fame. 6. There be three Harpies very hurtful in a commonwealth, to wit,
flatterers, usurers, informers 7. Boreas is the son of Neptune, and brother of
Iris or the rainbow, for the winds are ingenerated of the sea vapor, so are
raines, clouds, and rainbows by the help of the Sun. 8. Boreas is the Northern
wind, who carries away fair Orithyia, for the cold wind takes away beauty;
his two sons Zeris and Calais, that is frigidity and and sic^^tie, drive away
the H^rpies, that is, Southern pestilentiall vapors, which consume and devour
living creatures; for in the Southern wind there are three properties,
answering to the three names of the Harpies, to wit, sudden and swift blasts,
that is, Ocyp^te; storms Aello; and obscurity Celaeno. 9. Sae ilegious
Church-robbers are these Harpies, who fell upon Christ's patrimony like Ocypete
or Ae^lo, a sudden blast or storm; and like Celaeno have brought obscurity on
the Church, and have eclipsed her light; and indeed the names do agree, for
(...), id est, (...) alienum t^ll^ns.
Aello is he that takes away another man's goods, Ocypete suddenly, Celaeno,
blackness or darkness; so they on a sudden snatched away those goods that were
none of theirs, and with the obscure clo^d of poverty have turned the Churches
beauty into blackness; but these goods make them never the fatter, they pass
suddenly from them, as Pheneus meat did through the Harpies, they are troubled
with a continual Faedis^ima ven^ius ^roluv^es.
flix or lientery, neither can their crooked talons hold them long: I grant the
blindness and wickedness of Pheneus, that is, of the Clergy, gave occasion
to this; but now their eyes are open, and their lives reformed: therefore the
sons of Boreas, the Magistrate and Minister, with the arrows of authority and
wings of Gods word, may be expected shortly to drive away these Harpies. 10.
Pheneus is a covetous miser who is blind, and sees not what a number of
Harpies gape for his death, that they may devour those goods which he
himself had not power to touch. 11. Gods Spirit, like Boreas, a cooling and
refreshing wind, which filled the Apostles, and came on them like the rushing
of a mighty wind, delights in the soul of man, whilst that in the s^owry
meadows of the Church, watered with the clear fountain of Gods word, she is
gathering spiritual comfort, and when she is joined to that blessed Spirit,
Zetis and Calais, that is, divine raptures are begotten, whose hairs are
skie-coloured, and feet winged, that is, heavenly meditations and swift
affections, which are nimble in the ways of Gods Commandments, and ready to
fly upward from earthly things, are the ^ffects of this spiritual conjunction;
and so by these, all Harpies, that is, covetous and earthly desires are driven
away. 12. God, like Boreas, being in love with his Church, has begot in the
womb of the blessed Virgin that winged Conqueror, who with the arrows of his
power, and wings of his word, has driven away all spiritual Harpies.

CHAP. III.
C
CADMUS and HARMONIA.
He was King of the Thebans, to whom Jupiter gave Harmonia to wife, who was
the daughter of Mars and Venus; the chief gods were present at the wedding,
and gave several gifts: This Cadmus was sent by his father to seek out his
sister Europa, whom when he could no^ find, and no^ daring without her to
return home, built Thebes, and killed a Dragon which kept a Well, the teeth of
which he sowed, and of them were begot armed men, who by means of a stone which
Cadmus flung among them, fell to quarrelling, and killed each other; afterward
he was turned into a Dragon, and by Jupiter was sent unto the Elysian fields.

The INTERPRETER.
1. AS Cadmus was sent to find out his lost sister, without whom he durst not
return to his earthly father; so we are employed to seek out the image of
God which we have lost, but except we find it, we must not return to our
heavenly father. 2. when Cad^us lost his sister, he was turned into a Serpent;
so we having lost the image of God, are become base, contemptible, and earthly
minded with the Serpents. 3. Cadmus may be meant of a wise Governor; who
marries with Harmonia, when he does all things with order and harmony, and
where this Marriage is, God bestows many blessings, Ceres will not be wanting
with her corn, nor Apollo with his Cithern, nor Mercury with his Harp, nor
Minerva with her golden chain and artificially wrought cloak; that is, both
profit and pleasure, and arts are to be ^ound where wisdom and order go
together in Government: It is this which seeks out Europa, that is, countries
for new Plantations; by this Thebes and Cities are built; by this the Dragon,
that is, malicious and subtle enemies are slain; and if of one enemy many
should arise, it is the part of a wise Prince to sling a stone among them, that
is, to use some means whereby they may fall out among themselves, that so they
may be weakened, and their viol^nce kept off from him: he must also be a
fav^urer of learning; for Cadmu^ brought from P^oenicia into Greece sixteen
letters Alphabeticall; and a Prince must have the Dragons eye, and be turned
into a Dragon, when wi^kednesse gets the upper hand, that he may be fearful
to those that do evil; and such a Prince at last shall be received into the
Elysian fields, that is, shall have rest and liberty. Again, a King must no
nothing but by advice of Minerva, that is, of his wise and learned Counsel;
the two chief props of a kingdom are Mars and Venus, war and propagation,
and these two live in harmony and order, as parents in their children; a wise
man that cannot live securely in a public place, will with Cadmus turn
himself into a Serpent, that is, live a private and solitary life. 4. A good
Minister, like Cadmus, must do all things with order and decency, he must do
nothing without advice from God; he must seek out Europa his sister, that is,
every lost soul; and if she cannot, or will not be found, he must not be
idle, but must give himself to build the City of God; for these two a Minister
must do, seek those that be lost, and confirm or st^blish those that stand;
he must also kill the Dragon that infecteth the Well, that is, the Heretic,
who poisoneth the clear fountain of Gods word; and if the destruction of one
heretic be the generation of many, as we see in the A^rian heresy, being
overthrown by the Nicene Synod, of which, as out of the Dragons teeth, arise
^usebians, Pho^inians, Eudoxians, A^acians, Eunomians, Macedonians, Aetians,
Anomians, Exu^en^ii, and Psa^y^ians; we must sling Minerva's stone, that is,
wise Arguments out of Gods word amongst them, that these armed men may destroy
one another; so we read, that in the Council of Selentia, the A^^ians went
together by the ears among themselves, b^ing divided into Arrians and
Semiarrian^; a Minister also must be turned into a Serpent for wisdom, and so
shall be received unto the Elisian ^ields. 5. Christ is the true Cadmus, who
was sent of his father to seek that which was lost; he is the husband of order
and harmony, the builder of a greater city then Thebes; the destroyer of Si
veteres sapientes satis hyd^^ dentibus armatorum segetem inh^^^uisse
crediderunt, etc. ^uanto ^aguc^eden^^m, etc. An b. de side (...).
the great Dragon the Devil, and of all his armed teeth or associates; he
has opened unto us the fountain of grace and knowledge; upon him God bestowed
all gifts and perfection; that Serpent that was lifted upon the ^rosse to cure
all beholders, and at last was received unto glory. 6. Here is a type of the
R^surrection.

CASTOR and POLLUX.
THese were twins begot of Leda's egg, with whom Jupiter conversed in the
form of a Swan; the one was a champion, the other an horseman; they went
against the Chaledonian Bear, and accompanied the A^g^n^uts, upon whose heads
when two ^lames were seen, when they were in the ship the storm ceased; and
they were afterward thought to be gods of the sea: when Castor was killed,
Pollux obtained of Jupiter that the immortality should be divided between them;
therefore when ^n^ dies the other lives.

The INTERPRETER.
1. CAstor and Pollux are these flaming exhalations or meteors which appear in
the air near the ground in the night time; these we call ignis fa^^us or Jack
in the candle; because they are engendered of the air, and are seen there, they
are called Juno's companions. These two in the habit of young men on horse
back, with spears in their hands, and caps on their heads appeared to the
Lacedaemonians. So did they also to the Lorenses, when they were fighting
against the Crotonia^s; and to the Romans likewise; bringing them news of the
overthrow of Perses; therefore the wearing of the cap, was used in sign of
liberty, as we may read at the death Caesar lances were carried about with c^ps
on their tops; and at the death of Nero the Romans put on their caps. The Roman
coin had stamped on it two daggers with caps, when Tarqu^nius the king was
banished. 2. I Think, not unfitly against the Peripatetikes we may gather out
of this fiction, the creation of the Sun and Moon; for in the beginning the
Spirit of God, like a Swan, moving on the waters, out of a confused egg, that
is, out of the chaos brought forth these two glorious flames, whose dominion is
over the sea, because by their influence, light, and motion, storms and
vapors are raised and settled: the Son is the Ch^mpion, who by his heat
subdueth all things: The Moon is the Horseman, if you consider its swift
motion; it is well and comfortable when they both shine, but if either of them
be eclipsed, it is dismal and ominous: Immortality may be said to be divided
between them, because when the one lives, that is, shines, the other is
obscured, and in a manner dead, at least to us: They ride on white horses, to
show their light; and they found out the golden Fleece, because no metals are
generated but by their influence, nor can they be found out, but by their
light. 3. The soul and body are like Castor and Pollux; for when the one
dies, the other lives; and when the body is asleep, and as it were dead,
then is the soul most active; and when the body is m^st vgil^^t, the soul ^s
less vigorous. 4. By thi^ fiction the Gentiles wound themselves; for if they
believe that th^se Dioscuri were begot o^ a god and a wo^an; why will they not
believe the true generation of Christ, of a Virgin and the Holy Ghost. 5. By
this also judicial Astrologers may be confut^d; for we see that the souls
and dispositions of men depend not on the Stars. These two were twins, borne
under the same const^llation, yet of far d^fferent studies and inclinations,
the one being a wrestler, the other a horse man. 6. Satan who can transform
himself unto any shape, appeared to the Romans in the Latin war in the form
of Castor and Peliux on horse back, for which cause a Temple was erected to
them, by A. P^sthumius dictator; have not we more cause to erect the Temple of
our hearts to Christ, who upon the two white ho^ses of the two Testaments, has
brought us good News of our victory against our spiritual foes? 7. This
temple was erected both to Castor and Pollux; but Castor the less worthy
carried the name from the other; by which we see, that honor is not always
given to those that deserve best. 8. Di^s^^i were preservers of men, but Helena
came out of the same egg, which was the overthrower of Troy: so in the same
Church are good and bad, savers and destroyers. 9. It was love in Pol^ux to
share his immortality with Castor: but in this he did him more hurt then good,
for it had been better to dye once then so often: thus our affections are
oftentimes preposterous. 10. Christ has done more for us then Pollux for
Castor, for he lost his immortality for a while, that we might enjoy it for
ever.

CENTAURI.
THese were half horses, half men; begotten of Ixion, and of a cloud which
was presented unto him in the form of Juno, with which he was in love; they
quarreled with the Lapithae, and carried away their wives being in drink, for
which cause many of them were killed; they were given to many naughty
qualities; but Chiron, who was Achilles Sch^olmaster, for his wisdom and
justice was much commended, but was wounded accidentally by one of Hercules his
arrows, which fell upon his foot out of his hand, and was cured by the herb
Centurie, and was then made a Star.

The INTERPRETER.
1. THe Centaurs were said to be begot of Ixion and a cloud, because they were
the subjects of Ixion King of Thessaly, which Country is called by Plautus
Centauromachia; and the town where they dwelt was called Nephele, which
signifies a cloud. 2. In Thessalie was the first use of horse-manship,
therefore the Centaurs were said to be half men, half h^rses. Pele^^^nius
found out the use of bridle and saddle: the Lapithae and Centaurs were people
at first different, but afterward made one, as the Romans and Latins. 3. Many
men are like Centaurus, whose fore-parts are of a man, but hinder-parts of an
horse, they begin in the spirit, but end in the flesh; their younger years are
spent civilly, their old age wantonly and profanely. 4. Kings have oftentimes
Centaurs for their Councillors, A^hilles had Chiron for his Schoolmaster; they
have men's faces, fair and honest pretenses for their advice, but withal an
horse-taile, for the event is cruel and pernicious oftentimes; these are
children of clouds, Nubigi^es bimemb^e^, V^g.
for their intentions are oftentimes wrapped up in a cloud and mist, that they
cannot be discovered. 5. A drunkard is a right Centaur, a man in the morning,
and a beast in the evening; the son of clouds; for whilst he is sober he is
heartlesse, melancholy, and as a dead man; but when his head is full of clouds,
and vapors arising from the wine, then he is full of life, talk, and mirth,
and then he is most given to quarrel with the Lapithae, even his dearest
friends, and to offer violence to women. 6. Misshapen and hard-favoured men
have harsh and ill-favored conditions. 7. Every regenerate man is in a sort a
Centaur, to wit, a man in that part which is regenerate, and a beast in his
unregenerate part. 8. There is no race or society of men so bad, but there may
be some good amongst them; one Chiron among the Centaurs, as one Lot among the
Sodo^i^es, and one Job among the Edomites. 9. Drunkenness, whoredom, and
oppression are the overthrow of kingdoms, as we see here by the Centaurs 10.
Sin is a Centaur, having a man's face to persuade, but a horses heels to kick us
in the end. 11. Where things are not ruled by laws, order, and civility, but
carried headlong with violence and force, we may say, that there is a
Commonwealth of Centaurs. 12. A Comet may be called a Centaur, as having an
horse tail, and the wisdom of a man in fo^etelling future events; it has its
generation in the clouds or air, and upon the sight of it, bloodshed, wars,
and desolation follow. 13. Just Chiron was wounded by Hercules, but was
afterward placed among the Stars: so, although might does oftentimes overcome
right here, yet the end of justice and goodness shall be glory at last. 14.
Our life is a Centaur, for it runs swiftly away; and as the Centaurs are
placed by the Centauri in so^ibus stalulant. Virg.
Prince of Poets in the gates of Hell; so is our life, as soon as we are born
in the gates of death; Nascentes morimu^. 15. Governors, Soldiers,
Schoolmasters should be Centaurs, to have the wisdom of men, and the strength
and courage of horses.

CERBERUS.
PLuto's dog, begot of Typhon and Echidna; he had three heads, and Snakes in
stead of hair, and lay in the en^^y of Hell, who ^y Hercules was d^awn from
thence, who vomited when he saw the light; and of his foam^ sprung up the
poysonable herb Aconitum, or Wolf-bane.

The INTERPRETER.
1. AS Pluto was held the god of riches, so Cerberus was his dog, who is
painted with three heads, still barking; by Pluto's feet, to show us the great
c^re and vigilance that rich men have over their wealth. 2. Cerberus is a
glutton, whose three throats are his threefold desire to eat, much, often, and
varieties; he lies in the entry of hell, for gluttony is indeed the g^te of
hell, and that which brings many men to untimely deaths, Plures gula quam
gla^io; and intemperance of Diet causes oftentimes that Bulimia and Canina
appetentia, dogs app^tite, which is an unsatiable desire of eating, the effect
whereof is vomiting: This proceeds of Typhon and Echidna, heat and cold; to
wit, of the heat of the liver, and cold melancholy humors of the stomach, when
the stomachicall nerves are too much refrigerate; but this is sometimes cured
by Hercules the Physician. 3. Cerbe^us is a covetous man, Cr^sest amor num^^^
quantum, etc.
whose greedy desire of having is never satisfied: he is Pluto's dog, for he
makes riches his God, and like a dog he is continually watching his wealth,
and by conseq^^^ce his desire of having proceeds of Typhon the Giant, and the
sn^ke Echidna, that is, of oppr^ssion and secret cunning; the three heads, or
as some write, an hundred heads do show his unsatiable desire; his snakie hairs
do show how ugly he is in the sight of good men, and how much by them
abhorred: he lies in the gates of Hell, from whence gold comes, for his
affections are there, and his punishments are already begun in this life: he
lies in a den, as lying basely and obsurely, and when he is drawn out from
thence by Hercules the King, to any public office or service for the State,
he frets and foams, and at last against his will, or else profusely without
judgment vomits out his wealth, as a misers feast is always profuse, and this
breeds a poysonable herb, which is bad example. 4. Death is Cerberus, which is
Pluto's dog, Satan's mastiffe, by which he bites us; Typhon, that is, the
devil begat death upon Echidna the serpent, in which he poisoned our first
parents; his three mouths, or hundred rather, do show the many ways that
death has to sease on us; the snakie hairs does shadow out the ugliness and
fearfulness of death; it lies in hell-gates, for the wicked must by death
come to hell; this dog does suffer all to go in, but none to return, from hell
is no redemption; but Hercules by his strength overcame and bound him, and
Sybilla by her wisdom cast him asleep: so the Son of God by his power and
wisdom has overcome death, and taken away its sting. 5. An evil conscience
is Cerberus, still barking, and with his snakes affrighting and stinging the
wicked, and lies in hell-gates, for the wicked man's hell is begun here, it
vomits out all by confession, when it is convinced by the light of Gods word,
and that inward light which is in the mind. 6. The grave is Cerberus, the
great [(...)] flesh-eater, still eating and never full: the snakie hairs show,
that the ground is full of worms and snakes; it is also the entry of hell. The
light of Christ the great Hercules, when he went down to hell, caused this
dog to vomit up his morsels, for the graves were opened, and many of the Saints
bodies arose, and at the light of Christ's second coming, he shall vomit up all
that he has eat; out of Cerberus his foame grew the aconitum, to show that
poysonable herbs grow out of the corruption of the earth. 7. Satan is the
hell-hound, whose many heads and snakes does show his many malicious and
cunning ways he has to destroy men; he is begotten of the Giant Typhon and
the snakie Echidna, because as parents live in their children, so violence and
craft live in him: he is the vigilant doorkeeper of hell, lying in wait to
toll in souls, but never to let them out. The true Hercules Christ, by his
strength and wisdom has bound him, at the presence of whose light, he foames
and frets, and was forced to vomit and restore those souls which he held in
captivity. 8. Time with his three heads, that is, past, present, and future,
is this dog, which devoureth all things: and he shall vomit up all hid things,
for Time reveals all secrets: he lies in the gate of hell, all must go
through his throat that go thither; that is, all must have a time to die, and
it is time that brings forth poysonable herbs as well as profitable: and time
has brought us to the knowledge thereof.

CERES.
She was the daughter of Saturn and Ops; o^ her brother Jupiter she had
Proserpina; of Jason she did bear Plutus, and of Neptune a horse, at which
she was so much displeased, that she hid her self in a dark cave, and was
found out ^y Pan: whilst her daughter Proserpina was gathering fl^wers with
Juno, Minerva and Venus, Pluto carried her away in his cha^iot; therefore Ceres
lighted torches, and sought her up and down the wo^ld. and in her journey
being kin^ely lo^ged by Celeus, she taught him to sow corn, and nourished his
son Triptolemus by day with milk, by night in fire; which Celeus too curiously
p^ying into, was sl^in by Ceres; and Triptolemus was sent through the wo^ld in a
cha^i^^ d^awne with winged Dragons, to teach men the use of corn; Proserpina
could not be delivered from hell, because she had tasted of a Pomegranate in
Pluto's Orchard: yet afterward she was admitted to remain six months above
the ground, and six months under.

The INTERPRETER.
1 CEres being the goddess of corn, is painted with peace by her, holding
Plutus the god of riches in her hand, to show, that corn, with other fruits of
the earth, do flourish and increase, and money also abounds in time of peace,
which in time of war are destroyed. Therefore Ceres would not bestow her
daughter Proserpina upon Mars, though he was a suter to her; nor yet upon
Apollo the god of Wisdom, to show perhaps that as soldiers are not friends to
husbandmen, so wise men are sitter to sit at the helm of Government, then to
hold the plow; husbandmen are not Statesmen. 2. Of such reverend esteem were
the sacrifices of Ceres, that none were admitted to them who were conscious of
any crime; for this cause Nero being guilty of so many wickednesses, durst
never a^venture to be present at these sacrifices: What boldness then is it in
notorious and scandalous sinners to present themselves to the Lords table? And
what neglect is it in Ministers to give that which is holy to dogs? Precul, O
procul este profani. 3. Ceres is the Moon, which one h^lfe of the year
increases, to wit, fifteen days every month, which time she is above the
earth; the other half year that she is decreasing, she is under; her daughter
Proserpina may be the earth, which she loses when Pluto, that is, darkness
does take away the sight of it; and her lighting of torches is the increase of
her light, by which the earth is seen again; her hiding in a cave is her
eclipse by the earths interposition, but Pan the Sun makes her appear again. 4.
Ceres is corn, which Saturn and Ops, that is, time and earth produce;
Proserpina is the seed which Pluto ravish^th, because it lies a while dead
underground: Ceres hides her self, that is, the corn is not seen, till Pan the
Sun by his heat brings it out: Ceres begets Plutus, corn brings money to the
Farmer; and a horse also, because the desire of corn makes the Farmer labor
like a horse, or because the plenty of corn makes men wanton and unruly like
horses, as it did the Sodomits: the lighting of Torches is the heat and light
of the Sun and Moon, by whose influence the corn is produced; the nourishing of
Triptolemus by day with milk, by night with fire, is the cherishing of the corn
with rain by day, and heat in the bowels of the earth by night; the tasting of
Pluto's ^ruit, is the food which the corn receives from the ground. 5. Ceres
is (...).
the earth, by whose benefit, we have Proserpina, corn; Plutus, money, and a
horse, that is, all cattle fit for use: this is the nurse of all living
creatures astording them milk and fire, food and heat: hence come these
phrases, cereale solum, cereales caenae, for plentiful, suppers, and a
fruitful ground: and cerealis aura, for a temperate clim^^: when Proserpina
gathering flowers, that is, the corn which grows with the Cereale papaver.
Virg.
flowers, especially the Poppie (therefore consecrated to Ceres) was carry^d
away by Plu^o, that is, fails by reason of sterilitie of the ground, and
intemperance of the air: then Ceres hides her self, that is, the earth loses
her beauty: but by the me^^s of Pan, that is, the shepherd with his sheepfold,
the land is enriched, and Ceres comes abroad in her best ar^y, and by the help
of her two lamps, the Sun and Moon, she recovers Prose^pina or corn again:
for half of the year he affords corn to Ti^ptolemus the husbandman, who in
the chariot of time, drawn by the winged serpents, that is, used, guided, and
employed by his diligence and prudence, he sends his corn abroad to those
that want. 6. Ceres may be the type of a earthly minded man: who is not content
with on^ c^lling, but is still trying new ways to grow rich* sometimes he is
in love with Jupiter, or the air, and of him begets Proserpina, that is, he
will be a husbandman; then finding that life too Laborious and not gainful
enough, falls in love with (...) sano, (...) sanatio.
Jason, and plays the Physician, and of him begets blind Plutus, that is,
money; and yet not being content, he courts Neptune, and will play the Merchant
venturer; and so being in love with the sea, begets a horse, that is, a ship;
but losing this way what he had got before, hides himself and dares not show
his head, till Pan, that is, money, (for money is every thing) get him abroad
again; in the mean while he is run so far in the usurers bo^^es, that his
Proserpina, his land, to which he would fain return, is carried away by Pluto
the usurer. 7. In this fiction is reproved curiosity, by the example of
Celeus; it is a dangerous thing to pry into the secrets of God. 8. Here also we
see the reward of hospit^y. 9. Triptolemus is a spend-thrift, who scatters
abroad his goods as he did his corn, in traveling; being carried by winged
serpents, cunning flatterers, who suddenly exhaust him. 19. Let us take heed,
that whilst^we are gathering flowers with Proserpina, that is, deligh^ing our
selves in these earthly vanities, Pluto the Devil do not take away our souls,
and so shall we be forced to leave the company of Minerva, Juno and Venus, that
is, be taken from all our wordly wisdom, wealth and pleasures. 11. Ceres, that
is, parents should be very watchful over their daughters; for a Virgin, that
has Minerva, Juno, and Venus with her, that is wit, wealth, and beauty, is in
danger to be carried away, by Pluto, by some debauched and untoward ruffian. 12
As Triptolemus could not be immortalized without Ceres milk, and fire, neither
can we atain Heaven without the sincere milk of Gods word and the fire of
affliction; and as in the day of prosperi^ie we are content to drink the milk
of his good things, so in the night of adversity we must not refuse to suffer
the fiery trial of persecution. 13 Ceres was both a good Lawgiver, and feeder
of men; therefore her sacrifices were called [(...)] Thesmophoria; so Princes
should be both. 14. Beware of eating Pomegranats in Pluto's orchard, for that
hindered Proserpina's delivery from thence; so it is an hard thing to reclaim
those from the power of Satan, who do relish and delight in sin. 15. Ceres is a
type of Gods Church, which is a grave matron in rustic apparel, as being of
little esteem in the world, having the spade of discipline in her right hand,
and from her arm hangs a basket full of the seeds of Gods word; by this hand
stands two husbandmen, the one turning up the ground with a spade, the other
sowing the seed; on her left hand (which holds the book and ^^ail of
correction and excommunication) stands two other husbandmen, the one reaping,
and the other threshing; these are her ministers, whose office is Jer. 1.10.
to root out, and pull down, to build and plant; she sits upon the ox of
patience and labor, with a crown of wheat ears upon her head, as having power
to distribute the bread of life; her breasts are open and stretched forth with
the Mammosa Ceres.
sincere milk of Gods word; over her right side Juno is dropping down rain, and
over her left Apollo shines; to show, that by the heat of the Sun of
righteousness, and influence of graces Siv^ ^uod geri^ (...), sive quod creat
^m^ia.
from Gods Spirit, she does flourish and fructify. 16. Christ is truly Ceres;
which having left mankind, being carried away by the devil, he came, and with
the torches of his words found him out, and being drawn with the flying
Serpents of Zeal and Prudence, dispersed his seed through the world, went down
to hell, and rescued us from thence.

CHARYBDIS, See SCYLLA.

CHARON.
HE was the son of Erebus and Night; the ^^at man of Hell, who admitted none
^o his boat without money, and till they were dead and buried; yet Aenaeas by
his piety, Hercules and Theseus by their strength, Orpheus by his music, were
admitted there before their death.

The INTERPRETER.
1. BY Charon Time may be meant, who was the son of Erybus and Night; because
Gods secret decree which was hid from man in an eternal night, gave being to
time, before which was night or darkness; his abode is said to be in hell, or
here below, (for this sublunary world may be called hell in respect of heaven)
because above in heaven there is no use of time, for there is eternity. 2.
Charon was said to ferry souls over the river Styx to the other bank, to show
that Time brought us in, and time will bring us out of this world, which is
like a troublesome river, the two banks whereof are our coming in and going
out, or our estate before our birth, and after our death: whilst we live
here, we are sailing in the rotten, feeble, and brittle boat of our bodies over
the river Acheron, by which is expressed the comfortless condition and
joylesse state of this life. 3. Charon was old, but not weak; his age
diminished nothing his strength or vigor, sed ^^uda suit viridisque senectus:
so time suffers no diminution of vigor by continuance or diuturnity. 4.
Charons garments were ragged and fordid, so is the condition of this life,
being compared to that of heaven. 5. By Charon doubtless death was understood,
from (...) to dig or make hollow, for death is still hollow eyed; or from (...)
joy, for good men in death have true joy: (...) also is a benefit, and death is
such, and an advantage to good men; but so it is made by Christ, for in it self
death is the child of Hell and Night, and as Charon is described by the King of
Poets, Ae^aead. 6. to be old, but yet vigorous, ugly, furious, terrible, sad,
covetous, so is death; that which they fable of Aenaeas, Hercules, etc. was
true in our Savior, who overcame Charon, or death by his piety, strength,
power, of his word, etc. He that would be admitted into Charons boat, that is,
have a joyful death, must carry mon^y in his mouth, that is, make him friends
of his unjust Mammon; for what we bestow on the poor, that we carry with us,
to wit, the benefit and comfort of it; and we cannot have a joyful death, or
be admitted into Charons boat, till our body of sin be buried by repentance. 6.
Charon is a good conscience, which is a continual feast; this carries us over
the infernal rivers, that is, over all the waters of afflict^on in this life,.
7. Charon is the sin of drunkenness, the cup is the boat, the wine is the
river Phlegeton which burns them, and Acheren wher^in is no true joy, Styx
which causes sadness and complaints; for these are the effects of
drunkenness: Charons f^^ry face, ragged clothes, brawling and scolding tongue,
rotten boat still drinking in water, are the true emblems of a drunkard; he is
the child of Hell, and begot of Satan and the Night, for they that are drunk
are drunk in the night; he admits of no company but such as are dead in this
sin, and buried in it, and such as have money in their mouths, that is,
spend-thrifts, who spend all on their throats.

CHIMAERA.
THis was a monster, having the head of a Lion breathing out fire, the belly of
a Goat, and the tail of a Dragon; which did much hurt, but was killed at last
by Bellerophon.

The INTERPRETER.
1. THe Church of Rome is a Chimaera, her head was a Lions head breathing out
fire; for her devotion was then awful and majesticall to the world, her zeal
was hot like fire, and her words were powerful: but about the middle of her
reign she showed her Goatish belly, for wealth made her wanton and insolent;
but in the end she showed the Dragons tail, by open persecution in devouring
the bodies, and striving to poison the souls of the Saints. 2. Some think that
this was a hill, on the top whereof were Lions and Vulcans of fire, about the
middle was pasture and Goats, at the foot Serpents, which Bellerophon made
habitable: others think this was a Pir^ts ship, having the picture of these
three beasts on it: others, that these were three brothers called by these
names, which did much hurt: others, that by this ^iction is meant a torrent of
water, running furiously like a Lion, licking the grass upon the banks like a
Goat, and winding like a Serpent, as may be seen in Natal. Comes, and others.
3. But I had rather think, that by this Monster may be meant a Whore, which is
[(...)] the wave or scum of love, wherein many are drowned; she has a Lions
devouring mouth, still craving and devouring men's estates; she has the wanton
belly of a Goat, but in the end will sting and poison like a Dragon. 4. By
Chima^^a I think Wine may be meant, which makes men ^urious like Lions, wanton
like Goats, and cunning or crafty like Serpents. 5. The life of man may be
meant by this Monster, for man in his youthful years is an untamed Lion, in
his middle age a wanton or an aspiring Goat, still striving to climb upon the
steep rocks of honor; and in his old age he becomes a wise and crafty
Serpent. 6. Satan may be understood by Chimaera, who in the beginning of the
Church did rage like a Lion by open persecution; in the middle and flourishing
time thereof, like a Goat made her wanton; and in the end will show himself to
be that great red Dragon, laboring by secret cunning and slights to undermine
and poison her; but Christ already has, and we in him shall overcome this
Monster.

CHIRON
WAs a Centaur begot of Saturn in the form of a horse, of Phyllyra the
daughter of Oceanus; he was an excellent Astronomer, Physician and Musician;
whose scholars were Hercules, Apollo, and Achilles; he was wounded in the foot
by one of Hercules his arrows, of which wound he could not die being immortal,
till he entreated Jupiter, who placed Sagittarius.
him among the stars, with a sacrifice in his hand, and an Altar before him.

The INTERPRETER.
1. CHiron was half a horse and half a man; God does oftentimes punish the
adulteries of the parents with monsterous and deformed children, for Ops was
the wife of Saturn and not Phyllyra 2. The deformity of children proceeds
ordinarily from the distempered imagination of the parents. 3. That Chiron is
begot of Saturn and Phillyra, is meant that Astronomy, Physic, Music and all
other arts are begot of time and experience, or of time and books; for Phillyra
is a thin Skin or parchment, or paper, or that which is betwixt the bark and
the wood of the tree, and is called Tyllia, on which they used to write. 4.
Saturn or time begets learned Chiron, that is, arts and sciences by the help of
reading, but he must do it in the form of a horse, that is, with much patience
and labor. 5. Chiron may signify to us the life of a Christian, which
consists in contemplation, and so he is an Astronomer, whose convers^tion and
thoughts are in heaven; and in action, which consists in speaking well and so
he is a Musician; and in doing well, and so he is a Physician; and because
Christianity is more a practick then speculative science, he has his
denomination Chiron from (...) ma^^^, the hand, not from the head; lastly
suffering is a part of Christianity, and so Chiron patiently suffered the
wound of Hercules his arrow. 6. Chirons feet were wounded before he was
admitted amongst the stars; so our affections must be mortified, before we can
attain heaven. 7. Chirons pain made him desire to die, so affliction makes us
weary of this world, and fits us for heaven. 8. Chiron has his Altar still
before him, and his sacrifice in his hand, so Christ our Altar must be still in
our eyes, and our spiritual sacrifices still ready to be offered. 9. In that a
Centaur had so much knowledge, we see that sometimes in misshapen bodies are
eminent parts, as were in Aesop, Epicte^us, and others. 10. Achilles so
valiant, Hercules so strong, Apollo so wise, yet were content to learn of a
deformed Centaur; so all should hearken to the Ministers doctrine, be his life
never so deformed, though he be a Centaur in his life, yet he is a man, nay an
Angel in his doctrine.

CIRCE.
THe daughter of Sol and Persis, and by her grandchild of Oceanus; she was a
witch, and skillfull in herbs, she poisoned her husband, King of Scythia, and
for her cruelty was banished thence, and carried by her father Sol in a
chariot, and placed in the Island Circae^: she turned Ulysses fellows into
swine, but over him she had no power; she could not procure the good will of
Glaucus, who loved Scylla better then Circe; she infected the water, in which
Scylla was wont to wash, and (having touched this water) turned into a
Sea Monster.

The INTERPRETER.
1. Circe was a famous witch who was said to transform men into Wolves, Bears,
and other beasts; which is not true indeed; for the devil cannot cause such a
transformation, because it is a kind of creation, proper to God only, who
could change Lots wife into a pillar of salt, and Nebuchadnezzar into a beast;
but these transformations of witches, are only melancholy conceits and
disstempers of the imagination caused by herbs, or ointments, or else they are
delusions of the eye. 2. Circe, says Not. Comes, is the mixture of the
Elements, which is caused by heat and moisture; the four Elements are the four
handmaids; she is immortal because this mixture is perpetu^ll; and the
strange shapes show the variety of strange forms brought in by generation;
she had no power over Ulysses, became the soul comes not by mixtion of the
Elements, or generation. 3. By Circe, I suppose may be fitly understood death;
caused by Sol and Oceanus grandchilde, because death and corruption proceed out
of heat and moisture; the poisoning of her husband shows that death is no
accepter of persons; Sol carried her in his chariot, for where the Sun shines,
there is death and corruption; her turning of men unto beasts, shows that man
is like the beast that perishes, yea a living dog is better then a dead man;
but she has no power over Ulysses, that is, over the soul which is immortal,
death has no power; the four handmaids that gathered poison for her, were
Adams pride, gluttony, infidelity, and curiosity, which made Adams death
poison all his posterity. 4. By Circe may be meant the devil, who has caused
beastly dispositions in the nature of man, and has poisoned us all; as Circe
infected Ulysses fellows, but not himself: so he poisoned Jobs body, but had no
power over his soul; and because God had set his love upon man, and had
rejected him for his pride being an Angel, he to be revenged, poisoned man, as
Circe did Scylla. 5. Circe is physical knowledge consisting much in herbs;
she is the daughter of Sol: because herbs proceed of his heat: she turns
men into beasts, because some physicians searching too much into nature, become
beasts in forgetting the God of nature: she dwelt on a hill full of physical
simples, to let us understand wherein the Physicians skill and study lies;
he has no power over Ulysses the soul, but the bodies of men he may poison
or preserve: his four handmaids are Philosophy, Astronomy, Anatomy, and
Botanie or skill of simples. 6. Sin is a Circe, chiefly drunkenness and
whoredom, which poison men, and turn then into Swine: Circe has both a cup
and a rod, with which she poysoneth men; so in sin there is a cup of pleasure,
and the rod of vengeance: though Ulysses fellows were poisoned, yet he would
not himself be enticed by Circe; but by means of the herb Moly and his sword,
he has defended himself, and made Circe restore his fellows again to their
wonted shapes; so Governors and Magistrates must not be overtaken with the
Circe of drink and fleshly pleasure, howsoever others are; but they must use
Moly, that is, temperance in themselves, and use the sword against this Circe
in others.

COELUS.
THis was the son of Ether and Dies, who married with Terra, and of her begot
Giants, monsters, Cyclopes, Harpes, Steropes and Brontes; he begot also of her
the Titanes and Saturn: Mother Earth being angry that Coelus had thrown down
his sons to Hell, caused the Titans to rebel against him, who thrust him out
of his kingdom, and Saturn out off his testicles: out of the drops of blood
which fell from them the Furies were engendered.

The INTERPRETER.
1. COElus and Terra make an unequal match, therefore of them proceed strange
and monstrous children: the matches of Nobles and pesants prove for the most
part unfortunate and mischievous. Sique voles apt nubere, nube pari. 2. By
Coelus I understand the upper region of the air; for the air is called heaven
both by Poets and Divine Scripture: this may be said to be the son of Ether
and Dies, not only because it is always clear, free from clouds and mists,
but because also it has the nature of elementary fire, to which it is next;
for it is hot and dry as that is; and more properly may this fire be called
Ether from its continual burning, then the heaven which has no elementary
heat at all: his marriage with the earth, of which Titans, Cyclopes, etc. are
procreated, do show, that those fiery Meteors in the upper region of the air
are procreated by its heat and motion, of these thin and dry smoaks which arise
out of the earth: the names of Steropes and Brontes show, that lightning and
thunder are generated there in respect of their matter, which being received
within the clouds of the middle region, cause the rumbling, as if there were
some rebellion and wars within the clouds: Saturn his son, that is, Time
the measurer of heavens motion, shall geld his father; that is, the Heaven
shall grow old, and in time shall lose that power of generation; for this shall
cease when there shall be a new heaven: and upon this new change in the heaven,
the Furies shall be engendered, that is, the torments of the wicked shall begin.
3. They that geld ancient Records, Fathers, and Scripture, are like Saturn
rebelling against heaven, being encouraged thereto by those spiritual
monsters, enemies of truth who were thrust down from heaven, and that light of
glory wherein they were created, unto the lowest Hell; and of this gelding
proceeds nothing but Furies, that is, heresies, schisms, dissentions. 4.
Saturnious, Tatianus, and his Scholars, the Encratites, Originists,
Manichaeans, and all other heretics who have condemned matrimony as an
unclean thing, and not enjoined by God, they are all like Saturn, being
assisted by their brethren the Monsters of hell, and do what they can to geld
their father Adam of his posterity, and to rebel against heaven; and what
ensues upon this gelding or condemning of wedlock, but furies and all kind of
disorder and impurity? 5. The children of Heaven and of the light, must not (as
Coelus did) join themselves in their affections to the earth; for of this union
shall proceed nothing but Monsters, to wit, earthly and fleshly lusts, thoughts
and works which will rebel against our souls, and geld us of all spiritual
grace, and of our interest in the kingdom of heaven, and then must needs be
engendered the Furies, to wit, the torments of conscience.

CUPIDO.
OF Cupids parents, some say he had none at all; others, that he was
engendered of Chaos without a father: some say he was the son of Jupiter and
Venus, others of Mars and Venus, others of Vulcan and Venus, others of Mercury
and Venus, etc. He was the god of love, painted like a child, with wings,
blind, naked, crowned with roses, having a Rose in one hand, and a Dolphin in
the other, with bow and arrows, etc.

The INTERPRETER.
1. I find Cupid painted sometime standing close by Fortune, to show how much
fortune prevails in love matters: and sometimes I find him standing between
Mercury and Hercules, to let us see, that love is most prevalent when it is
attended on by eloquence and valor. 2. There is a twofold love, to wit, in the
Creator, and in the Creature: Gods love is twofold, inherent in himself, and
this is eternal as himself, therefore has no father nor mother; Or transient
to the creature. This love was first seen in creating the Chaos, and all things
out of it; therefore they said that Love was engendered of Chaos without a
father: and when they write that Zephyrus begot Cupid of an egg, what can it
else mean, but that the Spirit of God did manifest his love in drawing out of
the informed and confused egg of the Chaos all the creatures? The love of the
creature is twofold, according to the twofold object thereof, to wit, God and
the creature: that love by which we love God, is begot of Jupiter and Venus,
that is, God; and that uncreated beauty in him is the cause of this love: and
because the maine and proper object of love is beauty (for we do not love
goodness, but as it is beautiful) and it is the object that moves and
stirs up the Pasio movetur ab objecto.
passion, therefore Venus goddess of beauty is still the mother of Cupid or
Love, which notwithstanding has many fathers, because this general beauty is
joined to many particular qualities, which causes love in men according to
their inclinations and dispositions: some are in love with wars, and count
military skill and courage a beautiful thing, so this love is begot of Mars
and Venus; others are in love with eloquence, and think nothing so beautiful
as that, and so Mercury and Venus are parents of this love: some love Music,
and so Apollo begets this Cupid; and so we may say of all things else which
we love, that there is some quality adherent to beauty, either true or
apparent, which causes love in us: Now that love which all creatures have to
creatures of their own kind, in multiplying them by generation, is the child
of Vulcan and Venus; for it is begot of their own natural heat and outward
beauty: by beauty I mean whatsoever we account pleasing to us, whether it be
wealth, honor, pleasure, virtue, etc. 3. The reasons why Love was thus
painted, I conceive to be these; Cupid is a child, because love must be still
young, for true love cannot grow old, and so die; Amor qui desinere potest,
nunquam fuit verus. He has wings, for love must be swift; he is blind, for
love must wink at many things, it covers a multitude of sins; he is naked,
for amongst friends all things should be common, the heart must not keep to it
self any thing secret, which was the fault that Dalila found in Samsons love:
he is crowned with roses, for as no flower so much refreshes the spirits and
delights our smell as the rose; so nothing does so much sweeten and delight our
life as love; but the rose is not without prickles, nor love without cares: the
crown is the ensign of a King, and no such King as Love, which has subdued
all creatures; rational, sensitive, vegetative, and senseless have their
sympathies. The image of a Lioness with little Cupids playing about her, some
tying her to a pillar, others putting drink into her mouth with an horn, etc.
do show how the most fierce creatures are made tame by love: therefore he has
a rose in one hand, and a Dolphin in the other, to show the quality of love;
which is swift and officious like the Dolphin, delectable and sweet like the
rose: his arrows do teach us, that Love wounds deeply, when we cannot obtain
what we love: some of his arrows are pointed with lead, some with gold; he is
wounded with a golden arrow, that aims at a rich wife, and cannot obtain her;
to be wounded with leaden arrows, is to be afflicted for want of ordinary
objects which we love: and so his burning torches show, that a lover is
consumed with grief for not obtaining the thing loved, as the wax is with
heat: Ardes amans Dido; Vtitur infoelix; Coeco carpiturigne, Est mollis flamma
medull^s; Haeret lateri laethalis arundo, etc. These are my conceits of Cupids
picture; other Mythologists have other conceits, applying all to unchaste and
wanton love, whose companions are drunkenness, quarrelling, childeish toys,
etc.

CYCLOPES.
THese were the sons of heaven, their mother was Earth and Sea, men of huge
Nature, having but one eye, which was in their forehead; they lived upon man's
flesh; Polyphemus was their chief, he was their shepherd, and in love with
Galathaea; he having devoured some of Ulysses his fellows, was by him
intoxicated with wine, and his eye thrust out. These Cyclopes dwelt in Sicily,
and were Vulcans servants in making Jupiters thunder, and Mars his chariots,
etc.

The INTERPRETER.
1. BY the Cyclopes is meant water, for they were begot of Neptune and
Amphitrite, as some say; and yet they were servants to Vulcan, which is fire,
to show that in generation the fire can do nothing without water, nor water
without fire. 2. These Cyclopes are by some meant the vapors which by the
influence of heaven are drawn out of the earth and sea, and being in the air,
engender thunder and lightning to Jupiter, as their (...), S^^r^p^^, H^^p^^,
Py^^^m^^.
names show; they dwelt in Sicilie, about hill Aetna, because heat is the
breeder of thunder; they were thrust down to Hell by their father, and came up
again, because in the cold winter these vapors lie in the earth, and by heat
of the spring are elevated; wise Ulysses overcame Polyphemus, that is, man by
his wisdom and observation found out the secrets of these natural things, and
causes thereof; Apollo was said to kill these Cyclopes, because the Sun
dispelleth vapors. 3. I think by these Cyclopes may be understood the evil
spirits, whose habitation is in burning Aetna, that is, in hell burning with
fire and brimstone, being thrown down justly by God from heaven for their
pride, but are permitted sometimes for our sins to rule in the air, whose
service God uses sometimes, in sending thunder and storms to punish the
wicked; they may well be called Cyclopes, from their round eye and circular
motion; for as they have a watchful eye, which is not easily shut, so they
compass the earth to and fro: they may be said to have but one eye, to wit, of
knowledge, which is great; for outward eyes they have not, their chief food and
delight is in the destroying of mankind; Polyphemus or Beelzebub is the chief,
who having devoured Ulysses fellows, that is, mankind, the true Ulysses,
Christ the Wisdom of the Father came, and having powered unto him the full cup
of the red wine of his wrath, bound him, and thrust out his eye; that is, both
restrained his power and policy: these evil spirits, because they are the
chief sowers of sedition and wars among men, may be said to make Mars his
chariots. 4. Here we see that little Ulysses overcame tall Polyphemus; policy
overcomes strength. 5. We see also the effects of drunkenness, by it we lose
both our strength, and the eye of reason. 6. Servius [ in lib. 3. Aenaead.]
thinks that Polyphemus was a wise man, because he had his eye in his forehead
near the brain: but I say, he was but a fool, because he had but one eye,
which only looked to things present: he wanted the eye of providence, which
looks to future dangers, and prevents them. 7. Here we are taught to beware of
cruelty and security, for they are here justly punished. 8. The State of Rome,
which at first had two eyes, to wit, two Consuls, became a Polyphemus, an huge
body with one eye when one Emperor guided all; this Giant fed upon the flesh
of Christians in bloody persecutions; but when she was drunk with the blood of
the Saints, Ulysses, that is, wise Constantine, thrust out the eye, and weakened
the power of Rome, of that Giant which had made so much thunder of war in the
world, and so many chariots for Mars. 9. A Commonwealth without a King, is
like great Polyphemus without an eye: and then there is nothing but Cyclopum
vita.
Cyclopian cruelty and oppression, great men feeding on the flesh of the poor;
then is nothing but intestine wars and broyls, the servants of Vulcan making
thunderbolts and chariots for Mars; Aetna R^s^^at p^sitis incudibu^ Aetna.
resounding with the noise of their hammers on the anvill; Brontesque,
Steropesque, and nudus membra Pyracmen.

So it was in Israel, when every man did what he lifted. 10. An envious man is
like Invidus no^ videns.
Polyphemus, he has no charitable eye: he feeds and delights himself with
the ruin and destruction of other men. 11. The Sun in the firmament is that
great eye in the forehead of Polyphemus, which is put out oftentimes by vapors
and mists arising out of the earth.

CHAP. IV.
D
DAEDALUS.
He was a famous Artificer, who having killed his sisters son, fled to
Creta, and was entertained of King Minos, whose wife Pasiphae being in love
with a Bull, or a man rather of that name, she obtained her desire of him by
the help of Daedalus, who shut her within a wooden Cow; and she brought forth
the Minotaur, or man with a Bulls head, which the King perceiving, shut the
Minotaur, and Daedalus with his son Icarus within the Labyrinth that Daedalus
had made: but by a thread he got out, and flew away with wings which he made
for himself and Icarus; who not obeying his fathers advice, but flying too
near the Sun, fell and was d^owned: the wings he used were sails and ^ars.

The INTERPRETER.
I. PAsiphae being taken with the love of Astronomy, and with the knowledge of
the twelve celestial signs, especially of the Bull, which Daedalus taught her,
gave occasion to this fiction of Pasiphaes falling in love with the Bull. 2.
Dedalus was a cunning Artificer, who found out diverse tools and instruments
for workmen, and the first that either made images, or made their eyes movable.
Hence cunning engines and works, are called Daedali machera, Daedalaea opera.
3. Hell is the labyrinth into which we were cast for our sins, by a juster
Judge then Minos: and should have been devoured by Satan the Minotaur, had not
Christ helped us out by the thread of his word, and wings of faith. 4. They that
give themselves to unlawful pleasures, with Pasiphae, shall bring forth that
monster which will devour them. 5. Daedalus made this labyrinth, and was cast
into it himself; so the wicked are caught in their own nets; and fall into the
pit which they dig for others. 6. Daedalus was guilty of murder, therefore is
justly pursued; for murder is never secure. 7. Icarus is justly punished for
refusing to hearken to his fathers counsel, a good lesson for all children. 8.
Let us take heed of curiosity, pry not too much into the secrets of God, lest
we have Icarus his reward: for all humane reason is but waxen wings. 9. Here
we see for the most part that young men are high-minded and proud, but pride
always has a fall. 10. Astronomers, and such as will undertake to foretell
future contingencies, or will take upon them such things as pass humane power,
are like Icarus; they fall at last into a sea of contempt and scorn. 11. The
golden mean is still best, with what wings soever we fly, whether with the
wings of honor, or of wealth, or of knowledge and speculation; not to fly too
high in pride, nor too low in baseness. 12. If we will fly to Christ with
the wings of faith, we must not mount too high in presumption, nor fall too
low in desperation. 13. We see by Pasiphae, that a dishonest and disloyal
woman will leave no means unattempted to fulfill her lustful and wanton
desires. 14. Many women are like Pasiphae, outwardly they seem to be mortified,
having the skin of a dead cow, or wooden cover; but within they burn with
wanton lusts.

DEUCALION.
HE was the son of Prometheus and Pandora, a just and religious man, who was
the first that built a Temple to the gods: when the earth was drowned, he and
Pyrrha his wife were saved on Parnassus; and being advised by Themis, they
flung behind them the bones of mother earth, that is, stones, and they became
men and women, with which the earth was again peopled.

The INTERPRETER.
1. DEucalion was said to make men of stones, because he brought them down from
their habitation in the stony hills, to dwell in the fruitful plains below. 2.
Parnassus on which he was saved, was called first Larnassus, from (...) an
ark, or covered cock^boat, in which he and his wife were saved. 3. By the
circumstances of the dove which Deucalion sent out, and by the ark in which he
was saved, it is plain, the Scripture has been used in the contriving of this
fiction. 4. Deucalion may be the type of a Minister; he must be the son of
Prometheus and of Pandora, that is, he must have both prudence and forecast, as
also all gifts fit for his function: his name should be Leucalion, which may be
made of (...) to moisten or water, and (...) to call; for their office is to
water the barren ground of men's hearts, and to call them to repentance and
grace: they must be just as Deucalion was, and build up the living temple of
God: they must strive to save both themselves and others from the flood of Gods
wrath; and if others will not be saved, yet let them do their duty, and be
Deucalions still, and so they shall save themselves when others shall perish.
Pyrrha, which may be derived from (...), must be their wife; that is, they must
have the fire of zeal, and Gods word must be in their mouth like a fire to
burn up the chafe: Parnassus the hill of the Muses must be their place of
retreat and abode; without Universitie-learning they are not fit to save
themselves and others; and when they come down from Parnassus, or come abroad
out of the Universities, they must strive of stones to raise up children to the
God of Abraham; and they must fling behind them all earthly and heavy
burdens, forgetting that which is behind, and striving to that which is
before, and so they shall make the stony hearts of men hearts of flesh. 5. By
this fiction, the Gentiles might have taught themselves the doctrine of the
resurrection; for if stones cast on the ground could become men, why should
they not believe that Idoneus est resicere qui fecit, Tertul.
our bodies fallen to the earth, shall in the last day resume their ancient
form, by the power of him who first gave it? 6. Magistrates, and such as would
bring rude and barbarous people to civilitie, and of stones to make them men,
must have the perfections of Deucalion, prudence, religion, justice, etc.
Themis or Justice must be their counselor, without which nothing should they
do: but chiefly let them take heed of covetousness, they must cast the love
of earthly things behind them, and so they shall make men of stones, that is,
men will be content to forsake their stony caves and rocks, and will frame
themselves to the City life. And what are men without Petrones Festo: P^p^cet,
apud Tertul. lib. 1. de anima.
religion and civility but stones, representing in their conditions the nature
of the place where they live? 7. Deucalion turned stones into men, but
Idolaters of stones make gods; such a god was Jupiter Lapis among the Romans,
by whom they used to swear, and these stony Gods turned the worshippers into
stones, for they that make them are like unto them, and so are all they that
worship them: the Idolater is a spiritual fornicator, committing whoredom
with the earth, which affords the materials, and he brings in the form. 8.
It is not the least happiness to hide ones self in Parnassus amongst the
Muses, for a Scholar to spend his time privately and quietly in his study,
whilst the tumultuous floods of troubles and crosses prevail abroad in the
world. 9. Here we see that God is a punisher of impiety, and a preserver of
good men. 10. By Deusalion and Pyrrha may be understood water and fire, heat
and moisture, of which all things are generated in the earth.

DIANA.
She was the sister of Apollo, and daughter of Jupiter and Latona, the
goddess of hunting, dancing, childe-bearing, virginity; who still dwelt in
woods and on hills, whose companions were the Dryades, Hamadryades, Orades,
Nymphs, etc. she was carried in a silver chariot drawn with white staggs; she
was painted with wings, holding a Lion with one hand, and a Leopard with the
other: on her altar men were sacrificed.

The INTERPRETER.
1. DIana was wont to be painted sitting in a chariot drawn with two horses,
the one white, the other black; by which doubtless was meant both the
swistnesse of her motion, and the diversity of her aspects; for the white horse
represented her brightness in the full, and the black her darkness in the
wane or change. 2. Diana is the Moon, called Apollo's or the Suns sister,
because of their likeness in light, motion, and operations: the daughter of
God, brought out of La^ona or the Chaos, she came out before her brother
Apollo, and helped to play the midwife in his production; by which I think was
meant, that the night, whoreof the Moon is ruler, was before the day, the
evening went before the morning; so that the Moon did as it were usher in the
Sun: therefore the Calends of the months were dedicated to June, or the Moon.
She has diverse Ju^^, Luna, Diana, Lya, He^^se, Proserpina, Dys^^lan^, (...).
names for her diverse operations, as may be seen in Mythologists; in Macrobius
she is called (...) fortune, from her variableness, as both being subject to
so many changes, and causing so many alterations. Scaliget observes that she
was called Lya, or Lua, from lues the plague, because she is the cause of
infection, and deseases, by which the soul is loosed from the body; she was
called Fasceli^ from the bundle of wood, out of which her image was stolen, by
Iphigenia Agamemnons daughter; but I should think that she was called Lya,
from loosing or untying of the girdle which young women used to do in her
temple, called therefore (...), in which temple virgins that had a mind to
marry, used first to pacify Diana with sacrifices; she was also called (...),
that is earthly; because they thought there was another earth in the moon
inhabited by men; doubtless in that they called her Hecate, or Proserpina, the
Queen of hell, they meant the great power that she has over sublunarie bodies;
for all under the Moon may be called Insernus or Hell, as all above her is
heaven; this free from changes, that subject to all changes; and perhaps she
may be called Hecate, from the great changes that she makes here below, every
hundredth year; she may be called Diana from her divine power, Juno from
helping, Proserpina from her creeping; for though she is swift in the lower
part of her Epicycle, yet in the upper part thereof she is slow; Luna quasi
una, as being the only beauty of the night, 'Dyctinnis from a net, because
f^shers and hunters use nets, and of these she is said to have the charge; for
the Moonlight is a help to both; they called her (...), quasi (...), from
cutting the air; Lucina, from her light; her hunting and dancing was to show
her diverse motions; for she has more then any planet, six at least, as Clavius
observes; her virginity shows, that though she is near the earth, yet she
is not tainted with earthly imperfections; she is a help to childbearing, for
her influence and light, when she is at full, is very forcible in the
production and augmentation of things; her conversing on hills and in woods
shows that her light and effects are most to be seen there; for all herbs,
plants and trees feel her influence; and because she has dominion over the
fiercest beasts, in tempering their raging heat by her moisture, she holds a
Lion and Leopard in her hand, whose heat is exc^ssive, but tempered by the
Moon; her silver chariot shows her brightness; the staggs and wings do show
her swistnesse; and because her light increasing and decreasing appears like
horns, therefore the Bull was sacrificed to her, as Lactantius observes^ her
arrows are her beams, or influence by which she causes death and corruption;
in respect of her corniculated, demidiated, and plenarie aspect, she is called
Tria Virginis (...) Dianx.
triformis, and trivia, because she was worshipped in places where three ways
met. The dancing of all the Nimphs and Satyrs, shows how all take delight in
her light; her hunting is to show how in her motion she per^u^s and overtakes
the Sun. 3. A rich usurer is like Diana, for he is (...), an earthly man, a
great hunter after wealth; who has his nets, his bands and bills, he wounds
deeply with his arrows, Proserpina and Lya; for he creeps upon men's estates,
and he brings a plague upon them; though he dwells in in rich Cities, yet his
hunting and affections are set in hills and woods, that is, in farms and
manors, which by morgages and other tricks he catches; he is carried in a
silver chariot drawn with stagg^^ because fearfullnesse does still accompany
wealth, with which he is supported; he would fain fly up to heaven with the
wings of devotion, but the Lions and Leopards in his hands with which he
devoures men's estates, keeps them back. Diana was a virgin, yet helped to bring
out children: so money though barren in it self, yet brings great increase: he
will not be appeased without bribes, no more then Diana: nay many a man's estate
is sacrificed upon his altar: who does not unloose their girdles, as in Diana's
temple, but quite bursts them. 4. They that will live chaste, must with Diana
live on hills and woods, and use continual exercise: for idleness and great
Cities are enemies to virginity. 5. Every good man should be like Diana,
having the wings of divine meditation, the courage of the Lion, and swiftness
of the stagg, his feet should be like Hinds feet, to run in the way of Gods
Commandments. 6. Gods Church is the true Diana, the daughter of God, the
sister of the son of righteousness, who is a virgin in purity, and yet a
frutfull mother of spiritual children, whose conversation is sequestered from
the world: she is supported in the silver chariot of Gods word, in which she
is carried toward heaven, being drawn with the with the white staggs of
innocence and fear; she holds in her hands Lions and Leopards, the Kings
of the Gentiles who have suffered themselves to be caught and tamed by her: she
flies with the wings of faith and devotion: and hunts after beasts, that is,
wicked men, to catch them in her nets, that she may save their souls, and with
her arrows kill their sins: Diana was midwife to bring forth Apollo: so the
Church travells in birth, till Christ be formed in us, and brought forth in our
holy lives: and as it fared with Diana's temple, which was burned by
Erostra^us, so it does with the Church, whose Temples have bin robbed: defaced,
and ruinated by profane men.

CHAP. V.
E
ELYSIUM.
THe Elysian fields were places of pleasure, in which the souls of good men
afie^ this life did converse; enjoying all those delights which they affected
in this life.

The INTERPRETER.
1 LVu^ian ( Lib. 2. ver. Hist.) shows, that among other delights of the
Elysian fields, the trees that grew there were of glass all, and the fruits of
these trees were curious and diversely wrought drinking glasses, which were
filled presently with delicate wine as soon as they were plucked off. There was
also continual f^asting and good cheer; a brave Paradise for our Epicures and
drunk^rd^, who would desire no other heaven then this. 2. Elysium is a place of
liberty, as the word shows; for they only enjoy it who are loosed from their
bodies: not only Poets, but Scriptures also have described those heavenly joys
under earthly terms for our capacity; there is Paradise, in which is the tree
of life; there shines another Sun then here, to wit, the Sun of righteousness;
there are rivers of pleasure, t^^re are the flowers of all divine graces, there
is a perpetual ^pring, the music of Angels, the supper and wedding-feast of
the Lamb, the new Jerusalem all built of precious stones, the fountain of
living waters, all kind of spiritual fruits, the continual breath of Gods
Spirit, etc. And as none could enter the Elysian fields till he was purged, so
no unclean thing can enter into the new Jerusalem; the blood of Christ must
purge us from all sin: and as they must pass Acheron, Phlegeton, and other
rivers of hell before they can have access to those delightful fields; so we
must pass through fire and water, troubles and persecutions, before we can
enter into heaven. And thus we see the Gentiles were not ignorant of a reward
for good men, and of punishment for the wicked.

ENDYMEON.
He was a fair shepherd, who falling in love with Juno, who was presented to
him in the form of a cloud, was thrust down from heaven into a cave, where
he slept thirty ^eers, with whom the Moon being in love, came down oftentimes
to visit and ^^sse him.

The INTERPRETER.
1. ENd^meon was King of Elis, who for his justice, obtained of Jupiter that
he should ^eep perpetually; to show, that after a toylesome life there can be
no greater happiness then continual rest and quietness: and this should
en^^urage Kings and Magistrates to endure the molestations of their Government
with patience, seeing their short troubles shall end in perpetual rest. 2. It
is thought that Endymeon being an Astronomer, and one that first observed the
diverse motions of the Moon, gave occasion to this fiction, that the Moon loved
him: but I think these (...) may be made of this fiction. I. Endymeon is a rich
man, and riches make men fair though never so deformed; and with such the
Moon, that is, the world, (as unconstant as the Moon) is in love, these are the
men whom the world kisseth and honors: but when these rich Endymeons set
their affections upon wealth, (for Juno is the goddess of wealth) then do
they lose heaven, and fall into the sleep of security, saying, Soul, take tby
rest, thou have store laid up for many years, with that rich farmer in the
Gospel, and so they lose their souls for a shadow, (for such is wealth) and
this shadow brings upon them spiritual stupiditie, that they cannot be roused
from their cave, though Gods word should shine on them as clear as the Moon. 2.
By Endymeon Adam may be meant, who was fair whilst Gods image continued with
him; but when he fell in love with Juno, Jupiters wife, that is, affected
equality with his Maker, he was thrust out of Paradise into this world, as
into a cave, where he was cast into a dead sleep, or the sleep of death, from
which he shall not be awaked though the Moon so often visit him; that is, so
long as the Moon shall shine and visit the earth (which shall be till the
dissolution of all things) man shall sleep in the grave. 3. By Endymeon may be
meant those over whom the Moon has dominion; for Astrologers observe, that
every man is subject to one Planet or other, more or less: such men then over
whom the Moon rules, are instable, subject to many changes, nimble bodied,
quick in apprehension, desirous of glory; and such a one perhaps was Endymeon,
therefore the Moon was said to love him: and such, because they affect honor
and popular applause, which is but air, may be said to be in love with Juno,
which is the air; and indeed honor is but air, or a cloud. 4. Every man may be
called Endymeon, for we are all in love with air and empty clouds, with toys
and vanities, which makes us so sleepy and dull in heavenly things: and the
Moon is in love with us; changes and inconstanci^ still accompany man's life; to
signify which instabilitie of humane affairs, the feast of new Moons was kept
among the Jews; and the Roman Nobility used to wear little pictures of the
Moon on their shoes, to show that we are never in one stay: for which cause I
think the Turks have the half Moon for their Arms. 5. When Endymeon, that is,
mankind slept in sin, the Moon, that is, our Savior Christ (whose fle^h is
compared to the Moon (in Psalm. 73) by S. Augustine, as his divinity to the
Sun) in his flesh v^^ited us, and dwelt amongst us; this Moon was eclipsed in
the passion, and this Moon slept in the cave with Ad^m, and the full of this
Moon was seen in the r^surr^ction: this is he who has kissed us with the
killes of his mouth, whose love is b^tter then wine, whose light shined in
darkness, and the darkness comprehended it not. 6. The Moon falls in love
with sleepy Endymeons, that is, carnal and sensual pleasures, and earthly
thoughts invade those that give themselves to idlen^sse, security, and
laziness: for the Moon, in regard of her vicinity to the earth, may be the
symboll of earthly minds; and because she is the m^stris of the night and of
darkness, the time when carnal delights are most exercised, she may be the
symboll of such delights: and because of her often changing, she may represent
to us the nature of fools, which delight in idleness, as the Moon did in
Endymeo^. 7. Endymeon in this may signifi^ the Sun, with whom the Moon is in
love, rejoicing and (as it were) laughing in her full light, when she has the
full view of him, and every month running to him and overtaking him, whose
motion is slow, and therefore he seems to sleep in regard of her velocitie.

ERYCHTHONIUS.
THis was a Monster, or a man with Dragons feet, begot of Vulcans seed shed on
the ground, whilst he was offering violence to Minerva the virgin: which
monster notwithstanding was cherished by Minerva, and delivered to the
daughters of Cecrops to be kept, with a caution that they should not look into
the basket to see what was there; which advice they not obeying, looked in, and
so grew mad, and broke their own necks.

The INTERPRETER.
1. ERychihonius was the first that found out the use of coaches and chario^s
to hide his deformed and serpentine feet in: Primus Erychthonius currus, and
quatuor ausus
Jungere equos, rapidisque ro^is insistere victor.


So many men go about to hide their soul actions, and excuse them, but not to
reform them. 2. Vulcan shedding his seed on the ground, is the elementarie
fire, concurring with the earth, in which are the other two ^lements, and of
these all monsters are procreated: and by ^inerva, that is, the influence of
heaven or of the Sun, cherished and somented, though not at first by God
produced, but since Adams fall, and for the punishment of sin. 3. Vulcan
offering wrong to Minerva, is that ^^regenerate part of man, called by the
Apostle, the law of our members, rebelling against the law of the mind; of
which arises that spiritual combat and strife in good men, which is begun by
the flesh, but cherished and increas^d by the spirit, till at last the spirit
get the victory. 4. Minerva, that is, he that makes a vow to live still a
virgin, must look to have the fiery Vulcan of lust to offer him violence, and
so he shall never be free from inward molestation and trouble; therefore better
marry then burn; and if he intertains any unchaste thoughts, though his body
be undefiled, yet he is no pure virgin, as Lactantius (De falsa religione, lib.
1. cap. 17.) shows, that Minerva was not, because she cherished
Erych^honius; therefore an un^h^st mind in a ch^st body, is like Minerva
somenting Vulcans brat: he'is a pure virgin, says S. Hi^rom, (Lib. 1. Adver.
Jovini) whose mind is chaste, as well as his body; and this he ingenuously
consesseth was wanting in himself. 5. Minerva, that is, wisdom has no such
violent enemy as Vulcan, that is, fiery anger, which does not only overthrow
wisdom in the mind for a time, for it is short ^ury; but is also the cause of
Erych^honius, that is, of all strife and contention in the world. 6. War is a
fiery Vulcan, an enemy to learning or Minerva; the cause of Erych^honius, of
monstrous outrages and enormities; and oftentimes fomented by seditiout
scholars, and learning abused. 7. Erych^honius is a covetous man, as the word
shows; for (...) is contention, and (...) is the earth; and what else is
covetousness but a presumptious desire of earthly things, and the cause of so
much strife and contention in the world? this monster came of Vulcan the god of
fiery, that is of Sat^n the god of this world, who reigns in the fire of
contention, and in the fire of Hell, and is somented by Minerva the soul, which
is the seat of wisdom. 8. Tertullian (Lib. de spectaculis) says, that
Erych^honius is the devil; and indeed, not unsitly, for he is the father of
all strife, and of avarice: he has a man's wisdom, or head to allure us to sin,
but a Dragons feet to torments us in the end for sin; whosoever with delight
shall look on him, shall at l^st receive destruction. 9. Let us take heed we
pry not to curiously in the basket of natures secrets, lest we be served as
Ce^rops daughters, or as Pliny and Empedocles were. 10. A Magistrate or
Governor must be like Erych^honius, who was hinself King of Athens; he must be
both a man and a Dragon; if the face of humanity and mercy will not prevail,
then the Dragons feet of vigor and justice must walk. 11. If any fiery or
choleric Vulcan shall offer us wrong, we must wisely defend our selves with
Minerva; and conceal the injury and our own grief, as she did Erych^ho^ius.
12. Though the preserving and cherishing of Vulcans child is no certain proof
that Minerva lost her virginity, neither did she lose it though Vulcan (...)*
red her violence, because there was no consent; yet it becomes all, chiefly
virgins to avoid both the evil and the occasion thereof, that there may be no
suspicion.

EUMENIDES.
THese were the three Furies, the daughters os Pluto and ^roserpina, or of
hell, darkness, night, and earth; in heaven they were called Dirae, in earth
Harpiae, in hell Furiae: they had snakes instead of hairs, brazen feet, torches
in one hand, and whips in the other, and wings to fly with.

The INTERPRETER.
1. THe Ancients did worship the Furies with sacrifices altars and temples, as
they did the other gods; not, that these might do them any good, but that they
might do them no hurt: There they worshipped the gods A^errunci, so called ab
averrun^ando, or Aver^endo, that they might forbear to hurt them. It is the
part of every wise man not to exasperate a potent adversary, but to mitigate
his fury. Thus we must deal with tyrants; though they do not love us, yet
we must fawn upon them, that they may not wrong us. 2. There was a temple in
Achaia dedicated to the Furies, into which whosoever went, that was guilty of
murder, incest, or such like impieties, fell presently distracted and mad. I
doubt me that temple is yet extant among us, and that too many have been in
it, there is such ma^nesse, and so many distractions and distempers among us.
3. Commonly these three furies are taken for the tortures of an evil
conscience, proceeding from the guilt of sin; they cause fear, and fury, as
the word Erinnys signifies; hell is the place of their abode, and where they
are, there is hell; the tortures whereof are begun in the conscience of wicked
men. 4. There are three unruly passions in men, answering to these three
furies: covetousness is Al^^to, which never gives over seeking wealth; and
indeed this is the greatest of all the furies, and will not suffer the miser to
eat and enjoy the goods that he has gotten: Furiarum maxima, juxia
Accubat, and manibus prohibes contingere me^sas.
Ae n. 6.

This is an Harpie indeed, not only delighting in rapine, but polluting every
thing it has, Contacts omnia foed^^ immundo, Aen. 3. this may be called
Jupiters dog, or rather a dog in the m^nger, neither eating himself, nor
suffering others to ear. The second fury is Megaera, that is, Envy, full of
poison and snakie hairs. The third is Tis^phone, which is Inordinate anger, or
a revengefull disposition: the burning torch and wings show the nature of
anger: all these have their beginning and being from Hell, from Darkness, and
Night; even from Satan, and the twofold darkness that is in us, to wit, the
ignorance of our understanding, and the corruption of our will: but as the
Furies had no access unto Apollo's temple, but were placed in the porch, (
ul^ic^sque sedent in lumine Dirae, Aenead. 8.) although otherwise they were had
in great veneration: so neither have they access unto the minds of good men,
which are the temples of the holy Ghost. 5. Gods three judgments which he
sends to punish us, to wit, plague, famine, and sword, are the three furies:
(...)
Megaera is the plague, it sweeps and takes away multitudes: the famine is
Alecto, which is never satissied: and the sword is Tis^phone, a revenger of
sin, and a murderer. These have their seat in hell, as they are sent from, or
raised by Satan; and in heaven also as they are sent by God, without whose
permission Satan can do nothing: they may be called Harpies from (...), as the
Furies were, because they snatch and carry all things headlong with them: and
Dirae, quas^ Dei irae, being the effects of Gods anger; they are Jupiters dogs,
the executioners of Gods wrath, and devourers of sinners; they come swistly
with wings, and tread hard with their brazen feet: the plague is the snake that
poysoneth, the famine is the torch that consumes and burns, the sword is the
whip that draws blood. 6. Ministers should be Eumenides, from (...), that is,
gracious, benevolent, of a good mind, as the word signifies, being properly
taken. They should have the wisdom of Serpents in their heads, the torch of
Gods word in one hand, the whip of Discipline in the other; the wings of
contemplation, and the brazen feet of a constant and shining conversation.

CHAP. VI.
F
FAUNUS, See PAN.

FORTUNE.
She was the daughter of Oceanus, and servant of the gods, a great goddess
her self, in sublunary things; but blind, and carried in a chariot drawn by
blind horses; she stood upon a globe, having the helm of a ship in one hand,
and the horn of plenty in the other, and the heaven on her head.

The INTERPRETER.
1. FOrtune and the Moon are taken for one and the same Deity; for as the Moon,
so Fortune is still changeable and unconstant; and as the Moon, so Fortune has
the command and dominion over sublunary things; and as from the Moon, so from
Fortune the generation and corruption of things have their dependence. 2. Near
to Fortune stood the image of Favor, in the habit of a youth with wings,
standing upon a wheel; to show us that favor is procured by Fortune; and that
this is as unstable and ready to fly from us as Fortune it self. 3. Amongst
many other images of Fortune, there were two of special note; the one was
called Fortuna calva, bald Fortune: the other Fortuna vi^^ea, glassie fortune;
to show that it is a difficult thing to lay hold upon Fortune being bald; so
when we have caught her, she is quickly broke being glassie. 4. The Roman
Emperors put more confidence in Fortune then in any other Deity; therefore
they always kept in their closets the golden image of Fortune, and when they
traveled abroad, that was still their companion. I wish we Christians would
as much esteem and honor Gods providence, and rely on it, as the Romans did on
their Fortune. 5. Fortune is either an unexpected event, or else the hid cause
of that event: the blind Gentiles made her a blind goddess, ruling things by
her will, rather then by counsel; therefore they used to rail at her, because
she favored bad men rather then good, and called her blind, as not regarding
men's worth. 6. But I think, that the wiser sort by Fortune understood Gods will
or providence; which the Poet Aen^ad. ^. In ^mni re domi^a^^^, Salust.(...).
calls Omnipotent, and the Historian the Ruler of all things: she may be
called fortuna, quasi fortis un^, being only that strong Ruler of the world.
She had many temples at Rome, and many names; s^ice stood upon a globe, to show
her dominion of this world; and the heaven on her head did show, that there is
her beginning; the helm and the horn of plenty in her hands are to show, that
the government of this world, and the plenty we enjoy, is from this divine
providence; and though they called her blind, yet we know the contrary, for
she is that eye which sees all things, and a^ar off, and before they are, as
the word Providentia signifies; therefore they called her and her horses
blind, because they were blind themselves, not being able to know the
wonderful ways and secret ends of this Providence, why good men should here
live in affliction and misery, and the wicked in honor and prosperity;
whereas they should have known, as some of the wiser men did, that no misery
could befall a good man, Bo^sius, l. 4. T^os 6.
because every hard fortune does either exercise, amend, or punish us; he is
miserable, says Seneca, Cur boni^ vir^s mala s^^ns.
that never was miserable: they are miserable who are becalmed in the Sea, not
they who are driven forward to their haven by a storm: a surfeit is worse then
hunger; but see himself speaking excellently to this purpose; therefore they
had no reason to rail at Fortune when she crossed them, for to a good man all
things fall out for the best: yet in good sense Gods providence may be called
blind, as Justice is blind; for it respects not the excellency of one
creature above another, but Gods general providence exteneth it self to all
alike, to the worm as well as the Angel: for as all things are equ^lly subject
to God in respect of casualitie, so are they to his providence; he is the
preserver of man and beast, his Sun shines, and his rain falls upon all
alike. 7. Now the four horses that draw fortune, are the four branches of
providence, whereby Gods love is communicated to us: to wit, creation,
preservation, gobernation, and ordinations of all things to their ends. 8. In
that they called fortune the daughter of the Sea; by this they would show her
instabilitie still ebbing and flowing like the Sea; therefore they made her
stand upon a wheel, and she was called in a common byword fortuna Euripus, (
Er^s. in adag.) because of the often ebbing and flowing thereof. I grant that
as one and the same effect may be called fortune and providence: fortune in
respect of the particular cause, but providence in regard of the first, and
general c^use, which is God: so the same may be called instable in respect of
the particular cause, but most stable in respect of God, with whom there is no
variableness, nor shadow of turning; though contingent causes produce
contingent effects, yet nothing is contingent to God, for all things come to
pass which he foreseeth, and yet his for^knowledge imposes no necessity on
contingent things; but indeed we are instable our selves and evil, and we
accuse fortune of instabilitie and evil; a good man may make his fortune good;
^uisque suae est fortunae faber. 9. I have read that in some places fortune was
wont to be pained like an old woman, having fire in o^e hand, and water in the
other; which I think did signify that providence does still presuppose
prudence, whereof old age is the Symbol, and because of the mutable and various
effects of fortune, she was presented by a woman, the Symbol of mutabilitie:
but the Romans upon better consideration, made her both male and female, to
show, that though the particular and secondarie causes of fortunall effects be
various and unconstant like women, yet the supreme cause has the staidness
of a man; the fire and water shows, that our fiery afflictions (which fall not
without Gods providence) are so tempered with water of mercy, that though they
burn good men, yet they consume them not; as we are taught by Moses fiery
bush, and the furnace of Babylon.

CHAP. VII.
G.
GANIMEDES.
He was the King of Troys son, who whilst he w^n hunting, was caught up to
heaven by an Eagle, Jupiters bird; and because of his extraordinary beauty,
Jupiter made him his Cup bearer.

The INTERPRETER.
1. WHen Ganimedes was caught up to heaven, he let fall his pipe on which he
was playing to his sheep; so whilst we are carried up by divine raptures and
contemplations, we must sling away all earthly delights. 2. Whilst Ganimed
was piping on his cane, and keeping of his fathers sheep, then was he caught
up to heaven; God is never better pleased with us, then when we are faithful
and diligent in our calling: Not the sad and melancholy, but the cheerful
mind is f^rtest for God and heavenly r^ptures. 3. Ganimedes ((...)) is one
that delights in divine counsel or wisdo^me; and wisdom is the true beauty of
the mind where n God takes pleasure. 4. Every Eagle is not Jupiters bird, as
Aelian observes, but that only which abstains from flesh and r^pine, and that
was the bird that caught up Ganimedes; so fleshly minds and thoughts set upon
rapine and carnal pleasures, are not sit to serve God, nor to carry the soul
up to heaven. 5. The quick-sighted Eagle, is divine contemplation or
meditation, by which Ganimedes, the soul is caught up to heaven. 6. When by
holy raptures, we are carried up to heaven, the best Nectar that we can power
out to God, is the tears of repentance, and of a broken heart. 7. Ganimedes
was caught up by one Eagle only; but if we have the true inward beauty of the
mind, we shall be caught up in the air by Legions of Angels, to meet the Lord,
and shall for ever serve him, at his table in the Kingdom of heaven. 8. I wish
that the Roman Eagle would not delight so much in rapine and man's flesh, as he
does; but rather endeavor to be carried up to heaven, that is, to their
ancient dignity, the decayed and ruinated parts of the Empire. 9. As the Eagle
caught up Ganimedes, so the wings of a great Eagle were given to the woman,
Rev. 12. to carry her from the Dragons persecution; the great Eagle was the
Roman Empire, whereof Constantine was the head, by whose power and help the
Church was supported. 10. Our Savior Christ is the true Ganimedes, the son of
the great King, the fairest among the sons of men, the wisdom and counsel of
the father, in whom God delighted, and was well pleased, who by the power, and
on the wings of his Divintie* was caught up to heaven, where he is pouring out
his prayers and merits before God for us: and like Aquarius (to which Ganimedes
was converted) is pouring down the plentiful showers of his grace upon us.
11. Vespasian set up the image of Jupiter and Ganimedes, caught by the Eagle in
the Temple of peace; so the image of God, and heavenly raptures, are found in
that soul wherein is the peace of conscience. 12. As the Eagle carried
Ganimedes, so Moses compares God to an Eagle, who carried the Israelites on
his wings through the desert; and S. Ambrose says, that H^min^m inferni rap^^^
f^^cibus portavit ad cal^^. Sermon. 6^.
Christ is the Eagle who has caught man from the jaws of Hell, and has
carried him up to heaven.

GENII.
THese were the sons of Jupiter and Terra, in shape like man, but of an
uncertain sex; every man had two from his nativitie waiting on him, till his
death; the one whereof was a good Genius, the other a bad; the good ones by
some are called Lares, the bad Lemures; and by Tertullian, and his commentator
Pamelius they are all one with the Daemones; they were worshipped in the form
of Serpents.

The INTERPRETER.
1. IT was a high degree of honor among the the Romans to swear by the princes
Genius; therefore Caligula put many to death, because they never swore by his
Genius; so to falsify that oath which was taken by the princes Genius, was
most severely punished: by which we see, that swearing by a superior is an
honor held due to him; and therefore Anabaptists rob God of his honor, when
in cases of necessity they will not swear at all by him. On the other side, how
do they dishonor God, who swear by his Name rashly and falsely, and yet are
not punished? The Romans were more religious toward their Princes, which were
but men, then we are toward the true God. 2. The Roman Genius was wont to be
painted with the horn of plenty in one hand, and a dish with offerings reached
out toward the altar in the other hand, to show, that the Roman State, and
consequently all others, are supported by outward plenty, and religious bounty
or devotion toward God. 3. Genius, a gignendo, for by them we are ingenerated;
and so whatsoever is the cause or help of our generation, may be called Genius:
thus the clements, the heavens, the starts, nature, yea, the God of nature, in
whom we live, move, and have our being, may be called Genii in a large sense:
And Genii, quasi geruli, a gerendo, vel ingerendo, from supporting us, or from
suggesting good and bad thoughts into the mind; therefore gerulofiguli in
Plautus, is a Scaliger in Fest.
suggester of lies: and so by these Genii may be understood the good and bad
angels which ^ill accompany us, and by inward suggestion ^tir us up to good or
evil actions. 4. The form of Serpents, in which the Pl^ge dues angues, etc.
Genii were worsh^pped, does show the wise and vigilant care which the angels
have over us. 5. When after this life they punish us for sins, they are called
Quisi^^
Manes. Therefore the Genii were painted with a platter full of garlands and
flowers in one hand, and a whip in the other, to show, that they have power
both to reward and punish us. They have oftentimes appeared in the form of men,
therefore they are painted like men; but they have no sex, neither do they
procreate: for which cause perhaps the fruitful Palm Tree was dedicated to
them, with which also they were crowned; and because they were held of a middle
kind, between gods and men, they were called the sons of Jupiter and Earth; or
rather in reference to Plato's opinion, which held angels to be corporeal. 6.
Our souls also are Genii, which from our birth to our death do accompany our
bodies. 7. Every man's desire and inclination may be called his Genius, to which
it seems the Poet alluded, saying, Ansua cuique deus fit dira cupido? 8. And
perhaps Aristotle's Intellectus agent is all one with Plato's Genius; for
without this we have no knowledge; because the p^ssive intellect depends in
knowledge from the active, in receiving the species from it; which by the
active intellect is abstracted from time, place, and other conditions of
singularity: and this is all one, as if we should say, we receive no
information of good or evil, but from our Genius. 9. As the Gentiles believed
the stars to be Genii, so the Jews thought them to be angels, and that they
were living creatures, therefore they worshipped them, called them the host of
heaven. 10. But indeed, Christ is on^ true Genius, the great Angel who has
preserved and guarded us from our youth, by whom we are both generated and
regenerated, the brazen Serpent from whom we have all knowledge, who alone
has power to reward and punish u^; who appeared in the form of man, and in
respect of his two natures was the son of Jupiter and Terra, of God and Earth;
and who will never for^ake us, as Socrates his Genius did him at last; who came
not to affright us, or to bring us the message of death, as Brutus his Genius
did to him; but to comfort us, and assure us of eternal life: let us then
offer to him the s^crifice not of blood, cruelty, or oppression, which the
Gentiles would not offer to their Genius, thinking it unfit to take away the
life of any creature that day in which they had received life themselves: but
let us offer the wine of a good life, and the sweet fumes of our prayers; and
let us not Des^auda^^ Gens^en^s, indulgere genia.
offend this our Genius, or deprive him of his due, but make much of him by a
holy life: and though the Gentiles assigned unto every man his Genius, and Juno
to the women^ yet we know that Christ is the Savior and keeper both of men and
women, and that with him there is no difference of sex.

GIGANTES.
GIants were hairy, and snakie-footed, men of an huge stature; begor of the
blood of Coelus, and had earth for their mother; they made war against Jupiter,
but were overcome at last by the help of Pallas, Hercules, Bacchus and Pan, and
were shot therow by Apollo's and Diana's arrows.

The INTERPRETER.
1. THat there were men of an huge stature, fier^e looks, and of wicked
dispositions, and of high and proud minds, which they called Giants, is not to
be doubted, seeing the Scripture so often mentions them both before and after
the flood: besides diverse Historians, Scaliger saw one of them at Millan, so
tall that he could not stand, but lay along, and filled two beds joined in
length, Exerc. 163. All ages have produced some such Giants: but that these
were begot of devils and women is ridiculous; for these Giants were men, not
differing from other men either in their matter or form, but only in
greatness, which makes but an accidental difference: neither have spirits
seed, or organs of generation: and whereas spirits and women differ generally,
it must needs follow, that what is begot of them must be different from them
both, as we see a mule is different from the horse and thee-asse, which differ
but specifically. 2. If by Giants we understand winds and vapors, they have the
earth for their mother, and heaven for their father; they are bred in the belly
of the earth, and are begot of the rain, which may be called the blood of
heaven: they may be said to war against Jupiter, when they trouble the air; and
they were shot with Apollo's and Diana's arrows, when the beams and influence
of the Sun and Moon do appease and exhaust them. 3. Notorious profane men are
Giants, and are begot of blood, to show their cruel dispositions; and of
earth, because they are earthly-minded: their hairy bodies and snakie feet do
show their rough, savage, and cunning disposition; they war against Jupiter
when they rebel against God with their wicked lives; but Hercules and Pallas,
strength and wisdom overcome and subdue such monsters; and oftentimes they are
overthrown by Bacchus and Pan, that is, by wine and music: drunkenness and
pleasure at last prove the b^ne of these Giants. 4. Rebellious Ca^alines who
oppose authority, are hairy, snakie-footed Giants, of a sanguinary and cunning
disposition, warring against Magistrates, which are gods; but at last come to a
fearful end. 5. Arius, and all such as oppose the divinity of Christ, are like
these Giants warring against God; but are overthrown with the thunder and
arrows of Gods word. 6. Let us take heed, 'as Ambrose Ambros-cap. 4. de ar^a
and No^. and cap. 34.
exhorts us, that we be not like these Giants, earthly-minded, pampering our
slesh, and neglecting the welfare of our souls, and Contu^ati pr^lia^tur
affectu, etc.
so fall into contempt of God and his ordinances; if we dote too much on earth,
we show that she is our mother, and that she is too much predominant in us: if
we think to attain heaven, and yet continue in sin and pleasure, we mount our
selves upon ambitious thoughts, and do with the Giants, imponere Pelion Ossae,
climb up on those high conceits, to pull God out of his throne.

GLAUCUS, See NEPTUNUS, and OCEANUS.

GORGONES.
THese were the three daughters of Phorcus, whose chiese was Medusa; she
preferring her fine hairs to Minerva's, and profaning her temple in playing the
whore there with Neptune, had her hair turned into snakes, and her head ^ut
(...) by Persius, being armed with Minerva's shield, Mercuri's helmes and
wings, and Vulcan's sword: this head Minerva still wore in her shield, and
whosoever looked on it was turned into a stone: these Gorgones had fear full
looks, but one eye, and one ^oosh amongst them, which continually they used as
they had occasi^n; they never used their eye at home, but still abroad: when
Persius had got this eye, he quickly overcame them: they had also brazen hands
and golden wings.

The INTERPRETER.
1. A Then^us writes, that Gorgo^es are certain wild beasts in Lybia, which by
their breath and looks kill other ^reatures: one of them being killed, was
brought to Marius, whose partie-coloured skin was sent to Rome, and hung up for
a monument in the temple of Hercules. Heretics and false teachers are worse
then these Gorgones, which with their breath killed men bodies, whereas the
other poison men's souls; and little better are they who with the venomous
breath of their lying and slandering tongues, poison and kill men's good names.
2. Many men are like the Gorgones, they are quick-sighted abroad, but blind at
home* they spy moats in other men's eyes, but not beams in their own. 3. Satan
deals with us, as Persius did with Medusa, he first steals away our knowledge,
then with the more ease he destroys our souls. 4. We see here in Medusa, that
pride, sacrilege, and whoredom shall not go unpunished. 5. From whence let us
learn not to be proud of our beauty; for all beauty, like the Gorgons, shall
end in deformity; and as Absoloms hair, and Medusa's here brought destruction
on them, so it may bring upon others; and shall, if they dote too much on it.
6. The sight of these Gorgones turned men into stones; and so many men are
berest of their senses and reason, by doting too much on women's beauty. 7.
They that would get the mastery of Satan that terrible Gorgon, must be armed as
Persius was, to wit, with the helmet of salvation, the shield of faith, and the
sword of the word. 8. Minerv^, by means of her shield, on which was fastened
Medusa's head, turned men to stones; so the nature of wisdom is, to make men
solid, constant, unmovable. 9. I wish that among Christians there were but one
eye of faith and religion, and one tooth, one common defense, that so they
might be Gorg^ns indeed, and terrible to the Turks their enemies; that with a
brazen hand they might crush the M^hume^ans, and with the golden wings of
victory they might fly again over those territories which they have lost. 10.
Medusa, by seeing her own face in Persius his bright shield, as in a glass,
she fell into a deep sleep, and so became a prey to Persius; so many falling in
love with themselves, grow insolent and careless, and falling into the sleep
of security, become a prey to their spiritual enemy. 11. If a woman once lose
her modesty and honor, be she never so fair, she will seem to wise men but
an ill-favored Go^^on, he accounts her hair as snakes, her beauty as
deformity. 12. A Captain, or whosoever will encounter with a snakiehaired
Gorgon, that is, a subtile-headed enemy, stands in need of Minerva for wisdom,
of Mercury for eloquence and expedition, and of Vulcan for courage. 13. Persius
got the victory over Gorgon by covering his face with the helmet, that he might
not be seen of her; the best way to overcome the temptations of lewd women, is
to keep out of their sight, and to make a covenant with our eyes. 14. The
Gorgons are like those that live at home a private life, and so make no use of
their eye of prudence, till they be called abroad to some eminent place and
public office. 15. They that have fascinating an^ bewitching eyes, by which
many are hurt and infected, especially young children, may be called Gorgons;
and that such are, both ancient records, experience and reason does teach us;
for from a malignant eye issues out infections, vapors or spirits, which make
easy impressions on infants and tender natures: therefore the Gentiles had the
goddess of cradles, called Cunina, to guard infants from fascination; and we
read, that in Scythia and Ponius were women whose eyes were double-balled,
killing and bewitching with their sight; these were called Bithi^ and Thibiae,
and they used the word praes^s^ine, as a charm against fascination, and in
Africa whole families of these fascinating haggs were wont to be; and let it
not be thought more impossible, for a tender nature to be thus fascinated, then
for a man to become blear-eyed by looking on the blear-eyes of another; or for
one to become dumb at the sight of a woolf; as for a glass to be infected and
spotted at the looks of a menstrous woman, as Aristotle shows, it is too
manifest what passions and effects the sight of diverse objects do produce; as
love, sorrow, fear, etc. and so we read that the Basili^k kills with his
looks, though some say it is with his breath; and I deny not, but the
apprehension of the parties thus looked upon, helps much to the producing of
the foresaid effects; there is also fascination by the tongu^; ^e vati noce^l
mala lingua fa^uro. 16. These Gorgons which were so beautiful, are placed by
Virgil in hell to torment men; so sin and pleasure here with pleasant looks
delight us, but hereafter they will torment us. 17. Satan at first a beautiful
Angel, but by pride in making himself equ^ll with his maker, was turned into a
terrible Gorgon, and with his snakie hairs, that is, his cunning inticements
infected our first parents, and turned them in^o stones, by bereaving them of
spiritual understanding; but Christ the true P^rsius, and son of God, armed
with a better shield then Minerva's, a better helmet then Mercuries, a sharper
sword then Vulcans, cut off the head of this Gorgon.

GRATIAE.
THe graces were three sisters, daughters of Jupiter and Buronyme; they were
fair, naked, holding each other by the hand, having winged feet; two of them
are painted looking toward us, and one from us; they wait upon Venus, and
accompany the Muses.

The INTERPRETER.
1. VEnus and Cupid were said to accompany the Graces, to show that mankind is
preserved by generation represented by Venus and Cupid; and by mutual
benevolence and bounty expressed by the three Graces. 2. The temple of the
Graces was built in the midst of the street, that all passers by may be put in
mind of benevolence and thankfulness. 3. Apollo and Mercury are painted
sometimes ushering of the Graces, to show that prudence and celerity are
requisite in thanksgiving and bounty. 4. Seneca Lib. de benes. cap. 3.
Ph^rautus de ^a^. door. E^as^^ adag. (...)^^^. ^^^. Na^. Co^^es.
and the Mythologists by the 3 Graces understand 3 sorts of benef^s; some
given, some received, and some returned back upon the benefactor; two look
toward us, and one has her face from us, because a good turn is oftentimes
double requited. They hold each other by the hand, because in good turns there
should be no interruption; they are naked, or as others write, their garment is
thin and transparent, because bounty should still be joined with sinceriti^;
their smiling face shows, that gifts should be given freely; they are still
young, because the remembrance of a good turn should never grow old; they have
winged feet, to show that good turns should be done quickly, bi^ da^ qui cito
dat. 5. They that will be bountiful, must take heed they exceed not, lest they
make themselves as naked, as the Graces are painted; there is a mean in all
things; and no man should go beyond his strength; he may be bou^tifull that
has Euronyme for his wife, that is, large possessions and patrimonies, as the
word signifies. 6. There be many unthankful people, who are content still to
receive benefits, but never return any; these are they that strip the Graces
of their garments, and have reduced free hearted men to poverty. 7. The Graces
are called in the Greek Charites, (...), from joy, or from health and safety,
and they still accompany the Muses, Mercury and Venus; to show that where
learning, eloquence, and love are conjoined, there will never be wanting true
joy, health and contentment 8. I think by the three Graces may be meant three
sorts of friendship; to wit, honest, pl^asant, and profitable; honest and
pleasant friendships, which are grounded on virtue, and delight, look toward
us, because they both aim at our good; but profitable freindship looks from
us, as aiming more at her own gain then our weal, which as Seneca says, is
rather traffic then freindship; but all friendship should be naked, and
without guile and hypocrisy, like the Graces still young and cheerful, and
still nimble and quick to help. 9. By the three Graces I suppose also, may be
meant the three companions of true love; of which Aristotle Ethic. l. 9. c. 5.
(...).
speaks; to wit, 1. good will or benevolence 2, concord or consent of minds,
idem velle et idem nolle; 3. bounty or beneficence, these three like three
Grace, look one upon another, and hold each other by the hands; these ought to
be n^ked, pure, still young; and where these three are found, to wit, good
will, concord and bounty, there shall not be wanting the three Graces, that
is, 1. (...) floridus; (...) ^^rens vitae status, and re^um af^luentia; (...)
ornare, seu honorare; (...) lae^uin reddere.
Thalia a flourishing estate. 2. Agalia honor or glory. 3. Euphresyne true joy
and comfort, for these are the handmaides of love. 10. Faith hope and charity,
are the three divine Graces, pure and unspotted virgins, daughters of the great
God; sincere and naked without guile; looking upon one another, and so linked
together, that here in this life they cannot be separated one from the other,
but their positure is somewhat different from the other Graces; for of the
other, two look on us, the third has her back to us; but in these three divine
sisters, one only looks to us, to wit, charity; the other two, faith and
hope, fix their eyes from us upon God; faith is Aglaia the glory and honor of a
Christian; hope is Euphrosyne, that which makes him joyful, we rejoice in
hope; and charity, that is Thalia, which would make our Christian state
flourish and abound with all good things, if we would admit of her company
amongst us; but by reason there is so little charity, I doubt me there is as
little faith and hope; for reject or admit of one, you reject and admit of all.

CHAP. VIII.
H
HARMONIA, See CADMUS.

HARPIAE, See BOREAS.

HEBE.
SHe was the daughter of Juno, begot without a father, only by eating of
lettuce; for Juno being invited to a feast by Apollo into Jupiters house, she
presently conceived by feeding upon lettuce, and bare this Hebe, who for her
beauty, was made Jupiters cup bearer, till she disgraced her self by a fall in
Jupiters presence at a feast, where she discovered her nakedness, by which
means she l^st her office, and Ganymed was chosen in her room.

The INTERPRETER.
1. BY Juno is meant the air, by Apollo the Sun, by Hebe the fertility of the
earth, which is caused by the air being warmed with the Sun, and refreshed with
cold and moist exhalations, which is meant by the lettuce. 2. By Hebe is meant
the Spring, by Ganymed the Winter; both are Jupiters cup-bearers, both moisten
the earth: Hebe is beautiful, because the Spring is pleasant; but when Hebe
falls, Ganymed succeeds; so when the pleasant time of the year is gone, Winter
follows. 3. I think rather, that He^e was the daughter of Jupiter and Juno; for
Jupiter being the heaven, and Juno the air, by the influence of heaven upon the
air, is caused both serenity and fertility in this inferior world. 4. Jupiter
would have none to serve him but such as were beautiful as Hebe and Gany^hed;
neither would God be served in the Tabernacle by such as had any deformity or
blemish; much less can they be fit to serve him who have deformed and maimed
souls: God is beauty it self, Christ was the fairest amongst the sons of men,
and he will have hi^ sister and spouse to be all fair; and for this cause he
has redeemed his Church, that she might be without spot or wrinkle, or any
such thing. 5. Though Hebe had disgraced her self, yet Jupiter married her
afterward to Hercules, by which is intimated, that youth is accompanied with
strength and vigor of body. 6. Hebe was the sister of Mars, to signify, that
wars do accompany youth, and fertility, or richness of soil. 7. Hebe had a
temple erected to her at Corinth, which was a sanctuary for sugitives and idle
persons; so idleness and wantonness abound mos^ in those Countries which are
blessed with a temperate air and a fruitful soil. 8. Hebe was wont to be
painted in the form of a child, clothed with a rich garment of diverse colors,
and wearing garlands of flowers on her head: by this they represented the
nature of the Spring, which is the infancy and beauty of the year, clothed
with party colored fields and meadows, and graced with delightful and
fragrant flowers. 9. Adam was created beautiful both in body and soul,
therefore God delighted in him, and made him his servant; but by his fall he
discovered his nakedness in the fight of God and Angels, therefore was
rejected and banished from Gods presence, and that earthly heaven in which he
was: but afterward God taking pity of him, married him to Christ the true
Hercules, who only by his power subdued all the monsters of the world. 10.
Though Jun^ was at the feast with Apollo in Jupiters own house, yet she
conceived not till she ate lettuce; this may signify, that the influence of
heaven and heat of the Sun are but universal causes, and do not work without
the concurrence of the secondary: and that the matrix is unapt to conceive, if
there be not a due proportion in it of heat and cold; for if it be too hot, it
corrupts the seed, so excessive heat is a main cause of sterility. 11.
Jupiter would be served by young Hebe, and young Ganymed, to signify, that God
will be served by us in our youth, which is the prime of our life; therefore
young men are not made for themselves, and their own pleasures, but to serve
God: Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth. And, remember young man,
that thou must come to judgment. Josiah in his youth served the Lord. 12. Hebe
fell in her younger years, and when she was at a feast; youth and feasting are
dangerous ten^ations, and occasions of falling: young peoples feet are
slippery, youth is more apt to fall then old age; which made David pray, Lord,
remember (...) the sins of my youth. And that feasting is the occasion of much
falling, is too apparent, for it made Job go to sacrificing when his children
went to feasting: and doubtless, if they had not first fallen then in sin, the
house had not fallen then on them. Therefore let all, especially youth, beware
of feasting and drinking; which drinking matches, and merry-meetings were fitly
from the ancient Gre^ks from Hebe, called Hebetria. 13. If Jupiter did not
spare his own daughter which he had of Juno, but thrust her out of her office,
and drove her from his presence when she fell; then let not the children of God
think that they are more privileged from punishment when they fall, then
others are; ^ay judgment oftentimes begins at Gods own house, and he will
correct every son whom he receives: he neither spared the Angels, nor Adam,
that were his sons by creation; he spared not Christ his only begotten son by
an in^fsible generation; much less will he spare them that are his sons only
by adoption: Qui flagellat unicum sine pecca^o, ^kin relinquet adop^iv^m cum
peccato, says Augustine? 14. Hercules was not married with Hebe till he was
received into heaven, and his spirit placed among the stars; so whilst our
sou's are in this earthly tabernacle, they are deprived o^ that true beauty,
youth, vigor, and alacrity which they shall enjoy in heaven. 15. In that Juno
conceived not till she had eat of the lettuce, by this perhaps they did
intimate, that lettuce accidentally is the cause of fecundity: for as
Dioscorides, Mattheolus, and others show, lettuce, or the seed thereof is good
against the Gonorrhoea, and also against nocturnall pollution in sleep, which
are hindrances to procreation. 16. In that Jupiter removes Hebe from her
office and his presence, we see in what slippery places Princes favorites
are, and how suddenly the affections of Princes are altered: Ste^ quicunque
volet lubens aulae culmine lub^ico, me dulcis sa^^^e^ quies.

HECATE.
SHe was the daughter of Night, or of Hell, and the queen of hell; of a huge
stature, and deformed face, having snakes in stead of hairs, and serpents for
feet: she was accompanied with d^gs, and had three heads, to wit, of a horse,
of a dog, and of a man; or of a wild hog, as some think: she is called Luna,
Diana, Proserpina, Hecate, Juno, Lucina.

The INTERPRETER.
HEca^e is so called, either from (...), that is, an hundred, because she has
a hundred ways of working upon sublunary bodies, or because of the
hundredfold increase of grain which Proserpina or the earth yields; or from
the heca^ombe or 100 sacrifices that were offered to her; or from the 100
years walking about the river S^yx of those souls whose bodies are unburied:
Cenium e^rant anno^, volitantque haec littora circum. or from (...), which is
one of the titles of Apollo, whose sister Hecate was; and he is so called,
from shooting his darts or rays afar off. 2. Hecate was said to be accompanied
with dogs, by which are meant the Furies, and by these the tortures of an evil
conscience, which most of all howl and rage in the night time, of which Hecate
is queen: -- Visaeque canes ululare per umbram
Adventanie dea: --
therefore her s^crifices were performed in the night, and she was howled or
called upon in the night by her pri^sts, Nocturnisque Hecate ^riviis ululata
per urbes: and her sacrifices were black, by all which the Poets elegantly
signify the terrors that accompany the guilt of sin, chiefly in the night;
for then it was that Job complains, he was affrighted with visions, and
terrified with dreams: and David says, that his sold refused comfort in the
night. 3. Hecate was said to be the goddess or protectrix of witches, because
witches do work most in the night, and the time of darkness is most fit for
such works of darkness, and for such as are the servants of the prince of
darkness. 4. Rich men were wont at night when they were going to bed, to place
a table for Hecate in the high ways, which they furnished with lupins,
mallows, leeks, and other mean and savourlesse cates, which the poor in a
confused manner snatched all away, while the rich men were asleep: hence arose
those Proverbs, Heca^ae coena, for a mean and beggarly supper; as also for a
tumultuary or confused Feast: And, Anus digna Hecatae sacris, for a miserable,
beggarly, or poor woman. Rich men now adays use (when they are ready to sleep
their long sleep, or to die) to bequeathe some small share of their ill gotten
goods to the poor; and as it fared with these rich Romans, so does it now with
our rich cormorants; the wealth which they have with much care and pains been
scraping together all their life, is oftentimes dissipated and snatched away by
strangers; and we see that the poor are more beholding to rich men in their
death, then in their life. 5. Hecate is called Trivia, because she has the
charge of highways; because the highways are discernable by the Moonlight,
which in the dark are not easily found out; and because the highways are
barren or fruitless: hence Hecate is said to be a perpetual virgin. 6. Hecate
was said to affright and terrify men; by which I suppose the Poets meant, that
fear and terrors proceed from an evil conscience. 7. Hecate was the name of a
cruel woman, who delighted in hunting, and in stead of killing or shooting
beasts, murdered men: sure she had been a fit wife for that mighty hunter
Nimrod. 8. The common conceit is, that Hecate is so called whilst she is in
hell, Luna while she is in heaven, and Di^na on the earth: but I could never
find the reason of this conceit; therefore I do suppose that the Moon has
these three names from her diverse affections or aspects: for in the full she
is Luna, quasi Lucens una, giving light alone, for then the Stars shine not,
though some of then are seen. So she is called also Lucina and Diana, (...),
for the light of the Moon is a special gift of God. Her other name Proserpina,
which is a serpendo, has relation to her increase and decrease; for her light
(as it were insensibly creeping) comes and goes. But the third name Hecate was
given to signify the change, in which she affords us no light at all, but
then seems to be the Queen of hell, or of darkness: Hence she is called Dird
^rifor^is by Hora^e; Trivia and Tergemina by Virgil; T(...) by the Greek Poets.
9. By Hecate may be meant affliction, which is (...), from afar, for all
affl^ctions are from heaven: as Hecate was the Queen of hell, so affliction
subdues hellish affections in us, It is good for me that I was afflicted,
says David. Hecate was deformed and terrible, so afflictions to flesh and
blood are unpleasant and ungrateful: the dogs which accompany Hecate, are the
molestations and anxietles of mind that follow afflictions: the Serpents,
hair, and feet of Hecate do signify the prudence and wisdom which is got by
affliction: the three heads, of ^ horse, a man, and a dog, may show us, that
whosoever is afflicted, must have the strength of an horse, to bear that
burden; the faithfulness of a dog, who will not for sake his master, though
he beat him; and the wisdom of ^ man, to know that correction is needful to
subdue our corruption. 10. Hecate is the true emblem of a whore, who is indeed
the child of hell, and queen of the night, for shoe domineers in times of
darkness: her snaki^ hairs and serpentine feet show her crafty and poysonable
disposition: the body of Hecate was not so ugly and deformed as the soul of an
harlot is; though abroad she^ has the face of a man, yet at home she is no
better then a ravenous dog, a wanton jade, a wild bore; her company are
barking dogs, as bad as Acteons, who in time will worry the young gallant, and
devour his estate also: Qu^ cum for is sunt, nihil videtur mundius, etc. Omnia
haec scire salus est adolescenin, Terent. in Eun.

HERCULES.
He was the son of Jupiter and Alcmene, whom June persecuted out of malice,
and exposed him to many dangers, which notwithstanding he overcame, and for
his noble acts wa^ deified, and placed among the stars. The chiesest of his
famous act^ were these: 1. He killed the two snakes that were s^^a by Juno ^o
kill him in the cradle. 2. In one night he beg^ fifty sons of Thespius his
fifty daughters. 3. He slew the Lion in the wood Nemaea. 4. He killed the
snake Hydra in the lake of Le^na. 5. He over^ooke and killed the golden-horned
Stagg on hill Maenalus. 6. He killed Diomedes the Thracian King, and gave him
to be eaten by his man-eating horses. 7. He killed the Boar in Erymanthus, a
hill of Arcadia. 8. He killed the wild Bull in Crete. 9. He slew the birds
called Stymphalides. 10. He overcame Achelous. 11. He killed Bufirls the
Tyrant of Egypt. 12. He slew Antaeus the Giant. 13. He killed the Dragon that
kept the golden apples in the gardens of Hesperides. 14. He helped Atlas ^o
support the heaven. 15. He divided the hills Calpe and Abila, which before were
united. 16. He oppressed Cacus. 17. He overcame Geryon. 18. He killed Lacinus
the great robber. 19. He tamed the Centaurs. 20. He killed Burypylus the
Tyrant, with his wife and children. 21. He delivered Hesion, Laomedons
daughter from the sea monster. 22. He slew Tyrthenus the Tyrant of ^uboea. 23.
He subdued the Amazons. 24. He went down to hell, and drew up with him the
dog Cerberus. 25. He shot the Eagle that fed upon Prometheus his heart. 26. He
killed Lycas the Tyrant of Thebes. 27. He brought back from hell Alcestos. 28.
He overcame Cygnus the son of Mars. 29. He killed Thoedamas, and brought away
his son Hylas with him. 30. He sacked Pylus, and killed the King Neleus with
his family, except Nestor. 31. He killed Zetes and Calais, the sons of Boreas.
32. He traveled through the torrid Zone, and sands of Lybia. 33. He overcame
the apish people Cercopes. 34. He purged Augits his Stable. 35. He passed on
foot over the Lyblan Syries, having lost his ship. 36. He erected two Pillars
in Spain and Africa. 37. He killed Eurytus the Tyrant of Oechalia, whose
daughter Iole he carried away and married her: at which Deianira being
displeased, sent him a cloak dipped in the blood of the Centaur Nessus, thinking
thereby to have reclaimed him; but it put him into such a madness, that he
burned himself.

The INTERPRETER.
1. BY Hercules some understand the Sun, who is (...), the glory of the air,
which is then glorious, when by the Sun beams it is illuminate. His twelve
labors are the twelve signs of the Zodiac, which every year he passes
through: he is the son of Jupiter and Alcmene, (...) signifies strength or
power, because God by his almighty power created the Sun; and gives power to
the Sun to overcome all the oppositions of clouds, mists, vapors which ((...)
or Juno) the air cast before him, to obscure his light. Hebe the goddess of
youth is married to him, because when he returns to us in the spring, he
renews all things, and makes the world as it were youthful again. Geryon,
whom Hercules overcame, is the winter which the Sun masters, and rescues the
cattle which the winter would destroy. 2. Hercules was called Alcides, his
mother was Alemene; both are from (...) strength; by which may be meant
spiritual fortitude, which is the child of Jupiter, that is, the gift of God;
and by which we are made able to overcome all difficulties: by this David
overcame the Lion, and the Bear, and Goliath too. Daniell mastered the Lion; S.
Paul overcame the beasts at Ephesus, the viper at Malta, and all dangers of sea
and land; fire and sword; and whosoever has this virtue, shall be truly
Hercules, (...). Juno, or riches and glory shall be the end and reward of that
man, and a higher advancement then Hercules, above the starrie heaven, yea
above all heavens shall be his habitation. 3. by Hercules may be meant every
good Christian, who must be a valiant champion to encounter against the snakes
of malice and envy, the Lion of anger, the Boar of wantonness* and to subdue
the Thespian daughters of lust, the Centaures and wild horses of cruelty, the
Hydra of drunkenness, the Cacus of theft and robbery, the Busiris of
tyranny, yea, hell it self, and the devil that Great Dragon. 4. Hercules may
be the type of a good king, who ought to subdue all monsters, cruelty,
disorder, and oppression in his kingdom, who should support the heaven of the
Church with the shoulders of authority; who should purge the Augean stable of
superstition and profanation; who should releeve the oppressed, and set at
liberty the captives. 5. Hercules dishonored all his former actions by doting
upon Omphale; let good men learn from the searfull death and dotage of Hercules
to have circumspection, and a watchful eye over themselves; for '^is not
enough to begin well; he only shall be saved that continues to the end: it is
the end that crowns the work: Exisus acta prob^^. 6. the end of Hercules his
lust and dotage was a miserable death, and conslagration of his own body: let
young men remember, that the end of pleasure is p^ine, and that love, (or lust
either) which in the beginning is all honey, determines in gall and wormwood:
Amor and melle and selle foecundissm^^^. 7. Hercules was persecuted and
maligned by Juno, not withstanding all his heroik actions: soelici^atis comes
est inuidia; happiness is still accompanied with envy. 8. Hercules who
overc^me others, could not overcom himself; he is the greatest conqueror that
can conquer himself: sor^ior est qui se, quam qui for^ssima vincit m^nia, 9.
Some understand these passages of Hercules literally; the stable of Augits was
a large field over-laden with dung, which Hercules cleared by cutting the river
Achelous, and causing it to overflow that field: Antaeus and Busiris where
tyran^s whom Hercules overthrew: Diomedes that sed his horses with man's flesh,
was a tyrant, who by the strength and number of his horses overrun the country,
plundering and murdering men* Cerberus was the name of the king of the
Molossians dog, which devored men; threfore called the dog of hell: Theseus
should have bin devoured by him, but that he was rescued by Hercules: The birds
called Stymphalides were robbers near Stymphalis the town and lake of Arcadia:
The Dragon that kept the gardens of Hesperides, was a winding river or arm of
the sea, repr^senting the windings of a serpent; this arm encompassed these
gardens. Cacus spitting fire, was a tyrant in Compania, who used to fire men's
houses and corn: The Contaures were the Thessalians, who first learned to ride
on horse back; these Hercules subdued; as likewise he overcame the Lion, bull
and stag; that is, notable thieves and robbers: By supporting the heaven with
Atlas, is meant his knowledge in the sphere, which Atlas king of Mauritania
found out: The three-bodied Geryon, were three brothers in Spain, all princes
and entirely loving each other, whom Hercules also overcame. 10. By Hercules
the Acients did not only mean valor and strength of body, but the force of
eloquence also; which they did express by that picture of Hercules clothed in
a horse skin armed with a club, with a bow and arrows, having small chains
proceeding from his tongue, and tied to the ears of people whom he drew after
him; by which they signified how sharp and powerful eloquence is, to pierce
and subdue the affections of people, and to draw them far. 11. The Romans used
to worship Mercury within the City, but Hercules without; to signify, that by
strength and policy they maintained their Empire; at home they used eloquence
and policy; abroad, strength and industry. 12. Wrestlers and soldiers used
to woship Mercury and Hercules together; to signify that in wrestling and
wars strength and policy must go together. 13. It was not lawful for women
to swear by Hercules, nor to enter into his temple; this was a punishment laid
upon that sex, for the insolency of Queen Omphale over Hercules, in causing
him so effeminatly to serve her. 14. It is recorded that Hercules never swore
but once; I wish we could say so of Christians, who make no conscience in
swearing by the name of god upon all occasions. 15. Children and young men were
not permitted to swear by Hercules but bare-headed, and abroad in the open air;
perhaps to make them the more wary and fearful in swearing, and to strike a
greater reverence of an oath in them. I wish our children and young people
would learn the like reverence to the true God when they take his name in their
mouths. 16. They used in old times to offer the tenth part of their goods to
Hercules, therefore the tithe was called Herculana, and they that offered this,
were said Pollucere Herculi: But Tertullian complains (in Apoll.) that the
Gentiles cosened their God, promising to him the tenth, but scarce offering the
fourth part of that. Are there not too many Christians now, who prosesse much,
but practice little; not caring how they serve God, so they may serve him at an
easy rate; who would willingly go to heaven so they may save their purses? 17.
The new married bride was wont to be girded with a girdle having a strong knot,
called nodus Herculanus, an Herculean knot; in sign of secunditie, because
Hercules in one night begot 50 sons of Thespius his daughters. But we know,
that it is the Lord only who does open and shut the womb, who makes the
barren to rejoice. 18. Whilst Hercules was alive, he was slighted, and
persecuted; but being dead, he was deisied, and placed among the Stars, he was
solemnly called upon, he had temples and altars erected, holy days dedicated,
Priests called Poli^ii and Penarii consecrated to him; he was called (...),
the driver away of evil: when any thing fell out well, it was though to be so
by Hercules his means; hence arose these proverbs, Amico Hercule, Dexiro
Hercule. They used to carve or paint him upon their dice in the habit of a
King, whose cast was counted luckie; hence arose that phrase, Hercules
Basilicus, for good luck. Rich men gave the tenth of their goods, to Hercules;
this they called Polluctum, and they thought thereby to prosper. They called
the richest, and most sumptuous and capacious things by the name of Hercules;
as, Herculea coena, Heraclia pocula; balnea Herculana, lecti Herculani,
Hercules hospitatur: By this we see the foolishness of the world, in
persecuting, hating, and murdering these men, whom afterward they honor, and
adore. Thus it sared with the Prophets, Apostles, and Martyrs; of this Christ
accuses the Scribes and Pharisees, for building the tombs of the Prophets,
and garnishing the sepulchers of the righteous, etc. Mat. 23.19. 19. Our
blessed Savior is the true Hercules, who was the true and only Son of God, and
of the virgin Mary: who was persecuted but of malice, and exposed to all
dangers, which he overca^^e: he subdued the roaring Lion that red Dragon, that
tyran^ and devourer of mankind, the Devil; he subdued the (...) of sin, the
Ant^us of earthly affections: he by his word supporteth the world; Satan is
that Oac^s [(...)], that sea monster, from whom by Christ we are delivered; it
is he only that went down to hell; and delivered us from thence; he alone
traveled through the Torrid Zone of his Fathers wrath; he purged the Aug^^n
stable of Jewish superstition and heathenish profanation; he overcame the
world, and all his enemies, and has killed the Eagle of an evil conscience,
which continually fed upon the heart of man: he was that only true (...), the
expel^er of all evil from us; who with the club of his power, and chams of his
eloquence has subdued and drawn all men after him; who at last was burned,
but not consumed by the fire of his fa^hers wrath; who having subdued
principalities and powers, was received up into glory, and exalted above all
heavens; where now he sits at the right hand of God, being adored by the Angels
in heaven, by men on earth, and by spirits under the earth; to whom be glory
and dominion, and power for ever and ever Amen. 20. Let me complain with (...),
de falsa rel.l. 1. c. 9. of the pravitie and madness of the Gentiles, who
would make a god of Hercules, who scarce deserved the name of a man, if we
consider his adulterous b^rth, his whoredom^s, oppressions mi^thiers, glutony
and other sins; whose titles and epithits the poets give him; show us what he
was, when they call him (...), that is a great eater, a devouter of every
thing, an eater of raw flesh, a devouter of oxen. Clem. Alexandrinus, in
proir^pt. complains of his whoredoms with the Thespian daughters, with the
Elian women, with Chalcipoe, with sole, with Omphale, and many others. What
fools were they to make him a god who killed a Lion, and could not kill his
own violence, and the wild beasts of his anger and fury? who killed a few
ravenous birds, but could not kill his own ravenous affections; who could
subdue Ama^ons, but not his own lusts; who could purge a stable of dung, but
not his own heart of wickedness? And indeed, as he was in his life, so he was
honored aster hi^ death, with sacrifices sull of railings and cursings, as
Lactanius shows, de falls. Relig. lib. 1. c. 21.

HESPERIDES.
These were the daughters of Hesperia by Atlas, called therefore Hesperides and
Atlantides* they had a rich garden wherein grew golden apples, which were kept
by a watchful Dragon* but Hercules killed the Dragon, and carried away the
apples.

The INTERPRETER.
1. SOme by these golden apples understand sheep of a yellow fleece like gold;
for (...) signifies both an apple and a sheep, these sheep Hercules brought
from Africa to Greece, after he had killed Draco the shepherd. 2. By these
golden apples may be meant, a golden mine near mount Atlas in Africa, which
Hercules first discovered. 3. By this garden kept by a Dragon, may be
understood some rich orchard environed by a winding arm of the sea, which
Hercules p^ssed over; or by cutting it, and directing the tide another way,
made the passage open. 4. By the daughters of Hesperia, and the golden apples,
may be meant the stars, which because they begin to appear in the evening, may
be called the daughters of Hesperia, or Hesperus; and because the stars are
round like apples, and of a golden color, they were called golden apples. By
the Dragon, may be meant the Zodiac, which windeth about the earth, as a
serpent or Dragon; by Hercules killing the Dragon, and carrying away the
apples, may be meant the Sun, who by his light takes away the sight of the
stars and Zodiac. 5. As the golden apples were kept by a vigilant Dragon; so
wealth is got and preserved by care and vigilancie; and as these apples
belonged to the three daughters of Hesperia, to wit, Aegle, Arethusa, and
Hesperetusa; so riches should belong properly to these who are eminent for
honor, and virtue; for (...) signifies honor and glory, and (...) virtue. But
as these apples were consecrated to Venus; so commonly the wealth of this world
is dedicated to, and employed on our lusts and pleasures. 6. Hercules could not
obtain the golden apples, till he had killed the Dragon; neither can we attain
to the precious fruits of faith and holiness, until we have destroyed the
Dragon of envy and malice. 7. The covetous wretches of this world, whose
affections are set upon wealth, can no more rest and sleep, then the Dragon
did, that kept the golden apples, but doath that all subduing Hercules comes
and kills these Dragons, and carries away the wealth from the owners, and
bestows them oftentimes on strangers.

HIPPODAMIA, See TANTALUS.

CHAP. IX.
I
JASON.
He was the son of Aeson: his brother Pelias sent him to Colchis, to fetch
from thence the golden fleece; who accompanied with 49 young gallants of Greece
having overcome many dangers, arrived thither in the ship Argus, which was so
called from the builder; Jason by the help of Medae^, the king of Colchis his
daughter over came the ^^rie-breathed, brasen-footed bulls, and cast asleep the
watchful Dragon, and so having attained the golden fleece, he returned home
with it, and married Medaea, whom afterward he repudiated.

The INTERPRETER.
1. JAson is from (...), which signifies medicine or the art of curing
diseases; and Medaea from (...), that is, counsel; to show us that where
health of body is conjoined to counsel and judgment of mind; their great
actions and brave exploits are atchived. 2. That a Physician who would cure a
disease, must do nothing without Medaea, that is, without advise or counsel.
3. By Jasons voyage to find out the golden fleece, was meant that journey of
the Grecians to Colchis to find out a golden mine. By the golden fleece may be
understood a book gilded, and covered with a sheeps skin, teaching the
Philosophers stone, or art of converting metals into gold. That was a long and
charge^ble voyage; but the pains which our Chymist^ take to find out the
Philosoph^rs, ^tone is more tedious, and chargeable; and which is worse, Jason
found the golden fleece; but these men have not yet found, and I believe never
shall find the Philosophers stone. 4. They that with Jason will find the golden
fleece of honor and immortality, must with him undergo and overcome all
difficulties, dangers and obstacles; he was content to receive co^rection and
instruction from Chiron the Centaure; so must good men be content to submit
themselves to those who scarce deserve the name of men; and to live in holes
and caves of the earth, in obscurity, as Jason did in Chirons cave. Jason with
his Argon^u^^ were forced to carry their own ship two days together on their
shoulders through ^he deserts of Lybia; so good men that aim at eternal
honor, must b^re con^agiously the pressures and heavy burt hens that are laid
upon them. Jason passed through and overcame the dange^s of those troublesome
rocks called Symplagides; s^ must all good men pass through and overcome the
dangerous rocks of pride, lust, anger, covetousness, etc. Jason overcame the
sirie mouthed bull; so m^st all good men overcome the sirie and sl^nderous
tounges of wicked men: and so they must subdue their own fiery lusts and
impotent affections. Jason mastered the Dragon, and killed the armed men that
sprung up of ^is teeth; so must we subdu^ malice and envy; and overcome with
watching fasting and prayer that old red Dragon the Devil, and destroy all his
works in us. 5. We may see how anci^nt the greedy desire of gold has bin
among men, by ^^is voyage of Jas^n and his Argonauts for the golden sleece,
which was performed ^^no mundi, 2716. and before the building of Rome, 920
years: in honor of which expedition, Cha^les Duke of Burgundy instituted the
Order of the Golden Eleece. This disease in ^he latter age, is come to the
hoight; for now such is ^^ri sa^ra sames, that men adventure daily beyond
Hercules Pillars, even to the remotest Jndies for gold: and as if they had not
adventured far enough, they are content to dig down as f^r as h^ll for it; and
to use Plinie^ phrase, In sede Manium opes quaerimus. This made the America^s
bel^eve that gold was the Christians god. 6. The ship in which Jason s^iled was
taken out of the speaking grov^ Dodona; for the ship sp^ke and gave good
counsel to Jason, and his Argonauts, that they should avoid the danger they
were in ^or the murder of Absyrius, and repair to Circe, and expi^te that
murder: such a ship is the church in which we are sailing toward heaven; she
is a speaking ship, couns^lling us to avoid danger, to r^p^ir to him who is
only able to ^xpiate our sins. 7. Jason was the type of ^ good Prince; for he
is commended by the Greek poets for his feature, and stature, and strength of
body, for his judgment, valor, and wisdom, for his prudence, and providence,
for his piety to Juno and Minerva, for his eloquence and vigilance; all which
vertue^ are requisite in a Prince; who ought to be Jason, that is whole, or
sound in body and mind; he should be married to Medaea, that is, judgment and
counsel; he should be care^ull with Jason, to avoid the enchanting longs of
the Sirens; that is, parasites and slatterers; he ought to be like both to
Mars and Apollo; that is, be both a good soldier and a wise man, full of
M^jestie as the golden Su^ is full of glory, as Orpheus describes Jason.

IO, or ISIS.
She was the daughter of the river In^chus, whom Jupiter loved: and that Juno
might not suspect i^, he ^u^ned ^o to a cow, which Juno begged of Jupiter, and
delivered her to be kept by the hundred e^ed Argus, whom Mercury by Jupiter^
command killed; and Juno in revenge, sent a Gad-bee to sting her^ which made Io
run mad up an^ down the world, till she came to Egypt where she rec^vered
her own shape again, and was there called Isis, and married to Osyris; after
her death, she was deisyed by the Egyptians, who us^d to sacrifice a goose to
her.

THE INTERPRETER.
1. IO was married to one whose name was Bull; or she was carried from Argos
to Egypt in the ship called the Bull; hence arose the fiction of Io become a
cow. 2. Because the cow in respect of her benefit to mankind, was by the
Egyptians worshipped for their god; and Io after her death was worshipped by
the Egyptians; hence arose the fable of Io's being turned to a cow. 3. Io or
Isis did not only first bring unto Egypt husb^ndrie or the way of sowing and
reaping of corn, but also arts, and laws: therefore she was first worshipped
in Egypt, then at Rome, who erected a temple to her, in Campus Martius; and
amongst the Germans, also before Christianity was planted among them: and
because she was carried to Egypt in a ship, they made her a goddess over the
winds and seas, and res^rved her hairs at Memphis as a sacred relic, and
dedicated a holy day yearly to the honor of the ship that carried her; Against
this idolatry of Isis and of others, S. Austin disputes learnedly in his books
of the City of God, lib. 8. c. 27. l. 18. c. 37. etc. 3. Laclantius de falsa
religione, l. 1. c. 11. Eusebius in his books of the preparation of the
Gospel; and others. 4. By Isis may be meant the Genius or nature of the soil
of Egypt, as her picture shows, which moves a timbrell with her right hand,
showing thereby the coming of Nilus; and holds a bucket in the left hand,
signifying a repletion of all the channells; for Isis in the Egyptian tongue
signifies earth, as Vives shows in his not^s upon Austins City of God; l.
18. c. 3. out of Servius upon Virgil. 5. Tertullian in his Apolegetic against
the Gentiles, shows how unsettled the Rom^ns were in the gentiles religion; for
they admitted the worship of Osiris and Isis, the^ ov^rthrew their altars,
under Piso and Gabinius, and cast them out of the Capitol; and then admitted
the^ again into their city: this is the condition of men without Christ; still
wav^ring, and unsettled in religion. 6. Near to the image of Isis and Osiris,
which is the same with Serapis, stood the image of Harpocrate^ the god of
silence whom they held to be their son; intimating, that the secret^ of
their religion must not be divulged, but that the priest should be ^lent.
Doutle^le this showed the vileness of that religion, which was afraid to come
unto the light. 7. Some take Isis for Juno, and Osiris for Jupiter, called also
Ammon: others by Isis think. Cer^s is meant, and so understand the earth; which
Jupiter or the heaven loves by its continual embracements and influence: the
turning of Isis into a cow, is to show us the benefit we receive by the earth,
in that she both supports us, and feeds us: in that they say she was the
daughter of Inachus the river, they showed by this that they were of Thales his
mind, in making water the original of all things: By many eyed Argus that kept
her, they meant the starry heaven that incompasseth her; the half of whose eyes
are asleep, the other half awaked, because whil^st the stars are seen in one
hemisphere they are not seen in the other. By Isis assuming her own shape
again in Egypt, is meant (as I suppose) that the earth re-assumes its ancient
shape and beauty upon the receding of Nilus, whose overflowing took away the
shape of the earth; and turned Isis to a cow, that is, made Egypt fertile both
in pasture, cattle and grain. 8. I think by isis is meant the Moon, is which
is called the daughter of the river, because the Moon is mistr^sse of the
Night, which is the moistest time; and of waters also, and all moist bodies;
Jupiter is in love with her, because the heaven embraces the orb of the Moon,
and the Sun once ^ month is conjoined to her; and Argus, that is, the starrie
heaven does ke^p her, in that she being in the low^st sphere is encompassed by
the greater and higher; which Argus is killed by Mercury, because the Sun
takes away the fight of the st^rrs. The turni^g of Isis to a cow by reason of
Juno, shows that the Moon is horned shortly after the conjunction; and so she
appears to us, it Juno, that is the air, be clear. But she reassumed her
form again when she came to Egypt, because the Egyptians made her a goddess,
and worshipped her in the form of a woman: her traveling through the world
shows her wandering motion without the eclyptick, sometimes to the North,
sometimes toward the South. 9. Mercury killing of Argus may be understood
thus; that the most vigilant and prudent men are oftentimes mastered by an
eloquent and cunning tongue. 10. Io was turned into a cow by Jupiter, and
delivered to Juno; so many men by gods permission, degenerate into beastly
affections, and are made ll^ves to Juno, that is, to there wealth; and are made
subject to many-eyed Argus, that is, to watching and continual cares; until
Mer^ury, that is, the preaching of Gods word kill these cares, and beastiall
affections; then the stinging Be of their guilty conscience drives them to
repentance, and so they receive their old shape again, and become more wise and
holy then before; and by repentance and holiness are made, though not gods,
yet the sons of God. 11. To Isis was dedicated the garland of corn cares,
which garland was in chiefest esteem among the Romans; her priests were
clothed in white linen, and had their beards and heads shaved, as Tertullian
shows: in lib. de Spectac. They were also initiated by water and blood; and
used to worship her in the form of a dogs head; which by Virgil, Acn. 8. is
called Latrator Anubis. All these may signify the qualities and effects of the
Moon; for in the night time when she shines, the harvest people work hardest
in hot countries, when they cannot work by day; therefore the garlands of corn
cars were dedicated to her: the white linen represented the Moons white
color; the shavings of the hairs away, showed the smoothnesseof the Moon, for
she looks not so rugged with beams as the Sun; the initiation by water and
blood, may represent her white and red colors which she has for she is red
in the horizon, white in the meridian: or it may show the power sh^e has over
waters, and the blood of living creatures: the dog and goose were thought
fitt^st creatures to be dedicated to her, because these are most watchful in
the night, the time of the Moons dominion. 12. Isis, so called by the
Egyptians, and Io by the Greeks, was clothed in white, as Apulaeus shows,
lib. 11. sometimes in red, and sometimes in a black garment^ by which they
intimated, that the Moon looked white in clear weather; but red against wind;
-- Vento semper ^uber aurea Phoebe: her black garment was to represent her
duskie color after the change, and in her eclipse. 13. The Egyptians placed
the image of Sphynx in the porch of Isis temple, partly to show, that the
mysteries of religion were not to be devulg^d among the vulgar but
enigmatically; and partly to show, that the causes o^ the variations and many
motions of the Moon are nor known to us, no more then the riddles of Spbynx,
were to the vulgar people.

JANUS.
He was the f^^st King of Italy: he received Sa^^rne when he fled from his
son Jupiter, and lea^ned of him the a^t of ^usbandry, and coining of money;
w^i^h had on the one side the picture of the ship in which Saturn was ^^ought
to ^tali^; and on the other a head with two faces. To show his gratitude to
Saturn, he ^^stowed the one half of his kingdom upon him.

The INTERPRETER.
JAnus is thought to be the same with Noah, for he is so called from the hebrew
Jain wine, because he taught ^en to plant vineyards; and is said to have two
faces, because he saw two worlds, one before, an other aft^r the stood: he was
also a Lawgiver, and lived in the golden age of the world* and the first that
taught navigation, as the ship on his coin sh^weth. 2. Macrobius by Janus
underst^nds the Sun; therefore the Gentiles made him the keeper of the four
doors of heaven, to wit, the East^rn and Spring, out of which he seems to
come; and the Western and Winter, into which he seems to go when he moves
from us: They gave him two faces, because the Sun sees as wll backward as
forward: and they put in one of his hands a Scepter, in the other a Key, to
show both his dominion over the world, and that by his light he opens it in
the morning, and shuts it up again in the evening. 3. Janus is said to be the
first that taught men religion, to build temples, to offer sacrifice and
prayers; therefore perhaps they made him the god of gates and doors, to show
that religion is the door of heaven, and prayer the key to let us in: and as
they made hi^ the god of doors, so they make him to be the same that Por^unus,
the god of sea port^ and harbors; to teach us, as I suppose, that prayer is
the saf^st harbor to an afflicted conscience, and the best porter or
doorkeeper of our houses; so that without this Janitor w^ should neither go
out, nor in: Hierom tells us, Egredien^ de ^ospitio a'met oration:
regredientibus de platea occurra^ oration: So that this one porter is better
then all the door-keeping gods amongst the Romans; to wit, Janus the god o^
gates, Forulus of doors, Limentius of thresholds, and Ca^^ or Cardinea, the
Nymph or goddess of hinges. 4. Jan^^ married with Carne the goddess of
bowels, this may ver^ fitly (as I think) teach us, that prayer or devotion must
b^ j^yned with the works of mercy; for if prayer be the key doubtless mercy is
the lock, and without th^se two we^ can h^ve no access into heaven. What is
prayer without bowels of mercy, but like a key without a lock, or li^^ Janus
without Carne? 5. Janus his two faces may sign^ f^ the two chief s^asons of
the year, to wit, the Sprin^ and the Winter; therefore one of the faces looked
youn^ and cheerful, the other old and sad: or they signify the two kinds of
life which he lived; the one ^ude, the other civil: or the knowledge and
providence of Princes; for not only must they be skillful in the Histories of
times past, but also they must have a forecast and eye unto the things that may
or shall come to pass: they must have for their companions An^^voria and
Postvorta, as the old gods had. 6. Sometimes Janus had but two faces, sometimes
four; by this they signified, that the world which was represented by Janus,
had four parts; but two chief, to wi^, the East and West; or that the year
had four seasons, whereof the Summer and Winter were the two principal. But S.
Austin laughs at them who gave him so many faces, and but one power; fa^iem
duplam, sed potestatem dimidiam, De Civil. Dei lib. 7. cap. 7. ^or they made
him only the god of initiation, but they made another god for termination,
which was called Terminus: but we are taught that the true God, who by his
power gave the world its beginning, will by the same power dissolve and finish
it; so that he alone is to the world both Janus and Terminus, the Alpha and
Omega of all things. 7. Many men are like Janus, with two faces, one toward
heaven, another toward earth: with a youthful and smiling countenance they
look upon the world, but with a sour face upon heavenly things. Such men are
not fit for heaven, for they cannot serve two masters, neither must they look
back if they put their hand to the plow. If their heart be fixed on Janus,
which was that place in Rome where the monychangers dwelt, that is, if they
love the world, they cannot lov^ heaven. 8. In time of peace the temple of
Janus was shut, in time of war it stood open, Numa appointed it should be so,
because once the gate was open^d by strength of water that suddenly issu^d
thence when the Romans were at war with their enemies: so in time of their
wars they still opened Janus, as expecting his aid. But in our wars it is quite
otherwise; for our temples are either shut up, or pulled down, religion
banished, the priests silenced. 9. By the image of Janus there was placed a
serpent biting his tail, by which they intimated how the year returns still
into it self, beginning where it ends: but I would have all men learn from
hence, not only the wisdom of the serpent in general, but the posture of this
serpent in particular, to wit, to hold their tail in their mouth; that is, to
be still talking and thinking of their end.

IRIS, See JUNO.

JUNO.
She was the daughter of Saturn and Ops, the wife and sister of Jupiter, the
mother of Hebe, Vulc^n, and Mars, the goddess of ri^hes, and of marriage also,
called therefore Pronuba; and of childbearing, therefore called Lucina: as
from the wealth of which she was held to be goddess, she was named Juno, a
juvando, for riches are great helps.

The INTERPRETER.
1. WHen Juno is called Jupiters sister, is meant the air, which does much
resemble the heaven, called Jupiter by the Poets: but when she is c^lled
Jupiters wife, is meant the earth, which like a fruit^ull wom^n conceives and
brings forth the creatures by the heavens influence; which the prince of
Poets intimates, when he says, that in the Spring Jupiter comes down into the
bosom of his beloved wife, Conjugis in laetae germinum descendit.

2. Juno was painted of old in the form of a matron in a long robe, having a
lance in one hand, and a platter in the other; perhaps to show us, that wealth
is every thing; it is both meat, drink, clothes, armor, it is that which does
command all things: therefore Juno is still termed a Queen, and she carries a
scepter in her hand in some pictures, and is carried in a rich chariot of gold
and silver drawn by lions; to show, that riches adds beauty, and strength, and
courage to men, and who is able to resist it? 3. The peacock was dedicated to
Juno, and so was the raven and goose; doubtless to shadow out unto us the
nature of rich men, for pride, rapacitie and watchfuln^sse are incident to
them; the peacock is not so proud, nor the vulture so ravenous, nor the goose
so watchful as rich men; but while with the peacock they look big at the sight
of their fine feathers, let them cast their ^yes upon their black feet, and
remember their end, which will be blackness and darkness: and while they feed
upon the hearts of poor men, as that raven in Caucasus did upon the heart of
Prometheus, let them know, that death shortly will feed upon their flesh, and
the worm of conscience upon their souls. And though they be as watchful to
preserve their wealth as the geese of the Capitol were; yet there be they that
watch as narrowly over them, and for their death are still watching and
wishing; and what better are rich men without grace and literature, then the
geese of the Capitol, which were carefully looked to and fed by the command of
the Censors, and at last killed and carried at their solemn feasts with great
solemnity in silver platters? so rich men are fed and pampered, then die, and
in solemn pomp carried to their graves, where their carcasses tot with their
names, little vitam mor^emque jux^a aestimo.

4. Some by Juno understand the Moon, therefore they called her Lucina; and
painted her with beams about her face, sitting upon lions, holding a scepter in
one hand, and a spindle in the other; by which I think may be meant both her
light and operations: for the Scepter signifies dominion, and she bears rule
over the humid bodies; hence she is called Fluona: the spindle which properly
belongs to one of the Parcae or Fates, may show us, that the Moon has a great
influence upon our lives: and her sitting upon lions may signify, that her
moist influence does temper and moderate the fiery and choleric heat of our
bodies. And because the moisture of the Moon is a great help to facilitate
childbearing, therefore she was called Juno Lucina, as the goddess that did
help to bring forth children to the light, and for this cause she was called
upon by women in their labor: Juno Lucina fer opem. 5. I think Juno may be the
emblem of an honest, careful, and frugall matron; for she is commonly
painted sitting, to show, that a woman must not be given to gadding she has a
scepter and a pair of sheers in her hands, for she must both rule her family
by her authority and discretion, and she must clothe and feed them, which is
intimated by the platter in her hand, and sheers with which she shears her
sheep: she is clothed with a goats skin, to signify her frugalitie, which is a
rare thing to find in the women of this age, whose excess in apparel are
badges of their pride and luxury: she is crowned and girded with vine
branches, to show her fruitfulness; to which David alludes, when he says,
Thy wife shall be like the fruitful vine upon the walls of thine house: she
treads upon a lioness, as all honest and laborious matrons should do; to wit,
subdue lust and wantonness: she is armed with a lance and a target; for a
matron should have a sharp tongue to reprove, and the targed of modesty to
keep off all lascivious assaults and tentations. 6. By Juno may be meant the
air, which that picture shows, wherein she holds thunder in the one hand, and
a drum or cymball in the other: she wears a partycoloured garment, and is
attended by Iris the rainbow, by Castor and Pollux also, which are two fair
meteors presaging serenitie: the fourteen Nymphs which Virgil gives her, are so
many exhalations begot in the air: her holding of a pomegranite in one hand,
and a cuckoo upon her scepter in the other, shows the serenitie of the air in
which the cuckoo, that sings only in the spring, takes delight; and the fruits
do prosper in a temperate air: That the rainbow is engendered in the air by
the reflex of the sunbeams upon a waterish cloud, is manifest; the diversity
of whose colors is caused by the light shining upon the unequal parts of the
cloud, some being thicker, some thinner, which the Poet shows in that verse,
Mill trahit varios diverso Sole colores. Aen. 4.

Although the rainbow may represent riches, whereof Juno is goddess, for
indeed wealth makes a fine show like the rainbow, but quickly vanishes; --
Divitiarum
Et formae gloria fluxa and fragilis: --
Aen. 1. and whereas the learned Poet makes Juno petitioning Aeolus to send out
the winds against Aenaeas; he shows, that the wind is something else then the
bare moving of the air, and that it is an exhalation raised out of the earth
and waters, without which the air could not be so violently moved. 7. Juno was
the goddess of marriage, therefore called Pronuba, and jugalis from jugum, or
the yoke that was put over the new married couple. There was at Rome an altar
dedicated to Juno juga, in the street called Jugarius, because at this altar
they were joined, and here their feet were fettered; whence the Poet calls
marriage Vinela jugalia: but because they thought her power not sufficient,
they joined an help to her, whom they called Hymen, and the god of marriage; in
one hand he bare a torch, in the other a red vail called flammeum, with which
the bride was covered to hide her blushing: these two might signify the two
properties that ought to be in women; to wit, fervent love represented by the
torch, and modesty shadowed out in the vail: and it is observable, that when
the parties who were to be married offered sacrifice to Juno, they flung away
the gall behind the altar, to show that in marriage there ought to be no gall
or bitterness. 8. I find that Juno had her education from the hours, and was
nourished by the Ocean and Thetis, or as some say, the sea-Nymphs; to show,
that Navigation, and Time or opportunity beget riches; or that the airy
exhalations are begot of, and nourished by moisture. 9. As Juno signifies the
air, Vnlcan was her son; because the fire is begot of air oftentimes: But as
Juno signifies wealth, Mars was her son; for wealth begets quarrels, pride,
and wars: But as Juno was the goddess of marriage, Hebe was her daughter;
because in our you^^ and vigor we are fittest for marriage. 10. Juno's temple
was open roofed, and by Numa's law no who^e must enter into it; to show, that
marriage must not be performed in dark corners, but publicly; and that
marriage ought to be honorable among all men, and the bed undefiled. 11. Juno
shed her milk rather then she would be nurse to Hercules, of which milk the
Poets ^eign lilies received their whiteness; and the milkie way in heaven,
called Galaxia, had its original thence; which, as Aristotle (1. Meteor. c.
8.) tells us, is a bright whiteness proceeding from the beams of the lesse^
stars reslected on a clear cloud; others hold it to be no Meteor: but however
Juno in this may paint out unto us wanton mothers, who will rather lose and
spill the milk which nature has given them, then nurse their own children;
which the wildest beasts will not do. 12. Juno was said to have the government
of kingdoms, because wealth commands and rules all things; that is able to make
a maid the wise and sister of Jupiter: therefore not without cause was she so
much adored and called upon by maids that were to marry, under the names of
Imerduca, Domiduca, Vnxia, Ci^xia; for it is wealth that can bring in, and
bring home, anoint, and gird the maid with a wedding girdle; and without that
she may sit long enough without house, ointment, or husband: but if she be
rich, she shall not want a Jupiter to woo her, who will rather abuse himself,
to take on him the shape of a cuckoo, then miss her. 'Shee is Populonia, the
goddess of the common people; and Curetis, the soldiers goddess, for wealth
is that they fight for: this is the rich man's Soticena, or S^spitatrix, or
Opipena, that is, his savior and helper: but as Juno was a weak help to
others, who could not help her self when Hercules wounded her; so riches will
prove such helps in the end, when the dying wretch shall say to his bags,
Miserable Comforters are ye all.

JUPITER
He was the son of Saturn and Ops, and was born in Creta at the same birth
with Juno, and was brought up on mount Ida by the Curetes privately, ^or fear
his father should find him, who was devouring his own children: but afterward
be drove his father out of his kingdom, and divided the world with his two
brothers, Neptune and Pluto; be took heaven for himself, the sea fell to
Neptune, hell to Pluto; be used to change himself into many shapes; and took
^nno his own sister to wife.

The INTERPRETER.
1. JUpiter is so called, quasi juvant pater; because he is a helping father,
and Diespiter the father of the day, and in Greek (...), from life; for it is
he that gives life to all things: by this name they understood that divine
power by which all things are moved and preserved, as may be seen in the
Epithets given to him by Virgil, and the other poets, as also by the
descriptions of him in Orpheus and others; and by the ancient pictures which
they made of him, for they placed him in a throne, to show his immutabilitie;
they crowned him, to show his authority; they clothed him with garments
representing light and Rimes of fire, and all besparkled with Stars, to show
his heavenly nature and divine glory; they put a pair of globes in one hand,
the one of amber, the other of gold, to signify that both the globes of heaven
and earth are in his power: in the other hand there is a violl or citron,
intimating that he is the cause of that admirable harmony that is in the world:
his throne is covered with a garment of peacocks tails, to signify his
providence and omniscience: he has the look of an ancient man, because he is
the ancient of days: his sandals or shoos are green, and he treads upon
Neptunes Trident, to show that sea and land are subject to him. They paint him
sometimes with the thunder in his hand, to show that he is the punisher of
impiety: sometime they paint him with a scepter in one hand, and a circle in
the other; signifying that he is that great King who rules the world; for which
cause they place the eagle by him, who is the king of birds: they give him
sometimes the image of victory in his hand; because conquests and victories
are from him; sometimes they make all his upper parts naked, his lower parts
clothed, to show that he discovers himself to the Angels and blessed souls,
which he does not to us mortals, who see nothing of him but his lower parts;
and these clothed, because here we see him only in his effects and works, and
some of his attribu^^^ but obscurely, and in a dark speech as the Apostle
faith: (...) Celtae or ancient Galls worshipped Jupiter under the shape of an
oak, and so the Romans used to crown Jupiters image with oaken leaves; to show
that he who gave being to all things, does also feed them; for akorns were the
first food of the old world. And for the same cause was he worshipped by the
Egyptians and Assyrians under the shape of a ram, to show us, that it is he who
feeds and clothes us; and therefore the horn of his nurse Amaethaes was filled
by him with all kind of food, called therefore cornu copiae, because from him
we have our food, for he opens his hands and fills all things with his
blessings. And to signify that he both rules and sees all things, they
represented him in their hieroglyphics by a scepter with an eye on the top of
it, called Jovis oculus, Jupiters eye. 2. By Jupiter may be meant kings and
judges: for as Jupiter is called king by the poets, so kings were called ^oves.
They painted him sometime without ears, sometime with four years; to show that
kings must have no ears for flatterers, informers, and slanderers, but must
have many ears for complaints and advise: they must never want ears to hear
the grievances of their subjects, nor the wholesome advice of their
councellers: they gave him also three eyes; whereof one in his forhead, to show
that princes must see more, and higher, and further off then private men; their
knowledge must be more eminent and sublime. Justice is always painted by
Jupiter; to signify that kings actions must be always just. Jupiter subdued
Aegaeon and the rest of the Giants, to show that kings must not suffer tyranny
and oppression to go away unpunished. Jupiter taught people who before fed
upon men's flesh, to eat akornes, therefore the oak was dedicated to him; so
princes should endeavor to civillize their people, and to provide by good
laws fit and wholesome food for them. Jupiter is said to have begot diverse
daughters which were called prayers, intimating, that Princes must have a
fatherly care of their peoples entreaties and petitions, and not slight them.
Jupiter drove away the swarms of ^^ies that infested Hercules (therefore called
Musidarlus) whilst he was sacrificing; so Princes must drive out of their
kingdom all busy bodies and disturbers of religion. Jupiter married Me^is,
which signifies counsel, and after he swallowed her he conceived Pallas in
his brain; so Princes must unite themselves to good counselors, and by
swallowing their good advice, their heads shall be filled with wisdom, and
they shall produce wise actions. Jupiter was the father of the Muses, so should
Kings be the nursing fathers of learned men. 3. Jupiter may be the type of a
Tyrants for his banishing of his father, and usurping his kingdom, and cutting
off his testicles, his marrying with his own sister, his devouring of his own
wife Me^is, his ravishing of Ganymed, his many whoredoms and adulteries, his
transforming himself into so many sh^pes of beasts and birds, as into the
cuckoo, the swan, the bull, the ram, etc. What, I say, do all these mean, but
lively represent unto us the cruel manners and wicked qualities of Tyrants?
therefore when he began to reign, the golden age ceased, the lamb durst play
no longer with the wolf, men could not live securely and happily as they did
before: in his reign began rebellions, when the giants consp^red against him;
for what could he else expect, but that his subject, should rebel against
him, who rebelled against his own father? His advancing of the Swan his whore,
and placing her amongst the stars, the honor he gave to the Goat his nurse,
in making her a constellation, and in wearing her skin upon his target, called
therefore Aegis, does show us how Tyrants advance licentiousness and
wantonness, and rapacity also, as they intimated by the ^^gle that still
waited on him, and drew his chariot: As Kings may be called Joves, so Tyrants
should be called Veiores; who are sicly represented by that picture of Jupiter
in the form of a boy, with horns on his head, arrows in both his hands, and a
goat by him, showing to us the childish, hurtful, and wanton disposition of
tyrants. 4. Jupiter is taken sometime for the air in Poets; sometime for the
element of fire, and Juno for the air, therefore they made her Jupiters wife,
and they used to paint him with a rail flaming about his head: and sometime by
Jupiter they meant the heaven, as by Saturn they understood time; so then when
they write that Saturn devoured his children, except Jupiter, Juno, Neptune,
and Pluto, their meaning was, this Time destroys all compounded bodies; but
the heaven with the element of fire, the air, the sea, and the earth are not
subject to Times laws and tyranny: And because there is no commixtion but
between the neighboring elements, therefore it is, that Jupiter took Juno to
wife, but could not be permitted by the rest of the gods to marry with The^is
the sea. 5. Austin ( Lib. 3. de Civ. cap. 10.) sh^ws the Gentiles vanities, who
held the world was eternal, and yet acknowledged that Jupiter and Juno, that
is, heaven and earth to be the children of time; for if they had their
beginning of time, then they must acknowledge the creation of the world, and of
time also. 6. He laughs likewise at their madness, who called Jupiter the
chiefestof all the gods, by the name of Pecunia money, the basest of all
things; which no wise man will cover, as he shows out of Salust, ( Lib. 7.
de Civil. cap. 12.) and may we not laugh at them who not only call, but have
also made money their great god and Jupiter, which now has their commanding
power of all things: This is that idolatry the Apostle speaks of,; this is that
Jupiter that can make p^ssage to Donae through a tower of brass; who more
violently then a thunder bolt can break through the strongest armies;
Perrumpert amat castra potentius ictu
Fulmineo. --
Horat,

This is the covetous man's Jupiter S^a^or, and Tereulus, and Liberator, and
Elicius, and Invictus, and Omnip^tens too, and Hospitalis, and what not? for
he has said un^o the wedge, Thou art my hope; and to the gold, Thou art my
confidence: But in the house of death the coverous wretch will find no more
comfort in this Jupiter of gold, then the Romans did in their Jupiter of stone,
when they swore by him, Jovem lapidem jura^^. 7. Jupiter is said to be born in
Crete or Candle, because the people of that Island were more religious then
others; and to show that God is chiefly to be found there where religion is
most cherished. 8. Saturn could not devou^ his son Jupiter, but devoured a
stone in stead of him, to show us, that Time which destroys all things, even
the hardest stones, yet cannot consume or destroy that eternal Mind or Deity
which they called Jupiter. 9. The Curetes and Coribantes saved Jupiter from his
fathers fury, by the sounding of brass and clashing of arms, that the childs
crying might not be heard; even so kingdoms are preserved from outward violence
or foreign forces, by arms and military discipline. 10. Jupiter had diverse
titles given to him, as Xenius the god of hospitality, Philus the god of love,
Heterius the god of fellowship, Homognius the god of kindred, Phras^ius the god
of tribes, and Enhorcius the god of oaths, etc. to show what care men should
have of hospitality, love, fellowship, kindred, tribes, and oaths. 11. At Rome
Jupiter was worshipped upon the Capitol, and had a temple there, thence he was
called Jupiter Capitolinus: he was named also Jupiter Latialis, and was
worshipped by shedding of human blood, as Tersullian and Lactan^ius shows; and
he was styled Jupiter Pistor, or the baker, because he taught the Romans is
their sleep, when the Galls besieged the capitol, to fling out their bread to
them, by which the Galls forsook the siege, supposing the Romans to be stored
with bread. May not this fitly be applied to the Pope, who is now Jupiter of
the Roman Capitol, and the Latin Jupiter whose name is (...), 666. whose
worship consists not in wine, but in blood, in the Eucharist: not to speak how
his power and religion have been still maintained by blood of martyrs? and may
not he be called Jupiter the baker, who has cast the bread out of the
Sacrament, by which means he has lost not only many of the Galls, but also of
the Dutch, English, Scots, Swedes, Danes, etc.?

CHAP. XI.
L
LARES, or PENATES.
THese were the two sons of Mercury and Lara, which he begot of her, when he
conveyed her to hell, after her tongue was cut out by Jupiters command, for
bewraying to Juno his intent he had to desloure Juturna.

The INTERPRETER.
1. THese Lares were the Gentiles household gods; and this word is sometime used
for house or household goods; so Salus: nobis Larem familiarem nullum. The place
where these Lares were worshipped or kept, was called Lararium; they were called
also penares from penu or peni^u^, from whence comes penetrale, for they were
kept in the most retired and inward places of the house: and sometimes Penates
and Lares were of whole cities and kingdoms. 2. The Lares were painted like
young boys wearing a dogs skin about their shoulders, and having a dog always
by them, to signify that they were the faithful keepers of houses and goods,
as dogs are; and that they are terrible to strangers, but familiar with
domestics. 3. They were painted also with their heads covered, which was a
sign of liberty, and preservation; so we read that Castor and Pollux the
deliverers and preservers of Greece were painted covered: so Sueton^us writes
that the Roman people covered their heads with caps when Claudiu^ Nero was
dead, in sign of their re-obtained liberty. By their covered Lares then they
signified, that men in their own houses ought to be free and protected from
wrong and violence. 4. Arnobius tells us, that Lares were the gods of highways
and travelers, Lib. 3. cont. Gent. and that they were the same that the
Curetes were, which with the noise of their brazen instruments preserved
Jupiter from devouring by Saturn. I find also that they were the same with
Larva, and Lenures, and Genii; save only that the Genius waited on the living,
but the Lares upon the dead: yet the name Genius is given to these also by
Virgil, speaking of the serpent that came out of Archises his grave; Incerius
Geni^^^e loci, etc. -- Aenaead. 5. By this it seems, the Gentiles thought it
unfit that those gods who were assigned to preserve men in their houses, should
forsake them when they went abroad; for the dog which was consecrated to them,
does not only preserve the Masters house, but also waits upon him when he goes
abroad; -- Gressumque ca^es comi^a^^^ herilem^ and so they thought it unfit,
that the gods which waited on men in their life time, should forsake them in
death, and not wait upon their souls: and by that fiction of the Cu^^^es
preserving Jupiter, they did show, that as soon as Lucina brings us out to the
light, the Genii or Lares, as so many Angels, wait upon us to preserve us from
hurt. But what madness was this, to multiply so many gods, whereas that same
God who gave us life and being, gives us also his protection and custody both
in life and death. 5. They used to offer to their Lares and Genii wine and the
smoke of frankincense; and they thought it abomination to offer any living
creature to them, or to worship them with the loss of any beasts life, by whom
they had the preservation of their own life: I wish they would truly consider
this, who think they cannot worship the true God of peace, except by war;
whereas he turned the sacrifices of blood unto the Sacrament of wine, to show
that he delighted not in the blood of beasts, much less in the blood or death
of men: nor does he think that he is worshipped by shedding of their blood,
for whom he shed his own blood. 6. The chief place where they worshipped their
Lares was in the chimney; by which they signified, that they were the gods of
fire, as well as of their houses: and therefore Lar^^ taken for the fire or
chimney sometime; and Servi^^ Tullius gave out, that his mother conceived him
of Lar, whom she saw in the fire as she was one night warming of her self in
the chimney; in token of which conception, a flame was seen afterward issue out
of Servius his head: It seems that too many Princes are conceived of fire, and
they are too much addicted to the worship of their fiery gods, as appears by
their too great delight they take in the fire of strife, war^s, and contention.
7. I find that Lares, Larva, Lemures and Mares signified the souls of men
after death, seeming to appear to men sometimes: if they were good souls, they
were called Lares, and did no hurt; if they were wicked souls, they were called
Larva and Leo^res, and affrighted men: these are called by Apul^^; No^tium
acc^^s^cula, Busl^r^n (...), sepulchrolum urriculameusa; therefore Romulus
instituted the feasts called Lemuria, or Remulia, to pacify the soul of Remus
his brother, whom he killed: But I find Manes a general word for good and
evil souls. Upon these Gentile fictions the Church of Rome has grounded the
fained apparitions of souls after death, to confirm superstition, and their
doctrine of Purgatory. 8. In that the Lares were begot of a dumb goddess, and
the god of speech as they were going to hell; I suppose, they might by this
signify, that the departed souls, though they cannot speak with corporeal
organs, as we do; yet they have a spiritual speech, whereby they communicate
the conceptions of their mind to each other, as Thomas shows, Prima primae,
quest. 107. art. 1. for there is no hindrance why one soul or Angel should not
understand another, but only the will: for in us our bodies hinder the
apprehension of one another conceptions; but in spirits the will only; so
that as soon as the Spirit is willing to impart his conceptions to another, he
is said to speak, and the other to hear. 9. Among the Romans there were Lares
publici and familiares, public and household gods; also Lares hostitii, gods to
drive away their enemies; Lares marini, gods of the sea; Lares viales, gods of
high ways; Lares querquerulani, gods of the oaks or woods; neither was there
any place in the world which had not these petty gods, besides their great
gods: But what pretty gods were these, whom a man must rescue out of the flames
of Troy, or else they had been burned? Therefore not without cause does S.
Austin (De Civit. lib. 1. c. 3. laugh at the Romans; who made these conquered
gods their protectors, who thought that by their help they subdued the world,
that could not help themselves when they were subdued by the Grecians; as he
proves out of Virgil, whom he call^ the greatest, most excellent, and best of
all Poets. What better are the new Romanists in multiplying to themselves
tutelar saints, forsaking the fountain of living waters, and digging to
themselves cisterns that will hold (...) water?

LATONA: See APOLLO and DIANA

LETHE.
THis was a river in hell, of which whosoever drank, he forg^^ all forepast
actions and sufferings.

The INTERPRETER.
1. THe Platonists, which held the souls existence long before their bodies,
affirmed that the souls before their entrance into their bodies, drunk of this
river, that they might not think of or remember the happiness they had lost,
which had been a continual torture to their life: this opinion Virgil
follows, Ae^ad. 6. But I think that by this fiction may be meant, that the
Saints who depart from hence, forget all forepast miseries: for what happiness
or rest can there be in the glorified souls, if they should remember the
miseries, disgraces and wrongs which they have suffered, or the sins which they
have committed here? Surely, even in this life, if it were not for sleep and
oblivion, our condition should be most miserable; (...). How sweet is oblivion
of evils, says Orestes in Euripides? 2. The river Lethe is in Africa, running
by the City Berenice, which is swallowed up by a great gulf, and runs under
the ground many miles, then breaks out not far from Berenice, which gave
occasion to the country people to think that this river sprung out of hell. 3.
They that went to the cave of Trophonius to consult with the oracle, used to
drink of two rivers; the one was Lethe, at the entering in, that they might
forget their forepast affairs; the other was the river Mnemosine, or memory,
which they were to drink at their coming out, that they might remember what
there they had seen and heard: I wish that they who run so eagerly to Church to
the Sermon, would drink of Lethe when they go in, and lay aside thinking upon
worldly businesses: and that they would drink Mnemos^ne at their coming out,
and remember carefully what they have heard: but it is farotherwise with them;
for they drink Mnemos^ne when they go in, and have their minds altogether
busied with wordly affairs; but when they come home, they remember no more,
then if they had drunk of Lethe, with those which Securos latices and longa
oblivia posans.

4. There were said to be four rivers in hell, to wit, Lethe, Acheron,
Plegeion, Cocytus. This world may be called hell, being compared with heaven
which we lost by sin: in this hell or sinful condition in which we live,
there are first the river Lethe, or forgetfulness of our duty to God, for
which cause we are urged with so many memento's in Scripture. Secondly,
Acheron, or the loss of that spiritual joy of conscience, and comfort of the
holy Ghost, of which sinful men are depr^ved. Thirdly, Phlege^on, the fire of
lusts and anger with which we are inflamed. Fourthly, Cocy^^, sorrow or
groaning; for (...) is to lament: and this arises from Styx, which signifies
sadness, (...).

LUNA, LUCINA.
She was the daughter of Hyperion and Thia, the wife of the Air, of whom she
begot the Dew; and she was the sister of Phoebus, or the Sun.

The INTERPRETER.
1. LUna is called the daughter of Hyperion, either because he was the first
Astronomer that found out her diverse motions, or because her motion is far
above this aeriall world in which we breathe. She is the daughter of Thia,
because her original is immediately from God: she is the wife of the air,
because by her influence and the Air^ frigiditie Dew is engendered in the night:
she is the sister of Phoebus, because amongst all the stars she is likest
in light and beauty to the Sun, and in magnitude also, according to our
appearance. Some call her the daughter of the Sun, because perhaps she has
her light from him. 2. The Poets give her a partie-colouredgarment, to show her
various aspects; and do sacrifice black bull to her, to show how black and
horned she appears after the change. But to declare her brightness in the
full, they gave her a coach drawn with white horses: and whereas they ascribed
four horses to the Sun, but only two to the Moon; by this they intimated, that
the Suns motion is far swifter then the Moons, in respect the or^^ in which he
moves is far more capacious then that of the Moons. 3. They held her to be both
male and female, because of her active quality of heat, and the passive quality
of moisture: therefore men did sacrifice to her in women's apparel, and women
in the habit of men. Her masculine power is seen in moving the inferior
bodies: her feminine in receiving light. 4. Luna is the same with Lucina,
because by her light and influence she helps childbirth: she is painted
with a torch in one hand, and arrows in the other, to show the servent and
sharp pains of women in childbirth; and that she is the light and torch of
the night: she is painted sometimes with wings, to show the swiftness of her
motion; and sometimes all covered with a vail, I think, to intimate her
eclipses and obscurity in the conjunction. The Egyptians in their
hieroglyphics represented the Moon by a white skinned man having an hawks
head, to signify, that the Moons whiteness or light proceeded not from her
self, but from the Sun, of which the hawk was the emblem, and dedicated to the
Sun, either because of her high flying, or quick sight. 5. The Romans used to
wear half-moons upon their shoo^, either to show their original from the
Arcadians, who did brag that they were more ancient then the Moon; or else to
signify the inconstancy of wealth, honors, and all humane glory, which
waxes and waineth with the Moon. And perhaps from the Romans the Turks have
borrowed the same custom of wearing half-moons in their colors. 6. The Moon
in her eclipse looks red, and the foolish Gentiles thought that it was for
shame she looked thus, as blushing at the madness of the witches, who thought
by charms to bring her down from heaven, according to that, Carmina vel coelo
p^ssunt dedusere Lunam: and therefore they used to beat brazen instruments,
which the Poet calls ara auxiliaria Lunae, as it these sounds did dull the
Magicians charms, and ab^e their force upon the Moon. Indeed, if the Moon could
blush, she would be much ashamed at such madness, as also at many other
impieties committed in the nightime: but the true cause of her redness is
the mixture of her own light with the shadow of the earth; or rather, as
Scaliger says, ( Exer. 62.) because she is in the point of the pyramide not
far from the first beams of the Sun; and situated in the second beams, which
are the species of the first beams, as the first are the species of the light.

CHAP. XI.
M
MARS.
He was the god of war, and son of Jupiter and Juno, or of Juno alone as
some say, who conceived him by touching of a flower in the garden of Olenius.
Vulcan finding him abed with Venus his wife, wrapped them both in a net, so that
they could not stir, till Neptune by in^^eatie got Vulcan to loose them; his
sister was Bellona.

The INTERPRETER.
1. MArs was called the god of war, he was the first that found out military
discipline; he was borne of Juno, because wealth begets strise and wars; Thero
or fiernesse was his nurse; for fierce and salvage dispositions are most given
to quarrelling: therefore he was said to be bred in the cold Northern
countries, for the Northen people by reason of abundance of blood, and
excessive drinking, are most given to strike and contention. He was worshppied
in Lemnos, where men were sacrificed to him, to show the cruelty of soldiers,
and of that place in particular: his companions were fear, and anger, and
clamor; for these do inseparably accompany war. Therefore terror and fear were
the two horses that drew his chariot, and Bellona his sister with a bloody
whip did still wait upon him: for this cause the woolfe, of all creatures most
savage, and the ravenous vulture, and the watchful dog, and the chattering
pie, and the cock also, which is a warlike and quarrelsome bird, were all
dedicated to him. The Scythians dedicated only to Mars temples, altars, and
statues, and to no other gods, because they delighted in wars, and by rapine,
spoils, and oppression of their neighbors, they maintained their own estate;
hence Mars was said to be born in Thracia, to show what a warlike nation that
was: and because the horse is a warlike creature, therefore he was sacrificed
to Mars; and his chariot was drawn by horses in ancient pictures, he himself
sitting on high in his complete and terrible arms, both offensive and
defensive: Fame having her body and wings full of eyes, ears, and tongues,
sounds the trumpet before him, to show that wars oftentimes follow upon evil
reports. And because the Romans would intimate how much they detested civil
wars in their City, they would not suffer the picture of Mars to be painted
on their gates and private doors, but in stead of him the picture of Minerva;
and for Mars his picture, they thrust out of the City, to be painted upon the
doors of country men's houses abroad: for by maintaining wars abroad, they
kept peace at home. 2. By Mars the Gentiles understood the Sun, as appears by
that picture of Mars adorned with the Sun beams, and anciently worshipped in
Spain: or rather the heat and vigor of the Sun, which heateth the blood, and
occasioneth strife and war, as may be seen in choleric and hot
constitutions: and because such hot temperaments are prone to Venerie, hence
the Poets saigned, that Mars lay with Venus; and withal to show, how much
soldiers are given to Venereall lusts: At non ad Venerein nocturnaque praeliae
tardi.

3. Not without cause do the Fathers laugh at the Gentiles, who made Mars
their god, that was both a murderer, as also unjust, impious, mad, and
persidious, as Homer describes him; who was detained a prisoner by Vulcan for
his adultery, and was wounded by Diomedes. This is that god from whom the
Romans bragged they had their original, whom they made the patron of their
City, and dedicated the first month of the year to him, assigned to him
certain priests whom they called Salii, and many divine honors: I wish that
Christians, who profess themselves the disciples of the Prince of peace, did
not too much worship this impious god of war: we erect not temples and altars
to him abroad, but we do this in our hearts; we do not sacrifice to him
horses alone, but men also, even those for whom Christ died: so that neither
Lemnos nor Thracia did more adore him, then Christians do. But however the
Gentiles worshipped him, yet Homer tells us, that Jupiter hated him: I am
confident that the true God, whose name is Jehovah Shalom, the Lord our peace,
hates and detests wars among brethren of the same faith; for he breaks their
bows, knaps their spears in sunder, and burns their chariots in the fire. I
wish with S. Austin, that it were as certain there were no war, as it is
certain that Mars is no god: Vtinam quam manifestum est quod non sit deus, tam
non sit bellum: Lib. 7. de Civit. cap. 14. But so long as pride, ambition,
covetousness, and malice reign among us, so long Mars must be worshipped by
us. 4. Mars is described by the Poets as a great enemy to Minerva the goddess
of wisdom and arts; we see by experience how true this is; for wisdom, arts,
learning, justice, and true piety are trampled upon in time of war. 5. Mars,
who by Homer is described the swiftest of all the gods, was caught in a net by
limping Vulcan, the slowest of them all; Tardus velocem assequteur: let men run
never so swiftly in ways of wickedness, yet slow-paced vengeance at last will
overtake them: Raro antecederuem s^elestum deseruit pede poena ^laudo. 6.
Though Mars thought to have committed adultery with Venus in secret, yet he
was seen by all the gods; there is no wickedness done so secretly, which is
not made obvious to the all-piercing eye of the Almighty. There is nothing so
secret that shall not be revealed, says Christ. 7. Mars was absolved from the
murder which he committed in the Areopage, a place where the Athenian
Magistrates used to judge; to let us see that the smallest homicides are
punished in time of peace, whereas the greatest and most horrible murders go
free in time of war: As Seneca complained of theft, so may I of murder;
Parva furia puniuniur, magna in triumphis aguniur: small murders are punished,
great ones are honored with triumphs. 8. Mars was conceived of Juno by
touching a flower: what is more specious to the eye, and yet what more
frivolous then a flower? By this we may see, that rich and potent men have
specious pretenses for their wars; but when they are sifted, they prove no
less frivolous then a fading flower. 9. Vulcan bound Mars and Venus together,
but Neptune got them to be loosed; I think they meant by this, that lust is
caused by the heat of youth; but given off in old age, which is cold and moist,
represented by Neptune.

MEDAEA, See, JASON.

MEDUSA, See GORGON.

MEMNON, See AURORA.

MERCURIUS.
He was the son of, Jupiter and Maia, the messenger of the gods, the god of
Merchants, of Theft, of Wrestling, of Eloquence; he found out the harp, and
killed Argus, and delivered Mars out of prison and bound Prometheus to hill
Caucasus; his head and feet are winged, and he begot of his sister Venus
Hermaphroditus.

The INTERPRETER.
1. He is called Mercurius, quasi Medius currens; for speech, whereof he is
said to be god, is that which runs between man and man, and by which we
converse one with another; and Merchants by this trade with each other,
therefore he is called the god of Merchants; and by the Greeks Hermes, from
(...), that is, Interpretation; for speech is the interpreter of the mind. And
to show the forc^ of eloquence, they painted him drawing of people after him by
the ears with a small chain reaching out of his mouth; therefore they called
him the messenger and embassa^our of the gods; for el^quence is required in
Princes embassadou^s. Or this fiction may show, that they who are born when
Mercury bears rule in their Horoscope, are ingenuous, and eloquent, and nimble
also both in their wits and fingers; for he was a notable thiefs, who stole
from Admeius his oxen, from Apollo his arrows, from Vulcan his tongs, from
Venus her girdle, from Neptune his trident, and would have stole Jupiters
thunder too, if he had dared. 2. He was the finder out of the harp or lute,
he taught the Egyptians all arts and sciences, he taught men to leave their
rudeness, and become civil and religious: therefore they make him still to be
waiting upon the gods, especially upon Jupiter; I think, to let us see, that
learned and wise men should be entertained in Princes Courts, and such as are
eloquent and ingenuous. 3. They write, that he sucked the breasts of Juno; to
show us, as I suppose, that Juno, that is, rich and potent Princes ought to be
the nursing fathers, and nursing mothers of learned and eloquent men. 4. They
used to paint Mercuries picture on their doors, that he being the god of
thieves, might keep off other thieves from their houses: a goodly religion,
that punishes men for theeving, and yet adore him for their god, who was the
author and patron of thieves and theeving. 5. They called him the son of
Jupiter, to show, that eloquence, sciences, and ingenuous arts are the gifts of
God. 6. They made him winged both in his head and feet, to show the swiftness
and various motions of the planet Mercury, and the nimblenesse of their wits,
tongues, and fingers who are born under that star; as also the nimble force and
power of eloquence in moving men's affections. 7. He killed (by Jupiters
command) manyeyed Argus; to show, as I conceive, that Princes by the tongues of
eloquent Orators are able to tame and subdue the many-eyed multitude, which
are sooner brought in subjection by tongues, then by swords; therefore the
tongue was consecrated and offered in sacrifices to Mercury: At pietate gravem
and meritis si forte virum quem
Conspexere silent, arrectisque auribus adstant;
Isle regit dictis animos, and pectora mulcet.
For this cause they gave power to Mercury to appease storms and tempests: for
as Neptune seeleth the tempestuous seas; so does Mercury or eloquence pacify
a stormy and tempestuous State. 8. I find that sometimes Mercury and Minerva
were painted together, to show how needful the tongue and hand are to beget
wisdom, the one by speaking, the other by writing; and that all Commonwealths
stand in need of eloquent men, and ski^full artificers; for by liberal
sciences, and handicrafts the State is supported: And is it not fitting that
they who are verbal professorus, and Mercuries in their tongues, should be
also Minervaes in their hands, and doers of good works? 9. Mercury was painted
with a rod in his hand wrapped about with two serpents embracing each other; by
which is signified, that eloquence must be joined with wisdom, whereof the
serpent is the emblem; and where wisdom and eloquence are conjoined, there
the State is well governed, which is signified by the rod or scepter, the
symboll of Government. By this rod also is showed, that the most brutish and
serpentine dispositions are made tame, and brought to agreement by eloquence,
as two serpents are upon Mercuries rod; which is called Ceduetus, a radendo;
for all anger and hostility falls to the ground, when that rod does mediate,
that is, when eloquence does interpose; therefore Princes Embass^dours that are
employed to mediate a peace, are called Gaducealores. 10. I find, that
Mercury is painted in some pictures not only with winged head and feet, but
also with a purse in his hand; to show, that he is the god of gain, which is
not got but by diligence, expedition, and wit: hence he is painted with a goat
and a cock by him, to show that as vigilancie, whereof the cock is the emblem,
is required in a Merchant, and in him that will be rich; so likewise must he
venture, and overcome all difficulties, as the goat that chambers up the
highest rocks. Or is it be true that the goat breathes not with his nose, but
with his ears; then by this may be meant, that from the mouths of Orators the
minds of the rude multitude are fed, and live by the ears; and to show that
vigilancie and fagacitie are required in those that will be rich, eloquent, and
learned: Mercury was worshipped in Egypt under the shape of Arubin, with a
dogs head. 11. Mercury may signify the Sun, for his wings may represent the
Suns velocitie; his killing of Argus may show, that the Suns appearance puts
out the light of the Stars to us, which seem to be as so many eyes of heaven.
The Sun seems to look upon us with a threefold aspect, pale, red, and blew; the
first presages rain, the second winds, the third serenitie; therefore it was
perhaps, that they painted Mercury with three heads upon a square stone, to
signify the four parts of the world, or the four seasons of the year. And to
show that the Sun never grows old, or decays in strength, they painted
Mercury always young, beardlesse, and cheerful: and perhaps that picture of
Mercury like a youth carrying of a ram, may signify that the Sun seems to
grow young, and makes the world look youthful, when he enters into the sign
of the Ram in the Zodiac. 12. Because he was held the god of speech,
therefore they made him also the god of bargains and sales; hence he was
called 'A (...), the god of the M^rkets ( Mercurius, a mercando, and his image
was wont to be erected in the Marketplaces; for without speech there cannot be
buying and selling: and we see how nimble-tongued shopkeepers are when they
are selling their wares, as if they were sons of Mercury. 13. He is always
painted with his head covered, to show, that nimble, cunning, and crasty heads
seldom discover their intents; but still h^ve a cloak (as we say) or some
pretense for their actions; so that Argus himself is deceived by them, and
they that are most vigilant and quick sighted are sometimes overreached. 14.
Nimble-tongued Mercury stood upon a square stone: I wish that our faire-spoken
and nimble-tongued professors would prove constant in their ways, and square
in their actions. 15. Jupiters messenger was called (...), from (...), that is,
interpreting, or speaking: so Juno's messenger was called Iris, from (...), to
speak; by which they would show how necessary it is for Princes Ambassadors
to have eloquence, and to be good Orators. 16. I have read, that Mercury
stole from Mars his sword; but we have Mercuries that put the sword into Mars
his hand. Sure these are not the sons of Jupiter Coelestis, but of Jupiter
Stygius: neither are they Cactuceatores, but Fae^iales; they are not like that
Mercury who with his rod made peace; and united serpents, and found out music
and harmony; but like him that found out the art of wrestling and theeving,
the authors of confusion, and the true successors of that Mercury who was
worshipped by the ancient Galls, who delighted in the shedding of men's blood:
these Mercuries are (...), the leaders of souls to hell, and not the bringers
of them from thence. 17. Mercury is painted sometimes with his soporiserous
rod in the one hand, and a short sword in the other; the Devil casts us asleep
in security, and then destroys our souls. 18. Mercury with his rod drives
the souls into hell, and from hell: -- Hac animas ille evocat orco
Pallenies, alias sub ^istia tartara (...);
'Dat somnos, adimisque, etc. --
such is the power of Gods word, it cast us down to hell in denouncing Gods
judgments, and raises us again in the promises of the Gospel. 19. By Mercury
may be understood the desire of knowledge, which bound Prometheus the
Astronomer to Caucasus, that the eagle might feed upon his heart; by this they
did signify the care and solicitude which the Astronomer took, in remaining
upon that hill in the night time to obs^rve the motions of the st^rres. 20. He
begot Hermaphroditus of Venus, and he himself had both sexes, to show us the
nature of that st^rre; for Mercuries power is partly mas^uline, in stirring up
heat, and partly feminine, in causing moisture; therefore he was painted with
a lance in one hand, and a distasse in the other: and he is described by the
Poet to be red or yellow haired, to signify his vicinitie to the Sun; and to
be very beautiful, to show his neernesse to Venus. 21. Our blessed Savior is
the true Mercury, the Son of God, the Word of the Father, the Messenger or
Angel of the Covenant, the Sun of righteousness, the God of order and
harmony, the Prince of p^ace, who by his cross, as the true Cad^ceus, has
reconciled all things in heaven and earth, who has killed the many-eyed Argus,
our vigilant enemy the Devil; whose eloquence was such, as never man spoke as
he did; who has tamed and subdued the two serpents, that is, the perverse and
venomous dispositions of Jews and Gentiles by his cross, and by the same has
delivered our souls out of hell.

MINERVA, or PALLAS.
SHe was the daughter of Jupiter, begot of his brain without the help of a
woman, and was held to be the goddess of wisdom, learning, and arts: she
found out the use of oil, therefore was chosen by Athens to be patroness of
their Chic, which she called by her own name Athene; she invented the use of
wool, of spinning and weaving; and because Arachne in this are durst contend
with her, she was by Minerva turned into a spider.

The INTERPRETER.
1. MInerva was called Jupiters daughter, to show that wisdom and learning are
Gods special gifts; she was begot of his brain, because the brain is the seat
of wisdom and learning; without the help of women, because wisdom comes not by
generation, but by infusion, study, and experience; and women for the most part
are hinderers, not furtherers of wisdom and learning: therefore she is said
to be a perpetual virgin, because men that live a single life have fewest
avocations from the studies of wisdom and knowledge: she came out of Jupiters
head Armed, to teach us, that a wise man is always armed against all assaults
and violence of fortune. 2. She is called Tri^^nta, and the daughter of
Neptune, because she was bred by Triton; or rather, by these poetical terms
of the sea, they meant the dangers that wise and learned men are subject to; or
else, that men gather wisdom and knowledge out of dangers and troubles; or by
this name they may signify the three faculties of the soul, memory, will,
and understanding; or rather, the rational, irascible, and concupiscible
powers of the soul: But I think rather, it is to show, that a wise or prudent
man can guide himself ethically, his family oeconomically, and the Commonwealth
politickly. 3. Minerva's Target called Aegle, as Jupiters was, is clear and
smooth like glass, and has Gorgons head s^t in it, with snakes about it; both
to signify that wisdom is terrible to evil men, and that they fear and tand in
awe of Wise men, as also that Wisdom and sincerity are joined together, which
is expressed by the clearness of her Target; for wisdom is conspicuous to
all: therefore they dedicated the O^le which sees in the dark to her, because
wisdom is able to discern obscure things, and to find out abst^use secrets. 4.
They paint her with a Helmet and a Crest, and a Cock upon the top of her
Helmet; to show that wisdom is both the defense and ornament of a man, and
that wise men are also vigilant with the Cock; but the Crow being a chattering
bird, is hated by her, because much prattling agrees not with wisdom, a wise
man is seldom talkative: and because a wise man knows how to command his
speech, Minerva is sometimes painted with a Crow in her hand; and as she has a
Cock on her head, so she has the Dragon at her feet, both which signify the
piercing sight and vigilancie of wise men. 5. They make her supporting on her
arm a round Target, and a long Spear in her hand; to show that wisdom rules
and supports the world, and that the force of it is such, as that it is able to
pierce the hardest and most difficult things that are; and can reach them,
though never so far off. 6. They made her the President of War, to (...) us
that wisdom and learning are required in a Commander or Captain; they placed
fear and terror by her, for these are unseparable companions of wars and gave
her long clo^k called Poplum, to signify the settled and sedentarle life of
Students, and that wis^dom is still joined with proving. 7. By Minerva's help
Pr^onosheus stole fire out of Heaven, by which he brought many Arts to
perfection, because wisdom is the Inventor of (...), and fire by its light and
Heat is the instruments whereby artificial things are pro^^eed. 8. Of old in
(...) and Colleges, they used to paint Mercury and Minerva close together,
which picture they called Hermathena, from Hermes and Athene; to signify that
Wisdom and Eloquence must not be separated, but that Scholars should strive
as well to h^ve wise heads, as eloquent tongues. 9. They gave her a golden
Helmet, sometimes with a Sphinx upon the top of it, to show that Wisdom is
glorious and shining, and withal that wise men use not to babble out secrets;
for it is Wisdom in some things to play the Sphynx, and not to divulge all we
know to all men promiscuously. Christ himself spoke sometimes by Parables. to
She is called Pallas from the Giant Pallas, whom she killed, or from (...) to
shake or brandish, for so she has been seen shaking of her spear, Therefore
Virgil calls it hastain trementem; her Image was called Palladium, which was
sent from Heaven, and kept to carefully at Rome in Vestas Temple, that none had
leave to see or touch it, but the Virgins that kept it: by shaking the Spear I
think may be meant, that Wise Princes in time of peace, whereof Minerva had the
charge, should exercise their arms, and not suffer their youth to live idely,
and forget military discipline, lest their enemies take advantages by their
security; as for the Palladium, that I a knowledge to be our Religion, which
came down from Heaven to us, which ought carefully to be kept in the Temple of
Vesta, where the sacred fire burned perpetually: The sacred fire of zeal and
devotion, is the means to preserve our Religion, especially if we be Virgins,
that is, pure and holy: and we must not suffer profane and ignorant men to
meddle with the sacred Function of the Min^stery: When the Trojans lost their
Palladium, they quickly after lost their City; so if we lose our Religion, we
must also look to lose that City whose Builder and Maker is God. 11. She is
called Minerva from monendo and minan^io; for wise Governors should partly by
admonitions, partly by threatenings rule their people, and subdue vice; and
indeed, should be still shaking the Spear, to keep disordered men in awe, whom
they should affright with the Gorgens head of the Law, by which their authority
should be reverenced, as Minerva was ^^ared for her Spear and terrible
Buckler. 12. The Olive was dedicated to Pallas, and with the leaves thereof she
was crowned; and at Athens a golden Lamp was dedicated, in which oil did
burn continually; both because she found out the use and way of making oil;
as also to show us that Wisdom is the light and lamp of the mind, and that
neither it nor learning can be attained to without lucubration, study, and
spending of much oil and light. 13. At certain Feasts of Minerva in March,
the Maids were wont to be served by their Mistresses, as in the Saturnalls the
Menservants by their Masters: The serving Maids claimed this as their due
from Minerva, because it was by them that the works of her invention were
performed, as spinning, sowing, and weaveing; by this servants were comforted,
and encouraged in their service, and Masters and Mistresses were admonished not
to insult over their servants: If this equity was observed among the Gentiles,
much more should it be among Christians: For in Christ we know there is no
difference between bond and free, master and servant. 14. Minerva was
worshipped upon the same Altar, sometime with Vulcan, sometime with Neptune; to
show that Arts and Handy-crafts cannot be exercised without Fire and Water; and
whereas Vulcan would have married Minerva, but could never g^t her good will,
for she was a perpetual Virgin, therefore she was called (...), to show that
Wisdom and Learning never die; by this ^e may see that the hottest and most
furious S^iters that are, cannot overcome Chastity where i^ is ^oyned with
wisdom; for this cause Minerva is armed, to show how Virgins had need to
stand upon their guard, for they shall not want Vulcans to assault them. 15.
Juno, Venus, Minerva, strove once who should be accounted most beautiful:
Paris was Judge, to whom Juno promised a wealthy, Venus a beautiful, but
Minerva a wise Wife: Paris preferred Venus, by which we see the folly of many
young men, who in their matches prefer fading beauty ^o wealth or wisdom.
16. As Athen^ preferred Minerva to Neptune, and her Olive to his Harp; so
should all Christian States and Cities (...) Peace to War, Tranquillity to
Troubles and Civil Tempests, (whereof Neptune or the stormy Sea is an
Emblem) and Spinning, Sowing, Weaving, Building, and other peaceable Arts
which she found out, to fighting, quarrelling, and destroying. 17. As there
were certain Images dedicated to Minerva and Mercury, called Herm^henae, so
there were some erected to Mercury and Hercules together, called Hermerachae:
to show that these three, to wit, Mercury, Hercules* and Minerva, that is,
Eloquence, Strength, and Wisdom are the three main Deities of States and
Cities, and must be most of all sought after and honored by Princes. 18.
Minerva had power over storms, which the Poet sh^weth in the first and second
of his Aeneads. He calls the storm which she sent against the Grecians,
Minervae sidus; She had power also over Jupiters thunder, Ipsa Jo^is rapidum
jaculata e nubibus igne^:

By which I think he understood the Sun under Minerva's name; for be by his
heat of all the Planets has the greatest power in causing storms and thunder.
19. As Minerva the Goddess of Wisdom was worshipped on the sime Altar with
Vulcan the God of Fire; so let us not separate zeal from wisdom; but let us
cherish the fire of zeal in our hearts, as well as wisdom in our heads; but
some have zeal without knowledge, and some knowledge without zeal; this is to
part Vulcan and Minerva. 20. Homer gives to Minerva a fiery Char^ot, Iliad. 8.
and describe^ her carrying of a golden Lamp, and holding out a beautiful
light. Od^ss. 19.

(...): Yet he makes her invisible when she went up into Di^medes his Chariot,
then she put on the dark Helmet of (...), so that Mars could not see her; by
this is not only intimated that Minerva is the Sun, who is the light of the
World, and to whom the Poets give a f^ery Chariot; and that he is obscured by
Orcus his helmet, is meant the want of his light to us when he goes under our
Hemisphere; but by this Fiction also is understood, that wisdom is the light
of the mind, and a wise man is the chief light and life of a State; and that it
is not the least part of wisdom in time of Wars and Tumults, for Minerva to
put on Or^us his Helmet, that is, for wise men to live obscurely, and to
conceal themselves: been vixit qui been latuit. 21. Minerva is described by
Homer and others, to have the chiefest place in Heaven next to Jupiter, and to
Be clothed sometimes with Jupiters own garments, and ornaments: to signify
that there is none of Gods gifts more excellent then wisdom, and that there
is nothing wherein m^n resembles God more then in wisdom. 22. Whosoever
looked upon Minervas Helmet, was turned into a stone; to show that wisdom
makes men solid, constant, unmovable, unfrighted in times of trouble. 23.
Christ our Sacrifice is the true Minerva, begot of the substance of the Father,
the wisdom of God, the light of the world, and the splendor of his Fathers
glory, the Author of all Arts and Learneing, the Prince of Peace, the President
of War; whose greatness, purity, wisdom, and goodness* are more terrible
to wicked men, then the Target of Minerva was. He it is that sup^orts the round
World by his power, and has pierced the hard rocks of men's hearts with the
sharp spear of his Word; it is he that has made servants equal with their
masters; and he is the great Patron and Protector of his Church, which is the
City that he has called by his own Name, as Minerva has called Athens by
hers; and that he had power over storms, his enemies acknowledged, Who is this
whom the Winds and Seas obey? The fire of his zeal made him undertake the
form of a servant: and though he died for our sins, and concealed himself
with Or^us helmet, and went down into hell, yet now he is (...), immortal,
death has no more power over him; he is set down at his Fathers right hand,
and is clothed with his Fathers rich robe of Majesty, and eternal glory.

MINOS, see AEACUS.

MUSAE.
THe Muses were the daughters of Jupiter and Mnemosyne; born in Pieria, they
dwelt in Helicon a hill of Boeotia, and in Parnassus, a hill in Phocis not far
from Aonia; hence they were called Aonides. They were at first three, then
seven, at last nine: Apollo was their guide, and the three Graces their
attendants.

The INTERPRETER.
1. OSyris the Egyptian God (thought to be the same with Apollo) delighted
much in Music, but chiefly in the Songs and Playing of nine Virgins which for
this c^use he entertained: therefore they were called by the Greeks, Muses. 2.
There were at first but three Muses, to show three sorts of Music; to wit,
singing, blowing, Playing; the first in the throat, the second in wind
instruments, the third upon strings: or to show the three^old chief learning in
the world, to wit, Philosophy, Rhetoric, and Mathematick; Philosophy is
threefold, to wit, Rational, Moral, Natural: there be three parts in Rhetoric,
the Demonstrative, the Deliberative, and the Judicial: there be also three
parts of Mathematics, to wit, Arithmetic, Geometry, Music. Afterward the
number of Muses were increased to seven, either because of seven holes in the
wind Instruments, or o^ seven strings on the other instruments; or of the seven
liberal Sciences, or of the seven Planets. Lastly they came to be nine in
number, from the nine Sphaeres which they held made a Musical harmony; and
because of the ten stringed Lute, they joined Apollo to the nine Muses, and so
made ten in all: and it may be that from this number of nine Muses, the Papists
have found out the nine Orders of Angels. 3. The Muses were called the
daughters of Jupiter and Mnemosyne, to show that learning cannot be had without
the Intellect and Memory, which are most eminent in learned men; or rather that
God is the Author of Learning, and Memory the Mother or Nurse thereof:
therefore the Poet ascribes to the Muses, Memory and Utterance; by the one they
are preserved, by the other they are heard, Et meministis enim Dirae, and
memorare po^estis.

Hence they are called Musae from (...) to enquire, this belongs to Invention,
and from (...) to in^tiate into sacred Mysteries: and by this is meant
Judgment: so that the Muses or Learning consists in Invention and Judgment;
and because Learning is cherished and maintained by Honors and good Report,
therefore Eupheme was said to be their Nurse. 4. The Muses were winged, to show
the nimblenesse of good wits, and the quickness of Poetry and Music in
moving the affections. For Homer gives wings to words; and the Sirens lost
their wings while they contended with the Muses; so an evil Poet is like a
Bird without wings, he can rise no higher then the earth, his conceptions are
gross and heavy, no ways sublime and aeriall, having lost the two wings of
invention and judgment, by which that incomparable Swanne of Poets did ^lye in
his Divine work of the Aeneads: who has as far excelled Homer, as the Muses
did the daughters of Pierius, who turned them to Mag-Pyes, weareing Crowns of
Pa^ty colored Feathers, which they took out of the Pyes wings: so Homers
confused inventions, are fi^ted, refined, polished by Virgil, and m^de a Crown
better becoming his head then the Mag-pyes wings. 5. The Muses did bear
Palms in their hands, to show they are the Conquerors of men^ affections and
passions; and they did all dance in a ring, therefore the Greeks called them
Muses, (...)* because of the consent, agreement, and harmony that is amongst
the liberal Sciences; Apollo leads the dance, for by him was meant that light
of the mind whereby wise men are initiated in the studies of Learning; the
Grace^ also were joined with them, as Horac^ shows, Junctae Nymph^s Gratiae
decentes. For the Muses are called Nymphs sometimes, as appears by that of
Virgil: Nymphae noster amor Lyb^^hrides. And it is sit that the Graces should
wait upon the Muses; for (...) signifies joy, and this is the inseparable
companion of learned minds: for the Scholar is more comforted in his own
private and solitary life, with a compepetency, then the richest men that are
with their outward pomp and variety: and what greater joy ca^ there be, then
in those Companions who both take us off from unlawful and wicked delights,
which shall end in sorrow, and fill our minds with knowledge of heavenly
things, and sweet contentment: therefore the Muses were held perpetual Virgins,
and they still preserved their chasti^y against all the assaults of Venus. For
men that delight in Learning, scorn fleshly lusts, which prevail most in
ignorant and idle men: and because Poets and learned men love a retired life,
therefore the Muses were said to dwell in des^rt woods and hills; For this
cause the Temples were built remote from Cities: and they were described
sitting on the tops of Parn^ssus, to show that learning has its residence in
the head, which is the top and capital of man's body; and because the Palm
is still green, and the Fruit very sweet and comfortable, therefore the
Muses were crowned with Palms, to show the sweetness, comfort, and
perpetuity of Learning: For the some cause the Poets were crowned with Bays,
and Ivy, to signify the perpetual verdure and beauty of Learning. 6. The
Muses had diverse Names from diverse occasions: they are called Nymphae, the
Goddesses of Water, to show the d^lights, benefit, and cleerenesse of Poetry.
Also (...) and Heliconides, also Pierides, Aonides, from the hills Parnassus,
Heliron, Pieria, and the Country Aonia where they dwelt; they are called also
Pegasides, and Aganippides, from the Well Hippociene, which Pegasus m^de with
his hoose, the Water of which Well made a kind of Musical sound, which also
other waters make in their running, for which cause also I think the Muses
were called Nymphs, and because they drunk Water rather then Wine:
notwithstanding Horace speaks against Water-drinkers, that they cannot be good
Poets: He loved Wine and Wenching to well to believe his commendation of
either: a far better Poet then he, who was called the Virgin Poet, both for his
temperature and abstinence, was no Wine-bibber; I find that Wine in some dull
and Palegmatique bodies, may a little help^ the invention, yet doubtless it is
an enemy to judgment, which is most of all required in a Poet* They were
called also Libethride^, from that Well in Magnesia dedicated to the Muses; and
Thespi^de^ from a Town called Thespia in Bo^tia; and Ilissides from Ilissus a
River of Allic^* and Pimpleides from a Fountain in Macedonia; and Cas^alides
from the Well Cas^ali^; Olympiad^s from hill Olympus; Corycides from the cave
Corycium; Mnemosynides from their mother Mnemosyne; Ardalides from the place
Ardalus; Pateides from a well in Macedonia; Ligiae from a kind of song called
Ligium; Maeonides from the country M^onia. 7. The particular names of the
Muses are Clio from (...) glory, for great is the glory of learning, though
ignorance be its enemy: Euterpe from (...); deligh^full, for there is no
delight comparable to that of learned men: Thalia from (...) to grow green, for
learning will still flourish, and never wither: Melpomene, that is, (...)
making melody; for the life of a Scholar is still cheerful and melodious:
Terpsi^hore from (...) and (...) to delight in singing or d^ncing, for the
songs, dancing, and mirth of learned men are within themselves: Erat^ from
(...) love, for the more a man knows learning, the more he^ loves it; only
ignorant fools hate it: Polymnia from (...) and (...), no men's minds are so
full of melody and spiritual comfort as the minds of learned men: Urania from
(...) the heaven, for learning came from thence; and the minds of learned men
are there, and not upon earthly things: Calliope from (...) a good voice, there
is no outward voice so charming and melodious as the inward voice of knowledge
in the mind, by which a man discou^^eth with himself, and is never less alone
then when he is alone. 8. They write, that diverse men being taken with the
melody of the Muses, forgot to eat and drink, and so were turned into
grasshoppers, who yet continually sing in the fields without meat and drink: by
this, I think, they meant, that many men by too much study macerate and
exte^uate their bodies, looking rather like grasshoppers then men; who
notwithst^nding with their spare diet live longer and healthier then fat
Epicures, feeding as it were upon, and delighting themselves with the songs of
the Muses. 9. Seeing the Muses are Jupiters daughters, and came from heaven,
and are perpetual Virgins, by which is intimated their divine original,
purity, and modesty: it is an injury to the sacred study of Poetry to call
scurrilous and wanton versifiers by the name of Poets, whereas Poetry is ^
divine gift, the end whereof is to praise and honor God the father of it; who
therefore has given wings to the Muses, that they might soar on high in
heavenly raptures; and that they might flee away from the company of such
chattering Mag-pies. 10. As all gods and goddesses had their birds dedicated to
them, so had the Muses; these are the bee^, which do much resemble Scholars in
their providence, industry, labors, order and harmony, temperance also and
observance to their kings; they are content with little, yet afford much
benefit to the owner; so do Scholars to the State: neither is there any bird
to which learned men and Students are more beholding, then to the bees, which
both afford them food and physic in their honey, and light in their
lucubrations in their wa^.

CHAP. XII.
N
NEMESIS.
SHe was the daughter of Jupiter and Necessity; o^ (...) others say, of Night
and the Ocean* the goddess oftevenge, punishing the wicked, and revenging the
good: she was ^^lled Adrastia from king Adrastu^, who first built her a temple;
and Rhamnusia from a place in Attica, where she had a stately image.

The INTERPRETER.
1. NEmesis is Jupiters and Necessities daughter, to show that God in his
justice punishes the wicked* which necessarily he must do, or else he were
not just* nor could he guide the world, if he should suffer the wicked still
to flourish and prevail, and good men to be still oppress^d: therefore Nemesis
is painted with a b^idle and a ruler, by which is represented Gods justice in
curbing and holding in of wicked men, and in ruling of the world. 2. She is
the daughter of Night and the Ocean, to show that God oftentimes punishes men's
sins with darkness, as he did the Egyptians, and the world at Christ's
crucifixion; and with spiritual darkness too, or ignorance of mind, as he
did the Gentiles, and the Jews too, who s^te in spiritual darkness, and saw
not the Sun of righteousness: so likewise he revengeth sin with inundations
of the sea, as he did the first world, and many countries since. Or else this
may show, that ignorance signified by the night, and wealth represented by the
Ocean, which enricheth the neighboring lands, are the causes of wickedness,
and this the occasion of Gods just vengeance. 3. Nemesis is called the daughter
of Justice, because God punishes none but when he is justly provoked
thereunto. Hence some have thought Nemesis and Justice to be the same; which
they paint like a virgin of a truculent aspect, quick-sighted, sad, holding the
balance in the one hand, and a whip or rods, with a hatchet in the other, to
show that Justice must not be partial, but pure from bribes and by-respects,
terrible to the wicked, quick-sighted in finding out the hidden truth, of a sad
aspect, for justice or vengeance does not punish with delight: the rods and
hatchet show the diversities of punishments according to the diversity of
sins: and sometimes she is painted naked, sitting on a square stone, because
Justice must be open, not hid, square and steadfast, not moveable and
unconstant. 4. Nemesis is sometimes described to us with wings, and a crown on
her head, standing upon a wheel, with a cup in her hand on which are engraven
the Ethiopians: The wings show the celeritie and swiftness of Vengeance
pursuing after wicked men; the crown signifies the command and dominion of
Gods justice in the world, on which were carried Stags, and small pictures of
Victory with palms, to show that Justice or Revenge keep men in awe, and make
them fearful, and that the same Justice is a Conqueror or Victor over the
world; the cup with the Ethiopians show that Vengeance can overtake a sinner,
though he run to the remotest parts of Ethiopia; the wheel signifies the
world, which is subjected to the feet of Justice. 5. By Nemesis the Sun may be
meant; therefore the Egyptians placed her above the Moon, by which is signified
that the seat of Justice or Vengeance is in heaven ^ and as the Sun sees all
things, so does divine Justice, from which nothing can be concealed. The Sun
illustrates obscure things, and obscures things lucid; so Nemesis or Justice
raises the humble, and humbles the proud; bringing them to obscurity that
shine like stars in the world, and raising them out of darkness to the light
of honor who have been low in their own eyes. As by the Suns heat and light
the earth is beautified and made fruitful; so it is by Justice that States and
Kingdoms flourish and prosper. 6. (...) or (...), Nemesis signifies both
revenge and distribution; for Justice is twofold, punitive and distributive or
remunerative; not only is Justice the punisher of wickedness, but also the
rewarder of goodness. 7. Jupiter fell in love with Nemesis, and was cherished
in her bosom in the form^ of a white Swan, of which two was engendered an egg,
and of this the fair Helena: By this (I suppose) may ^e meant, that Princes
ought to be in love with Justice* but withal they must be white and unspotted
Swans in their lives. For how can a wicked Prince, whose life is full of
blackness and darkness, be just? But the actions of a godly and just Prince
will prove more beautiful and lovely then ever Helena was, though the daughter
of the white Swan, and begot of an egg.

NEPTUNUS.
He was the God of the sea, the son of Saturn and Ops, the husband of
Amphitrite, of whom and of sea Nymphs be begot mulu^udes of children; he with
Apollo built the walls of Troy; and the first that taught men horsemanship.

The INTERPRETER.
1. THe Gentiles g^ve diverse names to one and the same power of God as it is
diff^sed into diverse parts of the world; in heaven it is called Jupiter, in the
fire Vulcan, in the air Juno, in the waters Neptune, in the earth Vesta, etc.
so that by Neptune they meant that power which is in the sea, moving it with
diverse motions, preserving it from pu^refaction, and restraining it from
drowning the earth; for which cause perhaps they gave him a Trident, or
three-forked s^epter: and as by Neptune they understood the divine power or
nature of the sea; so by Amphitrite they meant the body or matter of the sea,
of which multitudes of fishes are engendered, which they called the children of
Neptune. 2. He is said to find out the use of horsemanship, because one of
that name taught men first to ride; or else because ships seem to ride on the
sea, as horses on the land: therefore Plauius calls a ship a wooden horse, Nolo
vehi equo ligneo: or else because sudden eruptions of the sea have caused men
to get on horseback for the greater expedition, to avoid drowning, who perhaps
otherwise had not rid at all: or it may be that some horse might be seen
swimming toward the shore, which had escaped from shipwreck, which might give
occasion to the ignorant country people to suppose that Neptune gave the first
horse, for which cause he was called (...), Neptune the horseman: or lastly,
by the horse may be meant the swis^nesse and mobilitie of the sea; therefore
because the stars of Cas^or and Pollux are very swift, they were said to be
horsemen. 3. They used to paint Neptune, Nereus, and the other sea gods with a
countenance sometimes frowning, sometimes smiling, to show how the sea is
sometimes stormy, sometimes calm: they made him gray-haired, and gave him a
blew ga^ment, that by the one they might express the foaming, by the other the
color of the sea: therefore blue is called in Plauius Color thalas. sius, the
sea-colour. They gave him a chariot drawn with horses, or as some say, with
great and monstrous fishe^, to signify the swiftness of the sea: they give
him a Trident in stead of a Scepter, by which sometimes he moved and shook the
earth, to show that the sea, by reason of some subterran^all passages get^
under the ground, and shakes the neighboring shor^s with earthquakes in all
the thre^ parts of the earth, Asia, Europe, and Africa; if they had known
America, they would have made his Scepter s^u^sorked, and have called it not
Trid^ns, but Quad^ens: They made the sea-nymphs or Ne^eides wait upon his
chariot, as Virgil in the fifth of the Aeneads places Glau^us, Pala^non, the
Tri^ons, and the whole company of Ph^r^us on the right hand of Neptune; and on
the left The^is, Melite, Panopaa, and the other se^-nymphs, by which they meant
the diverse sorts of fishes, as their names expresse^ and among the rest, Triton
is called Neptunes trumpeter by the Poe^s, a^ the sound of whose shell-trumpet,
the sea cease to rage* because some sea monsters have appeared in such a
form as they describe Triton, and they seldom appear but after a storm in a
great calm: and as for Palamon or Po^^unus, he was the god of harbors, whom
seamen honored with sacrifices upon their returning from any voyage. 4. They
used to paint Neptune holding of a ^low, with a car^ behind him; intimating by
this, that without the sea, the earth could not be fruitful; for not only do
the sea weeds and sands serve in some places for dung to barren ground; but
also the seawater is an help to fertility, as we see in sale marshes:
besides, without rain the earth cannot s^uctifie, but rain is begot of vapors
^xtracted out of the sea: and therefore perhaps he is the god of horses,
because in salt marshes horses are cured of worms and other diseases; for this
cause they used in Illyricum to fling every year four horses into the sea as a
sacrifice for Neptune: and the Romans (to show that N^p^un^ had the charge of
horses) appointed horse-races, called Ludi Circenses, to the honor of Neptune*
and as the foot-companies in their wars had purple for their Colors or
Ensigns, so the horsecompanies had blue, which is the sea-colour. Or I think
rather, that the horses whereof Neptune was god are the sea-horses, called
Hipp^campi, having two sore feet like those of an horse, and the tail or
hinder part of a fish: and therefore this, as all other monstrous fishes are
called by the Poets Neptuni pecudes; and not only were horses dedicated to
Neptune, but also to Apollo, 'Diana, Juno, and Mars: therefore Romulus
appointed horse-races, called Equiria in campo Martio, to the honor of Mars,
which were different from the Neptunalia, ^r lud^ Ci^censes I spoke of but now.
5. Neptune was called Consus, a consulend^, from giving counsel or advice; for
it was he that counseled the Romans to ravish the Sabin^a^ women: but indeed
for better reasons may the sea be called Consus, for it counsels us by its
eruptions and ^nundations to fear God, and to repent for sin. The harmony it
keeps in its motion with the Moon, counsels us to follow the directions of Gods
word in heavenly things: its saltness counsels us to have salt in our selves;
Remember Lots wise. The fruitfulness of the sea and riches thereof, counsels
us to bring forth much fruit, and to be rich in good works. These and many such
like counsels have we from this Consus; which also counsels us to be humble,
and not to swell with a conceit of our own worth or perfections: for though
all rivers run into the sea, yet it swells never the more for that: and likewise
the sea counsels us to be content with our own, and not to encroach upon other
men's estates; for the sea is content with its own bounds, though of its own
nature, situation, and greatness it be able to drown the whole earth again.
The Romans had done better to have erected an altar to Consul for these
reasons, then for counselling them to oppress and wrong their neighbors by
ravishing their women. 6. Some think that Neptune was called god of the sea,
because under King Saturn he was Admir^ll of the sea, and the first that
rigged out a ^leet of ships into the maine: the Trident may perhaps signify
the three squadrons into which he divided his fleet: but if by Neptune we
understand the sea it self, then I think that the Trident may signify the
threefold motion thereof; the one natural as it is water, to ^all downward,
which motion proceeds from its active form; the other natural as it is
sea-wat^r, to ebb and flow, which proceeds from its passive form: the third is
violent, as it is agitated by the winds. 7. Perhaps Neptune was called god of
the sea, because he was by hi^ f^ther Sa^^ns command, who devoured his
children, drowned there: hence fabulous antiquity, in consideration of his
untimely aund undeserved death, made him the god of that element by which he
lost his life. 8. Neptune being in love with Amphi^rite, employed the Dolphin
to procure her good will, for ^he fled and hid her self in Atlas; by this may
be meant, that Princes Ambassadors ought to be faithful and nimble like the
dolphin in executing their masters commands; for the dolphin is a swift
swimming fish, and faithful to man, as diverse examples show: and likewise
Princes should be thinkfull, and not suffer quick and faithful servants to go^
unrewarded: therefore the Dolphin, whether a fish, or some eminent man of that
name, was by Neptune placed among the stars; and i^ painted holding the
dolphin in his hand; for it was by his diligence and wisdom that Neptune
married with Amphit^ite, which is so called from compassing; either because the
sea encompasseth the earth, or is encompassed by the air. 9. Neptune fell in
love with Theophanes that beautiful virgin, whose good will that he might
obtain, he converted her into an ewe* and himself into a ram, the r^st of her
suitors into wolves; of her he begot the golden sleeced ram, which carried
Ph^y^^us to Colchis: by this (I suppose) the Poets would signify, that
unlawful love and unsati^ble lust tur^s m^n into beasts; and that the b^st^rd
sons of Princes are no better than Rams with golden fleeces: for though they
have honor and wealth by the one side, yet they are contemptible by the other;
they have the fleece from the father, but the rams nature from the other. 10.
We^ fitly apply this fiction to the Pope, who is another Neptune, and with his
Trident or threefold power that he has in heaven, earth, and purgatory,
shakes the earth, and moves kingdoms by civil wars: he is the be^st that
rose out of the sea, having fallen in love with the fair virgin of the Church,
has turned himself into a ram, pushing men with the horns of his authority;
and he has made a very sheep of the Church, begetting of her golden-sleeced
rams, that is, Bishops, Deans, and Prebends, which have more wealth and honor
then true piety and learning. Neptune made himself a servant to (...), when
with Apollo he built the walls of Troy; the Pope calls himself Servant of
serv^n^s, and pretends to build the walls of the Church, but indeed overthrowes
them with Neptune, Aenaead. 2. Neptunus muros totanque a sedibus urbem ^ruit.
-- 11. Apollo and Neptune built the walls of Troy; that is m^ant either of the
money that was dedicated to these gods, which (...) seized upon, and therefore
for this sacrilege he and his city were grievously* plagued; and for his
unfaithfulness in ^ot repaying Neptunes money: or else is meant that the
bricks where with the walls were built were made o^ ^lay, or earth mingled with
water called Neptune, and dried or ^uked in the Sun, which they called Apollo.
12. Where^s Apollo and Neptune were forced to s^rve for their living, by this
the Poets would le^ us s^e how unconstant wor^dly honors are, and th^^ (...)
who is a ^ing today, may be a b^gge^ to morrow, as the ^x^mples of ^^s^us,
Diony^^us, Belis^rius, and many others can witness; we may see with Solomon,
Princes sometimes walk on foot, and beggars sit on horseback. 13. In Neptune
we may see the picture of a ty^ant, for tyrants delight in tormenting men, as
it is recorded of Tiberius, Phalaris, Mezen^ius, and others; so did Neptune in
continual vexing and tormenting of Ulysses, whom he would not drown, but kept
him alive that he might be still vexing of him. Again, tyrants do causelessly
and injuriously put men to death; so did Neptune, when he sent out his
sea-calves to affright Hpppolitus his horses, by which he was torn and killed;
and this he did upon a false accusation of his stepmother Phedra to Theseus,
as if Hyppolitus would have ravished her; whereas his innocence and goodness
were known: and had Neptune been a just Prince, he would have ex^mined the
matter, and n^t^rashly condemnd the innocent. 14. Neptune in Homer with the
other gods are feasted in Ethiopia; by which is intimated, that they were a
religious and devout people. I wish we were as ready to feast the true God by
faith and holiness; for he will come and sup with such: but we suffer him to
stand and knock at the door of our hearts, and will not open. Let rich men also
learn to feast Christ in his poor members, that he may in the last day thank
them for feeding him when he was hungry: otherwise the Ethiopians that feasted
Jupiter, Neptune, and the other gods, will rise in judgment against us. 15. As
Juno had the charge of the city gates, and Minerva of the castles and towers,
so had Neptune of the foundation and walls; by which (I think) they meant, that
riches, wisdom, and strength (for in Homer Neptune is called the strongest of
the gods) are required for the preservation of Cities and States. 16. Our
Savior Christ is the true Neptune, the God of the sea, whom both winds and
seas obey; the true Son of God in respect of his divinity, and of Ops or of
the earth in regard of his humanity; who has the true Trident, or full power
of heaven and earth given to him, and likewise the keys of death and of hell;
he is the true (...), or shaker of the earth, as he made it appear both at at
his death and resurrection; and the true Consus, or God of counsel, for his
name was in Isaiah the Counselor: he has married the virgin of the Church,
the fairest of women; who may be called Theophanes, because it was to her, and
for her that God appeared in the flesh; therefore the day of Christ's nativity
was called by the ancient Christians (...), the day of Gods apparition; for
then did he lay aside his majesty, and took upon him the form of a servant,
that he might build the walls of the new Jerusalem. And lastly, as the Greeks
called Neptune P^sidona, that is, (...) making the image, because of all the
elements, water only represents or makes images, by reason of its smoothness
and cleernesse; so it was Christ that made us at first to the image of God, and
afterward repaired this image being dec^yed in us; a fit work for him who is
the express and essential image of his Father.

NEREUS, See NEPTUNUS and OCEANUS.

NIOBE.
She was the daughter of Tantalus, and wise of Amphion king of the Thebans,
who because of the multitude and beauty of her children, preferred her self to
Latona; therefore Apollo and Diana being angered by her insolency, with their
arrows killed all her children, and she with grief was turned into a stone.

The INTERPRETER.
1. TAntalus was covetous, and Amphion rich; when wealth and covetousness meet
together, they bring forth Niobe, that is pride, insolency, and contempt of
God himself. 2. By Apollo and Diana are meant the Sun and Moon; they caused by
their beat and multitude of vapors a great pestilence, which killed all
Niobe's children; hence arose the fiction of Apollo's and Diana's arrows which
killed Niope's children. 3. The turning of Niobe into a stone, i^ to show the
nature and greatness of her grief and sorrow, which made her stupid and
benumbed, and in a manner senseless; for parvae cu^^ l^quumu^, ingen^es
s^upent: or else it may signify the stone monument that she erected to her
^^lfe and children; or that rock in Phrygia, which afa^ of seems to be a woman
weeping, by reason of the springs of water flowing from thence. 4. By this
punishment of Niobe and her children, we may see the judgments of God against
pride and insolency; and are taught not to be pu^t up with conceit of our
selves, wife, or children, but to carry an humble mind even in the highest
fortune. 5. The turning of Niobe into a stone may let us see how God hardens
the hearts of wicked men, as he did the heart of Pharaoh; and that profan^ men
are not mollified and bettered, but hardened, and more obstinate by
afflictions. 6. Niobe sinned, but her children are killed; by this we see, that
it is no injustice in God to visit the iniquity of the parents upon the
children, seeing they are a part of their parents; and in their punishment the
parents suffer oftentimes more then in their own; and God is absolute Lord over
his creature. 7. Here in Niobe we see the pride* of women, which brings
destruction upon themselves, husbands, and family: the beauty of Niobe made her
proud, and pride made her insolent, and insolence caused her ow^ and her
husbands ruin in their children: therefore he that marries for beauty where
there is not grace, will find in that match plus ^ellis quam mellis, more gall
then honey. As it fared here with Niobe, so it did with Cassiope; she in her
pride preferred her self to the Nymphs, therefore her daughter Andromache had
inevitably been devoured by the seamonster when she was tied to the rock, had
not Perseus resc^ed her. 8. Amphion Niobe's husband was an excellent Musician,
he made the rude stones hop together and make up the walls of Thebes; but h^e
that put life into dead stones, and civilized such rude and senseless
creatures, could not for all his music charm his wifes pride and insolency.
Our Savior Christ by the sweetness of his Evangelicall music charmed the
Gentiles, and of such stones raised children to Abraham, causing men to meet
together toward the building of the new Jerusalem; but yet he could not
prevail with the Jews, which he had married to himself, neither could he
cure their pride and obstinacy; though he piped, they would not dance.

NOX.
She was the antientest goddess, the daughter of Chao^, or of Hell, the
mother of Love, Deceit, ^eare, Darkness, Old age, Death, Misery, Complaint,
Sleep, Dreams, and many other such like children.

The INTERPRETER.
1. NOx is so called a nocendo, for the night is the occasion of much
mischief; Nox and amor vinumque nihil moderabile suad^nt. So is also any
grief, sickness or pain more hurtful and vi^lent by night then by day. 2.
Night is called by some the daughter of Chaos, by others, the daughter of Hell;
by which may be meant the night or darkness which was before the Creation, and
so she is the daughter of Chaos* this darkness is called negative in the
Schools: And also the darkness which is caused nightly, and is the shadow of
the earth when the Sun is under our Hemisphere; and so Nox is the daughter of
Erebus, or of Hell; this is called privative. 3. Night is painted like a woman;
because, as the female sex is the weaker and more fearful so is man's nature
more fearful by night then by day, and weaker also, as is seen in sick men.
She has a black garment, and long black wings, of which Virgil, Nox ruit, and
fuscis tellurem amplectitur alis: by these wings she embraces the earth. She
is also carried in a chariot, and is accompanied with the stars, and has the
Cock for her sacrifice, to signify the darkness and qu^lities of the night,
and that the stars are then most seen; and that the Cock by reason of his
vigilancie and noise that he makes, deserves to be sacrificed to the night,
which is the time of rest. Her black hair, her garland of popies with which she
is crowned, and her chariot drawn with four horses, do show the darkness and
ap^nesse of the night for sleep; and the four horses may have relation to the
four watches of the night. 4. Nox was the mother of Death, and of Sleep, and so
she was painted holding two children in her hands both asleep; in her right
hand was a white child, in the other a black; by the one sleep, by the other
death was signified: this was to express the relation and resemblance betwixt
these three, which are promiscuously taken one for another; death is called
night, Omnes un^ manet nox: so death is called sleep, -- Aeterno clauduniur
lumina somno: Sleep is called deaths cousin, Consanguineus lae^hi sopor. 5. If
in a spiritual sense we take night for ignorance, then truly she is the
mother both of carnal security, and of both deaths, as also of all misery;
My people pe^ish* (says God) for want of knowledge; they that sit in such
darkness, sit also in the valley of the shadow of death. 6. Though the
Gentiles made Death the Nights daughter a goddess, yet they gave her no divine
honors, nor temple, nor priest, nor altar, nor sacrifice, nor festival days,
as they used to give to their other gods; because they were without hope, death
was terrible to them; they thought that death did utterly destroy them, or else
bring them to endless punishments: but we Christians do rather love and
honor, then fear death; because not only does she put a period to our sins
and miseries, but also does as it were let us in, and lead us by the hand to
eternal happiness: Therefore the ancient Christians honored the days in
which the Martyrs suftered, and called the^ natales, their birth-dayes. 7. They
clo^hed death with a black garment all beset with stars, by which they
signified she was the daughter of the night; perhaps because more die
naturally by night then by day; for nature is weaker by night then by day, and
less able to resist sickness or death, by reason of the S^^s absence, who is
the author of life and health. But we may well say that the death of
Christians is clothed with stars; for by her we shall be made more bright
then the stars of the firmament. 8. Nox is the mother of Deceit, Love, Fear,
Complaints, Misery, Dreams, etc. because these reign most in the night, but
especially in the night of ignorance. 9. Sleep is one of Nights daughters,
because sleep is procured by the darkness and vapors of the night; for the
night is moister then the day, and moist bodies are most sleepy: therefore they
placed the City of sleep near the sea, and said that it was watered with soft
running rivers, and that Lethe or O^livion was sister to sleep; for then we
forget our cares: The two gates of horn and Ebonie in the city of sleep, were
to show the cleernesse and obscurity of men's dreams, according to the
cleernesse and muddinesse of men's temperatures and constitutions. And whereas
sleep could never overcome Jupiter, it was to show, that Princes and Commanders
ought to be more vigilant then others. Lastly, Sleep was painted with wings, to
show how suddenly it seases upon men.

NYMPHA^.
THese were the Peities of Waters; the daughters of Oceanus and The^is, the
Mother of the Rivers, and Nurses of Ceres and Bacchus; of these were diverse
(...).

The INTERPRETER.
1. BEcause the Nymphs were the Deities of Waters, or of moisture, therefore
they had diverse names from the diversities of waters and moisture; their
general name is Nymphae, quasi Lymphae, that is waters; but from the waters
that spring out of mountains, they are called Oreades; from the moisture of
woods and trees, they are named Dryades, and Hama^^yades; from the moisture
that is in Flowers and pasture grounds or meadows, they are called N^paeae, for
(...) is a pasture field; from the Sea waters they are called Nereides, whose
father was Nereus the sea-god; from the waters of rivers they are termed
Naides, for (...) signifies to stow, and so from fountains and springs they
are called Naides; hence all springs are called son^es sacri, as being
consecrated to, and in the special tuition of the Nymphs; and because rivers
and fountains in their motion make a kind of musical sound, the Nymphs are
called Muses sometimes; the Nymphs of standing waters are called Lymiades, from
(...) a pool; the Nymphs are also styled Ephydilades, because they are hid
under the waters. 2. The Nymphs are called the daughters of Tethys and
Oc^anus, because all rivers and springs proceed originally from the Sea, and
are increased and maintained by rain, which also by the Sun is exhaled out of
the sea. 3. The Nymphs by Virgil are called Junos hand-m^ids, ^unt mihi bis
septem praestan^i corpore Nymphae. because the clouds, mists, rain, and other
waterish meteors, by which springs and rivers are maintained, be engendered in
the Air, which is called Juno. 4. The Nymphs are called the Nurses of Bacchus
and Ceres, to show that wine and ^orne are cherished and increas^d by moisture;
and so be all ^^getables; neither is Ceres us^ful to us, nor Bacchus wholesome
without their nurse; for by water the m^al is kneaded, and by w^ter the wine is
tempered. 5. In Homer and Vir^il I find the Nymphs at work, busy in spinning
and wea^ing: to show how much women should avoid idleness, seeing goddesses were
not idle; neither is it any disp^ragement for the greatest women to put their
hand to the distaste, and according to the old English name, be indeed, as they
are called, spinsters, seeing the Nymphs themselves are not ashamed to spin:
in their hollow rocks called by Virgil Nympharum domus, in whose caves Homer
describes the Bees making honey, that even by that example women may be indu^ed
to be diligent and provident; for if they give themselves to idleness, wh^t will
follow but lu^t and wantonness, which I think the Poets expressed in that
fiction of the Nymphs that fell in love with H^l^, that fair boy, and ravished
him. 6. The Nymphs that nursed Bacchus, were by Jupiter translated into st^rs,
and called Hyades, to show perhaps that wine tempered with water, makes the
mind sit for heavenly raptures, and sublime thoughts, whereas strong wine of it
self intoxicates the brain, and makes it sitter for sleep then contemplation.
7. If the Nymphs and Muses be the same, it is not without cause that the hill
Nymphs called Or^ade^ found out the use of honey, as some say* therefore the
Nymph M^liss^ gave her own name to the Bees, to signify that learning is the
food of the soul, and it is that which sweetneth the life of man: there is more
honey and sweetness in the life of a Scholar on a hill, then of a Prinoce in
his palace.

CHAP. XIII.
O
OCEANUS, NEREUS, TETHYS, GLAUCUS, THETIS, TRITON, etc.
OCeanus was the son of Coelum and Vesta, the husband of Tethys, and father
of all the gods. Nereus the son of Oceanus and Tethys, the husband of Doris, of
whom he begot multitudes of children called Nereides from him. Tethys the
daughter of Coelum and Vesta; the mother of rivers and fountains. Glaucus one
of the chief seagods, who before was a fisherman. Thetis the daughter of Nereus
and Doris. Triton the son of Neptune, and the Nymph Silacia, be was Neptunes
trumpetter. etc.

The INTERPRETER.
1. OCeanus is called the son of Coelum and Vesta, that is, of Heaven and
earth, because the Sea has its preservation and motion from the Heaven, and by
it is encompassed, and by the earth it is born up, as a child by the mother. 2.
Oceanus is called the Father of all the Gods, because all things have their
original from moisture, without which there can be no generation, nor
corruption; hence Thales made water the original of all things: and for this
cause the Poets speak of such multitudes of children that were of Neptune or
the Ocean: for indeed the Sea is more fruitful of Fishes, then the earth is of
other living creatures, and because all springs and rivers proceed from the
sea, they called Oceanus the father of all the Nymphs. 3. The Gods are said to
be feasted by Oceanus, either to confirm that opinion of some, that the stars
are fed by the vapors that arise out of the sea, and are converted into
clouds; for the stars being of a fiery nature, are tempered by these moist
vapors, as they think; this was the Stoics opinion, which is resuted by the
Aristotelians, and is touched by Virgil Aen. 1. Conveza polus dum sidera
pascet: Or perhaps by the Ocean feasting of the gods, may be meant, that the
chiefest dainties that Princes feed on, are either from the sea, or conveyed
from remote Countries by Sea. But observe that the Gods feasted themselves in
the Sea, where is much water, but no wine: by which I think is intimated that
great men should be temperate in their Feasts; but now our gods have forsaken
drinking of water, and will feast no longer in the Ocean: Wine is the liquor we
feast with: the gods retained their honor while they were content with water,
but men degenerate into beasts while they intoxicate themselves with wine. 4.
The Ocean was painted with a Bulls head, either to signify the violent ^ushing
of the sea against the shore, or to express the bellowing noise the Sea makes:
he is also painted sitting in a cha^iot with his wife Tethis drawn by four
wheels, accompanied with Tritons and Sea Nymphs: by the chariot is meant the
swift motion of the Sea: and by his company are understood the diverse sorts of
Fishes which are said to wait upon the Ocean, becau^ they have their being and
habitation in the Sea. 5. I^^ no is said to have her education in the Ocean, be
cause of the vicinity the Air has with the Sea, bo^^ in situation and nature;
for the Water is quickly co^verted into Air, and this ag^ine into Water; the
Clouds are begott of Sea vapors, and they fall again into the Seas lap; and
thus is Juno educated and nourished in Oceanus: Or else by this may be meant as
(...) think, that riches, whereof Juno was goddess, are^ maintained and got
by Navigation. 6. Oceanus. (...) a great friend to Prometheus, for he was a
wise (...) and provident, and a good Astronomer; they tha^ would find the Sea
favorable to them, bad need (...) wife, and provident, and observant of the
(...) tim^ of Navigation; and be skillful in Astronomy and O^ographie too, to
know the Rocks, Quicksands, Shelves* Shoares, and Courses of the Tides; he
that in the^ is not Promotheus, will prove Epimetheus, and repen^ him of his
Navigation; which Palinu^us knew when he checks Morph^us, A^n. 5. for
counselling him to fal^ asleep, being in a dangerous Sea between Sicilie and
Italy: Mean salis placidi vulium, fluctusque quie^os
Ignorare jubes? mean huic considere moustro?
7. Neptunus, Oceanus, Nereus, Terbys, Glaucus, Thetis, Triton, Phorcus,
Proteus, and diverse others mentioned in Poets, are but different names of the
same thing, to wit the Sea. Nereus, Thetis, Proteus, are said to transform
themselves into diverse shapes, to signify, as I think, the diverse colors of
the Sea water, which sometimes looks green, therefore they gave the Nereides
green hair, Vi^idet Ne^ei^um comas; sometimes white, there Tethys i^ painted
with gray hairs, and a white garment, and partly also to intimate the
Antiquity of Navigation, and partly, as suppose, the cares and fears of
Seamen; for (...) facit ^anos; and Seamen become sooner gray-hayred then
others: the Seawater also looks sometimes blue, therefore the Seas are called
Caerula by the Poets; and the word Glaucus, which was the Sea god, signifies
the blue color, and Tibris is described by Virgil in a blue veil or mantle;
-- Eum glauco velaba^ amictu Carbasus: -- Sometimes also the Seawater w^ll
look red, as in a storm. And sometimes black: an lipithite often given to
the Sea by the Greek Poets. Or else this transforming of the Sea gods into so
many s^apes, may signify the diverse faces of the Sea: for sometimes it looks
with a smiling countenance in calmes; sometimes it frowns, as in storms, and
roares like a Lion; hence, Omnia tra^sformat sese in miracula rerum,
Ignemque (...) seram, sluviosque liquentes.
8. Proteus was king of Egypt, who used to have in his scutcheons and ensigns,
sometimes the figure of a Lion, sometimes of a Bull, or of a Tiger, or of a
Dragon, or of Fire; hence arose the fiction of Proteus transforming himself
into diverse shapes* Fiet enim subito Sus ho^ridus, a^aque Tigris,
Squamosusque (...), and sulva ce^vice Leoen^.
And by this is represented a wise Prince, who ought to ^^commodate himself to
all changes and ^ccasions, and to use his government accordingly; for there is
nothing here perpetual; and sometimes as occasions, and times, and men's
dispositions alter, so must also government both in Church and Sta^e. That
French king was too much like Proteus, who would have his Son learn no more
latin then this: qui nescit di^^imulare, nescit imperare. 9. Proteus was a
wise man, and a Prophet, who foreknew future things: Quae siu^, quae sue^int,
quae mox ventura (...). in this he was the type of a ship-^aster, who ought to
be skillful in the weather, and in those things which belong to his Art of
Navigation, and withal to have a foresight in the changes of the weather; for
want of which knowledge and providence, many ships are cast away. 10. Proteus
never played his part so much as now a days; is you look upon men's opinions
both in Religion and other things, into what multitudes of shapes is Religion
now turned? if you look upon men's garments, into what monstrous shapes do men
turn their bodies almost every month? if you look upon Sophisters in their
disputes, what windings, turnings, and intrical changings of words and
propositions shall you find, that you know not where to hold them? Tot variae
illudunt species, totque ora fera^um. Truth was never changed into so many
shapes as now, for every fond opinion is taken up and maintained for truth: but
the more opinions prevail, the more should wise men lay hold on truth, and hold
her fast, till she return to her own shape. 11. Tethys was the wife of
Oceanus, perhaps they menet by Tethys the Mediterraen Sea and other bays,
which were so united to the Ocean, as man and wife; by which union the
Mediterrane abounds with Fishes, and so do the other bays or arms of the Sea.
12. Thetis was also the Sea, and married to Peleus, because perhaps he was much
addicted to Navigation: In their marriage all the gods were present except the
goddess Discord: it were happy if she were absent from all other marriages.
13. Glaucus was a Fisherman, who in winter had a way to catch Fish, which
others had not; he was also an excellent swimmer and diver under water: being
at last drowned or devoured by some great fish, he was by superstitious people
held for a Sea-god; from such weak and foolish beginnings has idolatry
received its increase: so Phorcus king of Sardinia being drowned by Atlas in a
Naval fight, was by his people made a Sea-god; in like manner Ino who was
called also Leucothea, and Matuta, being both drowned, were made Sea-Gods; so
was Palemo^ or Portunus being a mortal man and buried in Isthmus, made a God
after his death. This custom the Romans borrowed in deifying of their
Emperors after death, and the Papists in canonizing of their Saints. 14.
Triton is most commonly taken for a Sea monster having the upper parts like
those of a man, but the* lower parts like a fish; which they made also a Sea
God; because of his monstrous, and unusual shape; but I rather think, that by
Triton is meant the sea, in whose upper parts or superficies men use to trade,
in the lower parts fishes have their abode, and perhaps from hence arose the
fable of Tritons Monstrous shape. 15. By Matuta or Matutina may be meant the
morning, by Pale^on, which is from (...) to shake is meant the wind which is
Matutas son because it is raised by the morning sun; these are laid to fall
into the sea, and to be made sea gods, because of the power which the sun and
wind have over the sea.

OEDIPUS See SPHINX.

OREADES See NYMPHS.

ORION.
He was the son of Hyreus begot of the Urine of Jupiter, Mercur^e and Neptune
when they pissed in the o^e ^ide, with the flesh of which these three gods were
seasted by Hyreus* for he being childlesse obtained this for a^^ward of his
hospitality; for after the hide was buried by their command ten months in the
g^^und, Vrion was borne, so called from the Vrin, but afterward, he was named
Orion, he pro^ed an excellent hunter, and was Dianas companion, but for
bragging too much of his skill, was killed by a Scorpion, and after that placed
among the Stars.

The INTERPRETER.
1 ORion is a constellation consisting of seventeen stam whereof seven of them
are very bright, thereso^^ Virgil girds him with gold: (...) auro circumspi^
Orion, this constellation arises in the winter at which time great storms are
raised and much rain falls, therefore in respect of the darkness of the air
which Orion (...)seth by railing such quantity of vapors and clouds, (...)
which storms, rain, and thunder are ingendered, he^ said by Seneca to affright
the gods tenet Orion D^os and perhaps he was said to be begot of the gods
Vrin^e, becau^^ abound^ce of rain falls by his influence; hence he is calle^
Nimbos^s, Agnosus, Plu^i^sas Orion, by the Prince of Po^ He is said to be
killed by Dia^ns arrows Diaie virgi^ls (...) niitus sagitta, because when the
moon shines bright (...) the full, his stars are scarce seen, others write,
the he was stain by the Scorpion, because when this rises^ the other falls and
is hid. 2. Orion may be the type o^ an excellent governor, who for his justice
and author^ (...) is begot of Jupiter, for his eloquence of Mercury; so his
skill in horsemanship and navigation of Neptune; the men of excellent parts and
eminent virtues are called the sons of the gods; therefore he was rewarded by
all the^ three gods; by Jupiter with a place among the stars, by Mecucilrie
with skill on the harp, by Neptune with ^alnesse (...) body, that he could
walk through the son.

-- quam magnus Orion
Cum pe^^ (...) medii per maxima Nerei
Stagna viam scin^tas humero super (...) undas
3. Orion for ravishing of Mecops the daughter of Oca^ plon lost his eyes, by
the same Ornopion; and for his pride and bragging of his skill, was killed by
Diana, thus we see that lust and pride seldom go unpunished. 4. Orion
recovered his sight by Vulcans help in counselling and conducting him through
the sea to the East, toward the sun; we shall never recover our spiritual
eye sight which we lost by our spiritual fornications, but by the fiery
zeal of the spirit conducting us through the sea of repentance, to Christ the
sun of righteousness. 5. Some in steed of Mercury make Apollo one of Orions
fathers: by which I think is meant that by the natural heat of the seed,
which they called the Vrin^ of the gods; and the radical moisture thereof, and
the influence of heaven, every generation is effected in this inferior world,
for Jupiter is the heaven, Apollo the natural hear, and Neptune the radical
moisture. 6. Hyreus for his hospitalit^e in entertaining the gods lost not his
reward, neither shall they that entertain Christ in his Ministers and poor
members. 7. By Orion may be meant the vapors which are extracted out of the
sea by the Suns heat, and the Heavens influence, for these three are the
parents of Orion; or the vapors there obscuring the light of the moon was
expressed by Orions assaulting of Diana, who by her arrows killed him, because
the moon by her light and influence oftentimes dispells and consumes these
vapors. 8. Blind Orion carried Cedalion on his shoulders by whom he was
directed and guided toward the Sun, even so the blind Church of Rome carried
the Protestant; Church even in the time of her greatest blindness, upon her
large shoulders; who was directed by the Protostants in all ages toward
Christ; but she would not go, and in this her condition was worse then that of
Orions, for he followed his director, and received his sight; but she
persecuted and killed her directors, and continue^ yet in blindness. If ye
ask then where the Protestant Church was before Luther, I answer, upon the
shoulders of blind Orion, or of the Romish Church, directing her to the sun of
righteousness.

ORPHEUS.
HE was the son of Apollo and Calliope, who by the sweetness of his music
caused birds and beasts, stones and trees to follow him. Having lost his wife
E^ridice who running away from Ar^steus w^^ st^ng to death by a Serpent he went
down to hell to bring her back; who b^ his harp so charmed Pluto and
Proserpina that they suffered her to depart thence with him; on condition that
he should not look back, till he were quite out of hell; but he did look
back and so he went without her; therefore in discontent he dissuaded all men
from marriage, which caused the Thracian women to tear him to pieces.

The INTERPRETER.
I Think by this fiction may be meant the force and power of Magic; for
Orpheus by witchcraft and spells brought up the image, shadow, or
representation of his wife, out of the grave, as the witch of Endor did raise
Samuels body, or shadow rather. 2. Euridice signifies justice and equity, to
which Orpheus, that is Princes and Magistrates ought to be married; if this be
slung to death as oftentimes it is by the serpent of war; the Prince by the
Melodious harmony of peace and concord, must bring it back again. 3. Great was
the love of Orpheus to his wise that would venture himself down to hell to
recover her, what a shame is it for any Christian, so to hate his wife as to
wish her rather in hell then to take the pains to fetch her thence. 4.
Ministers ought to be like Orpheus when any soul of their slock to which they
are spiritually married, is by despair or any calamity, as it were sunk down
into hell; they should by the melodious harmony of the sweet tuned harp of
Gods word, call them back from thence, and raise them up again. 5. O^pheus did
too much bewail the death of his Euridice; but so must not we that are
Christians; we may be sorry for the departure of our friends, but not mourn
like those that are without hope; nec sicci sint oculi nec stuant:. 6. Whilst
Euridice was running away from Ari^^cus she was stung by a Serpent, Ari^leus
signifies a good or just man; they that shun the company of good and just men
shall be a prey for the Serpent, even that red dragon the Devil. 7. Orpheus
his harp was said to be carried by water from Thrace to the Isle Lesbos, by
which was signified that the Ilanders gave themselves to the study of music
and Poetry, after Orpheus was killed in Thrace. 8* The same harp of Orpheus
when it was handled by him, charmed the beasts, and ta^ed their wild nature;
but being handled by Neanthus King Pi^^acus his son in Lesbos, so enraged the
dogs that they flew upon him, and tore him. By this we see what disferent
effects one and the same thing can produce, being used or abused, and how by
the same harp of Gods word some are tamed, others enraged; some saved, some
damned* to some it is the savor of life, to others of death; the Apostles that
by the harp of the Gospel tamed thousands of wild Gentiles, who were no
better then bru^t beasts, by the same harp, so enraged the dogged natures of
persecuting tyrants that they proved worse then wolves and bears. 9. The
reason why the body of Orpheus was torn in pieces, was because he dissuaded
marriage; the reason why the mystical body of Christ's Church is torn into so
many factions, is because the Pope inhibited marriage in the Clergy. 10. By
Orpheas charming of stones trees, birds and beasts with his music, is meant
how Governour^ at first by their wisdom and eloquence did bring rude and
ignorant people, G^nus indocile, et dispersum montibus altis, to civilitie, and
religion, and to submit themselves to wholesome laws, forsaking their wild
customs. 11. Orpheus for want of moderation in his affection to his wife in
that he could not forbear looking back upon her, though a little while, albeit
he was prohibited, brought destruction on his Eurldice, and sorrow on himself;
by this we are tought how dangerous a thing impotencie in love is, by which
many otherways, good men have brought misery on themselves and others. 12.
Orpheus was an Astrologer who first taught the Grecian^ that knowledge
mystically, by showing the motion, harmony, and order that was among the seven
planets, by his harp, that had seven strings as Lucian shows, for which
cause they placed his harp among the star^ about which is the Lion, Bull, and
other creatures which gave occasion to this fiction of Orpheus, his charming of
beasts with his harp. To his knowledge of the seven planets Virgill alludes,
when he gives him in the Elysian fields a seven stringed harp; Obloquitur num^
to discrimina v^cum. 13. Orpheus was the first tha^ brought into Greece, the
mad Bachanalls, or Orgya, in which he was torn himself; by which we see how
many are undone by their own inventions; then, (...) dangerous it is to bring
in new ceremonies or Religion into a state; besides, what bloody effects
proceed o^ drunken meetings. 14. Christ is the true Orpheus who by the sweetness
and force of his Evangelicall music caused the Gentiles who before were stocks
and stones i^ knowledge, and no better then beasts in religion to follow after
him: it was he only who went down to hell, to recover the Church his spouse
who had lost herself* by running away from Aristeus, even goodness it self,
and delighting her self among the grass and flowers of pleasure, was stung by
that old serpent the Devil. What was in vain attempted by Orpheus, was truly
performed by our Savior, for he above has delivered our souls from the
nethermost hell; and at last was he torn with whips, and thorns, and peirced
with nails and a spear upon the cross for our trans^ressions.

PALLAS See MINERVA.

CHAP. XIII.
P
PAN, FAUNUS, SYLVANUS, SILENUS, SATYRI, etc.
He was the god of sheepheards; and finder out of the pipe or cornet, red
faced, horned like an ox, footed like a go^ve rough and hairy on his thighs
and legs.

The INTERPRETER.
BY Pan may be meant the universe as the word (...) shows; therefore they
fained him to be begot of the seed of all Penelopes woers, because the world is
composed of the seeds of all things, as the poet shows.

-- Magnum p^r inane colecta
Semina terrarumque, animaeque, undaeque suerunt,
Et siquid; simul ignis -- his red face is to show the color of the heaven,
his long beard signified the masculine virtue of the fire and air, in the
production of things, he wore the spotted skin of a red dear, to re^esent the
starrie heaven, his rough and hairie thighs and legs* ^ signified the
roughness of the earth, with ^ockes, trees, bushes, hearhes; by his
sheepeheards ^ooke in one hand may be meant that providence by which the world
is guided; by the seven pipes in his other hand is meant the harmonious motion
of the seven planets; he is painted also with wings to show the swiftness of
the heavens motion. 2. By Pan some understand the^ Sun, for his horns signify
the sun beams; and his ^ooked staff may show the Suns oblique motion in the
Zodiac, his long beard represents his beams which he casts downwards, as the
horns, his beams which he dartath upward; with these he illuminates, the
upper regions, with those, the lower. His wingesshew his swift motion; he is
painted with a flowrie or branched garment, to represent how the earth is
clothed with flowers at his approach; he is the God of mountains, woods, and
groves, because in such places he was first worshipped; and he is called the
God of sheepheards, because they first admired the Suns motion, power, and
beauty, and so gave him divine honors; or because sheepheards being still
abroad with their flocks, stand most in need of his light and heat; he was
cheesely worshipped by the Arcadi^as, Pan deus Arcadiae, because that Country
most abounded in sheepheards, who called him the Lord of the woods, or of the
universe rather, and because Pan was said to drive away wolves, that they might
not hurt the flocks; he was called Pan Lycaeus and to him was erected the
lupercall at Rome, and those festivities called luper calia; and not only Pan
but Jupiter also was called Lyceus perhapps by both names, they meant but one
God. And in the same place to wit in Lyc^um a hill of Arcadia, Bacchus also was
worshipped with Pan and Jupiter; Ev^der I sinde brought this Pa^-worship into
Itali^ from (...) cadia his Country. ^. Pan was much given to lust and
renerie, therefore they saine that he was begot of Mercury in the form of a
goat, and that he had the hornos, bear^, hairynesse, and cloven foere of a
goat, perhapps they might signify that the (...) whom they mcant by Pan, with
his heat and influence being temperat, stirs up renerie, and desire of
procreation in all sensitive creatures, namely in the spring, when he comes
toward us, and his heat is moderat; then as the Poet says all sensitive
creatures feeling him, in furias ignem^ve (...). 4. He fed in love with the
Nymph Syrinx, and the Nymph Ecc^, Syrinx running from him was turned into a
cane by which they signified that Bacchus was the first inventor of the pipe or
whistle, which he made of canes* and delighted most in that music, and his
falling in love with Echo, (...) to show, how sheepheards who lived in woods
and caves, (where the greatest Echoes are most commonly,) took delight to
hear the resounding of their music. 5. P^ and Bacchus were constant
companions, and they two subdued the Indians, to show I think, that wine and
music agree well together in cheering up of the hearts and drooping spirits of
men, and we know that many men, besides Indians are subdued by wine and music
daily. 6. Pan invented the trumpet or cornet for war; by the sound of which
the Persian army was so affrighted, not being acquainted with that sound
before, that they ran all away; hence arose the saying of Panicke terrors, when
we speak of sudden fears; with such a fear were the Galls, under Brenn^s
affrighted when they came to spoil Apo^^oes Temple; and because cattle are
often times suddenly ^ affrighted, the cause being unknown, the shepeheards
^sscribed this fear to Pan. 7. The Arcadians maintained a perpetual fire in
the Temple of Pan, by which they signified that Pan was the Sun, the fountain
of heat and sight; or else that the natural heat of the body is the main cause
of salacitie or venerie, of which Pan was the type; and because wine excites
lust, and seldom do wine and venerie part company therefore they made
Bacchus the companion of Pan, and of the Sa^yres; and old Sile^us the father of
the Satyrs is always described drunk, Hesterno in flatus venis ut seniper,
la^he Et ^ravis attrita pendebat cantbarus ansa, and still with a cup of wine
in his hand; and to show that lust or wantonness consists nor only in heat,
but also in moisture, they fained that Pan has the Nymphs for his nurses, and
not only was Pan himself worshipped among the Greeks, but the goat also
whose Son he was, and whose shape and nature he so much resembled was held in
great veneration among them: And because Sea men are most salacious and so are
such as feed most on fish, perhapps for this cause they fained that Pan was
the god of Fishermen. 8. Pan is said to be in love with the moon, because
Fishermen, and shepeheards who have occasion to be abroad much in the night,
stand much in neude of the moonelight, with which they are most delighted. Or
if by Pan we mean the Sun, then he is said to be in love with the Moon,
because of their monthly conjunction. 9. I suppose Pan might be some great man
among the Grecians as Faunus, among the Latins, but of a deformed shape, or in
some thing resembling a goat; such deformed men were called Ar^ipa^es; there
are too many of these now, not resembling goats so much in their shapes, as in
their qualities; suffering themselves as they write of Pan* to be overcome by
Cupid, and to be inslaved to their own lusts and affections. 10. By the
Sa^yres, they meant country clownes or deformed hairie men, given to dancing,
drinking, and wenching, who when they grew old and sottish, they were called
Silini; and are painted riding on an ass, to show that then gowtie feet are
not able to carry theht, but are beholding to the ass as wise as themselves;
and more deserving doubtless, or else they would not have placed the ass that
carried old bald pated, flat nosed, pot bellied Sil^nus (for so I^ciant
describes him) among the stars; what shame and madness was it for the Gentiles
to make gods of such deformed creatures. 11. I believe Silenus was one who is
his youth delighted much in planting and dressing of vineyards; therefore I
think it is, that he was made foster Father to Bacchus* for which kindness
Bacch^ cherished him in his old age; for wine moderately taken is a cherisher
and comforter of old age, and he deserves to drink wines when he is old, who
will take the pains to plant them while he is young* 12. Faunus also is one of
their country gods so called from Fando speaking or prophesying; and his wife
was called Fatua, from prophesying, hence all that foretell future things, are
called Fatuarii; and Fatui are such as speak in considerately: In all country
places where there is an echo, there the Faunes and Satyrs were said to dwell;
and that disease which is called Ephial^es by the Greeks, by us the night
mare, was thought to be sent by these Fauni; Plix^ calls this disease Faunorum
ludibrium. 13. Sylvanus the god of woods the son of Faunus and brother to
Stercalius the god of dung; for he that taught men first to in rich their
grounds with dung, was also deifyed, he is called in Greek (...) the god of
matter; for wood or timber is so called, and in Latin ma^eria, is wood fit for
timbe^, he is called by Horace tutor finium the ^^lar god of country bounds;
perhaps because that ^etofore countries were bounded by woods and by them
^parated one from an other.

ANDORA See PROMETHEVS.

PARCAE.
THese were the three fatal Sisters, to wit, Clotho, Lachesis, and Atropos;
the daughters of Jupiter (...) Themis, or as others say of hell and night; the
one holds a distaffe, the other draws out the thread, and the third cutts it
off.

The INTERPRETOUR.
1. BY these three Sisters may be meant the threefold state of man in this
world.

1. Of his birth, therefore they are called Pacia a partu. 2. Of the
continuance of his life. 3. Of ^is death, hence one of them was called No^^,
because man is brought forth the ninth month; the ^, Decima, because man lives
ten times ten years, for ^ 100. years make up the ordinary time of the most
healthie man's life that is; which number notwithstanding few attain; but fewer
exceed. The 3 was Morta called also Atropos, for from the privation to the
habit, from death to life there is no returning by the course of nature;
Lachesis draws out the thread, Clotho wraps it about the spindle, Atropos cutts
it off.
2. By these three Sisters, they signified the three differences of time;
Atropos is the time past, which cannot be revoked; Clotho the time present,
Lachesis the time to come.

3. By these three Sisters called also fates or destinies, they signified the
secret decrees of God, concerning man's birth, life and death, therefore they
made them the daughters of Jupiter and Themir or Justice, because nothing
befalls to us in this life but by the decree of God, grounded on his justice;
and because we should not pry too much into these decrees, they fained these
three Sisters to dwell in a dark cave, and to be the daughters of night, and
of Erybus, because his judgments are a bottomless deep, how unsearchable are
they, and his ways past finding out: and because his decretes are immutable,
therefore they made the fa^es, the daughters of necessity, into whose Temple
at Co^^^h It was not lawful for any man to enter; intimating a^ I conceive,
that no man ought to search into the secret decrees of God.

4. They write that there was such union and agreement between these three
Sisters, that they never differed or fell out. I think by this they meant,
that Gods decrees how ever they may seem to be repugnant sometimes, yet they
are not so indeed, but keep an admirable correspondencie with each other, and
an harmonious concord, which may be signified by the musical harmony which
these Parca kept in Singing together.

5. They write that these three Sisters were clothed in white, and wore crowns
on their heads, and held fast an Adamantin distaffe, reaching from one end of
the world to the other. By this I conjecture they meant the innocence and
candor of Gods decrees, their dominion and rule over all created things, their
stabilitie, soliditie, perpetuity, and extent over all the world.

6. I read that these Sisters are called Jupiters Scribes, and that they were
winged, and waited upon Pluto in hell; what can this else mean, but that by
the divine decrees we know as it were by writing, the will of God^ and that the
same decrees extend even to the punishing of the wicked in hell; and that the
execution of them i^ swift, and comes flying with nimble wings upon the workers
of iniquity.

7. The Gentiles understood neither the nature of God, nor his decrees when
they subjected Jupiter him self to them, and made their Gods unable to alter
their fates; we know that God in his nature, is unchangeable, but yet his
decrees are alterable, for what he decreed against Niniveh and Ezechiah was
changed. It Is true it is not in the power of man or Angels to alter them non
sollici^a possunt curae mutare rati slamina susi, but God is omnipotent and a
free agent, and immutabilitie is the Attribute of his essence, not of his
decrees; therefore the doctrine of Seneca is Stoicall not Christian; non illa
d^^ vertisse licet, quae nexa suis currunt causis.

PENELOPE.
SHe was the daughter of Icarius and Peri^aea; the wife of Ulysses, who
continued chaste twenty years together in her husbands absence, neither could
she be drawn by her many woocrs to violat her conjugal faith.

The INTERPRETER.
SHe was at first called Amaen that is rejected, because her parents slighted
and cast her off, for (...) is to deny or reject; but afterward she was called
Penelope, from the gennies or turkey henns named Meliagrides and Penelopes; for
they fed her being an infant and exposed by her father into the sea in a
vessel. Here we have a notable example of Gods providence, who when father and
mother for sakes us takes us up, and cheerisheth us; and especially is h^s
goodness seen toward infants who cannot help themselves, as may be seen in
Moses when he was cast into the river; and many others mentioned in profane
stories.

1. The reason why Icarius rejected his daughter was because he misunderstood
the Oracle, which told him that she should be (...) the modesty and glory of
women, whereas he thought she should be the disgrace and shame of women, thus
we see how all mischeife in the world comes by false interpretations of Gods
oracles in Scripture and misunderstandings in divinity.

3. (...), a man commended for his prudence, married with Penelope the rare
pattern of chastity and continence; to show how well these agree, for wisdom
and lust will never accord; because lust or venerie is madness or folly as
the word shows (...).

4. Though Icarius with prayers and tears entreated Penelope to stay with him
in Lacedemon, rather then to go to Ithaca with Ulysses, yet she preferred the
dangers (...) troubles of the Sea, and a strange barren country, to her own
home, and her husband to her father; by which we see how the woman must forsake
Father and Mother, and cleave to her Husband; and much more must every soul
married to Christ, who is the wisdom of the Father, forsake kindred, riches,
honors, ease, and all to follow after him.

5. Icarius would not bestow his daughter but upon a man that did excel both
in wisdom and virtue; I wish all Parents did a^me at this in matching their
daughters, and not at wealth altogether; which too many do by which means
many good women are undone and d^vers unhappy effects succeed upon such
marriages.

6. In Penelope we have an excellent example of conjugall faith and chastity;
let all women learn of her to be loyal, faithful, and constant to their
Husbands is their absence, and to keep the conjugall oath and vow.

7. Pen^lope put off her importunat suitors by undoing her cloth by night,
which she made by day; for so she promised that when her work was at an end,
she would marry; by this we see how needful it is for women to be employed,
no means so fit to preserve modesty as labor and employments; whereas
idleness is the devils pillow, and the cause of so many whoredoms otia si
tell^s periere Cupidinis arcus; as the Poet: shewet ^in Argysus, asking the
cause of his adultery, answers, that he was idle, desidi^sus erat.

8. There is no virtue that becomes a woman so much as modesty, which Penelope
expressed, when being solicited by her Father to stay with him; and Ulysses
leaving it to her choice, whether she would stay at home with her Father, or
follow her Husband; answered nothing, but covered her head with a veil; by
which her Father knew her meaning, that she desired to follow her Husband; in
memory of which fact, in the same place, the image of God modesty was
erected; if once a woman cast off that veil of modesty, she is lost; Cui
perist pudor, illam ego periisse puto.

9. When Eurynome in Homer advises Penelope to wash her body, to anoint it,
and to put on better garments, and to leave off her sad life; she refused it;
as things not becoming her modesty, nor sitting that she should use any
means whereby she might look pleasing in the sight of her wooers; how much
do the women of this age differ from Penelope, who spend most of their time in
washing, painting, and trimming of themselves; dum moli^c^tur, dum ornantur
annus est, by this they show not only their pride and levitie, but by such
baits they draw inconsiderat men to lust and vanity.

10. Though Penelope had many importunat Suitors and her husband stayed away
twenty years from her, yet she continued constant, and at last was delivered
by her Husbands coming home, who killed all these Suitors: even so, though we
have many Suitors, the devil, the world, the flesh, or lusts and desires; yet
we must not hearken to them, but be constant to the end, and faithful to our
Husband Christ, who though he has bin long from us, yet will return at last,
in an hour when they think not and will slay all our enemies, and give them
their portion with hypocrites.

PERSEUS.
HE was begot of Jupiter and Danae whilst she was enclosed in the brazen tower,
Jupiter transforming himself into a golden shewer, and so falling into her
bosoln^, when Acrisuis Danaes Father heard this, he exposed both bi^ daughter
and her son, in a chest to the Sea, who were ^ave^ by a fisher man; afterward
Perseus overcame the Gorgon^ and cut of Medusa's head; and delivered
Andromeda, (...) Cepheus his daughter from the Sea monster; after dive^sether
brave exploits, he was placed among the stars.

The INTERPRITER.
1. PE^seus is called the son of Jupiter because he w^ an excellent man, and
had done great and bra^ exploits in subduing the Gorgones, either will b^asts,
or cruel women in Africa; in warring with the Ethiopians; in rescuing of
Andromeda; in subduing the Kingdom of the Argivi; in erecting a College o^
School in Helicon, for which fact he was said to be place^ among the stars,
that is extolled by men's praises unto the stars.

2. In that Jupiter in the form of gold getts within Da^aes brazen tower; we
see that no place Is so strong to hold out, where there is a golden key to open
the gates, or a golden ram to batter the walls; wherefore it was said that
Philip of Macedon subdued more towns with hi^ gold, then with his sword.

3. Perseus was said to be begot of gold; either because perhapps his hair was
yellow and of the color of gold or because his Mother was hired for gold to
prostitute h^t body to Jupiter, or because his parents left him great store of
wealth and gold; which is as it were a second Parent; for poor Parents bestow
on their Children but the life of nature, rich Parents bestow on their sons,
the life of honor, and worldly delights; for the life of a poor man in wan^
is little better then death.

4. That Jupiter did fall into the lap of Danae in a golden shower is but a
fabl^; yet it is most certain that the Holy Ghost descends into the hearts of
the faithful, like a shower of rain, to make them bring forth the fruits of a
good life, or spiritual Children to God.

5. When Perseus over came Medusa, and her Gorgous he covered his head with
Orcus his helmet, by which he was made invisible, he that will overcome the
world and the Gorgones of envy and malice must be content to live an obscure
and private life; for no men are sooner overcome by such, then they that live
in public and eminent places.

6. The Gorgones which Perseus killed, are thought to be the basilisks a kind
of beasts in Africa alone, which kill with their ey called Catoblepae, because
they look still downward; they are described by Mela, Plini^ and Aclian; if
we will be like Perseus, good Soldiers indeed, and deserve a place among the
stars with him, we must kill the Gorgones or Catoblepae within us, even those
covetous affections that are still loooking downward, and fastened on earth and
earthly things.

7. Perseus was so brave and excellent a man, that not only was he himself
made a constellation; but like wise his wife Andromeda, his Father in law,
Cepheus, and his Mother in law Cassiopcia, for his sake; by which we may see,
how one worthy person does innoble a whole family.

8. Perseus could not obtain the fair Andiomeda, until he had first killed
Medusa, and then the Sea monsters: neither can we attain true content and
happiness, until we have subdued the monsters of our lusts and affections.

9. Out of the dropps of blood which fell from Medusae's head, which Perseus
cut off, there ar^se multitudes of serpents in Africa; this may represent the
nature of heresy, which when it is slain by the sword of truth, and of
authority, yet out of it springs up new heresies, like so many serpents from
the blood of Medusae's head.

10. Our blessed Savior is the true Perseus, the son of the true God, and of
a pure Virgin, exposed in his infancy, and all his life after to many dangers;
he has subdued all our spiritual Gorgones, and has delivered the Church his
fair spouse, from the Devil that great monster; who was ready to devour her;
at last having conquered all his enemies, he has ascended into glory, and
there has prepared a place for h^s Andromeda the Church.

PHAETON.
HE was the Son of Sol and Clymene, who taking occasion by his Fathers rash
promise, entreated and obtained of ^im leave to guide his chariot for one day;
but for want of ^^rength and experience in him, the horses grew unruly, and ran
so near the earth, that had not Jupiter struck him down with his thunder
bolt, the earth had bin burned up.

The INTERPRETER.
1. BY Phaeton may be meant some fierle exhalation or comet, which being near
the earth, caused a great heat siccitie, or conflagration for (...) signif^eth
burning, and (...) to manifest or make clear 2. Phaeton was an Astronomer, who
spent much time in observing the course and motion of the Sun, therefore was
called his Son, but dying before he could bring his observations to
perfection, was said to be killed by Jupiters thunder, for even the natural
death of a young man seems to be violent. 3. Sol begot Phaeton of the Nymph
Clymene, which is from (...) to overflow; by this is intimated, that of the
heat of the Sun and of moisture, fruits are engendered, which from their
appearance or shooting out of the earth and tree, are called Phaeton from (...)
appearing; at which time when the sun is very hot, the trees also send out
amber or gumm; which is expressed by Phaetons sisters converted into trees,
whose tears are turned into amber. 4. He is said to be drowned in the river
Eridanus, because commonly after great heat and siccitie, follow great floods
and inundations of water; or else because when the constellation Eridanus
rises, heat is abated, and great raines follow. 5. By young and rash Phaeton
we see, how dangerous a thing it is for a common wealth to be ruled by young,
and rush heads, or such as want experience and judgment, a confl^gation in
that state must needs follow; therefore Rome made ancient men called therefore
Senator^ to ^e their rulers, and not young men; they knew by experience at
Canna, what odds were between young rash Flaminius, and old stayed Fabius, qui
cunitando restituit rem, an old man's shadow is better then a young man's
strength, temeritas slorentis aetatis prudentia Seneciuti^. 9. Phaeton presumed
too much upon his birth thinking that he was able enough to rule that chariot
of his Father Phoebus, be being his own Son; it is madness to presume too
much upon our birth and gentry; many men being puffed up with such arrogant
thoughts, have undone themselves and others. ^. The ruling of men, or guiding
of a Kingdom, is ars artium, and a work of no less difficulty then the ruling
of Phoebus his chariot; if we consider the obloquies, envy, fe^res, and
dangers to which rulers are subject* if we consider the unrulie and head strong
multitude, whose heads are not easily kept in by the curb and bit of
authority, no more then the Suns horses were by Phaetons strength; if we
consider the multitudes of Scorpions, Lions, Bulls and other wild beasts, that
is feirce and cruel natures, whereof there be more in the state among men, then
in the heaven among the stars; if we consider how much wisdom and
moderation is required in a governor* who must neither use too much his
authority, for that is to mount too high; nor must he be too gentle and
familiar, or use too much lenity, for that is to fall too low. 8. By Phoebus
we see how dangerous a thing it is in Princes to make rash and inconsiderat
vows and promises; which if they tend to the hurt or detriment of their
subjects, ought rather to be broken then kept; if Phae^^rs had either not
promised, or not performed what he promised, neither had tho ^arth be^n burned,
nor his Son drowned. 9. Lee younger (...) learned by Phaetons example not to
trust too much to their own heads; but to be advised and ruled by their
elders, especially their Parents, to whom they owe obedience; for want of
which, they (...) into many inconveniences, and are ^^ely punished ^or their
teme^itie (...) In that Phaeton Sisters were ^^ned into trees; we are taught to
moderation in nour^ing for the lost of our friends; for too much sorrow makes
^^en stupid and senseless, and unfit to serve either God, or the country;
such are rather trees then men; for the like excess in mourning, (...) his
fellows were turned into Sea birds* and Phaetons kinsman Cygnus, into a swan;
men cease to be men, when their passions (...) them beyond the bounds of reason
(...) else by this co^version of Dio^^^des his fellows, (...) of Cygnus, may
b^ (...), that when great men, or Princes fall into any misfortune their
fellows, friends, and kindred, become birds and fly away from them; this was
Jobs case, David's and many more; and such friends ^ld King Alphonsus compare to
Sea Mewes that slew about his gally whilst he had (...) to feed them, but when
that was spent they slew away.

PLUTO PLUTUS.
HE was the Son of Saturn and Ops, the brother of Jupiter and Neptune, the god
of Hell, and of riches, who ravished Proserpina, the daughter of Ceres, while
she was gathering of flowers, and carried her away in his black ^^ach to Hell.

THE INTERPRETER.
1. WHen Saturnes three Sons shared his estate amongst them, hell by lot fell
to Pluto, that is, some mines under ground of metal, fell to his share, by
which he grew rich, therefore was called the god of riches.

2. Pluto was Saturns Son, the foster child of peace, the brother of Jupiter,
Juno and Neptune, to show that time, peace, a temperate climate, and air, and
likewise the Sea, and navigation are the chief causes or occasions of riches.

3. As Jupiters thunder bolt has three points, Neptunes Scepter, three forkes,
or teeth, so Plutoe's dog has three heads, to show that either of these
three gods has a threefold power, to wit in heaven, earth, and hell.

4. Pluto has a three headed dog to guard him, and keys also in his hand,
to show that rich men, are careful to guard their wealth under many locks and
keys; and they want not their mastives to guard their houses; centum ferratis
limina portis addita, centenis serrea claustraseris, cuslodesque canes, etc.

5. By Pluto may be understoode the Sun, who is called the god of Wealth or
(...) because all wealth, as well that which is on the superficies of the
earth, as also that which is in the bowels of it, is begot of the Suns light
and influence.

6. He is called the god of hell, in relation to his being under the earth,
when he shines among the Antipodes, who is said to ravish Proserpina, that is
the seminall virtue which is in herbs, trees, plants and corn, which in
winter when the Sun is far from us, lies hid in the bowels of the earth.

7. Plutus or Pluto is painted with wings when he goes from us, but he halts,
when he comes to us, to show that wealth is slow in coming, but swift in
departing; for it flies away with the wings of an eagle says Solomon; again,
wealth comes to good and conscionable men but slowly and halting; but to
cheaters, extortioners, oppressors, liars, and perjurers wealth comes flying;
his black horses come galloping to them.

8. Pluto as he is taken for death or the grave is blind, because death is no
accepter of persons; rich and poor, Kings and beggars, Philosophers and dunces
are all a like to him, divisne prisco natus ab Inacbo nil im^cre^^, et infima
de geme sub diu moreris, victima nil miserantis Orci.

9. Pluto had a helmet called Orri galea, which whosoever wore, became
invisible and free from danger, this was worn by Minerva when she fought
against the Trojans, that she might not be seen by Mars. I think by this
helmet may be meant the grave, or coffin by which the dead are made invisible
to us, and by it they are def^nded from the injuries of beasts and birds.

10. The Cypress tree was dedicated to Pluto, and with the leaves of it, he
was wont to be crowned, to show the nature of death; for as this tree being cut
down never budds or grows again; so neither do the dead rise again, by the
course of nature, therefore this tree was much used in funerals; and chiefly
because of its strong smell, fit to keep off the stinch of the dead bodies
while they were burning; of all the wealth that a rich man injoyes, this tree
only says Horace shall accompany him to his urne; neque harum quas colis
arborum te praeto invisas cupressos ulla brevem dominum sequetur. Why Plutos
head was crowned with Narcissus, I know no reason, but because of its strong
smell, and because the seed thereof is black.

11. Pluto was called the god of the departed manes o^ ghosts, because he first
found out the way of burying the dead, who before lay unburied, as also perhaps
he found out the funeral oblequies or ceremonies of burialls; with which only
Plutus or rich men are honored; for the poor man is free from such vanities.

12. It Is not without cause that the same who is god of hell, is also god of
riches; for the riches of gold and silver which we so much swet and labor
for, are nere hell in the bowels of the earth; in ipsa sede manium opes quoe^^
mus, says Pliny; besides, covetous rich men, have a hell within them, if we
look upon their cares, and fears, their watchings, and toylesome labors,
besides the checks of an evil conscience; so that Pluto is in Plutus, hell or
Orcus has his Throne in the rich man's mind, there is the three headed Cerberus
continually barking, and the furies continually torturing of him, suum quodque
seelus agitat, amentiaque assicit, sua quemque sraus, et suus terro^ maxivie
vexat.

13. Some make Pluto and Plutus different gods; and they will have Plutus to be
the Son of Jason and Ceres, and he was more worshipped then any other god;
Ceres is corn, and Jason from (...) to hall, we know that plentiful crops
make rich farmers; and the practice of Physic has enriched many, dat Gal^nus
opes, and I am s^re no god is now held in so much veneration as wealth (...) in
praetio praetium.

14. Pluto is called by Homer (...) implacacable, (...) unconquerable (...)
most hateful; both to show the nature of death which is inexorable, and
therefore hated of all, as also the quality of a rich miler, who is odious to
all men, even to those that are nearest to him, non (...) salvum te vult, non
filia.

15. They write that Pluto trembles when there is any earth quake, fearing least
the earth should cleave, and so let in the light upon him, which he hates;
irepidant immisso lumine manes; this expresses the nature, of wicked men, who
hate the light, because it manifests their works; such delight in darkness
rather then light; and such was our condition before regeneration, we delighted
altogether in the works of darkness, as Pluto did in black sacrifices, and
night ceremonies for it was not lawful to sacrifice to him by day, therefore
Aeneas Staygio regi noctumas inchoat aras.

16. Plutoes attendants in hell are the three headed Cerberus, the three
furies, the three harpies, and the three Parciae or fatal Sisters, these do
show the company of rich milers, who by unlawful means get wealth, they have*
within them a three headed dog still barkeing, the three furies still raging,
the three harpies still craving and snatching, and the three fatal Sisters
measuring out his life; which oftentimes Atropos cuts off before they live out
half their days.

17. To Pluto they give keys, by which he locks the gates of hell, that none
may return thence; but they were deceived, it is only Christ that has the
keys of hell and of death; he opens and no man shuts, etc. he will open
the adamantin gates of death in the last day for us, and has already opened
for himself, when he rose the third day, breaking through the bars of death;
for it was impossible that the chains of death should detain him. who will see
more of Pluto let him look upon the word Ceres.

POLLUX See CASTOR.

POLYPHEMUs See CYCLOPES.

PRIAPUS.
HE was the Son of Bacchus, and Venus, begot by him, when he returned from the
Indies, for then Venus fell in love with him, and crowned him with roses: but
when she was bought to bed of Priapus, he was so deformed a child, because of
Juno's enchantments, that Venus slighted him; he was the God of Gardens.

THE INTERPRETER.
1. PRiapus is begot of Bacchus and Venus because wine and lust, are the maine
causes of procreation.

2. Venus fell in love with Bacchus after his return from the Indies; to wit,
when he was idle; for while he was employed in his expedit^on against the
enemy, he had no thoughts of Venus: this was David's case when he fell in love
with Bathsheba. Love is the employment of idle people, otiosorum negotium.

3. Bacchus returned a conqueror from India, but is conquered by Venus; he is
indeed no conqueror, that cannot conquer himself; this was the case of
Hercules, plus tibi quam I^no nocuit Venus.

4. Bacchus is crowned with roses when Venus fell in love with him, to show
that sweet smells are provocatives to lust, especially the rose, which
therefore was consecrated to Venus.

5. Priapus was a misshapen, deformed child; thus God does often punish the
inordinate lust of the Parents, with the deformity of their children; and so
they are punished for their Parents sins.

6. In Juno we see the malice of a woman that is jealous of her husband, she
cares not what mischief she does so she may be revenged on her husband,
because she knows not how to be revenged upon Bacchus, Jupiters bastard Son,
she does what hurt she can to Bacchus his child.

7. Priapus was called the God of Gardens, because he was the Son of Bacchus
that is of the Sun, and of Venus, that is of moisture, to show that all trees,
herbs fru^ts and plants are engendered and maintained by the Suns heat, and
their radical moisture.

8. In that Venus was ashamed of her own child, we may see that how ever lust
and other sins may seem pleasing for the present, yet they bring forth in the
end nothing but shame and confusion.

9. Venus tell in love with Bacchus, and so begot Pria^us; it is a dangerou^
thing for women to love wine, the fruit thereof must needs be deformed, wine
has caused many a woman lay aside the veil of modest^e.

10. Some make Priapus the Son of the Nymph Nai^ others of Chion, which
signifies snow, by which I believe they meant, that moisture in summer, and
snow in winter by keeping in the natural heat of hear^s and plants, are the
causes of fertility.

11. In that Venus forsook her child, she represents the nature of a whore,
who proves an unnatural mother, more regarding her own filth^e pleasures,
then the welfare of her child. Other things may be here written of Priapus, ^ut
for modesties sake I forbear them, not thinking them worthy of Christian
c^^es, and to use La^to^ius words; Pr^apum non de^^do m quid (...) ris^ dignum.
l. 1. de scis^^li^ion.

PROMETHEUS.
HE (...) the son of Japetus and Themis, who having made a man of clay, by
Minerva's help got up to heaven, and there he stole some fire from the Sun,
and wi^h it put life into his man: for which Jupiter was angry, and sent
Pandora with a box full of miseries and mischief, and withal bound Prometheus
to the hill Caucasus, where he had his heart every day eaten up by an Eagle,
and renewed again.

The INTERPRETER.
1. BY Prometheus perhaps may be meant a wise Father, who begets a stupid and
foolish Son, udum and molle lutum: such a father is fraughted with more
griefs, then Pandora's box was with mischiefs, especially if his son be
not bettered and spiritually enlivened by the Celestial fire of wholesome
admonitions, then is his fathers heart eat up by cares, as Prometheus heart
was by the Eagle. 2. Prometheus perhaps was the first Statuary or Image maker,
which expressed a man so the life, as if he had animated it with Celestial
fire; which Image gave occasion to Pandora's box of mischief to fly abroad:
for it occasioned Idolatry and the mischiefs that followed on it; and because
God was highly offended at it, he has oftentimes punished both the
Image-makers and worshippers with cares, doubts, and fears, as receiving no
comfort or satisfaction from their Images. 3. By Prometheus I think may be
fitly understood a wise Doctor, or spiritual Pastor, who animates men that are
by nature but clay, with the Coel^stiall fire of divine truth, for which work
he is oftentimes rewarded by wicked men with Pandora's box of afflictions, and
has his heart continually eaten up with cares. 4. Promotheus might be an
Astronomer, who continually looking on the Celestial fires, that is the
stars, and observing the Suns motion upon Ca^casus, was said to be tied
there, and to have his heart eat out by the Eagle of cares and study. ((...)
cura.) ^. By Pr^^^h^^ t^^ G^ruil^s might understand God himself, who by
Minerva, that is, by his wisdom made man of clay, and breathed in him the
breath of life, which is the Co^lestiall (...) they speak of; but Jupiter,
that is God (s^^ they gave him diverse names) was angry; for so we read, that he
repented he had made man, and lay^d upon him diverse miseries, diseases, and
cares, with which his heart is eat up in the day time, but is renewed by
sleep and rest in the night. 6. Some make a^ Historical sense of this
fiction, underst^nding a c^rtaine King, in whose Country the River Aquila, so
called from its swistnesse, overflowed the whole Land; this caused gre^ dearth
and mortality amongst his Subjects, which was the occasion of his miseries and
car^^; but Hercules cut the River, and so was said to kill the Eagle, and fr^ed
both the Country of water, and the King of his cares. 7. Adams perfections may
be here understood* for he was quickened by Prometheus ((...)) th^^ is
Providence, and Minerva, that is wisdom; and this Providence or Prometheus
was the son of Th^mis, that is, it was derived from his original justice; on
him likewise was bestowed pardon, that is, all gifts or perfections: but
as soon ^s he preferred the voice of the woman to the voice of God, of
Prometheus, he became Epimetheus; he lost his wisdom, providence, and other
perfections, and so by the event and woeful experience, he began to grow wise
again. 8. In that Prometheu^ fell into so many troubles and miseries by
putting life into his man of clay, this may show us that men begin to have
their life full of cares and troubles, when they begin to have children; the
man that lives a single life, is free from Pandora's box, and the devo^ring
Eagle. 9. God is the true Prometheus says Tertulli^n, (...) blasphe^i^ils
lan^lnaint; who having made man of cla^, and having put an heavenly fire into
him, he is worse used by him then Prometheus was by the Eagle; for the Eagle,
not the man which he made, picked his heart* b^t the man that God made* does
continually wound him with his sins and blasphemies. 10. Man may be called
Prometheus, for he is of all sublunary creatures the most prudent and
provident; and by a special providence of God he was created; Gods providence
also is most of all seen in man's preservation, and no creature subject to the
mischiefs of Pandora's box, and the Eagle of cares as man is; which is the
reason that man in Hebrew is called Enosh, and miserable (...) by Virgil and
Homer. 11. Prometheus was a Philosopher, who was said to steal fire from
heaven: because he was a curious observer of Lightning, Comets, and other fiery
meteors; and was the first that found out the use of fire among men, for which
he was honored after death with sacrifices, altars, and festivalls in which
men did run with light torches in the night; which custom also was observed
in the feasts of Vulcan, because he was the god of fire; and o^ Ceres, because
she sought out her daughter Proserpina with torches. 12. The same fire that
gave life to Prometheus his man, occasioned also burning Fevers, which destroy
man: Hor. Post ignem aetherea domo
Subductum, macies, and nova Febilum
Te^i^ in^ubuit cohors.
thus the natural heat preserves our life whilst it is temperate, but when it
exceeds this temper, it destroys our life. 13. Promotheus made up his man of
the parts of other creatures; and so of their qualities also, intimating that
man has in him alone the evil qu^lities of all the beasts; the Foxes
craftiness, the Goats wantonness, the Bears or Wolves cruelty, the Lions
anger and fierceness: prae annibus animalibus homo est pessimum animal. 14.
Lucian lib. de Sacrif. writes that Promotheus was nailed to a Cross on the
hill Caucasus, where his heart was picked by an Eagle, only for the love he
carried to man; I am sure our blessed Savior who is the true Prometheus was
nailed to the Cross upon mount Calvarie, where his heart was divided by a
lance, only for the love that he bore to man when he was his enemy.

PROSERPINA, See CERES and HECATE.

PROTEUS, see NEPTUNUS and OCEANUS.

CHAP. XV.
R.
RHADAMANTHUS see AEACUS.

RHEA, CYBELE, IDAEA, BERECINTHIA, TELLUS, VESTA, PHRYGIA, DINDYMENA, OPS, etc.
RHea was the daughter of Coelum, her mother was Terra or Vesta; her husband
was Saturn, she was the mother of all the gods.

The INTERPRETER.
BY Rhea is meant the earth, from flowing ((...)) because she flows with all
good things; or rather, as I think, because all rivers and springs of water are
continually flowing within her, and upon her: she is called Ops from wealth or
help, because she affords all wealth, and is still helping of us. Cybele is
from the cymballs which she found out, or from a hill of that name: so from
hills on which she was chiefly worshipped: she is called Idaea, Phrygia,
Berecyathia, Dindymene; from her stability she is called Vesta (vi sua stat) or
a vestiendo from clothing; for she is richly clothed with herbs, grass,
flowers, trees, etc. she is also called the great mother; for we are all from
the earth, therefore as soon as children were borne, they were set down upon the
ground, as it were in their mothers lap; she feeds and clothes us, and receives
us being dead into her lap again, and so covers us. 2. Rhea was painted like an
ancient matron, clothed in a branched or flowery garment, with a Crown like a
Tower on her head, with a Scepter in one hand, and a key in the other; these
did signify the earths antiquity; her flowery superficies, her circular or
round figure; her strength in supporting so many Towers and Cities, her
dominion over all living creatures; for the earth in their composition is most
predominant; and her key does show, that sometimes she is open, as in the
Summer and Spring, when all plants and trees bud out of the earth, and sometime
shut, as in the winter* round about her were the Carybanies in their arms, to
show that all quarrels, wars, and taking up of arms, is for her, or for
small portions of earth, Partimur f^^^o, mercamur sanguine fuso:
Ducimus exiguae glebae de part triumphos.
her chariot was drawn with lions; by which I suppose may be meant the
earthquakes: for as it is a fearful thing to sit in a chariot drawn with lions,
so is it to be in houses while the earth is shaking; or else by this they would
show the dignity of the earth: for it was fitting that the mother of the gods
should be drawn by the noblest of the beasts: and withal as I conjecture, to
teach us that reasonable creatures should not be stubborn and rebellious to
their parents, seeing the fierce lions submit their necks and backs to their
common mother the earth. 3. A Sow was sacrificed to Rhea, to show the fertility
of the earth, for the sow is a fruitful creature: in her sacrifices also her
Priests used to beat brazon drums, to express the noise of winds, and rumbling
of water within the hollow parts of the earth, non (...) sic geminant Corybames
era. 4. Rhea was Saturns wife, because as she is the mother of all corruptible
creatures, so time seems to be the father; for all things by the earth are
produced in time. 5. Rhea was the daughter of Coelum and Terra: by Terra I
think may be meant the Chaos out of which by the influence of heaven, or rather
by the God and maker of heaven, the earth was produced. 6. Seeing the earth is
the mother of the gods, Kings and Princes have no great reason to bragg of
their pedigree, for they are but from the earth: therefore why should earth and
ashes be proud* Pyrrbus was not ashamed to light from his horse, and to kiss
the earth, acknowledging her to be his mother: this I^b a king confesses, when
he says that he came naked out of his mothers womb, and shall return thither
again. 7. S. Austin de elvit. Dei, l. 2. c. 4. reproves the gentiles of his
time, who in their festivalls called Magalesia, did use to carry the ^mage of
Cybele in solemn procession, and wash it in the river, in the mean time
lasciviously abusing with sc^rrilous speeches, and such ribauldrie and
irreverence the mother of their gods, as they would be ashamed to utter in the
presence of their own earthly mothers: quae sacrilegia, si illa er^nt sacra?
aut quae inquinatio, si illa l^vatio? may we not as j^^tly complain of the
Christians of our time, who worship him in outward ceremonies, but defile and
abuse him with their wicked lives, and many times in his presence speak and do.
that which they dare not do in the sight of men. 8. The gentiles could
acknowledge Rhea to be a Virgin, and yet the mother of all the gods; what
reason then had they not to acknowledge Mary to be a Virgin, who was the mother
of the true God? 9. The priests of Cybele called Galli from the river Gallus in
Phrygia, used to geld themselves, and with sharp knives to cut and slash their
own flesh: what reason then have Papists to brag of their devotion and zeal
on good friday in whipping of themselves, or in their vow of voluntary
chastity? Is not gelding more then forbearing? and wounding with knives more
then whipping with cords* 10. I wonder not why the gentile gods were so cruel
and savage, and delighted so much in shedding of man's blood; for I find that
Cybele their mother was nursed in her infancy by wild and ravenous beasts. 11.
Cybele fell in love with one Atys a young man, and was defloured by him; but he
being sl^in by her fathers command, she ran mad ou^ of his house, with
disheveled hair, with a drum and a fise; in memory of this her priest^ used
drums and fises in their sacrifices: by which we may see what gods they were,
who had such a mother, and what Religion that was which worshipped such
deities: and how much are we bound to God, who by his Son our Savior has
delivered us out of this spiritual darkness, slavery, and tyranny of Gentile
idolatry, into the light and liberty of the Gospel, and knowledge of the true
God. 12. The same Cybel^ which was mother of the gods, was mother also of the
giants and Titans that were enemies to the gods: even so the same earth that
produces nourishment by which we are maintained, yields also poison by which
we are destroyed; so the same church affords holy men and sons of God, it
affords also wicked men and sons of Satan, as was typified by Rebeckah, when
Jacob and Esau strugled in her womb.

CHAP. XVI.
S
SATURNUS.
He was the son of Coelum and Thetis, who married Ops his sister, and begot of
her Jupiter, Juno, and diverse other children; but he devoured his male
children, that after his death the kingdom might return to Titan his elder
brother: but Jupiter was preserved by Ops, and bred in Crete; who coming to
manhood, because Saturn intended to kill him, thrust his father out of his
kingdom, who went to Italy; and there in his time was the golden age.

The INTERPRETER.
1. SAturn is nothing else but Time, which is the son of Coelum and Thetis,
because time is measured by the motion of heaven, and likewise by the motion,
or ebbing and flowing of the sea. 2. Saturn married his sister Ops, which is
the earth, of whom he begot many children, because by the heavens influence
upon the earth, all things are ingendered; the heaven is as it were the father
affording influence; and the earth the mother, surnishing matter for
generation. 3. Saturn was painted like an old man bare-headed, in a tagged
garment, holding a hook and a key in his hand, devouring of his children; by
which they did understand the antiquity and long continuation of times and by
^is bare ^ead they meant that time reveals all things: therefore the priests
used to be ^are-he^ded in Saturns sacrifices only. The ragged garment shows
that time wears and consumes all things: which was also meant by his devouring
of his children, and by the hook or sickle which he has in his h^nd: the key
may note, that time opens and discloseth all secrets. 4. This picture of
Saturn may have reference to the golden age of the world, i^ which men lived
till they were very aged, which was expressed by Saturn's gray hairs and worn
garment; which garment also shows, that men were not then given to pride and
curiosity of apparel: His ba^e head showed the honesty and truth that was
then, which indeed is naked; whereas lying, falsehood, and deceit are still
covered. 5. Saturn taught the Italians the use of hus^andry, t^erefore he was
called Sterculius, from dunging of the ground: the hook or ^ickle is the
instrument of mowing or reaping of corn; the gray hairs, bare head, and ragged
garment, show that husbandmen live long, have hardy bodies, and are not nice
in their apparel. 6. Saturn devoured all his children except Jupiter, Juno,
Neptune and Pluto, to signify that all compounded bodies are destroyed by
time: but the four elements, to wit, Fire, Air, Water and Earth, because of
their simple nature, are not subject to corruption. 7. I find Saturn described
sometimes with six wings, and yet ^low-paced, having feet of wool, to show
that time seems to go away slowly and silently, whereas indeed it ^^les very
swiftly: or this may express the slow motion of the planet Saturn, who moves
slowly by his own motion, but swiftly by the motion of the Primum mobile; to
wit, he spends but four and twenty hours by the common motion; but thirty years
in his particular motion: this swiftness also of time was expressed by that
fiction of Saturn transforming himself into an horse, a swift running
creature, when he had carnal commerce with the Nymph Philira, of whom he
begot Chiron the Centaur. 8. Because Saturn is a cold planet, and malignant,
breeding melancholy, and other ^ad effects in men's bodies, therefore they
painted him like an old man, sad and carel^sly clothed, and slowpac^d, with a
serpent in his h^nd biting of its own tail, to signify the virulencie and
biting cares that accompany m^lancholie, or else to express the nature of the
year returning into it self like a ring, or a snake with its tail in the
mouth: an^ because the lion, dog, and wolf are m^l^ncholi^ creatures;
therefore they expressed Saturn sometimes with the heads of these three beasts.
9. Saturn's genitals were cut off by Jupiter and cast into the sea, and of them
and of the se^ froth Venus was begot; by this may be meant, that old age, which
is called Saturn, is made unfit for generation, because Jupiter, that is,
wanton and intemperate youth has weakened the body, and as the Orator says,
Corpus e^^oe^um tradit senectu^i: whereas that man who has been temperate in
his youth, is vigorous and lusty in his old age, and nihll habet quod accuset
senectu^em, Or else by this may be meant, that the coldness of Saturn is
tempered by the heat of Jupiter, and so Venus is begot* for there can be no
procreation where cold is not tempered with heat. Or again, by this may be
meant, that Saturn, Jupiter and the sea are required to produce Venus; that is
to say, that Time, the Influence of heaven, and Moisture are required for
procreation. 10. As Saturn served his father Coelus in cutting off his
genitals, so is he served by his son Jupiter; It is just with God to punish
those men with rebellious and cruel children, who have been rebelliou^ and
cruel themselves against their parents. 11. Wha^ a cruel god was Saturn, who
defiled himself with the blood of his own father, devoured his own children,
and would not be satisfied in his sacrifices but by the blood of innocent
infants: Satius est pecudum more vivere, quam deos (...) sanguinarios colere,
says Lactantius, lib. 1. de falls. relig. It Is better to live like beasts, then
to worship such cruel, wicked, and bloody gods. By this we may see, that the
Gentile gods were indeed Devils delighting in the destruction of men; whereas
the true God whom we worship, is merciful and gracious, and delights not in
the death of a sinner, who will have mercy and not sacrifice, who would be
worshipped by the blood of beasts, to save the shedding of man's blood: Had not
then the Romans a bloody religion, who not only worshipped such a bloody god;
but fettered his feet also to their pillars, ^xce^^ only in their Saturnals,
that he might not go away from them. The Egyptians were wiser, who excluded
him quite out of their Cities, affording temples to him only in the Country:
And at last the Romans themselves began to abhor such a bloody god, when in
the Proconsulship of Tiberius they crucified his Priests for off^ring infants
to him. They were injurious to heaven, when they called such a bloody butcher
the son of h^aven, who should rather have been named the son of hell, to which
by Jupiter he was thru^t down. His priests, as Tertullian shows, were
initiated in a scarlet garment which they used to wear; a sit color to
express their sanguinarie disposition: to these (it seems) the Roman Cardinals
have succeeded, both in their color and bloody minds, who are guilty of the
blood of many thousand good Christians; so that at this day Rome is still Vibs
Saturnia, and the Popes pallaco may be called Seeds Satu^nia, and his f^stivall
days Saturnalia. 12. Wax tapers or candles were wont to be burned upon Saturns
altars, to show that he brought the light of knowledge and civilitie into
Italy, which before lived in the darkness of ignorance and ruden^sse:
therefore in his Festival kept in December, the Romans used to send away
candles, and other presen^s (which they called Saturnalia) to each other: from
hence (it seems) the Papists borrowed their custom of burning w^x candles on
their altars, and the giving of New-^eers gifts. 13. Saturn is so called a
Saturando, from filling or satisfying; for he being the first that taught men
the use of corn, did fill or satisfy them: and as he ^id fill, so his wife
the Earth did help; therefore she was called Ops. 14. By Saturn we may
understand the trees, ^erbs, and plants, with the fruits of which men and
beasts ^re filled: the cutting off his genitalls is the pulling off the fruit
from the trees; the casting of them into the sea, is the drowning of them in
the moisture of the stomach, which being digested and converted into blood,
begets Ve^us; for without fruits, especially of Bacchus and Ceres, friget
Venus, there would be no copulation nor procreation: the covering of Saturns
head may signify (as Fulgentius observes Myth. l. 1.) that the fruits, or
plants and trees are covered with leaves. 15. The binding of Satu^n, and
casting of him into hell, may signify how the motion of the star Saturn is
slow, and scarce percep^ible by us, by reason of its vast distance, so that it
se^ms to stand st^ll; and because it is so far off from our^sight, he was s^id
to be in hell. 16. During the time of the Saturnals, the servants in sign of
lib^rtie put on their caps, and commanded their masters; this custom afforded
matter of comfort to servants, and of humiliation to masters: When shall we
see these Saturnals, wherein pride, malice, covetousness, and other sins which
are now our masters, may at last serve us, and that we may obtain that
freedom which Christ has purchased for us?

SATYRI, See PAN.

SCYLLA and CHARYBDIS.
SCylla was the daughter of Phorcus, with whom Glaucus was in love; which Circe
perceiving, infected with poysonable herbs the fountain in which Scylla used to
wash, by which means the lower parts of her body were turned into dogs; which
when she perceived, out of impatience cast her self into the sea, and so was
turned into a rock, not far from the whirl-pool or gulf Charybdis, which had
been a most rapacious woman, and had stolen away Hercules his oxen, before
she was ^wned into this gulf. There was another Scylla, daughter to Nisus
king of the M^garenses, who having betrayed to king Minos her fathers red h^^^,
in which the kingdoms fa^e consisted, she was turned into a (...) and Nis^^
into ^n hawk^.

The INTERPRETER.
1. BY Scylla may be meant a whore; for she is a monster composed of dogs and
wolves, still barking, and biving, and devouring all that have commerce with
her, and is never sa^^^fied: (...) is indeed a very dange^ous rock; upon which
many me^ have split both their souls, bodies, and estates, Multorum fu^ti
cal^^n^^^. Bcylla was hated by Ci^^e the daughter of the Sun, and so is a whore
abhorred by the children of the light. Scylla was beautif^ll in her
upper-parts, but mon^trous and deformed below, formosa superna, desiris in
piscem: Such is the condition of whoredom, pleasing and delightful in the
Beginning, but t^^ (...) is sorrow and misery. Vl^sses, who was the type of a
^ise (...), escaped the dangers of this monster; and so will all wise men take
heed of a whore, and will abho^re he^ (...), who brings none but fo^l^ to the
s^ocks for (...). 2. Pala^phatics (F^ul^l.^.) thinks that this Scylla was a
Pirat ship or galley on the Tyrr^^^ sed, robbing and spoiling all M^rch^n^s
that sailed that way; which from its swiftness in sailing, and the rapacity of
the pirates within it, was said to be turned into a sea monster compos^d of dogs
and wolves: this ship Ulysses out-sailed by the help of a prosperous gale of
wind, and so escaped the (...). 3. Na^al^^ C^^es and others by Scylla and
^^drybid^^ understand two dangerous rock^ between Sicilie and Italy, which
being hollow, and the rides r^^ming through them, made an horrid noise, as if it
were wolves yelling, or dog^b^rking: and because there be diverse monstrous
fishes within these hollow rocks, devouring the bodies of those that make
s^ipw^^ck there* the Poets feigned that these were monstrous women (for so the
rocks appear like women afar o^^,) but below the navell were dogs and wolves.
4. In that Circe poisoned the waters in which Scylla used to wash, we see the
nature of jealousy and women's emulation, how spiteful and revengefull it is.
5. In S^ylla drowning of her self we see how impoten^ and impatient women are,
and how dangerous excessive grief is, and what the end of whores is, even shame
and ruin. 6. In Scylla the daughter of Nisus, who for the love of Minos,
betrayed her father and country, we see the nature of lustful affections,
Nox, and amor, vinu^nque nihil moderabile suadent. She casts off all natural
respect and affection toward her father and country, betraying his fatal
hair, that is, his counsels to the enemy, upon hope she should enjoy him, of
which notwithstanding she failed; for Minos like a prudent man, though he
loved the treason, yet hated the traitor, and rejected her, albeit he had
obtained both the King and the City by her. 7. The life of a man is much like
the sailing between Scylla and Charybdis; there be dange^ours rocks on each
hand of us, despair on the l^^t hand, presumption on the right; adversity on
the left, prosperity on the right hand, have destroyed many thousands: Dextrum
Scylla latus, laevum implaca^a Charybdis
Obsidet. --
Therefore let us neither decline to the right hand, nor to the left: let us
keep the middle road, which is the way of virtue; -- ^l^dio ^utisslmess ibis.
But most men fall with Ulysses upon S^ylla, whilst they labor to avoid
Charybdis; they run out of one extreme into another, and can never keep the
golden mean. 8. Charybdis is metaphorically taken sometimes for an unsatiable
glutton or drunkard, who is never satisfied; or may be taken for a covetous
extortioner, who is never contented; or for the grave, which is always
devouting and consuming the bodies put in it. 9. In that Nisiss was turned into
an hawk, which still pursues Scylla his daughter turned into a lark; we may
see the nature of a guilty conscience, which leaves not a man in death, but
pursues the fearful soul wherever it goes, Et pro purpureo p^nas dat
Scylla capillo:

The wretched soul is tormented for its sinful desires and pleasures.

SILENUS, See PAN.

SIRENES.
THese were three sisters, called Parthenope, Lagea, and Leucosia, the
daughters of Achelous the river, and Calliope; they were half women, and half
fishes, which with the sweetness of their music allured the seamen to sail
upon the rocks where they sat, and so having caused them to make shipwreck,
devoured them.

The INTERPRETER.
1. THese Sirens were called the daughters of Achelous, either in reference to
the harmony which the water of that river makes in running, or else of those
musical instruments of old called Hydraula, we may call them water-organs, in
stead of which we use wind-organs; and because of the sweetness of their
music, they were said to be the daughters of one of the Muses. 2. Sabinus
thinks by these Sirens were meant the Queens of the Islands near the Bay of
Salernum, who in the Promo^tory of Minerva, erected an Universitie or College
of good learning and eloquence, which gave occasion to this fiction of the
Sirens, who were called the daughters of Achelous and Calli^pe, because the
professors of that College came out of Greece, where Calliope dw^elt, and
Achelous was one of the chief rivers there. But the Sirens were turned into
sea monsters, when the professors and students gave themselves to drinking,
whoring, and all kind of licentiousness: and indeed, in such places where
discipline is not observed, many young men lose their time and estates, and
fall u on as dangerous rocks as those of the Sirenes. 3. The Sirens were
whores, who dwelt upon that coast of Italy, who by their inticements allured
men ashore, where they lost both their time and their money, and this was
little better then shipwreck. 4. By the Sirens are understood carnal and
worldly pleasures, by which many thousands are devoured; the virgin face of
Parth^nope* the sweet voice of Lagea, and the wh^te skin of Leucosia are buts
by which whorish Sirens draw young inconsiderate gallants on the rocks, and
destroy them in the is souls, bodies, and estates: therefore it becomes us with
Orpheus, to tune up the melodious harp of Gods word, which may drown their
voice and bewitching music; or else with Ulysses, to tie our selves with the
cords of reason, that these half unreasonable creatures (for so the Sirens are
expressed, in that they were but half women) may not so far prevail, as to
destroy our souls and devour our estates: or else let us stop our ears, as
Ulysses did the ears of his fell^ws with wax, that we may not hear the
chanting of their voice; and with the Adder, that we may not be charmed with
the voice of such inchanters. 5. The Sirens used to fit their songs for every
man's humor, that they might gain all: by this the nature of flattery is
showed, which sooths up men in their humors; and applying it self to that
which is most pleasing to the man whom flattery works upon, whether it be
pride, luxury, covetousness, or any other vice; a dangerous, but too frequent
a kind of Sirens, which sing in Princes Courts, chant^ng that which is
pleasing, but no way true. 6. Some think that the Sirenes were half birds,
whom the Muses berest of their wings, for daring to contend with them* I wish
that learned men would clip o^^ the wings of whorish and fla^tering Sirens,
that they may not fly any more into Princes Courts and populous Cities, where
they contend with the Muses, and prevail too; enticing more to hearke^ to them,
then Preachers do with all their Oratorie. 7. There were three Sirens, and
these had three sorts of music to allure men, to wit, the voice, the fife, and
the harp* to show that there are three ways by which whorish women induce men
to sin and destruction, to wit, beauty, singing, and familiarity. 8. The gods
allowed the Sirens so long to live, as they could prevail with passengers to
listen to their songs; but after Ulysses and his fellows hearkened not to
them, they perished in the sea, and were seen no more; whores and parasites
will live in the world so long as princes and rich men give ear to them: but if
once they would be so wise, as with Ulysses to slight them, the Court and City
would be quickly rid of them.

SISYPHUS.
HE was the son of Aeolus, who for his treachery to Jupiter, for his cruelty
and oppression was slain by Theseus, and in hell is punished by rolling up a
stone to the top of an hill, which still from th^nce r^mbleth down again.

The INTERPRETER.
1. SIsiphus was killed by Theseus for his cruelty and oppression; thus God is
just, who punishes the wicked here and hereafter: for not only did Sisiphus
suffer death here, but is tormented also in hell. If there were no other
punishment for wickedness but death temporal here, who would be afraid to
sin, seeing death puts an end to all miseries and pains? More arumnarum
requies, non cruciat^^. Neither is God unjust in punishing twice; for indeed
death temporal is but the beginning of death eternal, which ought to be
eternal, because the majesty of the person offended, and the desire of the
person offending are eternal, albeit the sin it self be but temporary. 2.
Sisyphus was a talebearer, and did not conceal the secrets of the gods, nor
the particular love of Jupiter to Aegina the daughter of Asopus; by this we
may learn to be silent, and not to reveal or divulge the secrets of others,
esp^cially of princes; Magnum silentii praemium. 3. The sins of Sisyphus were
many, for which he was punished in hell; to wit, inf^delity, in not concealing
the secrets of the go^s; ingratitude to them who had made him their secretary;
profaneness in speaking irreverently of Jupiter; oppression in robbing and
killing of strangers, and diverse other sins; by which we s^e that sin never
goes alone, and that God nev^r punishes but when h^e is justly offended. 4.
The work of Sisyphus is like the work of worldly men, they toil night and day
for pl^asures, honors, pr^fit, but the work is never at an end; and when they
think to end, they are but beginning. 5. Many ric^ and honorable men are like
^isyphus his stone, when they are advanced to the top of the hill of honor and
wealth, do suddenly tumble down again to the bottom, and he that is a king
to day may be a beggar to morrow: why then should men toil with so much labor,
vexation, and sweat for that which is so apt to run down the hill from them?

SOL.
HE was the son of Hyperion and Euphra^ssia, who did not assi^t the other
Titans against Jupiter, ^ut rather took his part against them, therefore was
honored by Jupiter with a crown and cha^ios.

The INTERPRETER.
1. SOl is called the son of Hyperion, from (...), because he was of highest
account among the Gentiles, and worshipped above all the other gods, as his
light, motion and influence is of more efficacy then all the rest: therefore
his mother was Thi^, or Euphraissa, from (...), because his operations and
light are divine, and his light is large or broad, as the word signifies. 2.
He assi^ted Jupiter against the other Titans, to show that God assisteth the
just and innocent against wicked oppressors. 3. His image was wont to be made
of gold, beardlesse, but longhaired, having a whip in one hand, and Jupiters
thunder in the other; by which they signify, that the Sun was the supreme god,
correcting some with lighter punishments, to wit, with the whip; and other with
greater, as the thunder. 4. Sol is placed amongst the midst of the Muses,
because the Sun is amongst the midst of the Planets, which they held made an
harmonious sound in their motion. 5. To the Sun were dedicated the wolf for
his rap^citie, expressing the force of the Suns heat in consuming of moisture
and vapors; the hawk for his swiftness and quick sight, to show the swftnesse
of the Suns motion, and that he is the eye of the world; the black raven and
the white swan, to express the quality of night and day which the Sun
causes, the one by his absence, the other by his presence; the cock also,
because he salutes the day with his crowing. 6. I find him painted sometimes
with arrows in one hand, and the Graces in the other, to show what hurt and
benefit we receive by his heat; more benefit then hurt, for he holds only
two arrows, but three Graces. 7. The Sun was painted with four ears, but one
tongue, to teach us, that a wise man should hear much, but speak little. 8. The
Sun was represented among the Egyptians by a scepter and an eye, to show that
he is the eye of the world, and king of the Planets. 9. I find the Sun
sometimes pictured with a crown on his head beset with twelve precious stones,
and sometimes with four pots or urnes at his feet; by this I think, they meant
the year with its twelve months and four seasons: sometimes again he sits
upon a lion, and carries a basket on his head, a lance in his hand with the
picture of victory on it; by this doubtless they understood, that the Suns
heat tam^th the wildest beasts that are, that all our plenty and filling of our
baskets are from his influence, and that he like a triumphant Conqueror rides
in his golden chariot about the world. Who would see more of Sol, let him look
upon the title APOLLO.

SOMNUS, see NOX.

SPHINX.
THis was a monster begot of Typhon and Echidna, having the face of a virgin,
the wings of a bird, and the rest of a dog or lion: this used to propose a
riddle to travelers, which was this; What creature was that which was
four-footed in the morning, two-footed at noon, and three-footed at night? They
that could not resolve this, were, ^^voured by Sphinx: but at last Oedipus
resolving the riddle, caused such indignation in Shpinx, that she slung her
self down from the rock, and brake her own neck.

The INTERPRETER.
1. SOme think that Sphinx was on Amazonian woman, who having gathered a number
of thieves, made oftentimes ex^ursions from the hill Sphingi^s upon the
Theh^ns; but at last was surprised by Oedipus in the night, and destroyed: and
this was the resolv^ng of her riddles, that is, the overcoming of her
inaccessible and difficult places and rocks where she remained. Her woman's
face might sign ^^e her alluring and entising ways to draw strangers to her;
the wings may signify her or her fellow* swiftness; her lions or dogs body
and claws expressed her rapacitie. 2. Satan is the true Sphinx, who has the
face of a woman to entice and deceive, the claws of a lion to tear us, and the
wings of a bird to show how nimble he is to assault us; he lives upon the
spoil of souls, as Sphinx did upon the bodies; he ^id for many ages abuse and
delude the Gentiles by his priests and wizzards, with riddles and ambiguous
oracles: there is no way to overcome him, but by hearkening to the counsel of
Minerva, as Oedipus did; that is, by following the counsel of Christ, who is
the Wisdom of the Father; by this he shall be destroyed, and we undeceived.
3. The creature with the four feet in the morning is man, who in his infancy
before he is able to walk, crawls upon all four; at noon, that is, in his
manhood, makes use only of his two feet; but in the evening of his age leans
on the st^ff, which is his third foot. 4. O^ naughty parents there proceed none
but naughty children; Mali cor^i malum ov^m; for Sphinx was the child of Tiphen
the giant, and of Echidna, which is a kind of serpent; and therefore of them
comes a serpentine brood; to wit, Gorg^n, Cerberus, the Dragon that kept the
garden of Hesperides, Hyd^a, S^ylla, Sphinx, Chimaera, all monstrous brats of
monstrous parents: if we would have good children, let us be good our selves;
Forter creaniur fortibus. 5. A Christian ought to be a Sphinx, having the face
of a woman, that is, cheerfulness in countenance, astible in words; the wings
of a bird, that is, expedition in actions, and a delight in supernall and
heavenly places; the body of the lion, that is, magnanimity and courage in
afflictions. 6. The The bans used to wear the picture of Sphinx in their
ensigns, Minerva on her helmet, the Egyptians placed it in the entry of their
temples; to show that soldiers, wise men, and priests should be wary and
circumspect in their words, and so to involve their actions and words, that
they may not be ton plain and despicable, to the prejudice of the (...), or of
Religion. 7. Sphinx is a kind of Ape or Baboon in Ethiopia, representing a
woman in her breasts, and it hold to be a docible creature.

STYX, ACHERON, COCYTUS.
THese were three rivers of hell, over which the souls must pass and they were
the daughters of Oceanus and Terra.

The INTERPRETER.
1. IIn that these were called the daughters of Oceanus and Terra, it is to
show that they, as all other rivers, have their original from the sea, but
particularly, they have some passages under ground. 2. Acheron signifies
joylesse; St^x hatred, from (...) hateful; Cocy^us complaint or lamentation;
to show that when we are departing out of this world, the joy of all earthly
things fails us; therefore the water of this river was very unpleasant; for
what pleasure can they have that lived in wealth, honor, and all outward
felicity, when they see that now they must part from them? sure the crossing
of this river must be very unpleasing and sad to the men of this world, who
have had their reward here, and their portion in this life. But having passed
this river, they come to S^^x, which is hatred; for then they begin to loath
and hate their former evil courses and wicked lives, and repent that they
spent their time in such vanities, whereof now they reap no other fruit but
shame and confusion. Lastly, they come to cross Cosytus, which is the river of
lamentation and complaint, which their friends make that part with them; and
they themselves, both for their former follies, and for losing their former
delights and vanities. These rivers are said to slow from Pluto's throne,
because the remembrance of that dominion which death shall have over them is
the cause of these sorrows and complaints. Some add the fourth river, called
Phlege^on, from burning, by which may be meant the wrath of God which burns
like a river of brimstone. 3. Because Vi^tory the daughter of S^^x assisted
Jupiter against the Titans, therefore he bestowed this honor upon her, that
none of the gods should swear by S^^x in vain; whosoever did, was debarred from
Nectar and Ambrosia for a whole year: The reason why they would not sweat by
Styx is because to swear by any thing is to honor it; but they would not
honor that which is so repugnant to their nature: for Styx signifies sorrow
or hatred, of which the gods are not capable, seeing their life consists in
joy and love. But by this we see what shame it is for Christians to take Gods
name in vain, seeing the Gentile gods would not take the name of S^^x in vain:
What can such Christians look for, that have no more reverence to Gods s^cred
name, but to be debarred from Nectar and Ambrosia, even from life and
immortality? For the Lord will not hold them guil^lesse that take his name in
vain. 4. As S^^x assist^^ Jupiter against the Titans; so ^^he^on assisted them,
by affording water to them when they sought against Jupiter: therefore as S^^x
was honored for her loyalty; so A^her^n for disloyalty is thrust down to
hell. By this princes are taught to reward their faithful and loyal servants,
and to punish such as se^k their ruin.

SYLVANUS, see PAN.

CHAP. XVII.
T
TANTALUS.
HE was the son of Jupiter and Plote the Nymph, who feasted the gods with the
flesh of his own son Pelops; which they so abhorred, that they all abstained
from eating, except Ceres, who unawares eat up the child's shoulder; but the
gods restored him to lif again, and gave him an Ebonie shoulder: as for
Tantalus, they thrust him down to hell, where in the midst of plenty he is
slarved with hunger and thirst.

The INTERPRETER.
1. IF the Gentile gods did so much abhor the eating of man's flesh, how much
more does the true God detest the sacrifices of man's flesh? and therefore would
not suffer Abraham to offer his son Isaac in a sacrifice; but furnished him
with a Ram inst^ed of his son. 2. The love of Tantalus was great to his gods,
in that he offered to them his own son, but not his only son; and that he
offered him to them that were his gods; but the love of God is far greater, in
offering for us his only Son; for us I say that were his vassals, yea his
enemies. 3. As Pelops was cut in pieces by his own father, to be a sacrifice
to the gods, so does God our heavenly Father mortify us by afflictions, that
w^ may be a fit sacrifice for him. 4. Pelops was advanced to great wealth and
power, as his Ebonie shoulder signifies, Ebonie being an Emblem of wealth,
and the shoulder of strength or power; so was he also advanced to great honor,
for that famous part of Greece was called Peloponesus by him: thus God after
our sufferings here, will advance us to eternal honor, power, and riches
hereafter. 5. If Tan^a* lus was so willing to part from his son, and to bestow
him upon the gods; why ^h^uld we be unwilling to bestow on God, or on his poor
members* some part o^ our goods? how are they to blame that are impatient, and
rage when God by death calls away their friends and children? 6. In Tantalus we
may see the picture of a S^holar, Student, or one transported with
contemplation; who though he abound in wealth, yet minds it not, but is carried
from all worldly thoughts to divine meditation, no more enjoying these earthly
things, then Tantalus did the rich and sump^uous d^shes of meat that were set
down before him. 7. In Tantalu^ we see the condition of a rich miser, who
abounds in all o^^ward wealth, and yet has not the power to enjoy it: Quaeri^
aquas in aquis, and poma fugacia captat. he starves in the midst of his
plenty, and wants the things which he possesses, and has not that which he
has. 8. Here also we may see the condition of a bloody Tyrant, who is in
continual f^ar and anxiety; as Dionysius showed to the flattering Philosopher,
setting before him a Princely Table richly furnished, but durst not eat because
of the naked sword which hung by a horse-hair over his head; so over Tantalus a
great stone hangs, ready to fall upon him, ^a sileae, jam jam lapsura; and the
Furies sit at his table with grim countenances* snaky ^airs, and burning
torches, intim^ting the terrors of an evil conscience, which suffer not the
Tyrant to enjoy or take delight in all his plenty or outward splendor; as we
read of that bloody king, who murdered Boethius and Symmachus: Furia^um maxima
juxt^ ^ccubat, and manibus prohibet contingere mensa^. 9. Pelop^ married with
lair Hippodamia the daughter of king Oenomaus, whose horses none of all her
suitors could t^ne, therefore many l^st their lives, only Pelops obtained her:
to show that they only shall obtain true happiness, who can subdue the
untamed and unru^y horses of their lusts and affections: but most men are
ov^rcome by them, therefore they come short of Hippodamia, and lose their
lives; only he that with Pelops is innocent, wise, and valorous, shall attain
to this happiness. 10. Tantalus was punished both for his cruelty in murdering
of his son, for his curiosity in desiring to know whither the gods could find
out what he had done, and for his prattling, i^ that he revealed the secrets of
the gods to mortal men; but let us take heed of these sins of Tantalus, if we
would escape the pu^ishments of Tantalus. 11. Of all the gods only Ceres eat
up his shoulder, but she restored it again stronger then before, because she
made it of Ivorie: this may I think betoken our death and resurrection: for
Ceres is the earth, which will eat and cons^me our flesh, but she shall restore
it again in the last day, far stronger and durable than before: for the body
that is sowed in weakness, shall be raised in power, and this mortal shall
put on immortality.

TARTARUS, see LETHE, and PLUTO.

TELLUS, see RHEA.

TETHYS, see OCEANUS.

TEREUS.
HE was the son of Mars and the Nymph Bistonis; who after he had married with
Progne king Pandions daughter, ravished Philomela his wives sister, and cut out
her tongue, that she might not discover it; which nevertheless Progne
understood by Philomela's letter, written with her own blood; this caused her
kill her only child Itys which she bore to Tereus, and bo^le him for his
supper; he being enraged at this horrid wickedness, ran at his wife with his
naked sword, but she was turned into a Swallow, and so escaped him; and he into
a Lapwing; but Philomela into a Nightingal.

The INTERPRETER.
1. THe Lapwing has a long bill representing that sword with which Tereus ran
at his wife, and the tusse on his head represents a Crown; and his delight in
raking and picking the dung of other creatures, gave occasion to this fiction,
to wit, that king Tereus was turned into a Lapwing; a sit transformation, that
the filthiness of ino^dinate lust, in which Tereus delighted, might be
repr^sented by the filthiness of the dung in which the Lapwing takes pleasure:
so the red spots on the Swallows breast, represents the blood of the child with
which Progne was defiled; and the continual mourning, groaning, and complaining
of the Nightingal, express the complaints of Philomela for the loss of her
Virginity and Tongue. 2. Because the two sisters ran to Athens to complain of
their wrongs, and Tereus ran after them; to express the suddennes and celerity
of their flight, they were fained to be turned into birds, the emblemes of
celerity and expedition. 3. There are two violent affections which make men
shake off all humanity; the one is impotent lust, the other, inordinate desire
of revenge. We see what lust did in Tereus, and how desire of revenge prevailed
in Progne; what was more ba^barous, horrid and cruel then for Tereus to cut out
his sisters tongue whom he had ravished; and for Progne to kill and bo^le her
own and only child for her husband to eat? 4. By th^se two sisters Philomela
and Progne, may be meant Poetry and Oratory; Philomela delights in woods and
deserts, so does Poetry: Carmina se^essum s^iben^is and o^ia quae^unt. Progne
loves to be in Towns and Cities, for the Swallow builds her nests in houses,
so does Oratory; but as far as the Nightingale exceeds the Swallow in melodious
notes, so far does Poetry excel Oratory: for the Poet does all that the Orator
can do, and much more, by adding delight to persuasion: Et prodesse volunt, and
delectare Poetae. 6. Tereus was the son of Mars: we see what the sons of Mars
use to do, and what be the fruits of war; to wit, the Muses are ravished,
Scholars are robbed and plundered; their tongues are cut out, that they may not
complain: that is, laws, learning, and truth, are silenced: barbarous murders
and cruelties are committed: and how many children are by soldiers devoured,
when their Parents are either banished or murdered, and their estates robbed
and consumed?

THESEUS.
HE was the son of Aeg^us and Aethra: his step-m^ther would have poisoned him
in his youth: he subdued the Am^zones, and of Hippolite their queen begot
Hippolitus; he killed Creon king of the Thebans, the un^^^ned bull in Africa,
the Minolaure in the Labyrinth; and carried away the two daughters of king
Minos, to wit Ariadne and Phaedr^: he killed also Procustus, Sciron, and
Schinis great ^obbers in Attica, he overcame the Centaures and the Thebes: he
went down to hell with his friend Perithous, to ravish Proserpina, where
Perithous was slain, and he put in chains, but was delivered by Hercules: at
last in his old age was killed by king Lycomedes.

The INTERPRETER.
1. IN Theseus killing of infestuous thieves, and subdoing of Monsters, is set
down a fit example of val^ur and justice for Princes to imitate. 2. Theseus was
guided by Ariadnes thread to get out of the Labyrinth; the word of God is the
thread that will direct us through the winding and intricate labyrinths of this
life. 3. Theseus proved himself to be Neptunes son, by leaping into the se^,
and fetc^ing up from thence the ring which king Min^s ^ad slung into it, and
for this fact he received a crown from The^i^, which he bestowed upon Ariadne,
and afterward it was placed among the stars: the way to prove our selves to be
the sons of God, is by patient enduring of our afflictions, which though they
be deep and bitter like the Sea, yet shall not drown us, but in that Sea we
shall find the ring, even eternity, which has no more end then a ring, and
withal we shall ob^ain the Crown of righteousness, which is laid up for us
in heaven. 4. Theseus and Perithous loved one the other so dearly, that they
went down to h^ll together; by which we see that neither death nor danger can
separate true friends, or dissolve that friendship which is grounded on virtue.
5. Theseus is commanded not to come to his father at Athens, until he was able
to remove the great ston^ under which his father Aegeus his sword lay, and till
he was of sufficient strength to manage that sword, and with it to clear the
highways of thieves and robbers: even so we ^^all not be fit to come into the
presence of our heavenly father, in the City of God, the new Jerusalem, until
we have removed the stony hardness of our hearts, and with our fathers sword,
that is, the sword of the Spirit, we have destroyed our spiritual enemies that
lie in our way, and binder our passage. 6. His going down to hell to ravish
Prose^pina, where he was bound, and from whence he could not be delivered but
by He^cules, teaches us that lust and venery have brought many a man to
sickness, and deaths door as we say; and intemperance that way has bound many
by the hands and feet with the Gout, worse then fetters of iron, where men lie
in pain, as it were in hell, from whence there is no delivery but by the help
of Hercules the Physician: be^^des fornication and adultery bring many souls to
hell, from whence there is no redemption, but by Christ the true Hercules. 7.
As Hercules in honor of Jupi^er his father, appointed the Olympic games, so
did Theseus in honor of his supposed father Neptune, insti^ute the Isthmian
games, to be celebrated every fist year also; thus we see how great spirits
affect immortality, and to be honored after death. 8. Theseus after all his
victories and brave achievements, yet is murdered in his old age; by which we
see there is no permanent happiness in sublunary things: Caesar who as the
Orator said domuit gen^es imma^itate barba^os, mul^i^udine innumerabiles
locis, infinitas, omni copiarum genere abundantes, etc. He overcame innumerabl^
fierce nations, and had thoroughly (as he thought) settled himself and the
Empire, yet at last was stabbed in his old age with 23 wounds: hence let no man
be secure: nescis quid se^us vesper vehat. 9. Our blessed Savior is the true
Theseus, who was persecu^ed in his infancy, and in his life time overcame many
monsters, but far more in his death; be went down to hell, and from thence
delivered mankind, which had been there detained in everlasting chains of
darkness, if he had not ascended: who by his own, and not by any other power,
delivered man from endless captivity.

THETIS, see OCEANUS.

TITANES, see JUPITER, SATURN.

TITHONUS.
He was the son of Laomedon, who for his beauty was beloved of Aurora, and by
her carried away to Aethio^i^ in her chario^, where she bore Memnon of him: By
her means he was made immortal; but living so long till he was turned into a
grasshopper, he grew weary of his life, and desired to die.

The INTERPRETER.
1. TIthonus is taken sometimes for the Sun, as in that of Virgil, Georg. 3.
Tithoni prima quot abest ab origin Caesar. And indeed, the Sun is the beauty
of the world; no wonder if Aurora fell in love with him, from whom she bath
all her beauty: And as the Sun is beautiful, so he is immortal; only in the
evening he is turned into a grasshopper, to show the weakness of his light and
heat then: Or by Aurora may be meant that all creatures in the morning fall in
love with the Sun, as delighting to see his light, of which they were d^prived
a while; as the birds by their chee^full chanting then show; hence it is, that
more do worship the Sun rising, then falling. 2. By Aurora's falling in love
with T^^honus may be meant, that he used to rise betimes in the morning, and
employed that time chiefly about his business; no fitter time for the Muses,
with whom she may be said to be in love, when Students give themselves then to
meditation. 3. Tithonus lived t^ll he was of an exceeding great age, to show
that early risers are long lived; whereas they that love too much sle^p,
specially in the morning, breed and cherish gross humors, by which diseases
are bred. 4. Tithonus lived so long, till he was weary of his life; and what
wonder seeing this life at best gives no true content, much less in old age,
which is it self a disease, and that incu^able; which Solomon calls the evil
days wherein a man takes no pleasure; as old Barzillai showed to David. 5. Old
Tithonus is turned into a grasshopper, to show that old men are much given to
chatt ng and prattling; therefore Homer says ( Iliad. l. 3.) that the old
Trojan men sitting in the gates were (...), like grasshoppers in a wood sitting
upon tre^s. 6. Tithonus was carried up to heaven by Aurora; even so holy
meditations and prayers in the morning should carry our minds and affections
up to heaven: thus David mounted up in the morning chariot of devotion into
heaven, and oftentimes prevented the morning watch of Tithonus. See more in the
word AURORA.

TITYUS.
He was Jupiters son of Elara, who being hid by Jupiter within the earth, for
fear of Juno, at last was born, not without a great gap in the earth: this huge
child, who was therefore called the earths son, afterward offering violence to
Latona, was killed by Apollo's arrows, and thrust down to hell, where he
covers with his body nine acres of ground; and his heart is still eaten up by
ravens, and still grows again.

The INTERPRETER.
1. BY Ti^yus may be meant the corn, which is by Jupiter, that is, by the air
and the earth somented and produced; this covers many acres of land, and is
killed by Apollo's arrows, that is, by the heat of the Sun is brought to
maturitie, and so is cut down by the mower: the raven that eats up his heart
which grows again, is the moisture of the earth which putrifies the corn, and
then it grows again. 2. An envious man is much like Ti^yus; his heart is eaten
up with envy, and yet is still growing: Invidia Si^uli non invenere Tyranni
Tormentum majus. --
He may be truly said to live in hell. 3. By Tityus his ravens may be meant
the tortures of an evil conscience ^ormenting men even in this life: when
wicked men therefore are wounded by Apollo's arrows, that is, by the word of
God, sharper then swords or arrows, they begin to have hell within them, and
then the ravens pick and tear their hearts; thus at Peter's Sermon the hearts of
the hearers were pricked, that they cried out, Men and brethren, what shall we
do? 4. Although Tityus was so big, that he covered nine acres of ground, yet
he is punished; by which we are taught that there is neither greatness,
strength, or power that can avoid the ^and of divine justice. 5. He that is in
love with a woman whom he cannot obtain, i^ like Tityus, he has a Raven
continually picking his heart; and lives in a kind of pleasing hell, or a
hellish pleasure: Vulnus alit venis, and caecoca^pinur igno.

TRIPTOLEMUS, s^e CERES.

TRITON, see NEPTUNUS, and OCEANUS.

TYPHOEUS or TYPHON.
HE was one of the giants, the son of Titan and Terra, he was about ^o shut
Jupiter out of his kingdom: but he was shot with his thunder, and thrust under
the Isle Inarim^: o^ as some write, under hill Aetna in Sicilie.

The INTERPRETER.
1. TYphon was brother to Osiris king of Egypt: who having killed the king,
invaded the kingdom; but was overthrown at last by Is^^: this man because of
his cruelty was said to be nursed by a Dragon: and surely bloody Tyrants are
not better then the foster-children of Dragon^, and the sons of earth, and of
the race of giants, and scourges or plagues sent by God to punish a people, as
they writ^ that Typhon was. 2. By Tiphon may be meant subterraneal exhalations
o^ vapors cau^ing earthquakes, and sometimes eruptions of fire, ashes, stones,
and pestilenti^l smoakes, flying up high in the air, as if they meant to pull
Jupiter out of his throne: the^e are said to be the sons of Titan, and of the
earth, because they are b^got by the heat and influence of the sun in the
hollow or spung^^ places ^f the earth. 3. The Devil is the very Typhon, w^o by
his pride opposed God, and was thrust down to hell: the greatness of Typhons
body argues the greatness of Satan's power; his sn^ky hands and serpentine feet
do show that his actions and ways are cunning and deadly: the stretching out of
Typhons hands from East to West, and the touching of the stars with his head,
are to show that his malice is every where diffused. 4. The Pope is another
Typhon: the son of earth, for he has turned Christ's heavenly kingdom into an
earthly Monarchy; he makes war against heaven, by opposing Gods ordinances; he
has stretched out his hands from East to West, that is his Empire: he has
with Typhon lifted up his head to heaven, exalting himself above every thing
that is called God: his snaky hands and feet show that his ways and actions
are full of poison and serpentine craft: and if we consider his cruelty against
Protestants, he may be said to have had a Dragon for his Nurse: he breaths
nothing but fire out of his mouth, to intimate his blasphemies * or edicts to
burn h^reticks: he was sent as a plague to punish the world: but at ^ast shall
be overcome by the breath of Gods mouth, as Typhon was by Jupiter^ thunder.
Enceladus and Typhon never shook or troubled Aetna and Inarime so much, as he
has moved and troubled Italy, and indeed the whole world. but it was Juno the
goddess of wealth that produced this monster out of the earth, and it was
wealth that raised the Pope to that pride and greatness, by which he has
troubled the world ever since. And lastly, as the gods were so affrighted at
the greatness and bigness of Typhon, when he challenged Jupiter, that they
sled into Egypt for fear, and turned themselves into beasts: even so did the
kings of Europe for fear of the Popes greatness, threatenings, and
excommunications, hide themselves in the Egyptian darkness of ignorance, and
cowardly like beasts submit their necks and crowns to his disposing.

CHAP. XVIII.
V.
VENUS.
SHe was the daughter of Jupiter, or a^ others say, she was begot of Caelus his
tes^icles (which Saturn cut off) and the Sea-froth: she was the goddess of
love and beauty.

The INTERPRETER.
1. THe Platonists make a Celestial and a Terrestrial Venus: so they make a
Heavenly and an Earthly Cupid; the one being nothing else but the love of
Heavenly things, as the other is of Earthly. They give wings, arrows, and
torches to both: but the wings of Celestial love carry up our thoughts and
affections above all transitory things: the arrows of that love are not to
wound and kill us, as the arrows of Terrestrial love do, but to wound and
kill all carnal affections in us; and so the Torches thereof are not to burn
our hearts as the torches of earthly love do, but to illuminate our minds, and
to purify our hearts from all carnal lusts and worldly desires. 2. There was
a kind of love among the ancients called Amor Lethaeus, whose Image was
worshipped in the Temple of Venus Erjcins; this Love was painted dipping his
arrows in the River, to signify that some are willing to forget diverse things
that they have loved; I wish that we could with this Amor Lethaus quench the
torches of vain love, and the fervent affections we have to earthly things, in
the waters of tears and repentance. 3. There was a Temple dedicated to Venus
Libitin^, where the coffins of the dead were kept, to show that love is the
cause of corruption, as well as of generation: I am sure love in many Impotent
and intemperate young people, may be called Venus Libitin^; for she brings many
to their grave before they have lived half their days. 4. Mutual love, called
by the Greeks ^ros and Anteros was expressed by two little Cupids, whereof the
one did struggle with the other, to get away the branch of Palm which he had
in his hand; ^o signify that we should strive to overcome one another in
Love. 5. Venus was painted of old rising out of the Sea, sitting in a shell, in
which she was carried to Paphos; she was also painted nak^d, crowned with
Roses, having her chariot drawn sometime with Doves, sometime with white
Swannes and Sparrowes: to signify the nature of carnal love or lust; which is
begott of the Sea*froth, for Salt is a friend to Venus, and froth is quickly
gone: and to show that Cyprus was much given to Venery, therefore she was
worshipped there most of all, and called Cypria from thence: she is naked, for
she strips men of their estates; and the whore will leave them naked at last;
or her nakedness may signify that all things should be open and naked among
lovers, and nothing hid in the heart; or by this nakedness is meant, that love
cannon be concealed or long hid: her crown of Roses show that sweet smells,
especially of Roses, are provocatives to lust; the Doves show the sincerity and
want of gall, quarrelling, or malice, or malice in love; the white Swans show
that love is or should be innocent and clean, because the Swannes sing sweetly
as they held, by which they would show that Music procures love: the Sparrowes
signify wantonness: her crossing over the Sea in a shell, signifies the
dangers, bitterness, and diverse storms or troubles that lovers are subject
to. 6. There was at Rome the Image of Venus Ver^icordia; because she turned
men's hearts and affections from lust to modesty and virtue; I wish our young
wanton gallants would look upon that Image, that so they might be converted
from lasciviousness, to the ways of virtue, modesty, and goodness. 7. The
R^se was dedicated to Venus, to show the nature of love, which is full of
prickles as well as of sweetness: when the sweetness and beauty of the Rose
is gone, the prickles remain: even so after the pleasure of lust which quickly
vanishes, there remain the stings of Conscience: and indeed the blushing
color of the Rose may teach all wantons to blush at, and be ashamed of their
own madness and vanity. 8. The Myrtle tree was consecrated to Venus, and with
the same, Conquerours in their lesser Tryumphs called Ovations were crowned: to
show that love is the great Conqueror, and that Conquerours should use the
conquered with love. The Myrtle also was a symbol of peace: so there ought to
be no jarres or strife among lovers. 9. They placed near to Venus, Mercury,
Pytho, and the Graces, to show that love is procured and maintained by
eloquence, persuasion, and bounty. 10. Marcellus built the Temple of Venus,
after the subduing of Syracusa, a mile from the City; but Venus has her
Temples no where so frequent as within our Cities: by this we may see how much
we degenerate from the Roman modesty. 11. Venus was wont sometimes to be
painted sitting upon a goat, and treading upon a snaile; to show that a modest
woman should subdue goatish wantonness, and should like the snail carry her
house about her, and give her self to silence; for the tortoise or snail wants
a tongue. 12. Venus armata was painted in her complete arms, in memory of the
Lacedemonian women, who put the Messenians to flight; but I think this was to
let us see, that militat omnis amans: every lover is a soldier: and that no
sword is sharper then Venus her lance; and that he who is in love must have a
good headpiece, cors^et, and target, to keep of the disdainful repulses ^f a
proud or coy woman when she is loved or sought after; and as Venus was painted
with fetters at her feet, so no men are tied with such strong fetters, as they
who are held with the fetters of love. 13. Venus calvata, or ^^ld Venus, was
worshipped in memory of the Roman women, who when the Capitol was besieged by
the Gauls, parted with their hair to make strings for the warlike Engines: but
I think Venus may be called calvata, or balde, because intemperate venery
begets baldness, by exhausting the radical moisture of the body. 14. Venus
barba^a, or bearded Venus, was to show that there was no diff^rence of sex in
the gods; therefore Virgil Aen. 2. calls Venus the male god: Descendo ac
ducen^e Deo sl^mmam inter and hosts. and she was painted with a man's beard,
and a woman's comb; but I think this was rather to mock the masculine venery
of those times; and it is though that bearded Venus is too much in request
among the Roman Cardi^als at this day. An Hermaphrodite also may be called
Venus barbara: besides in love there is both action and suffering, neither can
there be procreation, but when the male and female are united in one. 15. Venus
is sometimes painted with a veil over her face, bemoaning the beautiful youth
Adonis, that was killed by the boar: by which doub^l^sse is meant, that
wantonness and venery beget sh^me and sorrow, when upon serious thoughts men
call to mind how they have lost their youth by the boar of intemperance and
lust. 16. Venus and Mars were found together in one bed, and Bacchus was her
armor-bearer; this is to let us see, that they are given to adultery in whose
nativity Mars and Venus meet: and it is known how much soldiers are addicted
to Venerie. By this also they would show that generation consists in heat and
moisture, expressed by Mars and Venus: But Bacchus is fittest to be her
armor-bearer; for wine furnishes Venus with courage and vigor, Sine Cerere
and Baccho friget Venus: therefore wine was offered in the sacrifices of the
terrestiall or popular Venus, but never in the sacrifices of the celestial
Venus; for wine is an enemy rather then a friend to divine contemplation: for
which cause the sacrifices of Mercury, the Muses, Aurora, the Sun, Moon,
Nymphus, and celestial Venus were called Nephalia, that is, Sober sacrifices.
17. Venus, Juno, and Pallas strove for the golden apple, which Paris assigned
to Venus: there has ever been emulation between beauty, riches, and wisdom;
but too many with Paris, prefer beauty and Venereall pleasure to wealth, and
especially to wisdom: In a Prince wisdom is chiefly to be regarded; for
misery must fall on that State where an unwise Prince reigns, though he were
as rich as Juno, and as beautiful as Venus. 18. Venus is married to Vulcan,
because there can be no generation in the world, if there were not an union
between the natural heat expressed by Vulcan, and the radical moisture
signified by Venus. 19. There was Venus Cloacina among the Romans; some will
have her have her called Cluacina, from clueo to fight; in memory of the
quarrel between the Romans and the Sabines, which was happily ended in their
mutual marriages. But I think rather her name was Cloacina, from cloaca, by
which they expressed the nature of a common whore, as Venus was; for though
such a woman were as beautiful as Venus, yet she is but Cloacina, a public
sink or jakes. 20. Because Pompey would not be checked by the Censors (as
Tertullian observes, lib. de spectac.) for erecting such a huge Theater to
luxury and wantonness, he placed over it the temple of Venus, that under the
vail of religion he might cover the practice of impiety and wantonness: Thus
we see how religion is still the cloak to cover all knavery and mischief. 21.
Diomedes ^ soldier wounded Venus the goddess of love: I am sure, by our
civil wars we have wounded Christ the true God of love.

VESTA.
SHe was the daughter of Saturn and Rhea; or the mother of Saturn, as others
say; her prie^^s (called Vestall virgins) kept the sacred fire on her altars.

The INTERPRETER.
1. BY Vesta they meant sometimes the earth it self, and in this respect she
is called the mother of Saturn; for she is the mother of all the gods: And
sometimes they meant the fire within the bowels of the earth, or that natural
heat by which all earthly creatures are generated and fomented; so Vesta is the
daug^ter of Saturn and Rhea, because this fire or native heat is begot by Time
in the earth, and of the ear^h. 2. To this goddess a temple was erected at
Rome of a round form, to show the roundnesse of the earth: on it was a round
altar, upon which burned continually two lamps kept and maintained by the
Vestall Virgins: if at any time these lamps went out, the Vestall Nuns were
punished with death thus; they were let down by a ladder into a deep vault,
with some meat and drink, and a light by them, that so they might not be
thought to suffer a violent death, but might die by degrees, as their food and
^ight failed them. This going out of the Vestall fire, and the punishment of
her virgins was always held ominous and fatal to the State of Rome: I am sure
it is an ominous thing to our State; and indeed the ruin of it is portended by
the going out of the fire of love and charity amongst us, which ought to burn
perpetually on the altars of our hearts. 3. As on Vesta's altar burned two
lamps, which if they went out were not to be kindled again by any earthly fire,
but by the celestial heat of the Sun; even so there should burn and shine on
the altars of our hearts the two lamps of love, to wit, the love of God, and of
our neighbor; which being extinguished, cannot be kindled again but by the
celestial fire of Gods Spirit, which descended upon the Apostles in sirie
tongues. 4. From Vesta the thresholds and porches of houses were called
vestibula, for they were consecrated to her; and in them the Romans did eat and
drink as we do^ in our parlours; intimating that all their food came from the
earth: and therefore in all sacrifices she was first nominated before any
other gods, because without the benefits and increase of the earth there could
be no sacrifice: and because there can be no housekeeping or families
maintained without food, which is the benefit and fruit of the earth, they made
her one, yea, the chiefest of their PENATES, or household gods. 5. Upon the top
of Vesta's Temple stood the image of Vesta holding little Jupiter in her arms,
because it was said that she fed Jupiter in his infancy; it is the earth
indeed that feeds us all, both rich and poor, princes and beggars. 6. When all
the other gods move abroad in their chariots, only Vesta is said to stay at
home, or to remain unmovable in Jupiters house; by this they meant, that of
all the simple bodies, the earth only remains unmovable in the midst of
Jupiters house, that is, in the air, which does encompasse her round about. 7.
Vesta taught men at first to build houses; therefore she was held the chief
of the houshold-gods: and it may be she taught them to wear clothes also,
therefore she is called Vesta a vestiendo: or because she is the earth, she
may be so called, in that the earth is clothed with grass, flowers, plants and
trees: and indeed she is our mother that feeds us, therefore called Pales the
goddess of fodder; and she clothes us also, hence she is called (...), quasi
(...). And though she be a mother, yet she is called a virgin, and was served
by virgins only: as she is taken for the earth, she is the mother of all
living creatures; as for the fire, she is a virgin, for nothing is engendered
of fire; and as all things are made of the earth, so are they turned into the
earth again: therefore the Grecians used to begin and to end their sacrifices
with Vesta; A te principium, tibi desinet.

ULYSSES.
He was the son of Laertes and Antichea, the husband of Penelope, and father
of Telemachus; a subtle, eloquent, and valiant Grecian, who having done good
service in the Trojan wars, and having suffered much both by sea and land,
after twenty years absence, returns again to his Penelope, and killed all her
suitors.

The INTERPRETER.
1. IN the person of Ulysses we have painted out to us the actions and
sufferings of a wise and good man: the first wise action of his which we read
of was this, that he sh^w^d his aversen^sse to go to war by counterfeiting
himself mad, when he plowed with beasts of a diff^rent nature, and sowed salt
in stead of corn: no wise man will be too hasty to undertake a war; Omnia
prius tentanda, quam and arma ventendum. 2. He showed his wisdom in
discovering of Achilles disguised in women's apparel, and got him to go along
with him to the war. Strength and policy must go together; for the one
without the other will do little good; V^rumque per se indigens, alte^um
al^^rius auxilio viget, Salust. which Ulysses showed, when not trusting to his
own wit and policy alone, he carried along with him Hercules his arrows:
the policy of Ulysses with the arrows of Hercules can do any thing in
wars. 3. He showed his wisdom in removing from Troy secretly the ashes of
Laomedon, and the Palladium or image of Pallas, in which the safety of Troy
consisted; for it was impregnable so long as that remained there: a wise man
will not go about the performance of any great action, till he has removed
all impediments and obstacles out of the way. 4. He showed his wisdom in
killing Rhesus king of Thrace, and leading away his horses before they had
tasted of Xanthus; for until that was done, no hope of prevailing against Troy:
There is no hope of destroying spiritual Babylon, or the kingdom of
Antichrist, until first we remove their relics and images, and destroy
their Hierarchy. 5. His wisdom was seen in binding his fellows, and bringing
them home, who had forgot to return, having tasted of the herb Lo^os: It is
wisdom to subdue all delightful pleasures, which make us (as the Lotos did
Ulysses his fellows) forget to return home into the way of righteousness out
of which we have wandered, and have refused to return, being stupefied with
the pleasing vanities of this world. 6. It was a wise act in him to thrust out
the eye of the drunken giant Polyphemus, and by this means to free himself and
his fellows under the sheeps bellies from being devoured by him in his cave: If
we be wise, and clothe our selves with innocence, we shall escape any
danger, especially if with wisdom and innocence we join sobriety; for
sober Ulysses, though weak, mastered the drunken giant Polyphemus, though
incredibly strong. 7. It was not the least part of wisdom in him to rescue his
fellows from Circes enchantments, and causing her by his drawn sword to
restore them again to their own shap^s, being turned into beasts by her
witchcrafts; from which transformation he was free himself, having received a
medicine to that purpose from Mercury: He that has true Christian wisdom and
valor, will not be taken with the inchantings of whores. The word of God is a
better medicine then Mercuries was, and a sharper sword then that of Ulysses;
by which we may be enabled to keep our selves from fornication and other
unlawful delghts, and also to rescue and save others. 8. As he showed his
courage in going down to hell, so his wisdom was seen in returning thence:
Afflictions and crosses is the hell through which Gods children must pass;
therefore we had need of Christian magnanimity and wisdom, that we may
overcome the many difficulties thereof. 9. He showed the part of a wise man in
stopping the ears of his fellows that they might not hear the enchanting songs
of the Sirens; and caused himself to be bound fast to the mast, that he might
not have power to go to them: every wise Christian should stop his ears from
hearing the entising songs of sinful pleasures, and should bind himself with
the cords of reason, that he may not be drowned in the sea of shame and
confusion. 10. He did wisely in sailing between Scylla and Charybdis, to keep
the middle way, for so he escaped the danger of both: It were happy if we had
this point of wisdom, not to come too near the rock of presumption on the
right hand, nor of desperation on the left. 11. His wisdom and valor were
seen in killing the suitors that spent his estate, and went about to withdraw
his Penelope's affection from him: Let us show the same wisdom and valor in
mastering the devil, the world, the flesh, and all our sins, which (like so
many importunate suitors) go about to draw away our souls, which ought to be
our chaste Penelopes. 12. But in this life is no perfection; wise Ulysses
committed some acts of folly; as when he falsely accused Palimedes, and
sacrilegiously robbed the temple of Minerva, and carelessly suffered his men to
look into the bag where the winds were bound up by Aeolus, and to kill the
cattle of Sol, which caused both his long navigation and shipwreck, in which
he lost all his fellows. 'Ti^ true, he slept when his fellows looked into the
bag, and killed the oxen; by which we see how dangerous, ^ thing it is for a
Prince to be careless and secure; or for people to be curious in prying into
Gods secrets, or profane in meddling with what belongs to God; as also covetous;
for these men looked into the bag or bladder, supposing they should have found
it full of gold: He failed also in having too much familiarity with the witch
Circe. But we see in him Gods providence toward them that are in affliction;
for when he had lost all by shipwreck, he was relieved by Calypso, then by
Leuco^hoe, then by Nausicaa, and at last, by the help of Minerva, came safely
home, and enjoyed his own kingdom, having killed all his enemies: so after we
have fought the good fight, we shall at last obtain the crown of
righteousness.

VULCANUS.
He was the son of Jupiter and Juno, who for his deformity was thrust out of
^eaven and fell in the ^le Lemnos, with which fall he grew lame, and was the
smith of the gods; his shop was in Lemnos, where with the Cyclopes, he makes
Jupiters thunder, and the armor of the gods against the Giants.

The INTERPRETER.
1. THe Egyptians were wont to paint Jupiter putting an egg out of his mouth,
and out of that Vulcan proceeding, to express unto us, that God created the
world, and out of that drew the natural heat which gives vegetation to all
things: so that sometimes by Vulcan they understood the natural heat that is
in the creatures; and sometime our earthly fire, which because it is so useful
for the making of many things, they called Vulcan the Smith of the gods; and
they attributed unto him a smoakie and duskie kind of thunder and lightning,
as they did the red lightning to Jupiter, and the white to Minerva. And because
the flame of our fire does not ascend in a straight line, but crookedly
therefore they said that Vulcan was lame: and because thunderbolts and
lightnings fall out of the air upon the earth, they fained that Vulcan fell
from heaven into Lemnos. So because the lion is an hot, furious, and fiery
creature, they consecrated the lion to Vulcan, whom they honored by certain
feasts and sacrifices called Protervia; in these the remainder of the meat
which they could not eat was burned in the fire: this was an uncharitable kind
of feasting; for they should have remembered the hungry stomachs of the poor:
Too many such prodigal feasts are among us, or rather worse; for we were
better fling our superfluous meat and strong wines in the fire, then by
surfeiting and drunkenness fire our bodies, and destroy our souls too. 2.
Vulcan is called the son of Jupiter and Juno, because the fiery meteors are
begot in the air, by the motion, heat and influence of heaven. 3. Vulcan was
deformed, and for this was thrust out of heaven, to show the grossness of our
fire being compared to the celestial fire, and therefore not fit to have any
place among these sublimated celestial bodies or quintessences: What place
then can they have in heaven, whose sinful souls are more deformed then
Vulcans lame and dwarflike body? 4. Vulcan was called (...), from (...) to
shine; and Vulcanus, quasi volans candor, to show the light and heat of the
fire; and he is called deformed, not that the fire is so in it self, for it is
pleasing to look on; but because it makes every thing deformed that it burns:
and though it be deformed in the unequal ascending of the flame, and of the
smoke which it makes, yet the light which is joined with it is pleasant and
beautiful; which I think the Poets meant in making Aglaia and Venus his wives;
the former signifying splendour or beauty, the other being the mother of beauty,
for the light gives beauty to things. 5. Vulcan was said to shed his seed upon
the ground, because he could not obtain his desire upon Minerva; to show that
the natural heat has no power over the heaven to make it fruitful, which
remains still a virgin, that is, pure from the mixture of elementary
qualities; but it is the earth that is fruitful and full of seed by means of
this natural heat, by which all things are generated and preserved: for as
Vulcan made arms for the gods, whereby they were defended; so this natural
heat is* the armor and defense of our life, and by which we are preserved
from destruction. But as soon as this heat is gone, our life and motion ceases,
which the Gentiles expressed by their ^unning with light torches in their
f^asts of Vulcan; for as soon as the torches went out the race ended. 6. When
the gods fought against each other, he (s^ith H^mer, Ilia^. 2.) that gave the
onset first was ^ulcan the god of fire; to show that fiery and choleric
dispositions are quarrelsome and hasty; they had need to be bred and nursed by
Thetis and the Nymphs, as Vulcan was: which fiction does not only show that
the fiery Meteors are begot and maintained by these exhalation^ which are
raised out of the sea; but also (as I suppose) to teach us, that such as are of
a choleric and fiery constitution ought to feed upon moist and cold meats and
drinks, whereby their heat may be qualified and brought to a temper. 7. Vulcan
is brought in by Homer, ( Odyss. lib. 8) excusing his deformity, and laying
the blame thereof upon his parents Jupiter and Juno; though parents are
oftentimes by reason of their interp^rance the causes of their childrens
deformity, yet they should not upbraid them, but patiently bear with their own
defects, and strive for beautiful souls to supply the deformity of their
bodies. But as Vulcan laid the fault of his deformity upon his parents, so too
many use to lay the blame of their sins upon God their heavenly Father, then
which nothing is more hateful and impious. 8. Vulcan bound Juno to a golden
chair which he made for her, and he bound Mars with Venus to their bed that
they could not wagge: Juno, that is, the wealthy miser is bound so fast in his
affections to his gold, that he cannot be removed from it; but Mars the
soldier and Venus the whore are let loose: I wish there were a Vulcan among us
to bind up whoredom, that it may roam no longer among our youth, and to bind up
our Mars, that he may rage no more among our countrymen: -- V^ centum vinctus
ahenis
Post tergum nodis frema^ horri^^s ore cruen^o.


9. They make Vulcan lame and slow-paced, but I am sure he came too nimbly
upon all my pap^rs, manuscripts and and notes which I have been gathering these
40 years, and consumed them all on a sudden: I wish he had been abed with Venus
when he seized on my study; or that he had been better employed, either in
making Jupiters thunder, Ariadnes crown, or the Suns chariot, or arms for
Achill^s and Aenae^s; but he was always an enemy to Minerva, and he has
showed it by destroying my papers; Lemnos, Lipara, or Sicilie are places for
his forge, and not my desks; I wish The^is and the Nymphs his nurses had been
nearer to have tempered his heat: but I will not accuse him for my loss, as
he did his parents for his deformity: I look higher, even to him without
whose providence we cannot lose one hair of our head; It is the Lord that
gives and takes; it is the Lord, let him do what seems good to him. And so
here I end this work with that of Seneca, Quicquid facimus mortale genus,
Quicquid patimur, venit ab al^o.


FINIS.
An Alphabeticall TABLE of the chief matters handled in this WORK.
A.
AChates the companion of Princes, page 1. Aenaeas his angel, page 2. the
picture of a true friend, 2. Aenaeas his armour-beater, the idae^ of a
faithful servant, of a Princes favorite, of his chief Counsel, 2. he
suppor^^d Aenaeas, 2. Achates a jewel, 2* Achelous a river, the son of Sol and
Terra; why, 3 his horn cut by Hercules, and what he represents, 4. Acheron,
2.17. Act^on, a proud man and curious, 4. cruel, and a spend-thrift, 5. his
dogs flatterers; a wanton, 5. Adams first est^te, 226. Ad^neius who, and why
Alcestes husband, 7. type of Saturn, 8. Adonis who, and what he signifies, 5,
6. Adonia what, 5. Adonis the Sun, and killed by Mars, 6. turned to what, a
flower, 6. a type of the resurrection, 6. Ae^cus who, 8. he turned ants into
men, 9. relieved Greece, 9. Aegaeon who, a type of the winds, 10. he k^eps the
gates, fights against Jupiter, lies in Aetna, ^^. the type of pirates, of
heretics, of seditious men, of vapors and of animal spirits, 11. Aenae^s who,
and why the son of Venus, 12. why molested by Jun^ and Aeo^us, befriended by
Neptune, Vulcan, Cupid, Mercury, 12 how he found the golden bra^ch; his
travels, piety, and* other virtues, 13. guided by Sibylla, a type of Princes,
^3. Aeolus who, king of the winds why, a type of Princes, 14. Jupiters son, an
Astronomer, his City, Caves, and Islands, 14, 15. his marriage, and who is a
right Aeolus, 15. Aes^ulapius who, his picture, the type of a Physician, 15,
16. robbed by Dionysius, 15. brought to Rome, 16. the mild temper of the air,
and of sound bodies, 16. Afflictions needful, 114, 254. Air signified by Juno,
134* by Jupiter, 140. Alceste, what she signifies, 7, 8. Alphaeus who, and why
worshipped with Diana, 17. a river in Sicilie, 18. the type of a good
Christian, and of a good husband, 18. what Alphaeus signifies. Amphitrite,
175, 178. Amphion who, 18. a musician, 183. son of Jupiter, bred by shepherds*
born in a hill, 19. taught b^ Mercury; how he built Thebes walls, 19, 20.
outbraved Apollo and Diana, and killed by La^on^, 20. Andromache, 182.
Andromeda, 225. Angels represented by Achates, 1, 2. how they speak, 146.
Antaus, a giant and tyrant, 20. the same with earth and water, 21. the type of
a covetous man, of Satan, of the Sun, 21. Apollo fed A^me^us his sheep, and
procured a wife for Admeius, 7. signifies God in diverse things: and his
picture, 22. the Sun in diverse respects, 23. the god of music and physic why,
23, 24. his arrows, he killed Python, a prophet, 24. his birds, beasts and
trees, 24. he loved Hya^inthus, and built Troys walls, 25. a type of Christ,
and of a king, 25, 26. Arachne who, and the cause of her overthrow; the spiders
scholar, 26. she resembles Sophisters, false Judges, and Misers, 27. Arethusa,
the type of Baptism, 18. Argus who, 127.* killed by Mercury, what, 128, 156,
157. Arlon who, 27. a type of drunkards, his eloquence and ingratitude, 28.
Ariadne, 254. Aristaus who, 28. a type of Ministers, and of Wisdom, and
husband of Eurydice, 29. he signifies celestial heat; the type of a King,
and of Christ* 30. Ass placed among the stars, 224. Astrologers condemned,
76. Atalanta who, undone by idleness; the picture of a whore, and her
profaneness, 31. what we may learn from her, 32. A^las who, 32. a hill, and
an Astronomer, the type of God, of the Church, and of a King* 33. inhospitable,
34. Atr^pos, 206. Aurora who, why Lucifers mother, and of the winds, 34. why
the daughter of Hyperion, Ti^an and Terra, 34, 35. why she leaves her husband
ab^d^^ her chariot and colors, she makes old Tithonus young; the type of
Christ, and of a good matron, 35.
B
BAcchus madded the Tyrrhenian mariners, 27. what his baldness, sy^he,
garments, roses, priests, wild beasts, and cymbals signify, 36, 37. Semeles
son, begot of her ashes, hid in Jupiters thigh, bred in Egypt, subdued the
Indians, 37. his youth and diverse shapes; worshipped with Minerva, accompanied
by the Muses, carried by Mercury; hony-lipped, and still naked; he killed
Amphisbaena; the D^agon and Pie dedicated to him, 38 he slept with Proserpina,
was turned into a Lion, and torn by the Titans: why called Liber and Dionysius,
38. hoe signifies the Sun in diverse respects, 38, 39. he resembles
original sin, 39. the typ^ of Christ, 39, 40. Pans companion, 202. Beli^es
who, 40. their incestuous marriage and murder, 40, 41. their punishment
inflicted on all Eves children, 41. Bellerophon who, 41. his fiction, a
Navigator and Astronomer, 42. the type of the Sun, of a wise man, of Christ,
42, 43. and a good Christian, 43. of proud men, and such as search into Gods
secrets, 42, 43. Boreas who and what 44. he carried away Orythya; the type of
Gods Spirit 45. Bou^ie 106.
C
CAdmus who; he sought out his si^ter, and is turned into a serpent 47. the
type of a wise Prince, of a good Minister 48. of Christ 49. Caesar killed 255.
Cassiope 182. Castor and Pollux who and what 49, 50. to whom they appeared 50.
the Peripateticks by them are convinced of the creation, and of Christ's birth
50, 51. and judicial Astrologers 51. a temple erected to them; immor^^litie
showed between them; Helena's brother 51. they signify the Sun and Moon 50.
Centaures who 52. the tipes of many men, of kings counselors, of drunkards,
of regenerate men, of sin, of unjust States, of Comets, of our life, of
Governors, etc. ^2, ^3. Cerberus Plutos Dog; and a tipe of gluttons, and
covetous men 54. of death, of an evil conscience, of the grave 55. ^f Satan, of
time 56. Ceres who 56. how painted 57. her service and sacrifice in what esteem
57. she signifies the moon, corn, earth, and earthly minded men 57, 58. the
tipe of Lawgivers, of the Church, and of Christ; she ate up Pelops his
shoulders ^51. Charon signifies time and death 61. a good conscience, and
drunkenness 62. his garment, age, and boat 61. Charybdis 238. how taken 239.
Children swore bare-headed by Hercules, and abroad 118. Childrens ingratitude
274, 239. Chimera what 62. it signifies the Church of Rome, a hill, a Pirates
ship, a river, a whore, man's life, Satan 62, 63. Chiron, a just and wise
Centaur 52, 53. what he signifies 64. his knowledge and deformity 65. Christ
how to be found 13. what he did to the Gentiles 9. the true Aesculapius 17.
represented by Amphion 20, 183. by Apollo 25. by Arislaus 30. by Aurora 35. by
Bacchus 40. by Bellerophen 43. by Cad^us 49. by Pollux 51. by Ceres 60. by
Ulysses 73. by the Moon 86. by Ganymed and the Eagle 97. by the Genii 100. by
Hercules 120. by Mercury 159. by Minerva 165, 166. by Neptune 180, 181. by
Theseus 255. by Prometheus 228. by O^pheus 198. by Pers^us 214. Christians
expressed by Hercules 116. by Jason 124. worshippers of Mars 153. by Sphinx
246. by Ulysses 271, 272. they must not mourn without hope 197. their duties
211. Church represented by Atlas 33. by Ceres 60. by Diana 82. by Jasons ship
125. abused by the Pope 179. Theophanes 181. why rent in sunder 197. the Church
of Rome expressed by Chimera 62. Cir^e a witch 65. she could not transform
Ulysses 66. she signifies the mixture of the elements, death, Satan, sin,
physical knowledge 66, 67. Clo^ho 206. Coelus the husband of Terra by the
upper region of the air, whose children are the fiery Meteors 68. the tipe of
those that geld Scripture, and forbid marriage 68. gelded by Saturn what 68.
Cocytus 247. C^m^^^us 10. Conscience 258. Consus 177. Coronis 16. Cortina 24.
Covetousness 54, 58, 59, 85 88, 90. covetous men restless 122. their god 141.
what it produces 181, 272. Cruelty 252. Cupids diverse parents 69, 70. his
picture described and explained 71. two Cupids 261, struggling Cupids 262.
Curiosity dangerous 59, 88, 272. Cy^ele with her lions 230. Cyclopes the sons
of Heaven 68. they are waters and vapors 72. they signify evil spirits, and
the Roman State 72, 73. Cypress used in funerals 204.
D
DEath 55, 61, 66, 219. whose daughter 184. why not honored as a goddess 184.
why clothed with stars 185. death eternal 24. Decrees of God signified by
the Parcae 207, 208. how changeable 208. Daedalus who, an Artificer 75. his
Labyrinth, a murderer 75. Deu^^lion a type of Ministers 77. of Magistrates 78.
he with Pyr^ha, what they signify 79. Diana the Moon 4* her nakedness 5. her
white and black horse 79. Apollo's ^ister and midwife, the Moon 79. her diverse
names explained 80. her silver chariot, ^^ons, staggs, and arrows 81. the type
of a rich usurer 81. of a good man, of the Church 82. Di^m^^es his fellows
201, Dionysius his sacrilege 15. the name of Bacchus 38. ^olphin 178.
D^unka^ds 28, 53, 62, 110.
E
EArth signified by Ceres 58. by Vesta 267, 268. by Rhea 230. Eloquence its
force 156, 157. fit for Princes 158. Elysian fields 83. Envy 257. Endymeon a
King and Astronomer 84. the type of a rich man, of Adam, of inconstancy, of
all men 85. of the Sun 86. Erych^honius the first coachman 87. the type of a
covetous man, of Satan, of a Magistrate 88. Euridi^e who, she signifies right
judgment 29. the wife of Orpheus 196. her running from Aristaeus 197.
Eumenides what, and why worshipped 89. their temple in Achaia; they are the
tortures of an evil conscience 89. and the unruly passions of men 90. the tipes
of Gods three great judgments 90. and of Ministers; their seat and names 90,
91. Eupheme 167. Evil men hate the light 205.
F
Faith, hope, and charity 107. Fame, Mars his Trumpeter 152. Fascination by
the eye and tongue 104, 105. Faunus 204. Feasting dangerous 110. when unlawful
273. Fire its properties 273. Fla^^erers Act^ons dogs 5. Harpies 44. Sirens
241. infest Princes courts 241. Forti^ude 116. Fortune and the Moon the same
92. why Favor placed near her 92. of high esteem among the Romans 93. bald
and glassie Fortune 92 why blind 93. the same with Gods providence 93. her
picture and four horses 93, 94. why the daughter of the sea 94. why painted
like an old woman, male and female, with fire and water 95. Friendship 106,
201, 254. Furies trouble Tantalus 250.
G
GAlaxia 136. Galli who 231. Ganymedes who and what 96. when caught up to
heaven, and why by an Eagle 96, 97. the type of Christ, and of the soul 97. he
succeeds Hebe 108. Genius what, and the Princes Genius in what esteem 98. the
Roman Genius how painted 98. this name may signify diverse things 98, 99. in
what form worshipped, and when called Manes 99. our souls, and desires, and
the stars may be called Genii 99. types of Christ 99, 100. Genius the same
that intellectus agens 99. Gentiles ants before their conversion 9. convinced
by Castor and Pollux 51. not ignorant of future joys 84. their folly in
deifiing of Hercules 126. and in holding the worlds eternity 140. in
multiplying of Gods 144. in beating of brass drums in the Moons eclypse 150.
in worshipping a theife 155. in the feasts of Cybele 231, convinced by Rhea 231.
their idol^try 232. they subject God to the Fates 208. they deified monsters
204. Generation how performed 195. Giants in what sense they have been 100.
tipes of wicked men, of rebels, and heretics 101. many Giants in conditions
102. Glaucus 192. Glu^^onie 54. God represented by Apollo 22. by Atlas 33. by
Jupiter 137. by Neptune 175. by Prometheus 226. his spirit by Boreas 45. his
providence wonderful 94. an eagle 97: his servants beautiful 109. he spares
not his own sons 110. he will have our youth 110. he is both Janus and Terminus
131. Gods word 159. his justice 172, 173, 242. his power 175. his judgment
182. he bardneth 182. he punishes children for their parents 182. he abhorres
man's flesh 249. his love to men 249. his word Ariadnes thread 254. his justice
258, 235. his words 270. Golden branch what, its effects 11, 12. golden apples
121. golden fleece what 123. gold greedily still sought after 124. golden ram
178. golden bribes 32. force of gold 196. Goose of the capitol 133. Gorgons
certain beasts, tipes of slanderers, and fallse teachers 102, 103. of
Christians 103. Gorgons what 225. Graces accompanied by Nereus and Cupid 105.
their temple 105. their picture described 106. tipes of true friends 106. their
names 106, 107. what is meant by them, and the three Christian graces 107. they
wait on Apollo, Mercury, and the Muses. 105, 168. rave 55.
H
HErmonia married to Cadmus 48. Harpies, Furies, S^^yges, Lamiae, how the same,
and how painted 44. tipes of sinful delights, of hypocrites, of flatterers, of
prodigal sons 44. of Church robbers 45. their names and signification 45. Head
covered what it signifies 144. Hebe signifies the Earth and Spring 108.
married to Hercules 109. Mars his sister, her temple and picture 109. the tipe
of Adam 109. Hecate why so called 111. accompanied with dogs 112. Queen of the
night, and patroness of witches; her suppers 112. a cruel woman, her three
names signify the Moons three aspects 113. she signifies afflictions, and is
the type of a whore 114. Hercules cut off Achelous his horn 3, 117. when
married to Hebe 111. his travels and labors 114, 115. by him was meant the
Sun 11^. the type of Christian fortitude 116. of every good Christian, and of
a King; his dotage 116. his end, and how hated by Juno, and his labors
literally explained 117. the type of valor and eloquence 118. honored without
the city: he swore but once; how children swore by him; the tenth dedicate to
him 118. his knot with which the bride was tied 119. how honored after death
119. the type of Christ 120. his faults and undeserved deity 120, 121. when he
got the golden apples 122. Hermathenae 164. Hermeraclae what 164. Hesperides
who, their names and office 121, 122. they signify the stars 121. Hippodamia
251. Hippomanes his ingratitude and profaneness 31. Horses dedicate to what
gods 177. Hyades 87. Hymen, his torch and veil 135. Hyppoli^us 180.
I
JAnus is Noah 129. the Sun 130. his picture; he taught religion first; the
doorkeeper, and the same with Portunus, and husband of Carne why, his two
faces, and sometimes four faces 130. his temple when shut 131. why a serpent
placed by him 132. Jason who, and what 123, his voyage, labors, and conquest
123, 124. the type of good Christians 124. and of a good Prince; his speaking
ship 125. Icarus 209, 210. how he was punished 76. Idolatry 78, 225. Idleness
31, 187, 210, 223. Ino 192. Io, or Isis, who and what 125, 126. turned into a
cow, worshipped in Egypt and Rome, why 126. her picture explained 126. why
placed by Harpocrates 127. diversely taken; why a Cow, and daughter of Inachus,
and kept by Argus 127. she recovers her shape, and signifies the Moon 127.
and rich misers 128. her garland and priests 128. her white, red, and black
garments what 129. Juno conceived by eating of lettice 109. what that means
111. how Jupiters wife, and sister, and her picture explained 132. why the
Peacock, Raven and Goose dedicate to her 133. why called Fluona; she
signifies the Moon 133. the type of an honest matron, and her picture
explained 134. she signifies the air, attended by Castor and Pollux 134. the
goddess of marriage 135. nursed by Thetis and the Hours 135. Vulcan, Mars, and
Hebe her children; her temple, how she shed her milk 136. her diverse names 135*
136. her charge of gates 180. educated by Oceanus 190. bound to a golden chair
274. her malice 208. Julian his sacrilege 15. Jupiters Cup-bearers 108, 109.
his name and picture explained 137, 138. how worshipped by the Gauls, Romans,
Egyptians, Astyrians 138. his hieroglyphick, in many things the type of a king
138, 139. his eyes, ears, victories, justice, etc. 139 the type of tyrants
139. his cruelty, injustice, adulteries, rapes 140. his picture of a boy; he
signifies the air, fire, heaven 140. why Juno's husband 140. Jupiter pecunia,
lapis, Stator, etc. why born in Crete, how saved from Saturn, his diverse
Epithites 141. Jupiter Capitolinus, Latialis, Pistor 142. his falling into
Danaes lap what 225. Judges of hell, and their impartialitie 8. Jupiters sons
9. the tipes of an evil conscience 9. two mild, but one rigorous; their walk
through the field of truth what 9. partial Judges like Arachne 27. Justice the
same with Nemesis, how painted 173, 174. twofold. 174.
K
KIngs represented by Aeolus 25. Aristaeus 29. by Atlas 33. by Cadmus 48. by
Hercules 116. by Jupiter 139. by Pallas 162, 163. by Proteus 191. by Theseus
253. by Orion 194. by Orpheus 196. their uncertain condition 179. their secrets
to be kept 243. their rash vows dangerous 216. Kingdoms how preserved, and
their chief dieties 164. hard to be ruled. 216.
L
LA^hesis 206. Lapi^hae 52, 53. Laomedon 179. La^es what, how painted, their
heads covered 143. the same that Curetes, La^vae, Lemures, Genii 144. keepers
of houses and high ways 144. their sacrifices, and where worshipped 145. they
signify men's souls 145. begot of a dumb goddess 145. diverse sorts of Lares,
but weak gods 146. Learning commended 161, 162, 163, 164, 165. its happiness
168. its properties 170. the souls food 187 Le^he what, and when drunk 147.
why called the river of hell 147. Love of diverse sorts 70. it turns men into
beasts 179. Lucina how painted 149. Luna whose daughter, wife, and sister 148.
her garment, sacrifice, and horses, her torch, and arrows 149. how expressed by
the Egyptians. 149.
M
Magistrates their duties 78, 88. Ma^u^a 193. Man represented by Prometheus 227.
his man 127. signified by the Parcae 206. man's life 63. like the sailing
between Scylla and Charybdis 239. Mars kills Adonis 6. his mother, nurse, and
country, 151. an enemy to government 6. his horses, beasts, birds, and worship
152. his picture thrust out of Rome 152. maintained by Thracians and Scythians
152. why he lay with Venus; his injustice, impiety etc. 152. Minervas enemy,
caught in Vulcans net, 153. his adultery, seen by all the gods 153. absolved in
the Are^page, and how conceived of I^no 154. Medusa her beauty and sins, killed
by Perseus 103. her blood breeds serpents 214. Megalesia what 231. Merchants
157. Mercurius taught Amphion the harp 19. who he was, and why so called 154,
155. the gods interpreter and theife 155. what he taught the Egyptians 155.
he sucked Juno's breasts, and why pictured upon doors 155. why Jupiters son,
and why winged, he killed Argus 156. his power over storms; why painted with
Minerva, his rod with serpents 156. why painted with a Purse, a Goat, and a
Cock 157. why with a Dogs head; ^hee signifies the Sun 157. why still young,
and his three heads upon a square stone 157. the god of speech, and of
Merchants, and his head why still covered, and why an Interpreter 158. the
wicked Mercuries of this age 158. his rod and sword, and power over souls 159.
he bound Prometheus, he had both sexes, and begot Hermaphroditus 159. painted
with a lance and distaffe 159. the type of Christ 159. the star of Mercury
159. Me^is, Jupiters wife 139. Minerva, how she used Medusa's head 103. why of
Jupiters brain, still armed, a virgin, and why called Tritonia, and Neptunes
daughter 160. her target clear and smooth with a Gorgons head on it: the Owl
her bird, her helmet, crest; and Cock, Crow and Dragon, round target and
spear, President of war, and her long cloak 161. she helped Prometheus to
steal the celestial fire 161. why placed with Mercury, why called Pallas and
Minerva, her golden helmet with the Sphinx 162. her golden lamp and olive, her
feasts in March 163. why placed by Vulcan and Neptune 163, 164. slighted by
Paris, preferred by Athens to Neptune, her power over storms and thunder; she
signifies the Sun 164. her fiery chariot, and golden lamp, why covered with
Orcus his helmet, why next to Jupiter 165. the type of wisdom 160, 161, 162,
163, 164, 165. the type of Christ 165, 166. her castles 180. Ministers
represented by Orpheus 197. Minus 9, 129. Money its power 141. Moon signified
by Ceres 57. in love with Endymeon 84. her dominion over some men 85. why
called Hecate, Diana, Luna 113. signified by Isis 127. her diverse colors and
motions 129. signified by Juno 133. called Lucina 134. the same with Luna 148.
how set out by Poets, and why male and female 149. the emblem of inconstancy
149. why red in her eclipse 150. Muses who, entertained by Osyris 166. their
number; why Jupiters and Minerva's daughters, they nurse Eupheme, why called
Muses, and why winged 167. they carried Palms, and were crowned with them 168,
169. led by Apollo, waited on by the Graces 168. why virgins, and on Parnassus
168, 169. why called nymphs, and their diverse other names 169, 170. their
particular names; they turn men into grasshoppers 170. Bees dedicated to them
171. Music of three sorts 19. Myrrha the mother of Adonis, what she signifies
7. Myrtle 263.
N
Natural heat 203, 274. Nemesis* whose daughter 172. how painted 172. the same
with Justice 173. her picture explained, she signifies the Sun 173. she is
Revenge, loved by Jupiter, and Helena's mother 174. Nephalia what 265. Neptune
loses- Mars and Venus 154. what is meant by Neptune 175. why called an
horseman 175. his picture and attendants explained 175, 176. he holds a plough
why 176. his horses, and why he is called Consus 177. why god of the sea 178.
his Trident, and why he honored the Dolphin, and loved Theophanes 178. how
with Apollo he built the walls of Troy 179. was forced to serve 179. the type
of a Tyrant; why feasted in Ethiopia 180. his charge over the city foundations
180. the type of Christ 180, 181. why Posidon 181. Niobe who 181. her children
killed how 182. how turned into a stone, and her pride punished 182. Night
whose daughter 183. her picture explained 184. the mother of Death and Sleep
184. of many other children 185. Nymphs, their diverse names explained 186. why
Juno's handmaids 18^. nurses to Bacchus and Ceres; spinners and weavers 187.
called Hyades, why 187. Pans nurses 203.
O
OCeanus whose son 188. father of the gods, why he feasted the gods: his
picture explained 189. he educated Juno; a friend to Prometheus 190. his diverse
names 190. his wife 192. Oedipus 245, 246. Orcus his helmet 165, 225. Original
sin represented by Barchus 93. Orion who 193. a constellation, why begot of
Jupiters urine, why killed by Diana and the scorpion: the type of a Governor
194. his lust and pride 194. recovered his sight 195. he signifies vapors,
and is a type of the Romish Church 195. Orpheus who, he signifies the power
of Magic: his marriage with Eurydice what 196. his love to her 196. a type of
Ministers 196. his harp carried by water 197. his harps had different effects,
and why his body torn 197. the type of Governors, his impotent affection; an
Astrologer; his harp among the stars, his Bacchanals 198. he represented
Christ 198. Osyris entertained the Muses 66.
P
PAlladium what, where kept, and by whom 162. Pallas, See Minerva. Paris his
preposterous judgment 164. Parnassus where Deucalion rested 78. Peace
preferred to war 164. Pan who; he signifies the Universe 200. his picture
described, he signifies the Sun: Pan Lycaeus 201. why painted like a Goat;
he loved Syrinx and Ec^ho 202. why accompanied with Bacchus; he invented the
trump^t; Pannick fears 202. why nursed by the Nymphs and god of the fishermen;
in love with the Moon, a deformed man 203. Papists 231. Parcae who 206. their
names what they signify 206, 207. their concord, clothes, crown and distaffe,
and why Jupiters Scribes 207. Parents duties 218. Penates 143. Penelope who,
and how called, and why rejected by her father 209. forsook her father to
follow Ulysses, and how she put off her sisters 210. her conjugall faith 210.
her modesty and constancy 211. Perseus who, Jupiters son, and his brave
exploits 212. why begot of gold, why covered with Orcus his helmet 213. he
killed the Gorgons; a brave man 213. he obtained Andromeda, when 214. killed
Medusa how 103, 104. Pelops 249, 250, 251. Phaeton who, a Comet, an Astronomer,
son of Sol and Clymene 215. his subjects, and why drowned in Eridanus 215.
Phaeton a young ruler, presumptuous 216. his sisters turned into trees 217.
Philomela the Poet 252. Phlegeton 247. Phineus a type of blind fathers 44. and
of covetous men 45. Phoebus his rash vow 216. Phore^^ 192. Physicians
represented by Aesculapius 15. their office and properties 16. Pleasures like
Sirens 241. Pluto who, why god of hell, and of wealth, his kindred, and three
headed dog 218. he is the Sun, and why winged 219. the god of ghosts, of hell,
and of riches 220. how called by Homer; he trembles at earthquakes; his
attendants 221. why blind, his helmet 219. Poets life 168, 169. bad Poets 168,
171. Poetry 171. it exceeds Oratory 253. Pollux 50, 51. Polyphemus the Sun, an
envious man 74. a State, and the Devil 73. Pompies temple for Venus 266. Pope
the Roman Jupiter 142. another Neptune 179. and Typhon 259. Prayer the best
doorkeeper 130. joined with mercy 130. Princes represented by Aenaes 12. by
Aeolus 14. by Cadmus 48. by Jason 125. by Janus 131. they should nourish
learning 155. and love justice 174. how they are supported 2. their
Counselors like A^h^res 2. Priapus who 223. why god of gardens 224. the son
of Nais and Chion 224. his deformity 223. Progne 252. the Orator 253.
Prometheus, Atlas his brother 33. an Astronomer 159, 225. he stole the
celestial fire 161. befriended by Oceanus 190. a type of a wise father, and a
statuarie 225. a Preacher, his eagle, the type of Adam, his man of clay, and
troubles thereon 226. a type of God, of man, a Philosopher 227. Proserpina
lost, and sought after 57. she signifies the earth, and seed 57. carried away
by Pluto 58. gathers flowers 159. her eating of Pomegranats 60. Protervia what
273. Proteus who, and his changings; a type of Princes 191. and of a wise man,
and of a ship-master 192. Proteus is now every where 192. Proud men like
Actaeon 4. Providence 193.
R
Rainbow 134. Religion the true Palladium 162. like Proteus 192. Resurrection
represented by Adonis 7. by the serpents teeth 49. by 'Deucalion casting of
stones 78. by Pelops his shoulder 251. Rhadamanthus 9. Rh^a and her diverse
names 229, 230. her picture explained, her sacrifice and priests 230. Saturns
wife 231. whose daughter, the mother of the gods 231. her nurses, love and
madness 232. mother of the giants 232. Rich misers bounty 112. riches how got
and keept 128. rich men like ^o 128. riches expressed by Juno 132. rich men's
qualities 133. like the rainbow 135. how got, and how esteemed 135, 136. they
should feast Christ 180. they are like Sisyphus 243. like Tantalus 250. their
esteem, and miseries 205, 219. riches winged 219. Rivers how of old painted 3.
why called men, serpents, and bulls 3. four rivers in hell, and what they meant
247. Romans inconstant in religion 126. their weak gods 146. the Romans and
Turks half Moons 149. they thurst Mars out of their city 152. they chose Mars
for their god 153. their marriages 135. their Ludi circenses 177. their custom
in eating 267. in running with torches 274. in worshipping S^turn 236. Romish
Church like Orion 195. their Purgatory and tutelar Saints 145, 146. Rose the
flower of Venus why 263.
S
Sacrilege 45. Satan represented by Ant^us 21. by Cerberus 56. by Chimaera 63.
by Circe 66. by Polyphemus 73. by the Minot^^^ 76. by Erichthonius 88. by
Medusa 103. by Mercury 159. by Sphinx 245. by Typhon 259. Satyrs what 204.
Satur^e gelded by his son 68. devoured his children 140, 234. could not
devour Jupiter 141. signifies time, married his sister 233. his picture
described ^^3, 234. why called Sterculius, why he had six wings 234. a slow
planet 234. his other picture described 235. his genitals, and cruelty 235,
236. his priests, why lights on his alters, and why called Saturn 236. by him
are meant trees and plants 237. how he begets Venus, his casting into hell, his
Saturnal^ what 237. Scholars their content and happiness 168, 169. their
spare diet 170. like bees 171. like Tantalus 250. S^ythians lovers of Mars 152.
Scylla what 237. she signifies a whore 238. a pirates ship, and a rock. 238.
Scyll^, Nisus his daughter. ^39. Sea how Neptune 173. the Sea gods 176. the Sea
causes fertility, 176. teaches us many things 177. its diverse motions 178.
its shapes and colors 191. Triton 193. Servant when free anciently 163, 240.
Servius Tullius how conceived 145. Sibylla what 13. Silenus still drunk 203.
riding on an ass 204. foster father to Bacchus 204. Sin like Circe 67. never
unpunished 153. not hid from God 154. it brings shame 208. Sirenes 161. they
were whores 241. they signify (...)ll pleasures and fl^terers 241. their three
sorts of (...) 242. how long they were to live 242. they were queens 244.
Sisyphus killed by Theseus 242. his sins 243. his endless work 243. Sleep her
city and gates 185. Sphinx in the porch of Is^^ temple 129. he^ picture
explained, the type of Satan 245. her riddle, and whose child she was 246.
the type of a Christian, her emblem 246 a kind of an ape 246. Spiders our
^^achers 26, 27. Stars signified by the Hesperides 121. Sterculius 234. Sty^
what 247. why the gods swear not by her ^48. Sun represented by Adonis 6. by
Ant^us 21. by Apo^^^ 22. by Bacchus 39. by Pan. ^0^. bp Bell^r^phon 4^. by
Polyphemus 74. by Endymeon 86. by Hercules 115. by Janus 130. by Ma^s 152. by
Mercury ^^7. by (...) 164, 165. by Nemesis 173. Sun and Moon, by Castor and
Pollux 50. Sun Hyperions son 244, he (...) eth Jupiter 244. his pictures
explained 2^4, 245. in the midst of the Muses, and what birds dedicated to him,
his arrows and Graces, his four ^are^, how painted in Egypt 244. why Ti^honus
256. Swearing 248. Syl^anus who 204.
T
TAntalus who 249. his love to his gods 249, 250. the type of scholars, of rich
misers, of tyrants 250. why ^punished 251. Te^^^n 192. Thetis 192. Tereus who
251. turned into a lapwing, his lust and cruelty 252. the son of Mars 253.
Theseus who 253. he leaps into the Sea, goes down to hell with Perithous 254.
when admitted to his father, and what his going to hell signifies 254. he
instituted i^ the Isthinian games, murdered in his old age, 255. ^he type of
Christ 25^. Time 56, 234. Tiphons children 246. who he was 258. a type of
tyrants 259. signifies exhalation, the type of Satan, and of the Pope 259.
Tithonus made young 35. loved by Aurora 256. he lived long, and grew weary of
his life, turned into a Grasshopper 256. carried up to heaven 257. T^^us who, by
him corn is meant, the type of envy 257. of an evil conscience, of a lover;
punished in hell, 258. Tripos 24. Trip^olemus his education and immortality
58, 59. Triton 176. taken for the Sea 193. Trophomius his cave 147. Tyrants
signified by Jupiter 140. by Neptune 180. by Tantalus 250. by Typhon 259.
V
Vapors signified by Orion 195. Venus bewailing Adonis what 6, 205. her birds
13. Aen^^s his mother 12. her golden apples 31, 32. preferred by Paris 164. a
twofold Venus 261. Venus Libitina 262. Venus picture explained 262, 263. Venus
verticorda 263. her flower the rose, her tree the myrtle 263. her companions
Mercury, Python, and the Graces 264. her temple without the city, why she
sits on a goat, treading a snaile, Venus armata, Venus callvata 264. Venus
barbata, and why a bed with Mars 265. why Bacchus her armor bearer 265. and
why preferred to Pallas and Juno 265. why married to Vulcan 266. Venus Cloacin^
her temple what 266. wounded by Diomedes 266. ^acchus fell in love with her
223. she represents ^. whore 224. ashamed of Priapus 208. Vesta who and what
266, 267. her temple, fire, Vestall Nuns, and two lamps on her altar 267. the
chief of the Penates, her image, she only immovable why called Vesta, and
what she signified 368. Virgil excells Homer 168. and Horace 169. Virginity
87. Ulysses his behavior to the Sirens 241, 242. his wisdom and actions 269,
270. his killing of Rhesus 270 he removes the Palladium, and binds his fellows
269, 270. he thrusts out Polyphemus his eye, and rescu^s his fellows from Circe
270. he goes to hell, and stopps his fellows cares, and sails between Scylla
and Carybdis, he kills the woores, his errors and follies, 271. he marries
Penelope 210. Usurers 81. V^thankfulnesse 106 Vulcan injurious to Minerva 87,
163. he is the elementary fire, and the type of man's unregenerate part 87. and
of war 88. he bound Mars and Venus 154. why begot of an egg; his office and
thunder 272. his fall and lamenesse, his feasts, whose son, why thrust out of
heaven 273. his shedding of ^eed, his choler, and how nursed by Thetis 274. ^ee
bl^^^es his parents for his deformity 274. he binds Juno, Mars, and Venus
274, 275. Vulcan my Muses greatest enemy 275.
W
War an enemy to Minerva 88. hateful to God 145, 153. an enemy to Arts
153. an honou^^r of murderers 154. raised on slight occasions 154. the fruits
of War 153. (...) 31. their malice 42, 63. like Hecate 114. like Scylla's
barking dogs 238. they must not enter Juno's temple 136. they are Sirens 241.
their inticements 242. (...) its use and abuse 38, 63. if fit for Poets 169. or
for Princes 189. an enemy to true love 265. fit for old men 204. Winds
signified by Aeg^on 11. by Typhon 259. by the Giants warring against Jupiter
101. they scatter the Spanish Fleet 11. ruled by Aeolus in caves 14, 15. Winds
called Etesit 30. begotten of Aurora 34. they are exhalations 153. Wisdom and
wise men described and commended 160, 161, 16^, 163, 164, 165, 244. in Princes
265. W^^ens nakedness reproved 5. their foolish matches 8. many like Pasiphae
76. like Medusa 104. like Juno shedding her milk 136. they must not enter
Hercules temple 118. honest women ex^ressed by Juno 134. women's pride 182.
emulation 239. impatience 239. they must not love wine 224. their duties 210.
their modesty, and vain dressing 211. Word of God has diverse effects 197.
World like hell 148.
Y
YOung men rash 216. what they should learn 217. apt to fall 110. they must
serve God 110.
Z.
Zeal with wisdom 164.
FINIS.

