A ROPE FOR POL.

OR, A HUE and CRY after MARCHEMONT NEDHAM.

The late Scurrulous News-writer.

Being a Collection of his horrid Blasphemies and Revilings against the King's
Majesty, his Person, his Cause, and his Friends; published in his weekly
Politicus.

2 Samuel 19. 21. Shall not Shimei be put to death for this, because he cursed
the Lords anointed. 1 Kings 2. 44, 45. The King said moreover to Shimei, Thou
know all the wiceednesse thy heart is privy to, that thou did to David my
Father, therefore the Lord shall return thy wickedness upon thine own head.

And King Solomon shall be blessed, and the throne of David shall be
established before the Lord for ever.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1660.

An Advertisement to the READER.
IT has been made a Question long ago, whether more mischief then advantage
were not occasioned to the Christian world by the Invention of Typography. But
never was any Question more fully determined then this has been of late years
in these Nations. We have seen the Hierarchy of the Church of England traduced
and profaned by the Writings of zealous Incendiaries, the pious and learned
Governors of it loaded with loaded and accusations, the reverend Clergy
decry'd and almost proscribed, yea Religion it self publicly struck at, the
mysteries of it despised by notorious Heretics the Holy Ordinances declaimed
against by Fanatics and Enthusiasts. This in the Church. In the State we have
seen Sedition and Rebellion defended and propagated in full Treatises, Murder,
Treachery, Rapine, Perjury, Ambition, Tyranny, Oppression, Persidiousnesse
justified and applauded, Calumny taken into the Arts of State, the steps of
Gods Anointed stander'd, his Honor wounded with scurrility and reproach, his
person exposed to scorn and derision, his sufferings insulted over, his just
Title maliciously and impudently debased. and the Honorable and Loyal of the
Land basely aspersed and derided. Writings of this strain, and many-others as
they have been the issue of traiterous and postilent minds, so they have been
brought into the world and propagated by the assistance of the Press. But what
was by others singly attempted in several ways, has been in all practiced by
the late Writer of Politious, Marchemont Nedham, whose scurrilous Pamphlets
flying every Week into all parts of the Nation, it is incredible what influence
they had upon numbers of unconsidering persons, who have a strange presumption
that all must needs be true that is in Print. This was the Goliath of the
Philistines, the great Champion of the late Usurper, whose Pen was in
comparison of others like a Weavers beam: and certainly he that shall peruse
these Papers will judge that had the Devil himself (the Father of Lies and who
has his name from Calnmny) been in this man's office, he could not have exceeded
him. It will therefore, I conceive, be demanded wherefore these exceptions are
now published, and not rather suffered to perish in perpetual oblivion, and
perhaps it will be judged that they deserve rather to be burned then read? That
they may be so, and that so grand a Delinquent and Blasphemer of Gods
anointed, as the Author, may not (through the inconsider ableness of his
person) pass untaken notice of, but may have some share in that satisfaction
which is now intended to Justice, is the reason of this publication. I have no
enmity to his person, but me thinks there is some kind of necessity, that he
that has with so much malice calumniated his Sovereign, so scurrulously abused
the Nobility, so impudently blasphemed the Church, and so industriously
poisoned the people with dangerous principles, should (at least) carry some
mark about him, as the recompense of his villainies.

Farewell.
A ROPE for POLL, OR A HUE and CRY AFTER MARCHEMONT NEDHAM.
WHy should not the Commonwealth have Pol.
Numb. 1.
a Fool as well as the King had? it is a Page 1.
point of State, and the ready Road to preferment and a Ladies Chamber.

Is not this a ticklish time to write Intelligence? Page 2.
but what ever happens, you shall have it to the purpose; for I fear no
Colors, neither Black Coat nor Blew-Cap; nor that Raw-head and Bloody-bones in
the Royal Banner of Scotland.

Long may the Scotch Royal Progeny and Priesthood, be all Ibid.
fellows at Football, and enjoy Sunshine once a Quarter, for the reviving of
Factions, that they may never return again to stroke the Gils of the City, and
compare Notes with the Clergy, for the Restoration of their Members, and the
thrice Reverend Assembly.

The depth of the Plot, is to Barrel up their King like Ibid.
other Merchandise in a Dutch Hoy, that he may slink away among the Fishermen,
and be Landed any where in a Kingly Pickle, upon the Coast of Scotland.

For his better entertainment when he comes to Edinburgh, P. 3.
there is Montross's Head of the Kirks own dressing, provided for his
Breakfast, and mounted on the Townhouse, on purpose to bid him welcome, and
many thanks for the remembrance of his famous Services; which the young man
(having one quality of a King) has already learned to forget.

How much better must it needs be for the Cavalry to Ibid.
live in peace with their own Country men, under the present Government, then
to ruin themselves and Families, to restore the unlucky Family of a Scot.

Those are the shame of Presbytery, and the Goblins of P. 4.
that Party, who make a Scarecrow of the Covenant, to fright the People: these
are the precious Vessels, that can Sail with a side-wind, and tack about any
way with a foisted scruple of Conscience, so it be to satisfy their
Concupiscence and serve a faction; these are the Dreamers that speak evil of
Dignities.

Prince Rupert being Commander in Chief, over all the P. 6.
Squibbs and petty fireworks, for his poor Majesty of Scotland.

The Scots put up a politic Prayer for him, that God P. 8.
would turn his Episcopal heart to the Scottish modules, and make him worship
their Grand Idol as his only Diana, and prove himself, more affectionate to
her, than ever he was to any of his Mothers Maids of Honor, when he lay in
France at St. Germans.

An Act past for settling the Militia of London; the next P. 9.
I hope will be for settling the Militia of our Priesthood of London: It Is a
wonder to all men they dare be so Impudent, as to make a Mortar piece of the
Pulpit, shooting Squibs and Grenades to blow up the Parliament; certainly
these people have a world of Lechery in Faction, the four and twentieth of June
is coming, and they had best beware they be not taken napping, for their
Adulteries with the great Whore of Scotland; but the comfort is, they are
pretty well guelt-of their Iure Divino.

I hope to see Crowns pass for Two pence a piece, and P. 11.
they that take them will lose by the bargain. Ibid.


The late Queen of England continues still in the Monastery; Monasteries (you
know) were ever accounted holy places, and it is thought they are as godly in
France as ever they were in England, being very comfortable retreats, for ore
worn and disconsolate sinners. They say in France, a Monck is every jot as good
as a Gentleman Usher, and she has many of them. P. 14.


As for Newcastle, he is to Act a Comedy in hope of supplies from his Majesty
of Denmark; his Lordship is a good Poet, and a few begging Rythms may do much
when the Dane is in his Cups, of which he may chance to send a dozen or two to
his Cousin Stewart. Ibid.


The King of Scotland was alive at Hounslaer-Dike, where after he had given his
Chaplain a few pence and a Pass for their Episcopacy, they were discharged for
ever coming within the Borders of the more Holy Presbytery. Ibid.


I am confident not one Elder of an hundred but had rather dye the death of a
Wittol then of a Traitor. Number. 2.


The Presbytery cry out, that Politicus is an Atheist, because Page 17.
he tosses the Kirk like a Football, and jerks their Hypocrisy. O ye Publican
Sectaries and Harlots! come ye not near them? for these are the Congregation of
Dathan and Abiram who stood upon Holy ground, and are more holy then you, if
you list to believe them: these are the little Levites that cannot abide you,
because your sacrilegious Troopers have carried away all the Provender of
Reformation, and tied them up to the Manger. Woe and alas for the glory of the
Priesthood; who since they have lost their Command, must not look hereafter to
go so merrily a wiving, because they cannot promise their pretty Mistrisses to
make them Queens of the Parish: no more must they march like George-a-horseback
upon their steeds to Westminster, with their Hearts full of Pluralities and
Tithes; Their Souls swollen with pride, their Heads with Faction beyond the Pomp
of a Diocese, and other appurtinances of their Iure Divino, no longer shall
they sit Cheek by Joule with the supreme Authority, in the state of an Assembly
to Catechize the Parliament, and con over their most elaborate Confession, with
the more wondrous Directory, which being once past the Press, were worn out in
Chapels of Ease, though they cost us many thousands, with their four shillings
a day wages, and more then three years patience ere the works were brought to
perfection.

His Kingship of Scotland took his Journey from Breda P. 18.
to the Hague, his Brother Orange providing him ships for a Convoy. Because he
durst not trust himself with the Schippers, for fear he might have been put off
with other small fish, and sent in pickle to England; therefore in regard these
ships were but borrowed, the young man went aboard, and bad them strike sail
for three Kingdoms when he can catch them. Thrice they put to Sea, and as often
were driven back, so that the wind had like to have blown away the Shuttle cock
of Monarchy. Certainly, the Chicken of this family are none of the Halcyon
brood, because never without a storm; old Mary Queen of Scots never crossed the
sea but in a storm: her son King James escaped it, because he never was so
valiant as to venture, or else he had raised a storm in his Breeches, His son
Charles went a wooing to Spain in a storm and so Returned, etc. and since the
storm ever follows by land as well as by water, I suppose it was wisely done of
the Parliament, to throw them all over board, to save themselves and the
Vessel; But I hear he is blown back again by that pretended blast of Honor and
Conscience that blasted his Father.

The Kirk are very Righteous, even as Righteous as P. 20.
their elder Brethren the Pharisees, ten of whose Righteousnesses would have
hardly saved a Louse out of Gommorrha.

Judge you then whether the Kirk be not bravely inthroned Ibid.
in Scotland, where she destines whom she pleases to death, and causes them
to kiss the Scaffold, and those whom she pleases to let live, she makes to kiss
her Breech, or serve (without Ceremony) for a Footstool.

The bold Whore (bolder then her sister Babylon) would Ibid.
feign come hither a madding, and set up her trade here in England.

The King is at a pause, because he perceives (without P. 21.
the help of Astrology) that his head may be made the price of their peace and
security, he remembers who they were that hunted his great Grandmother, like a
Polcat, and were suspected for hanging her Husband: who they were likewise that
Baited his Grandsire Jemmy, and whipped him out of his Royalty: also how they
handled his Father, and therefore he will look before he leaps, having Cause to
fear, that the same Rods are laid in piss now by the Kirk and her Assembly.

When they send young Tarquin for a Token to his P. 22.
Friends in England.

This is like to be the last King that ever they shall be Ibid.
Masters of. And if they be wise they will have their pennyworths out of him
for all his Projects.

He has played fast and loose with Them and Montrosse Ibid.
at the same time: I mean the same Montrosse that was the Gallant Royalist,
whom they buried under the Gallows, in pure love to his Majesty, if he please
to believe them.

This is Dad's own Son, two faces under one hood, being P. 24.
an Hereditary Posture.

Montrosse acted nothing but by his instigation and commission, Ibid.
for which they hanged him in a most Presbyterian manner, and yet at the same
time the Kirk opens her bosom most lovingly to receive His Master as her son
into her protection; The Crime is the same in both, but the guilt greater in
him being the Author, than in Montrosse the Actor, wherefore I must here
proclaim to all the world the partiality and hypocrisy of the Presbyterians,
that they should anathematize one Delinquent even to Hell, and the Death and
Burial of a Dog, yet spare another more guilty then he, and not only so, but
give him sugar-sops, etc.

Ormond, (according to the common fate of all Lords) P. 25.
is a thing that lives but by Courtesy.

As for the rest of the Runnagates, the Curse of Cain pursues P. 26.
them beyond hopes of a Pardon.

All that begins with the name of Charles is unlucky, Ibid.
and must down.

I cannot blame them more then their Brother Curres P. 27.
here in England.

The Duke of York is a good Boy to be doing abroad I P. 29.
say, and not a Rambling after Charles, now upon his Voyage to Whitehall, for
if he be caught here, he will be soundly whipped for running away from St.
James's.

The young Lad of Scotland has left Holland. P. 31.


No Letters come yet upon what Coast young Tarquin is P. 32.
a Fishing.

Madam Kirk and a Baby King, A Dainty Covenant N. 3. P. 38
with other rare knacks.

The Ministers or Scotch Trumpeters. P. 39.


It is not known yet in what part of the World young P. 40.
Tarquin is landed.

The late Duke of York is turned Serving-man to his P. 42.
Cousin the King of France, who has bestowed a Cast office upon him being made
Commander of his Scottish Ianizaries; a warm place (believe me) and if it will
hold I warrant he will teach his Brother more Wit then to venture his neck in
two such cold Climates, as England and Scotland.

Young Tarquin slunk away in a Fly-boat, and Imbarqued P. 45.
like Poore-Iohn, ships being sent to scour the Road of King-Fishers, if the
young Trout had been worth taking.

When the Kirk stroak's up the Boy's forehead, and Ibid.
gives him her blessing, which passes all understanding. Ibid.


He wept at Montross's death by the Water side, like a young Crocodile upon the
ba^ks of Nilus, as all Kings use to do, when they have worn out their
Favorites..

Baby Charles of Scotland. P. 47.


The Kirk longs much, and is like to miscarry for a tried P. 48.
bit of young Tarquin.

They say young Tarquin is Landed among his good N. 4. P. 49
people, and must once more be Proclaimed King by the sound of Bagpipes, that
he may be sent after his beloved Cousin Montrosse.

There is not a Cavalier in England, but swears, this it Ibid.
will come to; and therefore they are mad if they stir from the Pipe and the
Piss-Pot in hope of a Knighthood; nor have they a mind to be led by the Nose,
or tied by the Tails with those Foxes, and Firebrands which frighted the Pope
and the Prelates quite out of the Parish, into the King's own Belly, so that
now she languisheth for a Cordial of new Insurrections, in hope of a safe
deliverance, if the old Cavalry and Bumkins will be made Midwives or Monkies,
in the behalf of her Holiness.

Cranford and Ienkins, two principal Rabbis of the Leviticat P. 50.
Order, brought a company of starcht'd faces along with them.

The Kirk is a Monster of a Scotch stomach, whose keen P. 60.
appetite, will know no difference between Presbyterian and Independent
morsells.

The Thing of Scotland Landed among his beloved P. 62.
Beasts, the Redshanks and the Highlanders.

Upon the Landing of Tarquin, etc. P. 63.


The young Gentleman came a shore without his Cousin Ibid.
Hamilton or Lauderdail, and not so much as a frippery of the old Priesthood
and Leiturgy.

Rather then Tarquin should be no King, it is but rubbing P. 64.
up an old Kettle or Warming-Pan; and either may serve for a Scotch Coronation.

How Sweet the Air of a Commonwealth is beyond that Number. 5.
of Monarchy. P. 65.


Young Tarquin is a coming with a world of Majesty and Ibid.
Vermin, and there is not a Royalist in England, but dreams of an Office (Sir
Reverence) to be at least Groom of the Stool.

Rabbi Ienkins, what a Platter face full of impudence he P. 66.
presented before the Committee, attended with his old gang of Luggs and Ruffs.

Young Tarquin creeps on still. P. 79.
Ibid.


Farewell William Pryn too, and farewell all ye wild Wittals of the nasty
Faction.

An ill fate attends all that take part with the Baby of P. 80.
Scotland. The young Lad. Young Tarquin. One Rout make's Tarquin not worth a
Pamphlet.

The Pride and Covetousness of a Pulpit Incendiary; Ibid.
the Spleen and Melancholy of a Secluded Member; the Purse of a City Elder; and
the Wit and Valor of a Presbyterian Lordling.

Iockie Charles. His Baby Majesty. P. 82.


The young man is full of hope; and at Dundee, he and P. 83.
the bonny Iockies are fellows at Football.

His pretty Majesty of Scotland the Lad, behaves himself P. 84.
like an obedient Son of the Kirk: he never moves, but like a Puppet upon the
Wire of the Covenant, and ambles altogether after their interpretation: they
feed him just as the Priests did Bell and the Dragon; they set meat before him,
but give him a Sermon of Temperance, and eat up all themselves, and then
Catechize him with a Scotch Primmer for digestion: His very Authority is all
Apocrypha, and the Kirk only Canonical, so that he dares not question a
Tittle, for fear of a whipping Iure Divine.

A fine Baby King for a Company of Scots to play withal. Ibid.


The old projects that were left in Legacy by his Father. Ibid.


There is no thriving for any whatsoever, upon the same P. 87.
account of the Tarquins.

The poor Pill of Orange, if things do not mend, he will P. 88.
never be able to set an Excise upon the Provinces, to buy Petticoats for his
Wenches.

Upon the young Lad's arrival at Dundee, Ringing of P. 91.
Bells, Shooting of Pottles and Quarts: Those Canon and Demicanon of Royalty
were freely discharged upon their Knees, to the health of his Medlcy Majesty,
yet all will not avail to the health of the Baby.

If Iockie please to search his Pockets, it is ten to one, but Number. 6.
P. 92.
he will find Madam Kirk, to be a Bull by an Vrchin, with the Pope's Broad Seal
and a dispensation for the Covenant.

Young Tarquin is grown sick upon his new Sovereignty. P. 95.


This old Doctor Bishop Hall in my opinion, next to Number. 7.
P. 100.
William Prynne, and the Mercurial Pamphleteer, is one of the greatest
Paper-wormes that ever crept into a Closet or Library.

His Clipped Majesty of Scotland. P. 103.


The Thing called his Majesty. P. 108.


Young Tarquin may have the luck to wipe the Nose of P. 110.
the Kirk's Holiness.

The Idol of Majesty. P. 111.


The Thing called King. Ibid.


That Puppet of their own making (I dare promise) will Ibid.
in the end (if they do not look to him) be their utter confusion.

Their great God Tarquin. Number. ^.


The young Lad begins to grow confident, and has Page 113.
P. 114.
thrown away the Kirk's Horn-Book. Ibid.


The Kingly Kickshaw. Ibid.


The great Lords and their Idol, have a design of their own.

Sr. John Culpepper, Ambassador Extraordinary from the P. 116.
Thing of Scotland, that calls it self King of great Britain.

The Earl of Derby intends to convert his Leaden P. 118.
Crown into Bullets, as Queen Mall did her Jewels.

The young Lad of Scotland. P. 124.


That Trifle called Charles the second, and avowed the P. 127.
Roy Charles to be King of England and Scotland.

The Scotch Baby King of England. Ibid.


Alas poor Thing! he has played his part long enough in Ibid.
this Tragedy, so that now it is high time to quit the Stage, since it is
resolved above and below too, that none of the Tarquins shall have any
inheritance in England. The two Birds here of the same nest shall be sent away
beyond Sea.

The Broad Seal of young Tarquin. P. 128.


The Diet, Dwelling and Designs of young Tarquin; the Number. 9.
Plots of his great Lords, etc. P. 129.


His Baby Majesty. P. 131.


Strip Tarquin out of all his Titles and pretty Trinkets Ibid.
of Majesty.

James Tarquin is not yet come from Iersey to Paris. P. 134.


The Thing of Scotland. P. 135.


Incheqnin the dapper Giant of the Iockies Interest. Number. 10.


The Drums have been long beaten up in the Pulpit P. 159.
Ibid.
for young Tarquin.

Young Tarquins Majesty. They promised the Baby, a Number. 11.
Bell, a Bib, and a Rattle. P. 161.


What would you have? a Royal Puppet to play withal. P. 174.


Mother Mall made a Muster of the forlorn Fobs and P. 175.
Pockets of her Family.

The Plague Landed out of Ireland in the Western parts, Number. 12.
much about the same time with young Tarquin in England. P. 178.


Alas poor Tarquin what a pickle art thou in. P. 179.


Alas poor Tarquin, whither will thou go? P. 180.


The State was put to far greater trouble and expenses Ibid.
upon the hanging of Montrosse, then some were pleased to bestow upon Tarquin's
great Grandfather, when they truss't him up upon a Pear Tree.

Young Tarquin intends to mount the Royal Galloway, P. 187.
to run a race with the Scotch Hierarchy, and out run Mon tross's and his
Father's destiny; and this if he do, he may do well to call upon his Brother.
James, at the I Will of Iersey, that they may learn to trayle a Pike, and Rant
away a Pension for the maintenance of the French.

In every line you will find We and Us, as if he had a Number. 13.
Litter of Pigs, besides Popes in his belly. P. 194.


He confesses the sins of his Fathers House (a foul Ibid.
House indeed) if he had reckoned up his Mothers House too.

The Thing called King. P. 195.


The Scots King has been in the Penitential Chair; he P. 201.
has acknowledged his Fathers sin, and his own wickedness, and his Mothers
Idolatry.

The Scots King is wholly passive, led up and down by P. 203.
the Nose at their pleasure.

Charles Tarquin being already a Catholic, swore he would Number. 14.
P. 211.
turn Turk too, but he would be revenged upon the English; James Tarquin is to
be a Cardinal, and Rupert Tarquin is as good as the best in the Bunch, having
been a Thief in two Elements, and a Runnagate in diverse Countries; all which
being considered by our Brethren of London and others, they have little
considence in a Cause that admits of a combination with that wretched Family.

It is very possible, young Tarquin may lick up again the Number. 15.
late vomit of the sins of his Family. P. 230.


Attempts have been made, to make a purse to buy Gunpowder P. 232.
and Milk for the Baby of Scotland.

The young Proselite. P. 259.


Their young King is in a Consumption I believe, both Number. 16.
of Purse and Reputation: they say he spits blood, but not P. 267.
so fast I suppose as he and his Father spilt it; his Doctors tell him he
cannot live three months, and yet I fear he will out live both his Religion
and Reputation.

We had Leisure to take notice of young Tarquins Declaration. P. 274.


He will believe all these Evils to have occasioned, P. 275.
through the blood spilt by his Father and himself; the Idolatry of his Mother,
and the sins of his Fathers House; that all his own miscarriages are excuseable
by reason of his Education, Age, evil Council and Company.

Out of a desire to recover the Crown) for which I will Ibid.
not give him a halfpenny) he is content to pass an Act of Oblivion for all,
but such who had the courage to do justice upon his Father, whom he himself
has acknowledged to be guilty of all the blood in the three Nations. The rest
concludes with an exhortation to Rebellion.

Given at our Court at Dumfermlin, Aug. 16. 1650.

Young Tarquin has shown the Kirk a fair pair of Heels. Number. 20.


James Tarquin is gone to Brussells, and required of Iermin, P. 329.
an account of 600 Pistols, lent him by the Duke of P. 336.
Orleance for his Journey, but Iermin had played away 60 of them.

A Crown he may have, but not of Gold; for some Princes Number. 22.
have been Crowned with Brown Paper, and some with P. 163.
Ivy.

James Tarquin (whom they call Duke of York) the Lad etc. P. 365.


His Father was justly put to death for his Acts of Tyranny. P. 369.


The King of Scots having received his Crown, designed Number. 33.
the Parliament to appoint a fast for his sins. P. 540.


I saw the Duke of York accompanied with bad Tutors, P. 546.
being part of the Fates of that Family.

The nominal Duke of York intends speedily for France, Number. 35.
being constrained thereunto against his will, because upon P. 580.
Iermins persuasions to the Princess his Sister, that she would not
countenance him in his disobedience to his Mother, he is like to receive no
farther supplies from her.

There will not ^ide with the Royal Party any persons Number. 37.
P. 606.
of note, that have but moral honesty in them.

The new Tyrant will be as absolute as was William the Number 38.
Conqueror. P. 607.


Young Pharaoh's Chariot wheels drive not with that N. 39.
fury as was expected. P. 633.


The young Pretender. Number. 40.
P. 640.


The only way to be rid of Taxes and make the Nation Number 42.
happy is utterly to desert the common Enemy, and P. 673.
cast off the Tyrannick Family, with all the Curses that attend it.

The Scots have an Ishbosheth amongst them, Heir of a Number. 43.
P. 686.
Family of the very same complexion and condition, against whom destruction
has been written in broad Characters by the special hand of Providence, that
no Party whatsoever that joins with it does prosper.

They have an Achan and an Isbosheth amongst them. Ibid.


Tarquin the Second. P 691.
Number. 44.


The Abominable Interest. P. 703.


Malignants, Cavaliers, Papists, yea and Irish Rebels are Ibid.
upon the Account of their Charles the Second.

When a Nation has cast off the yoke of Tyranny, or Number. 45.
Kingship, and newly obtained their Liberty, it must look P. 719.
to have all those for Enemies that were Familiars and Retainers to the Tyrant.

The Scotch King came with his Covenant-Pretences and Ibid.
acted the mockery of Repentance with much Hypocritical Solemnity.

Though the Presbyterians laid not the Tyrant down P. 720.
upon the block, yet they brought him to the Scaffold.

The Scots deprived him ( K. Charles the First) of his Ibid.
Earthly Crown as he deserved.

The young Raven has rookt the Kirk. Number. 47.
P. 751.


The Scots have taken a Snake into their bosom. Ibid.


He was born to the old Corrupt Interest, He sucked it Ibid.
in with his milk, was nursed up with blood and malignancy, and had a share (so
far as he was capable) in all the sins of his Family. Number. 48.


The Tyrant being beheaded, P. 769.


The young Gentleman by his guardian the Scot is very P. 771.
active.

They will see what Tarquin can do for himself. Ibid.


The cunning sleights and devices of the Scottish King. Number. 49.
P. 783.


That Heroic and most noble Act of Justice in Judging P. 784.
and Executing the late King.

The Scots pronounced and printed the late King, a Ibid.
man of blood, one that had shed more blood in his time than had been shed in
the ten Christian persecutions.

Mary, James his Mother massacred her own Husband by Number. 50.
Poison, Gunpowder and Halter, for the Love that She P. 799.
bare to a Fiddler and another of her Adulterers, by name Bothwell.

The wicked ways of his Father, the idolatry of his P. 801.
Mother, and the bloud-guiltinesse of his Father's House; Woe to that Bloody
House.

A Bloody Generation. Ibid.


He has approved himself Heir apparent of that blood Number. 51.
P. 816.
and vengeance which belongs to his Father's house.

As for the Title of young Tarquin who now would Number. 52.
fain be accounted Heir. P. 832.


The Treason of the Father has cut off the Son. Ibid.


What a governor he is like to be, who took in his Father's Ibid.
Principles with his Mother's Milk. Who has been bred up under the wings of
Popery and Prelacy, one who has been bedabbled in all the blood of England,
Scotland and Ireland.

We have cause to cut off this accursed Line of Tyranny, P. 833.
blood and usurpation in this young Pretender.

That Tyrannical Line. Number. 53.


Charles the Father is gone to his own place, and so is P. 855.
Charles the Son likewise, he being in his own proper Nation, Ibid.
Scotland.

The execution of Justice is then most proper, when Number. 56.
an Offender appears incorrigible, and by a settled obstinacy Page 885.
puts himself out of the capacity of mercy: surely then now or never is the
time that men may expect an administration of Justice without respect of
persons, this being an Age that is able to take a full Prospect of such
Delinquents through all the sacred Colors of Title and Function. The time was,
when this Nation was wedded to the vanity of admiring Kings, placing them in a
lofty seat of impunity like Gods, that were not bound to give men an Account of
their Actions, but had a Liberty to thunder at Pleasure, and put the world into
combustion, so that there was no Love, but Lust; no Rule, but the Princes will,
which so vassalized the Spirits of this great and mighty people, that they were
content to establish the highest piece of Injustice by such Maxims of P. 886.
Law, as said, The King can do no wrong; as if whatsoever he did could not make
him a Delinquent, or Traitor; nor was it Law only, but those antiquated Cheats
of the Clergy too made it pass for Divinity; so that the Commonwealth of
England for almost 600. years has been pinioned like a Captive, with that
twofold Cord of the Law and the Gospel, which the corrupt Professors have made
use of after their own Inventions.

Yet notwithstanding that this glorious Idol of Royalty was elevated to such a
Height over the Liberties of the Parliament, and set upon the very Pinnacle of
the Temple, we have lived to see a noble generation of English hearts, that
have fetched it down with a vengeance, and cured the Land of that Idolatry, by
one of the most Heroic and exemplary Acts of Justice that ever was done under
the Sun.

Nothing farther (speaking of transactions in Parliament, Number. 57:
and news a little before) save that the Lord Chancellor P. 915.
Lowdon has been found in bed with a Scotch Officers wife, getting
Privy-Counsellours; so that without the mercy of the Kirk, he must once more to
the Stool of Repentance.

So great was the stupidity of Elder Times, being ridden Number. 58.
by the Clergy, that in all our Chronicles we can hardly P. 917.
meet with a piece of Justice done upon any of that Tribe, till the time of
Harry the VIII. when Bishop Fisher was brought to the block as a Martyr for the
Popes Supremacy, and yet from Sodomy and private murder to public Treason and
Rebellion there is not any crime whereof they were not guilty; and from the
penalty whereof they were not guarded by impunity and exemption from secular
power. This having been so in time past, may prompt us upon the consideration
of the present Actions of many of our Ministers, to believe that we may be
still at the same pass that our forefathers were, and that our new Clergy are
still the same Idol, only a little disguised with a new dress of Mummery;
they have taken a new Form, but labor to hold up the old Grandeur, and
Punctilio's of Veneration, P. 918.
only here is the difference: heretofore they got an outward power to control
the temporal Jurisdiction; from which Plea being now nonsuited in all civil
Courts, they now renew their sanctimonious pretenses by tampering every where
in the Court of Conscience; but a Conscience well informed knows, that with God
there is no respect of persons; and methinks in those days it ought to be so
too among men, yea it must be so, since he that sat in the Royal Throne, in
the midst of his iniquity could not rest secure; but being disrobed of all his
sacred Titles, laid him down upon the Block, to show all inferionr Orders of
men how vain it is to hope for impunity, and that they must all expect to
submit and bow before the Throne ofe Justice.

It is the old Cavaliers Interest (speaking of his Majesty's Number. 62.
leaving Scotland, and now coming into England) that P. 982.
comes in new clad with a new Cloak of the Covenant, after the Scottish
fashion; and it comes attended by the Scot, the apostatizing Scot, that will
cide any way for a thriving voyage into England. Let the Presbytery remember,
that though they laid not the old Tyrant down upon the Block, yet the young one
knows they were the men that brought him to the Scaffold, and they are the old
enemies of his Family; in which respect, he ever bore a mortal hatred to their
whole faction, (and a little after) and we will Ibid.
allow both Cavalier and Presbyter so much sense, (were their spleen never so
high) as not to embarque their heads and Estates in the bottom of a beaten
rabble, for the sake of a Toy called King; who as he first sailed into
Scotland, so now he is driven out again by pure necessity; yet for fashion sake
he pretends great matters, and playing the second part of Perkin Warbeck, who
once invaded the North after the same manner, with a crew of Scots at his
heels, and had every jot as good a Title as himself, or as his Predecessor
Henry the 7th, and played the King with as good a Grace; issuing out
Proclamations and Declarations; calling folks Rebels with as brazen a
considence, and tossing pardons about to no purpose; till at length poor Perkin
and his Scots were pack't out again with a vengeance, as that Lowsy Nation ever
has been upon every offer of Invasion, as may be seen in the Chronicles of
both Countries.

Let not the Presbyters flatter themselves, (upon a Number. 63.
change) that they shall escape any better than others, because P. ^99.
they never opposed this man's Person ( viz. his Majesty) it would be ground
sufficient for his hatred, and the spleen of his Prelatick Clergy; that they
first bandied against his Father, the Prerogative, and Prelacy. And let them
consider (before they feel it) that revenge is reckoned inter Arcana Imperii; a
prime mystery in the Cabinet counsel of Royalty; even the best of Kings could
not refrain it, as may be seen in the practice of David and Solomon. Let them
consider too, how he has rook't all their Party in Scotland.

Let the Cavalier and Compounders consider, they Ibid.
will get nothing by this change; they can be but Masters of what they have
already? the high Ranters and Fugitives are they that will be looked on at
Court: those Belweathers of Tyranny will bear away the Bell of preferment,
while the poor Country Royalists (both Gentry and Yeomen) shall be glad to
drudge and plow, to pay those yet unknown Taxations, which must needs be
collected, to satisfy the forlorn Brethren of the sword, the Plunderers and
hungry Scots that come along with the Grandees, in hope to purchase a fortune
by squeezing the public. Let the whole Nation also consider, that if young
Tarquin come in by Conquest, he will be as absolute as was William the
Conqueror; and we all must be in the same slavish condition, as our
forefathers were under this Norman Bastard; by having our Birthrights trampled
under foot, our Parliaments, Laws, Liberties and Privileges resolved all into
the the will of an arbitrary Tyrant, and his Scottish Privy Council.

It Is reported, their King (meaning our most gracious P. 1009.
Lord and Sovereign) blames Major Astnerst, for bringing him to Lancashire,
since he finds no more access of forces: I do not hear that any considerable
person does openly own him since his march into England; wherefore we doubt
not, but God has ordered his coming hither, for the more speedy ruin of him
and his Adherents.

What a happiness it is, to live to see this day, wherein Number. 64.
we have experience of the noble temper of our Nation P. 1013.
that though many of them be divided in matter of particular Interest and
Opinion, yet they so well understand the General Interest of England, that they
scorn to embarque themselves in such courses, as must of necessity, either
debase us under the miserable yoke of a Scottish Tyranny, or vassalize us under
the will of an everlasting Tyrant: for, had God given over the people to run a
madding after the Royal Puppet, we could have expected no other consequents,
but endless Taxes, and inevitable slavery.

But the world is grown wiser now, then to throw away Ibid.
their Lives and Estates for a Trifle called a King; an Officer that we have
little cause to be in love with, if we take a view of them all since the
Conquest.

As it was said of old concerning Israel, that God gave Number. 65.
them a King in his wrath. So we may say of our own Nation, P. 1019.
if we view all the practices of our Kings; that they seem to have been given
by God, as the Scourges and Rods of his anger, rather then Tokens of favor
unto the people; and this in our last (meaning his 64 Number) was in part made
evident, by giving you a Character of each King since the Conquest, to the end
of Edward the second; therefore now in the next place, give me leave to trace
them downward to the present Age, drawing them in their Pourtraictures after
the Copy of our English Chronicles, and then let every different man judge, how
little reason we have to be in love with Kings, and how much the whole Nation
are obliged unto the Parliament, for blotting out so pernicious and tyrannical
a Session.

(Then after the enumeration of the rest till Queen Elizabeth, P. 1031.
and so to King James) the Scot brought in (as he says) with, and for a plague
to the Nation; the whole design of whose Reign, was to undermine the Liberties
of England, who laid the main Plot of Tyranny, and then being sent as his son
Henry, down into another world, he left his son Charles to execute it.

Charles being in the Saddle took a course to ride the P. 1032.
Nation quite off its Legs; all his Reign was to enslave, and embroile the
People, and to enhance the Prerogative; for which he died a Martyr, being
executed a Tyrant, Traitor, Murderer, and a public Enemy to the Nation.

As for the Title of the present young Pretender (meaning Ibid.
his most gracious Majesty) remember from whence he had it, and how it is now
tainted: had it been just, yet the Treason of the Father has cut off the Son;
who has lived already to embroile Scotland, and now takes the same course in
England. His Interest is revenge against the very Nation; for the effecting
whereof, he has harassed the Land with a desperate crew of Barbarians.
Consider what misery we have had by Kings in times past, and how they may be
multiplied in time to come. Tyranny has been the practice and design (you see)
of the whole race; but, admit this young Boutefeu, and he will soon bring it to
perfection; then farewell to Parliaments, Laws, Liberties and Estates, which
will be little enough for the haughty Scot, whose hopes and aims are all
levelled at these, and his quarrel at the very name and Nation of the English.

If after so many eminent discoveries of the will and purpose N. 66.
of God, touching the establishment of this Commonwealth, P. 1045.
any man shall be such a Sot, as to continue a Malignant, let him remember how
God uses to dispose of his incorrigible, and implacable enemies. But I
perceive one main impediment, that keeps men from quitting their old corrupt
principles, is, the fear of being counted a Turn-coat; yet know, that if God
once declare, as it were from heaven against thy ways, thy Principles, or thy
Party; then it is no dishonor, but ingenuity, and thy duty to turn: for, he
has said in this case; If a man do not turn, he will whet his sword; he has
bent his bow, and made it ready; he has prepared for him the instruments of
death and destruction.

Let the old Malignants and Cavaliers consider, that P. 1047.
in what shape they have appeared, with what pretenses soever they have clothed
their Conferences, yet God has found them out and confounded them. Let the new
Malignants of the Presbyterian opinion consider, how often, and notoriously God
has checked them, and cursed their unrighteous combination with the old
Malignants. Let both old and new consider, what an inseparable course is
annexed (as I have often told you) to the Family and Interest of the Tarquins,
that it proves ruin and destruction to all that own it. Let England her self,
and all the Nations about consider, what God has done for England; and how in
this auspicious time of Trial, he gave in the hearts of the people to live and
dye for the present Government. Lastly, let all Parties consider, it is high
time to lay aside animosities, and unite again upon the common interest of our
Nation; and there is no doubt but the Parliament will consider, that as God
has his design of glory in all these things, so it should be their design to
improve them all to that end; and for the ease and benefit of so willing and
obedient a people.

If ever there were a season of observation, (or rather admiration) N. 67
certainly it is the present; wherein we have P. 1061.
been eyewitnesses of so many outgoings of God's presence among us, and the
many miraculous turns of providence within a short Revolution. Some memorable
hints of those things you had in our last (meaning his Relation of the fight at
Worcester) But now observe farther; and in the first place, from whence came
the rise of all our distractions; of which we may truly say, according to the
old Proverb used by our Fathers; In nomine Domini incipit omne malum, all our
evils have been derived from the corruption of the Clergy, and such of the
Laity as have been wedded to their Faction. The first War may be truly called
Bellum Episcopale, the Bishops War, as being made for the upholding the second
correlated Interests of Prerogative and Prelacy. The two last Wars, may as well
be called Bellum Presbyteriale, being raised by the ranting Presbyters; for
erecting of a new Tyranny, upon the ruin of the P. 1062.
old one; by laboring to make one Compound of two Incompossibles, viz.
Presbytery and Monarchy. Thus you see, how when one part of the Clergy prove
Bankrupt, the other fell to traffic for the old ambitious Interest in a new
form, upon a new stock of Reputation; wherein, it is very observeable, how they
have thrived accordingly; by joining issue and Interest with the old Malignant
Traitors of Regality. The end then of this observation is, to show, that it
concerns the peace of every Commnowealth to see that the Civil Interest be
secured out of the reach of any Clerical Encroachments or Pretenses.

The next observable that falls in of courle is, how Ibid. ^
mightily the Lord has prospered the Commonwealth in a short time, since it
began to execute Justice upon our modern Traitors of the Clergy, for that blood
which has been shed through their designs and instigation: yet,
notwithstanding their confidence is more observeable than all, seeing, when
they suffer for manifest Treasons, they dubbe themselves with the Title of
Confessors and Martyrs: Thus the late Charles died a Martyr for Tyranny and
Treason; thus Mr. Love followed him, proclaiming himself a Martyr, when under
his own hand, and with his own mouth, he had confessed himself guilty of the
Treasons charged upon him; and it appears unto all the impartial part of the
World, that he died a Martyr for the old Tyrannick Interest (which he had so
often cried down) as it is now settled in the person of the young Pretender,
though cloaked with a pretense of the Covenant.

The English Church (meaning at Amsterdam) together P. 1071.
with their day of Thanks giving, joined their humiliation and supplication for
the good success of the King of Scots: But I hope their crying to God was like
those Baal's Priests, whom Elias mocked. Certain it is, these Baal's Priests
are extremely lifted up with hopes, that their Idol Episcopacy shall be set up
again, as soon as their King, for whom they pray so fervently, shall be settled
in his Throne.

The day following (that is the 1^ of September) many N. 66.
thousands of tattered Scots, that had been taken prisoners P. 1071.
at Worcester, were conducted through the City, to show the Cavaliers a true
Copy of their Kings Countenance, in his gallant design to overrun the Nation at
once with Barbarism and Tyranny.

The King of Scots, the Duke of York (that would be the N. 78.
Duke of Beaufort, and Madamoselle d'Orleance (in his Intelligence P. 1248.
from Paris) are much given to Hunting, Dancing, Balls and Masking. The
pretended King (meaning our most gracious Sovereign) is much in discourse about
the miracle of his escape, and his Episcoparians do much enlarge upon it in
their Sermons, hinting out to the World, as if God did thereby declare his will
to restore him.

He much magnifies the fidelity of the English Papists to him above all other
friends, and as much vilifies the Scots; whom he seems resolved never more to
trouble. It seems too, that the Covenant lay very foul upon his stomach, having
voyded it, and lickt up the old vomit of the English Common Prayer Book, which
is now become again the Rosary of his Devotions; his Chapel being crowded with
Copes, Surplices and Bishops that would be. The great kindnesses, the frequent
visits and revels that pass between him and Madamoselle d'Orleans minister to
all men large occasion of discourse, as if there were an intent of marriage
that way, and that thereupon his quarrel would be owned by that valiant man the
Duke, her Father, who is able to do wonders, if we may credit Town-talke, or
could they but believe quarrelling with each other. But the wiser sort say,
that this often sporting of Mademoiselle with him, is only to make a sport of
him, he being now of late become a great pretender to Wit, and jesting among
the Ladies; a thing wherein things of his Leaden complexion are seldom happy.

What, more of thy scurrilous language still, profane Rebel? but it is no
matter, thy tongue is no slander, because it is nothing else but slander.

We hear how the fugitive King of Scots has resumed N. 79.
his Masse-Book of Common Prayer again, at which the P. 1265.
King-doting Scots are much offended, and cry shame upon him. Are these the
fruits of his sitting in the Stool of Repentance? of his taking the Covenant?
have the silly Scots ventured their Lives and Estates for such an Hypocrite? It
appears well that he observed his good Mothers counsel, to do any thing till
he had gotten strength and power, and then do afterward as he list. How finely
had the Presbyterians been served, if their designgs had taken effect, to
enthrone such a dissembler for the enslaving of themselves.

This was remarkable in the late Tyrant Charles (falsely N. 97.
accusing Princes of perjury, and violation of promises) P. 1523.
whose inconstancy in this kind was beyond compare; who no sooner had past any
promises, made vows and protestations, and first appeals in the High Court of
Heaven, in the behalf of himself and his Family, but presently he forfeited
all, and canceled them by his actions. How closely his Son also has trodden the
Fathers steps, appears by the last Game with the Presbyters in Scotland, where
he played fast and loose with the Covenant and the Stool of Repentance.

Believe it, all your other enemies are tame Beasts to N. 98.
the high Presbyter, and yet with the winding and turning P. 1552.
of a religious pretense, and artificial zeal against Heresy, he will, like a
tame Snake, (if not warily avoided) get into your bosom. As the Scottish
Presbyter and the Cavalier look several ways, but are tied together by the
tail with a point of Stewarts Interest.

We have a very notable instance also in our own Nation, N. 105.
which may serve for a just example to all the world in P. 1644.
point of behavior; for, if we reflect upon these 30 years past, we shall
find how cautious the Parliaments and People of England have been, before they
proceeded to Arms, the utmost and most desperate Remedy. If we run over the
Catalogue of the late Tyrants defaults in Government, we find extraordinary
patience in the people, notwithstanding his extraordinary encroachments from
time to time. It were needless to reckon up the several Monopolies,
Impositions and other Oppressions of the people, both in Soul and Body, which
were made public and known to all the world; together with that highest of all
practices, not only in dissolving Parliament, abruptly, but professedly
designing the ruin of Parliaments, in depriving the People of their due
Succession. Though all these Tyrannies of his were sufficiently felt and known,
yet such was the wisdom and caution of our Nation from time to time, and
particularly of this Parliament, that they used all the ways under heaven, by
Petitioning, Declaring, Remonstrating to God and man, in hope to reduce him;
and though all would not do; yet notwithstanding, that desperate remedy of the
Sword was forborne, till after he had first taken it up, and that invincible
necessity did put it into their hands, for the preservation of themselves, with
the Rights and Liberties of the People.

After this, it was wicked reason of State that continued N. 10^.
Monarchy, and brought in a Scotchman upon us. This was P. 1693.
James, who was so great an admirer of Reason of State, that he adopted it for
his own Darling, by the name of Kingcraft, and his Motto, no Bishop no King,
showed, that he preferred reason of State before Interest of Religion, as in
other things before Honesty; witness among many other, his quitting the Cause
of God and the Palatinate, to keep fair with the House of Austria; for which,
and for the same Reason of State, put in practice by his Son Charles, for the
ruin of Religion and Liberty by a bloody War, the whole Family has been
brought to a sad destruction. Yet Reason of State is still the grand Idol of
the present Youngster: (villainously endeavoring to scandalize our most
gracious Sovereign) It made him first resolve to join with the Irish; but
things not falling out to his mind there, it made him wheel about into
Scotland, and turn Covenanter. Afterward it made him cast off the Covenant and
Covenanters both together; and therefore, no doubt but the next wheeling will
be toward Rome, or any way, if Reason of State require it, that he may finish
the transgressions of the Family.

It must not be forgotten, what hazard our Nation has N. 111.
ran of late, through the malice of falsehood and faction, of P. 1739.
the late Presbyterian drivers. He that will remember what they did in the year
1647, 48, 49, 50 and 51, must needs confess, that great has been the
deliverance of this Commonwealth, and the manner of it almost incredible,
considering the ways and means whereby we have been rescued out of the claws
of the old Tyranny.

From the Hague. P. 1734.

Here are daily productions of Pamphlets, so simple as not worth naming. There
is a Kite abroad, entitled, England possessed with the Devil; wherein all are
converted to Devils, Dogs, Serpent*tayles, King-murtherers, Villains, and I
know not what; but after all, he flings you into the bottomless pit, there to
be kept close prisoners, that Charles the second may be restored to his Fathers
Throne, and become a friend to the Netherlands, and receive bribes as his
Father, Grandfather, and their Courtiers did, to betray the Trade and Interest
of England; that these men may catch Herrings in the Sea in peace, and tickle
the Trouts in a corrupt Monarchy, and bait them now and then with a Golden
Gudgeon, whilst they draw the wealth of the World hither into this Bog through
English Channels; but if ever they truck with young Stewart, (as some would
have them) I Will send you word immediately; for if once they be so mad, as to
become your irreconcilable enemies: I suppose I cannot send you more welcome
news into England, than of an uniting with that Bloody House, which hitherto
has drawn a swift and inevitable ruin and curse upon all its partakers. P.
1784.


Another Pamphleteer entitles himself the Batavian Admonisher; he is full of
Rapture too, though in Prose; and brings in the Belgic Bear, (I mean you) and
Van Trump together; and the first work he does, is to rouse the Lion, and make
him seize upon poor Britain with his paws, that it may become Holland's
portion: Rise up (says he) O Lion, magnanimous Lion; yes then lie down again,
that Charles Stuart and his young Nephew may get up and ride thee, and pick thy
teeth with thine own bundle of Arrows: O brave Lion, strut and be stately; for
the Princess Royal is in Love with thee, and means to make a trim shock of
thee, for the little boy to play with thee, O magnanimous Lion.

Salmasius, that dirty and most dissolute Parasite of Kings, P. 1735.
is to be set on work by Authority, which is an ill sign, that a Cause should
want color of his tempering to point it over, and give it a Strumpets face,
that it may pass the more current to delude the World. This is that Salmasius,
who railed so admirably, under pretense of defending that foul Cause of
Stewarts; who broached such wild principles, as are not only prejudicial to
Princes themselves, but even to humane society. And thus much young Stewart was
told to his face out of the Pulpit, even upon the day of his Coronation at
Scone, by Mr. Robert Douglas, where he condemned that Hireling Salmasius,
before the Face of the Tyrant -- Would -- be.

They are much exalted at St. German's, to hear the N. 117.
Zealanders are so zealous for the house of Orange, that P. 1848.
they have in a manner given their Vote, for making the young Brat Stadtholder,
by which news Charles hopes to have a finger in the Pie.

Likewise the pretended Duke of York returned lately to the French Camp.

Charles Stuart lurks still at St. German's; being tossed and N. 11^.
tumbled betwixt hopes and fears; Lorain is a strange fellow, P. 1873.
for Plunder of Wagons, Carriages, or Houses, he transcends even the Palatine
Rupert.

The People are generally weary of War, and the Court N. 120.
of Charles Stuart, whom they would willingly supply with P. 1895.
money, to take a Journey out of France, if he knew whether to bend his course.

Charles Stuart is gone back to the house of the Duke of N. 123.
Cheiureuse, to spend some little time in pleasure there, and P. 1939.
then return to Paris; Sure, his affairs are defunct, because the Ranters about
him are very pensive and silent; which is not usual when the World goes on
their side.

Here are diverse Commissions brought into this Country, N. 123..
which run in the Name of a King of Scots: but whether P. 1941
any such thing as a King of Scots Commissions (as they call them) be of any
validity, it will concern you in England to determine that question, when you
catch any of them that shall venture to rob at Sea, under pretense of acting by
his Commission.

Sir Richard Brown (who would be called the Scottish N. 126.
Kings Resident) is by the Heels still, under the Sergeants P. 1981.
hands that arrested him, to the great reproach of his Master's Kingship. The
pretended Duke of York is still in the Army, and has got another Regiment, but
it is Irish. Ormond also has got such another. The Lord Digby has been here,
and showed himself a great favorite: he has gotten fairly by his Government
of Maute, where he has drained the Country by contributions and now means to
brave it in Town here this Winter. Buckingham is mending, but not a word of
comfort yet to any of them from the Low Countries.

If the Dutch miscarry in their design, they are resolved P. 1987.
to take up the rotten Interest of young Stewart. Stermont is translating
Clamor Regii Sanguinis ad coelum, etc. But it is the muzzle of the Canon, and
not such Squibs must resolve our case.

Sir Richard Brown, that calls himself the Scotch King's N. 127.
Resident, is at length released by order from the Queen, P. 2001.
out of the Sergeants hands, but was fain to pay the Jailer his Fees at his
departure.

The Lord Digby, with his Brother Sir Lewis Dives, by P. 2002.
him made Deputy Governor of Lile Adam, intends to brave it out this Winter;
having hired a great house, and given order to have it stately furnished, to
show how he has thrived (to his great dishonor) by squeezing the Country.

The English Cavaliers and Princely Party are half out P. 2004.
of heart; they have long cried up the taking in of the Stewarts Interest, to
be the only remedy for the distempers and misfortunes of these Lands; but
perceiving nothing but delays, and that their pretended King is rejected: they
are highly discontented, and seed their starved hopes, as well as their bodies,
with air and expectations from France.

It is said Charles Stewart would for Holland, were he supplied P. 2000.
with moneys for the journey; and a rumor goes, as if he had a design for
Ireland or Scotland; but his Party have often made the like reckonings to no
purpose.

Charles Stuart has sent order to my Lord Wilmot, to N. 128.
go to the Diet at Ratisbone, having got wherewith to go P. 2023.
himself, to bear his charges, to excite the Princes of Germany to join with
the States of Holland against the Commonwealth of England.

From Paris.
Sir Richard Brown, who styles himself Agent for Charles P. 2023.
Stewart, being released out of Prison, not being able to subsist here, is gone
into Britain, to exact a share of those Thefts and Piracies, that the Royalists
have taken and brought thither, which Charles Stewart had given him for his
subsistence many years since.

Charles Stewart has been fairly offered by the French N. 132.
Court; who to be rid of him, have promised him 5000 P. 2078.
Pistols, The Lord Digby Ran^s it with his stately House; but the world being
very short with the Lord of Ormond, the fair Isabella is fain to pawn her
Plate, and retire into the Country.

The States of Holland have not given their Master Charles his pretended Title
of King of England, or of great Britain, but style him the high and mighty King
Charles. There is no news yet of Rupert, but they heartily wish him in the
Seas; and have sent Sir Marmaduke Langdale and Sir Richard Page to Sea, to try
if they can find him out, and bring him back with all speed, supposing he might
be able to serve them and their broken Interest in this nick of time.

Wilmot is not gone on his German Ambassy, though it is N. 134.
supposed he will be going every day: He is for his better P. 2114.
accommodation set forth with a new airy Title, being created and called Earl
of Rochester. The pretended Duke of York is still in the Army.

Charles Stewart has kept but a cold melancholy Christmas, N. 136.
without any sports save a game at Cards, and a dinner P. 2148.
that he had on Thursday at the Lord Iermins.

On Monday he kept up the old Popish Custom, of offering Fankincence, Myrrh
and Gold, a small pittance for an oblation; where Ormond and Inchequin
assisted. The Lady Denbigh having been turned Roman Catholic, has hoped long
for a pension, but mist it. No sign as yet of any hopes for these poor
Courtiers.

The Earl of Bristol was buried in a mean Churchyard, N. 137.
with little solemnity; not one Lord appearing at his Funeral, P. 2180.
nor any other person of quality, except his second Son Mr. John Digby and a
certain Knight: His eldest the Lord Digby absented himself, though he were in
Town; and not only so, but its said, that he forbore inviting any to save
Funeral Expenses; which being talked abroad, has much cracked his Reputation,
because he is observed lavish enough upon other occasions.

The High Court of Justice sits now in Dublin, and another P. 2188.
is erected at Galoway, to try the Lord Mayo, who pleased to own the Court, in
bringing out evidences very strangely against some persons that were condemned.
I cannot but admire and adore providence, to see the work of Justice which
began in England in a High Court, against that Tyrant, should next take its
place in another High Court in Ireland; to give those wretches blood to drink,
who first opened the sluice of blood, which afterward overflowed the three
Nations.

On Wednesday an Irish Factour delivered a Letter to the N. 13^.
High and Mighties at the Hague. This gives just occasion P. 2206.
to suspect that the Scottish King endeavors to hook in his own Interest, in
the engagement of the Hogen State upon an Irish account; so that if the Dutch
should clap between these two Interests of Achan and Babel, they would be
daintily engaged, and a fine blessing must follow the business. But at present
the Stewarts Interest is kept off by the wiser sort, and that upon very
rational grounds, in despite of all the projects of the Orange Party; for
they apprehend their taking part with him, were to hazard their whole, in going
halves with a desperate Gamester, that has nothing to stake but a broken
Reputation.

The Irish broken Faction have not wanted a Letter recommendatory N. 139.
from Charles Stewart to several Lords here P. 2119.
at the Hague; and if ever Prince Rupert return into these parts, they will not
want a Head like themselves, to restore the lost hopes of that wicked
Rebellion; but if stories hold true, Ruperts Highness is laid low enough; for
here are strong reports, that he, or the best part of his ships are cast away.

Sir Philim Oneale is under examination, and will shortly N. 141.
receive the reward of his labor: he is a pitiful low spirited P. 2241.
man. Col. Luke Tool and seven more were hanged on Saturday last, and many
more are upon their Trial; the Goals are full in every Province; we have at
least 200 men in hold of considerable account. The High Court of Justice will
have work enough for one twelve month.

There is news that he that is called Duke of Gloucester, N. 143.
is arrived at Dunkirk, where he was entertained by the Governor. P. 2280.


Rnpert that Pirate-Prince is in the French road at St. N. 144.
Christophers. P. 2294.


Sir Phelim Oneale was lately condemned of high Treason, P. 2308.
at our High Court of Justice in Dublin; and within a few hours a period shall
be put to all his high Titles, being called the Earl of Tyrone by the Vltaghs,
Prince of Vlster by the Popes Commission or Bull, General of the Lemster and
Vlster Forces by Commission from the Lords of the Pale, and prime and chief
Actor in all the massacres of Rebellion by Commission from the late Charles,
Stewart. This Monster of men, when he came first to the Bar, was not able to
stand for trembling, or to speak for tears.

That grand Piratical Prince Rupert having fitted his N. 145.
ships, surprised two ships of London, and having plundered P. 2310.
what was in her left her.

The Scottish King (as they call him) and his Courtiers N. 147.
have gotten an ill name in France; for, it is said their counterseit P. 2344.
King and they have of late turned Coiners, and set a Mint of their own a going
in the Palace-Royal, but with counterfeit Coin; upon which they have stamp't
the French Image and Superscription, and now being weary of that Country he is
like to leave it, and an ill report behind him.

Prince Rupert is the man of whom the great discourse P. 2354.
is, and the Hollanders have more mind to put him upon action then his Cousin:
one while they will have him make work for England in Ireland, and another
while in the Scotch Highlands: any desperate attempt over a Bog or a break-neck
they think him fit for. Others would have him put upon a present action at Sea,
and supply him with two or three Frigates, to wear the King of great Britains
Colors (as they call them) thinking these fantasies would draw away Seamen;
but they are not yet agreed about the Manner, Scene, or Stage of Action; for
the performance of those wonders must be wrought by Rupert.

When the work of Justice shall be done in the Province N. 148.
of Vlster, as we trust it will ere long to some purpose, I P. 2372.
suppose the Land will in some measure be purged from the guilt of innocent
blood. These wretches which we cut off with the Sword of Justice, are but part
of the tail of that Serpent, whose head you first lopt off in England.

This know, that rather then the Interests of the Stewarts N. 153.
should be any impediment to a friendly composure P. 2450.
between England and Holland, it is laid aside, and that fatal Family left to
sink or swim, under the weight of their own destiny. N. 189.


And here I cannot let pass this last proviso^ without this P. 3217.
remark thereupon (after the mentioning of an Ordinance, passed by Oliver and
his Council) that the people of God in these Dominions have abundant cause to
bless the Lord, who has put it into the hearts of our Governors to make such
provision against the Faction (called Religion) of Popery, and those desperate
Engineers, the Popish Priests, who seek the ruin of us, our Country, and of
the Gospel of Christ, which is above all other considerations: and truly, there
was never more need then now of such a Law; seeing Popery is become the great
Interest of that Family, which the Lord has cast out before us (meaning the
Family of the Stewarts) If ever they procure any force or power again, it must
be upon a Popish account. And that their endeavors lie wholly upon that foot,
is evident by Charles Stewart's many applications to the Court of Rome, which
are commonly known, and to the Emperor; besides his Alliance and Combination
to, and and with other Popish Princes; so that the good and security of the
Reformed Religion, is absolutely involved in this present form of Government,
and the utter exclusion of that Family of the Stewarts for ever.

This day Charles Stuart, the Princess Royal his Sister, N. 279.
P. 5691.
and his Brother the Duke of Gloucester, etc. are gone by water to Mentz. I find
not that their Conversation here has made them commendable to any, so much as
to the English Stage Players, who style themselves to be his. N. 280.


Concerning Charles Stewart and his fortune, there is P. 5697.
great variety of opinions and inclinations in the Empire: some do bewail his
unfortunate condition, others do not pity him at all. That he might gain to
himself the affection of the several States of the Empire, and oblige them to
furnish him with moneys, he sometimes professes himself to be a Lutheran,
sometimes to be a Papist, but never appears to be of the Reformed Religion; and
that gives a very strong suspicion of him among the Orthodox professors, who
thereupon do openly pronounce, that his bad fortuneis a just judgment of God
upon him. He is daily seen among the Pastimes of the Common people; he misses
of no Comedy or Stage Play, and is a constant spectatour of all kinds of
Puppet-plays; he is seen every where, and therefore is neglected of all; and
having lately received a very considerable sum of money, he presently wasted
it. Ibid.


The said Charles Stewart was resolved to go to Heidelberg, but the Prince
Elector prevented him; perhaps lest the number of Illustrious Beggars should be
too great in the Palatinate; therefore misery has obliged the miserable to
return to Colen.

Charles Stewart with all his Train having finished his P. 5700.
rambling progress, is returned again to Colen.

It is a great satisfaction to the well affected, that a course N. 285.
be taken to suppress the Cavalier Clergy and Schoolmasters, P. 5781.
by depriving them of the opportunity to seduce the Souls, and pervert the
youth of the Nation.

The Gentleman of the King of Scots, who kept correspondency N. 289.
(as it is said) with some in England, was carried P. 2850.
in a Wagon to Drynwald, where he has been shot to death with three Bullets.
The place where this execution was done, is in the Country of the Duke of
Newburgh, an Apostate from the Protestant Religion, and now the most Jesuited
Papist in these parts, and therefore so great a favourer of Charles Stewart,
that he admits him (it seems by this action) to be partly Sovereign with him,
by allowing him the power of life and death within his Principality,

Edinburgh continues in very good quiet, nor is it observed, N. ^31.
P. 7316.
that many so much as hearken after Charles Stewart. It seems those few he has
raked together are most of them Irish, and with such Company you may imagine
how welcome he would be to Scots or English, and as little welcome would he be
with any other Foreigners his assistants: But I suppose there is little regard to
be had to him or his designs, which usually have so fatal a success, that
hitherto they have sunk all those who took his part. We here cannot but
observe, how the Lord deals in a most remarkable way of vengeance with the King
of Spain, presently after his owning and taking the Stewarts into his
protection: hitherto none have prospered that have had to do with them, and
therefore they are the fittest friends that may be for the Spaniard. N. 336.


The Titular King of Scots continues at Brussells, having P. 7385.
made but little progress in his affairs, though he has hopes given him by
the House of Austria, the fittest House that may be to receive him; for therein
he does follow the generation of his Fathers, whose juggling compliance with
that House (to the betraying of the Protestant Interest throughout Europe) has
provoked Divine Justice, to send him and his Brothers to beg Alms of the
Austrian Family, it being the last, and (if all be considered) the most
miserable refuge. N. 338.


The Remnants of Charles Stuarts patched up Regiments P. 7407.
in Flanders, which for want of money began to moulder, were designed to pass
over toward Edinburgh, to make a little noise for upholding his and the
Spaniards Reputation.

The party of Charles Stuart in these parts do hug themselves, N. 221.
P. 3734.
to think what a game they shall have of it, if Hans knock his Pitchers
together.

Yesterday his Majesty, the Queen and the King's Brother, P. 3740.
with the Cardinal, were feasted by the little Queen at the Palace Royal; where
met also the Titular Duke of York.

It is said, that at Vienna and other parts, they talk high N. 2^2.
P. 3750.
of choosing Charles Stuart King of Hungaria; in the mean time he comes not at
that Court: they suppose they bought him off at 200000 Rix-Dollars they
promised him, of which he has gotten a good part. Some say he and his Junto
are at their wits end at the Spaw, since they heard of Middleton's defeat: I am
sure they were at that long since, or they would never have run such desperate
courses.

The Princess Royal and her son, and her brother N. 225.
Charles are gone to Colen: but they have their busybodies P. 3814.
and Agents here behind them, to do what mischief they can, in stirring up
dissension among those that are honest, and mean well toward their Country:
wherein I doubt not but they will miss of their aim.

The ninth of this month, he whom they call the King N. 229.
of Great Britain arrived here. P. 3876.


On the 28. instant, our Magistrates bestowed a sumptuous N. 231.
collation upon him whom they call the King of P. 4017.
Great Britain, and the Princess Royal of Orange his Sister.

The Duke of Gloucester has a pension conferred on N. 232.
him by the Jesuits College in this Town in the street of P. 4032.
St. James's, where he is lodged, and has three of them to be his Tutors, who
are English by Nation.

Charles Stuart is still at Colen, where he intends to blow P. 4037.
his fingers this cold winter.

The Marquess of Ormond is still in this City: some N. 233.
P. 4052.
say he is come to fetch away the titular Duke of Gloucester, who is said to be
turned Catholic, through the persuasion of his friends, and promise of a
Cardinals Cap. Charles Stuart is still at Colen, expecting the assistance of
his friends in those parts for his subsistence.

The Marquess of Ormond has taken the Duke of Gloucester N. 234.
out of the Jesuits College, and that (as it is said) P. 4067.
by order of his Brother Charles, pretending that he will not suffer his
Brother to be of the Queen his Mothers Religion.

The Duke of Gloucester since he was taken out of the Jesuits N. 235.
P. 4081.
College, is gone toward Colen to his Brother Charles, without taking any
leave of the Queen his Mother, to whom Charles wrote a Letter, desiring her to
excuse the taking away his Brother in that manner: but she threw the Letter
into the fire.

Charles Stewart is still in his old station at Colen. P. 4088.


The Duke of Gloucester went out of Town yesterday with N. 236.
P. 5601.
the Marquess of Ormond, to go toward his Brother Charles at Colen. Before
he went the Queen his Mother sent to him the Marshal de Praslin to persuade him
that he would only go and take a dinner in the Jesuits College, to signify
his obedience to her. And when this would not do, Wat Mountague the Abbot of
Nuntuel was sent to him, but all failed. The Duke's Answer was, that though she
were his Mother, yet he must obey his Brother: and besides, that he could not
have to do with the Jesuits in the least, without wronging his conscience.
Which his Mother understanding, order was given to turn him out of doors at
ten a clock at night: so that he went away hence, without so much as being
admitted to take leave of her. N. 237.


Charles Stuart lies still here at his old quarters at Colen. P. 5016.


Not a word of their King, save only that male-contented P. 5017.
Kirkman remembers him now and then, as they have great reason, considering how
he slurr'd them and their party, when he was among them.

Further discoveries are still making of unchristian designs N. 236.
P. 5950.
laid to involve the Nation in blood again upon the score of Charles Stuart;
but God has disappointed them.

Charles Stuart is frozen up at Colen, no news yet of his N. 240.
removal. P. 5065.


Charles Stuart is still in his Quarters at Colen. The waters N. 246.
are now open, and passage free for him to retreat at P. 5161.
pleasure.

The Prince of Orange is with his mother at Teyling. N. 246.
The name of him and his family is not now much talked P. 5163.
on among the people, and will in time be forgotten. They are as mute as fishes.

We are here full of expectation to know what is become N. 247.
of Charles Stuart, who is gone privately from Colen with P. 5179.
two or three at the most of his attendants. Many conjectures are made about
his stealing away from thence at this conjuncture of time, when your Country
is said to be generally discontented, and Commissions ready to enter in at your
gates. Some will have him to be landed at Hull, which place is said to be
revolted, and to have declared against the Lord Protector. Others say he is
gone for Holland: but none know certainly where he has hid himself.

Some further light was given touching the dangerous P. 5179.
Conspiracies in diverse parts on the behalf of Charles Stuart, and that fatal
interest of his, which has sunk so many.

The late Queen of England went to the Louvre to visit N. 248.
the Queen: thereupon it was presently raised about, that P. 5191.
the occasion of her going was to communicate a Letter which she had received
from her son Charles, relating how that on the 5. instant he arrived at Hull, a
strong Town and Seaport of England, having none in company with him but the
Marquess of Ormond, Col. Blague, and his Barber, and a Groom.

Here are Letters come hither from the Hague which Ibid.
say, that Charles went from Colen the 24 last past, about 5 in the morning,
with the Marquess of Ormond, Col. Blague, his Barber and a Groom, intending to
imbarque himself at Embden for England, diverse Seaports and Inland. Towns
having declared for him.

We are still in expectation, to hear what success Charles P. 5192.
Stuart has had in England; whether he is held to be certainly gone, to head
the Risings and Designs that are on Foot there, for the bringing him in again.

The last Letters that are come from England, have Ibid.
much calmed the reports that were here invented by the Royalists, of the
Risings and Commotions there; that Hull and Newcastle were revolted, but now we
hear the contrary, and their fabulous stories are but laughed at; yet we have
no certainty to what place Charles Stuart is gone, the news thereof is as
diverse as uncertain. Some will have him in England, others that he is gone
toward Hamburgh; and some will have him to be still in these parts, which is
the most likely of any: for the present state of affairs of England is not so
bad and declining as was reported, for him to venture himself there. In the
mean time I hope we shall not be ill thought on by you for having him here
among us, since we cannot prevent it, he coming in a disguise; otherwise he
would soon be made to retreat hence.

I am wholly in the dark how it goes with you, whilst P. 5193.
from all parts it is generally reported and written, that Charles Stuart is
gone to imbarque himself in some Port, in or about Holland for England, Hull or
Lynne being his designed Landing place; both which places they say, are
certainly made for him; and that he has such assurance from his party in
England, as that he doubts not to adventure in thither, and carry on his
design, notwithstanding the large discovery you made of it: and all this (as
they also say) comes from the encouragement he has presumed from some in
England: But I trust, as you have been long forewarned, so you are well
fore-armed, to perceive them to their cost; and that you have secured those,
and all other important Ports and places, in more faithful hands then to
betray them. Your enemies glory much in their expectations at this time,
however former attempts have failed: but I trust they will be taken in their
own snare; God can, and I hope will do it.

Here is a fresh report of the King of Scots being in England; P. 5194.
whereof we expect a confirmation by the next.

Three days past has produced some matters of news Ibid.
in these parts: there is a considerable party of old Cavaliers risen, and in
Arms in Montgomery shire in North Wales: they act very publicly, and are
confident. It Is conceived upon good grounds, their purpose was, and perhaps is,
to possess themselves of some holds, as Shrewsbury and Chirk Castle.

They cannot leave their old tricks, and honest men cannot Ibid.
forget their old malice. We know a little what Liberty cost, and would not
lose it to them, though it cost us another knock.

We have Prisoners here, most of the considerable Cavaliers P. 5195.
in this County; some evidently guilty, others only suspected.

Also that there was an endeavor in Yorkshire to form a P. 5196.
Party, with an intent to seize York for Charles Stuart. They had two
Cart-fulls of Arms and Ammunition with them, and diverse of the Gentry; among
whom was Sir Henry Slingsby and Sir Richard Maleverer; but they dispersed,
perceiving no such appearance as they expected: and Sir Henry Slingsby is taken
by Col. Lilburn: Sir Richard Maleverer escaped home, took leave of his Lady,
and told her his condition, despaired of his estate and is fled; Sir William
Ingraham is also in hold. The Lord Darcy had sent in six Horses with his Groom,
who will also be secured. The Lord does confound and scatter this phrenetick
Generation in their conspiracies. The like we are to expect to hear from other
parts; knowing, they imbarque in a cause, that will sink all it is owners and
defenders. How much then does it concern all sober men, to be active in
resolution for the maintenance of the public peace.

The expectation here is, that Charles Stuart should be N. 249.
P. 5261.
entered England; and it is said, that before his entry he took a solemn Oath to
allow a Liberty of Conscience. The Titular Duke of York gives out to all his
acquaintance, that he is ready to take Horse upon the first order that shall be
sent him from his Brother.

At the Hague things are represented, as if there were great P. 5204.
inclinations to a change in England, and that for this cause Charles Stuart
went from Colen Feb. 24. in design to make some advantage by the present
occasion; but since that we hear the wind has been so contrary, that he can
find no place convenient to Land in.

It Is meet you should hear from me sometimes, though P. 5208.
I have been long silent. The reason why I trouble you now, is the report of a
Comet which appeared lately here, I mean young Charles the fourth King of
Colen; for the Papists have long enthroned and enshrined three Kings at Colen,
and Charles is come thither for a fourth of the same Litter.

The Princess withdraws from the Hague, because the Ibid.
States of Holland have straightened her Lodging Rooms in the Hoss, for their own
use, which she says belong unto her; and therefore will not come thither again
until they be restored her, which will be done at the Greek Kalends, or at the
Feast of St. Charles the second: for there is talk here, he shall be Canonized
for a Saint and a Martyr, if Walter Montague or Sir Toby Matthews be chose Pope
in this vacancy.

Here has been of late no small conflux, not only of Ibid.
the Royal stock, the Lady Elizabeth, whom the Princess calls one of mine
Aunts; and the Duke of Gloucester, who has as much profit of his Dukedom, as the
Aunt and Brother have of their Kingdoms: but also a great Tail of English
Fugitives and Hucksters, and Chaplains and Fiddlers, and Gamesters of both
Sexes. This Tail made me call young Charles a Comet. They have been mavelous
merry at Teyling, with Balls and Ballets, crying Victoria in England. And
indeed, as the blaze, so the gaze here was very great, and that in the
judgment of many Potent ones; so that we long to here the issue among you,
which we believe to be bad to the Carolists; for it was told him at Teyling,
that by Letters from England to the States, it was clear, his Highness the
Protector knew of young Charles his coming from Colen, long before he came
thence; which as they tell us here, has made him turn back to his Kingdom of
Colen, and there to enshrine himself again with his three Brethren, Melchior,
Belthazar and Caspar, because the design was known, although they gave out
here, that all England was up in Arms for him; and by their healthing and
dancing, drabbing and damning, you would judge all their own: but in very
sooth, it appears that you in England are notable Astrologers, who could
foretell a Comet before he rose, and that some Mercury was, and is in
conjunction with him, that has revealed his designs and motions; and that our
States are faithful to the Protector, who upon a bare rumor only sent to the
Princess Royal, that if young Charles were there, he should depart the
Country.

My self with the assistance of a friend, have discovered, P. 5210.
and since secured an arch youth, that was a Lieutenant for Charles Stuart, who
three or four days before the appearance, went as a messenger from Papist to
Papist, and the the old crew, as to a Rise; telling one that was formerly a
Cavie, that some would raise Horse, others Foot, for the Scots King, etc.

Charles Stuart (for certain) was at the meeting at Hessammoor. P. 5212.
All care is taken for discovery of him, and all others.

From Dantzick they write, the Holland Merchants there, N. 250.
were so confident of C. S. his designs, that they offered to P. 5220.
sell Goods to pay for them, when he should Reign in England: and I hear not of
an English man that durst take the bargain

From Colen a friend writes to night, that Chancellor Ibid.
Hide was going from Breda: most of C. S. Servants depart also, only Secretary
Nichols is to abide there with his goods. It is absolutely believed the Lord
Wilmot is gone for England: and it is now said, that since C. S. design is
dash't, he will return for Colen, and so wait upon a future Diet in Germany;
which it is conceived will be at Franckfort. All C. S. followers makes Holland
their Rendezvous, which agrees well with the late peace.

The Duke of York and his Servants gave out, that his P. 5222.
Brother has assuredly entered England, and was at the head of 4000 Gentlemen.
This fills all men here with expectation of great matters to be done for him
and his party; the issue whereof is the subject of all the present discourse.
The little Queen his mother is upon her knees for success, at her Lenten
devotion, in the Nunnery of Chaliot.

There is yet no certainty what is become of the Scots P. 5226.
King; he is still under the Bushel.

Since he whom they call King of Great Britain departed N. 251.
P. 5239.
hence, his family have been putting themselves also in a condition to depart
as soon as they shall receive command from their Master, of whom we have no
farther news.

Charles Stewart himself does not appear yet: it is supposed he will return to
his old Quarters at Colen, where he P. 5240.
may live both pleasantly, and at a cheaper rate then at any other place. P.
5243.


Letters from several parts relate, that things are in a quiet condition in all
Counties, but no news of Charles Stuart, who doubtless was in England; for
some foreign Letters do say, he had obliged himself to appear here at a
certain day among his Party. N. 252.
P. 5245.


It is said in these parts, and generally believed, that Charles Stuart was in
England: if so, it is probable you may have met with him. It is talked by
diverse who understand the transactions of men in these Northerly parts, that C.
S. should have had assistance considerable from some who speak you fair, had
his project proved prosperous. P. 5249.


The little Queen is retired to the Nunnery of Chaliot; which her Servants say
is done partly for devotions sake, and partly to avoid the visits of persons
that would flock to her, to rejoice with her, for the happy success of her
Sons affairs in England. N. 253.
P. 5271.


Such as favored the King of Scots, are very much dejected at the disastrous
news of his undertaking; and the more, because it is reported, that many of
his good friends in England are like to suffer both in their Lives and Estates,
himself having the wit to keep out of harms way, loving to sleep in a whole
skin, whilst his friends adventure and lose their lives for his sake.

The King of Scots is said here to be gone for Colen, but P. 5272.
no certainty. He is little regarded, and no ways beloved in these parts.

The news of the Protectors successes in England makes P. 5275.
all men at a gaze; and when it came first, he was thought mad or vain that
would believe it; so that now the Stuarts are given for lost; their party
appearing so inconsiderable in their actings, that they have lost their
reputation.

It was certified also, that Charles Stuart perceiving how P. 5276.
his designs were broken here, was gotten again to his quarters at Colen.

The King of Scotland is now at Colen, where he keeps N. 254.
himself very private. Many of his followers are trooping P. 5290.
after him from all parts, with heavy hearts and light purses.

The king of Scots, who was said to be at Teyling, his design P. 5291.
having failed, he was fain to retreat to his old Quarters, from his Royal
p^^resse, which was so privately managed by him, that few have certainly known
the place of his abode since he went from Colen.

The Colors are remarkable; having no Motto, but Ibid.
only three great Letters, H. D. G. which I cannot tell what to make of,
unless it signify Henry Duke of Gloucester: and perhaps their intent was to
have gotten the youth over Sea, to have been in the head of their party.

Charles Stuart was the 14 instant, with only five men N. 255.
with him, at Osterwick, in the Majoralty or Lordship of the P. 5298.
Buss: from thence he went the 15, and about the 18 arrived at Colen, and has
betaken himself to his old lodging.

Having information that the Duke of Gloucester (as they N. 256.
call him) does reside with his Sister the Princess Royal, P. 5322.
contrary to the Treaty made with England, they have ordered him to be gone
within three days.

The pretended Duke of York is to go to Rome, in case N. 260.
the peace be concluded between France and England, to P. 5386.
reside there from his Brother Charles, to solicit the Pope, who calls himself
the common Father of all Christians, to oblige the Kings and Princes to a
general peace, that so with joint forces they might help him in the Conquest of
his Kingdoms and States.

We hear not yet in what Country Middleton is landed, N. 265.
but its generally believed he is gone to Colen to his young P. 5453.
Master.

The Lord Wilmot is returned out of England to this City, N. 266.
and remains here with him whom they call King of P. 547^.
Great Britain.

Charles Stuart remains still at Colen, being a man much N. 267.
esteemed among the Jesuits. P. 5479.


The Queen of Sweden continues still in these parts, and N. 268.
the Scottish King at Colen, where his company increases P. 5514.
more then his purse.

The King of Great Britain, as they call him, brought N. 344.
back money, ordered a general Rendezvouse of his men, P. 7508.
and gave them some pay for encouragement, it being the first pittance they
have received.

It seems Charles Stuart thinks his debauched ranting N. 347.
P. 756^.
remnants will hardly effect any thing upon England, so long as his Highness
is alive.

Charles Stuart is still at Bruges, where the stragled sheep N. 350.
his Brother is also returned from his Progress. P. 7624.


The Scottish King and his two Brothers rant as high N. 358.
as ever, and talk as if they had the world at will, which P. 3624.
makes them ridiculous.

Of all the armies in Europe there is none wherein so Ibid.
much debauchery is to be seen, as in their few forces which the said King has
gathered together, being so exceeding profane from the highest to the lowest.

Colonel Grace a man famous for his cruelty, and many P. 775^.
bloody villains in the Irish Rebellion.

The Scottish King was at Dunkirk with his Brother the N 386.
Titular Duke of York. P. 8383.


FINIS.

