BALAAMS BETTER WISH:

Delivered in a SERMON BY WILLIAM ROSE.

PROVE. 14.32. The wicked shall be driven away in his wickedness, but the
righteous has hope in his end.

MAY 8. 1647.
I Have perused this fruitful, and profitable Sermon, on Numb. 23.10. and
judge it worthy to be printed and published.

JOHN DOWNAME

LONDON, Printed by R. L. for SAMUEL MAN, at the sign of the SWAN in Paul's
Church yard, 1647.

To the RIGHT WORSHIPFUL Sir EDMOND BACON, Knight and Baronet.
Right Worshipful:
IT pleasing GOD in a gracious dispensation of mercy to lay his hand of
visitation upon me, so as I have been disenabled to that public function of
the Ministry, to which I am set apart: I boldly adventured on this more
public course, willing to give some testimony of my desire to do my GOD the
best service I was able, though with the hazard of mine own repute, being never
such as I fear to be a loser. May it please my good GOD to accept of these my
weak endeavors, whose glory, and his Churches good be ever my aim: and may you
daigne them a gracious patronage, for the unweighed censures of the many, I
pass not much. Mine own sickness first pitched me on this subject, and while
I considered your body so enfeebled through infirmities, and your many years,
the two most certain forerunners of approaching death: it emboldned me to
tender this Dedication; hoping you would willingly entertain such a wish, and
make it yours. The ship that draws water but at one leak may be repaired, but
when it breaks in on all sides, it threatens speedy wrack: when the crazed,
aged body is become (...) Lucian.
a living sepulcher, it portends the grave is near. We are at best but of
(...). Plut. ad Apoll.
a days continuance: and you by the blessing of GOD have lived to the evening
of age, to the Sunset of man's life, it is now high time to think on sleep, and
making your bed in the dust. I am confident, diviner thoughts have long since
deaded your affections unto the world. Length of days, (...). Pind. Olym. Od. 1.
the cleerest witnesses of wisdom have given you experience of the Wisemans
conclusion, Vanity of vanities: and you who in your younger years have had a
care to live well, now make it your chief to dye so. It is not the thought of
your end will draw it nearer, nor the meditation of death will one minute
shorten your life: if so who might not fear a public odium, that should move
you to such a thought? For You, Deus amorem viri quem diligit in animos hominum
dignanter resudit, Malm. de reb. gest. Aug. lib. 4.
who by the goodness of GOD have lived so generally beloved, cannot dye but
much lamented, though there be neither solemn Funeral to raise the pomp, nor
mourning women, Horat. de art. Poet.
ut quae conductae plorent in funere: Your endeared friends, the poor whose
wants have been by You relieved, and widows will make lamentation. In that
desires cannot prolong your days on earth, here shall be my Amen. When the set
period of your life is come, may you lie down in comfort, rest in peace, arise
to glory, be happy to eternity. So prays

Your worths true honourer and humble servant in Christ, William Rose.

BALAAM'S better Wish.
Numb. 23.10. Let me dye the death of the righteous, and let my last end be
like his.


THe LORD being now about to settle Israel in the land of Canaan, the lot of
their inheritance, which he had entayled upon them by promise to their father
Abraham; their Prince, and Priest, Moses, and Aaron for tempting the LORD at
Meribah: and the whole number of the men of strength for their infidelity must
not take possession: so he wears them out by long journeys for forty years in
the Wilderness, and consumes them by fatal wars, while they were wasted. Yet
to make his word good to their posterity, he drived out and destroys the
Amorites before, S^hon and then King, with Og the King of Bashan: their army
coasting about the Wilderness, did now verge upon the borders of Moab. Balaac
being somewhat surprised with fear, as success strikes dread into the hearts
of adversaries, casts about to secure himself. Poor man had he been quiet, he
might have been secure, but his fear which made him forecast to prevent, might
betray him to a future ruin. The LORD had not said it. Israel had no
commission signed against Moab: but if he will oppose himself an enemy to them,
he may justly provoke GOD, and them against him. He sends to the Midianites,
with whom he was inleague to consult for their future safety. Who together
sent Elders with the Ambassadors of Balaac to Balaam, on whom they so doted,
as if he had commanded the power of Heaven, and could curse and bless whom he
pleased. Foolish thoughts, the manage, and order of men and their affairs is
from no other but from the wisdom, and order of an eternal providence: who
gives victory to some, and lays the honors of other in the dust. Who is
pleased to reveal the purpose of his proceedings to particular men, which
neither yet are principalls in the success, nor any way carry on the design,
though he gives them to foreknow the event. To Balaam, GOD gives to foresee the
happy and flourishing estate of Israel under the grace of divine protection,
and their success ordered by Heaven, which caused him to break forth into this
patheticall peroration. Let me dye, etc. The wicked man (as wicked men may
have) had good words in his mouth, the Wizz^rd had a good wish, I dare join
with him in his prayer, praying it may be with a better spirit and affection.
My hearty desire to Heaven shall be, when I shall have accomplished as an
hireling my days, and shall return unto my dust. I may dye the death of the
Righteous: in the mean time the LORD grant me the guidance of his grace, I may
so live, that my last end may be like his. The text presents us with Balaams
wish concerning his end of this present life, and the happiness of his future
being. When we shall have premised something of this Balaam, what he was, and a
word or two of the phrese of speech, we shall fall upon these three mayn
quaeries of the text. 1 Who is the righteous man? 2. What is the difference
between the death of the righteous and the wicked? 3 The ultimate end of
either, which will fully discover unto us the reason, and cause of this his
desire.

1 To derive his pedigree, to describe his country, to descant on his name
were but a dry discourse, which would have more of pomp then weight, more bulk
then substance. I shall only touch at his condition to term this; Balnam a
Prophet is a better character then the Scripture yields him, which entitles him
at best but a Divinour, a term admitting a worse sense. The Hebrews say be had
been a Prophet, but the ambition of preferment lost him the honor of
prophecy, and he wannow only a Divinour: and so they apply to him that
Proverb. The Camel seeking horns lost her ears: the Closse says in plain
terms he was a Magitian, and did foretell things by the ministry of the
Devil. That he spoke here Prophetically it cannot be denied, but that was by
an especial Dispensative contigii illi sermo non pro merito sed pro teporis
opportunitate. Bal. Proem. in es.
dispensation for the present, which proves him no more a Prophet then the act
of speech did prove his Ass a man though once he spoke more reason then his
master. Nor does it conclude him such that GOD ordinarily revealed himself unto
him, and put words into his mouth, who may, and does make known his truth by
Prophetae daemonum nonnunquam vera dicunt quae tamen non propriae ab ipsis, sed
potius a Spiritu Sancto profiscuntur. Aquin. 2. 2 ae q. 173. art. 6 conc.
wicked men. The phrase of Scripture may seem to put a difference between them
who were not, and them who were the Prophets of the LORD. When it speaks of the
first sort it says, and the LORD came to Laban, and the LORD came to Abimelek,
and the LORD came to Balaam. When it speaks of the second sort it lays. The
word of the LORD came unto them, thus says the LORD the hand of the LORD is
upon me, This may in part fatisfie, but the discovery of his affections show
him wholly vile. At the first time he was lent for by Balaat, berefuses to go,
it was well yet he would not stir ere GOD would figne him his Commission.
The King not here resting (as it is no easy matter to satisfy fear, and
jealousy) sends again the second time. Larger proffers are propounded, and the
promise of great promotion to him 2 Pet. 2.15.
Who loved the wages of unrighteousn^sse, was a sharp spur to set him forth.
The Kings countenance, Court honor, on his own terms over-weighed his
ambitious affections, and wrought upon his coverous desires: to run greedily
for reward, Jude 11. which be conceals, and it must rest whether yet he LORD
will give him leave to go. Did he think him changeable in his counsels? or
could he imagine to move GOD by an importunity to abet his iniquity? had his
heart been right with GOD as he would pretend he would never have tempted him
the second time, after so de^r an intimation of his will, and purpose: it is no
piety to tempt GOD by an importunity to what he is not willing: but when he
gives a flat denial, it is high temerity there not to cease. May my corrupt
affections be eversilent while my soul utters it self unto my GOD. Lest they
prompt me with unjust desires, which may neither stand with his glory, or my
good. May a religious fear ever bound my peritions, that GODS grant may be a
free act of grace that he gives me not, nor permits me in his anger what in
his gracious pleasure he would deny. Balaam would wrest a grant, and go he
shall, GOD permits him: but how he was thereat offended is evident, in that he
would rather work a miracle, and open the Asses mouth then there should want
one to reprove the masters madness, and when Balaam came thither, what ever
his heart was, there was a spirit that moved his tongue, Chap. 22.25.
and put words into his mouth other then which he could not utter. Nothing
pleasing unto the King, or which might much implead him upon his promise,
Antiq. Jud. lib 4.6.6.
Josephus frames Balaam this excuse to Balaac. Think thou that it is in us
so often as we speak the fates what we will say and wherein we will be silent,
who are inspired with the Holy Ghost: which utters what words and oracles it
pleases, we not knowing or thinking of them. Who so soon as he enters into our
breasts, there remayns nothing of ours there. The last words must be laid hold
of, because I perceive them a settled opinion in after times, which the sounder
Fathers opposed. Some say Proem. in Jes.
(says Basil) that the divinely illuminated do prophecy their humane soul
being swallowed up of the Spirit, but it abhors from the professed truth,
and goodness of the divine presence to make him a mad man who is inspired by
GOD. And when he shall begin to be filled with divine Oracles, that then he
should be out of his own wits.] What is there such an antipathy between a man
qualified by the Spirit of GOD, heavenly endued with those rare and excellent
gifts of knowledge, and understanding, and between divine inspirations, that he
must be wholly emptied of the former, that the latter may be infused? Must the
Oracles of divine wisdom be uttered by men beside themselves? Does the
eternal wise GOD so provide for the salvation of his people, that the sober
truths of heavenly knowledge must be preached by mad men? they spoke not
themselves but as the Spirit gave them utterance, Acts 2.4. yet not what they
understood not. Prophetia primo and principaliter in cognitione consislit
secondario autem in loquutione. Aquin. 2. 2. ae. q. 173. art. 1. concl.
How is it then a prophecy? I can allow it of Caiphas whom yet I will not so
readily grant to be a Prophet, though as high Priest he spoke prophetically.
Who as he spoke not of himself, so neither understood he the burden of his
Word. His mind meditated on one thing, the Spirit intended another: Dum
crudelitatem necis appetiit redemptionis gratiam prophetabit. Greg. Mor. 23.3.
he thirsted for blood, and thought on murder, while he prophesied of the
grace of our Redeemer. But we, says the Apostle, have a sure word of prophecy
as a light shining in a dark place, 2 Peter 2.19. and therefore Saint Paul
calls it (...), an illumination or manifestation of the Spirit, 1 Cor. 12.7. I
read of an Idol in Quest Romans qu. 56. Carmeata quasi carens mente.
Plutarch who was called Carmenta, her Worshippers Carmentae, the deduction of
the name is a fit express of such fool Idolaters. The Devil by objecting
phantasmes may elude the understanding, and distract the rational faculties:
but the good and wise GOD works not so. What Hosea speaks, the Prophet is a
fool, the spiritual man is mad, Hosea 9.7. Ezekiel explains it, that prophecy
out of their own hearts, feolish Prophets that follow their own spirit and have
seen nothing, Ezekiel 13.2, 3. Such Montanising mad Enthusiasts that pretend to
divine inspirations the World has known (that I may not say this age has) too
many. I grant some Prophets might be in an ecstasy and rapture at the
admiration of divine revelations. But there is a Fuerunt prophetae in extasi
non in extasi mentis, Epiph. l. 2. tom. 1. haer. 48.
twofold ecstasy.

1 From the outward and inward senses, the mind temayning the more enlightened,
the more the soul is abstracted from sensitive objects: Conticescant mihi omnia
anima mea sibi sileat. Aug. Med. c. 37.
as she is more full in her devotions: so the more free for divine inspirations.

2 From the mind it self when it understands not, Non excidebant mente
prophetae. Orig. hom. 6. in Ezekiel. 16.
so never were they in an ecstasy: but did utter all things Epiph. ubi supra.
with firm reason and understanding, and spoke from the Holy Spirit with a
perfect mind, and body. So that I ground not so much on the speech of this
wicked man, as his after advice proves him full. Who seeing enchantment failed,
and divinations could do nothing: because GOD had beheld no iniquity in Jacob,
nor perverseness in Israel. Numb. 22.21. Joseph. ubi supra.
counseled Balaac to tempt them by the Midianitish women to commit
fornication. And if the opinion of the Antiquary seems too light, it may have
allowance from that of Saint John to the Church of Pergamus, I have a few
things against thee, because thou have there them that hold the doctrine of
Balaam, who taught Balaac to cast a stumbling block before the children of
Israel, to eat things sacrificed to Idols, and to commit fornication, Revel.
2.14. For which wicked advice of his, when God set Israel upon the revenge of
Midian this Divinour as he ran for the wages, so he had full paid the reward
of iniquity. They killed Balaam the son of Beor with the sword. Joshua 13.22.
where we will leave him in his unhappy end.

Though the original runs in the futuretense yet is not to be interpreted as a
prophecy that so it should, but as it is translated in the sense of the
optative mood (which the Hebrews wanting express desires in the future of the
Indicative) signifying a wish or desire that so it might be, To dye is Heavens
heavy doom upon the sons of Adam. An unrepealable Statute has passed (...)
(...), it is appointed for all m^n (without any limitation) once to dye Heb.
9.27. Other are the limits and bounds of nature, other are the extraordinary
ways of working with the Almighty. He may if he please dispense with this law,
as he has done (...) Enoch, and Elijah: and there shall be a more general
dipensation for them which shall be found alive at the last day. We shall not
all dye, but we shall all be changed, 1 Cor. 15.51. Which change shall be
answering to a death, though without any real separation of the soul from the
body. Which I ground

1 On the term used by Saint Paul, (...), We shall not lie down to sleep in
the dust, or we shall not dye as it is rendered, which imports a dissolution of
soul, and body.

2 On that circumstance of time in which this shall be done, in a moment in the
twinkling of an ere, (...) in an atome, an unconceivable instant of time. Which
I take to be an after copy of Adams condition, had he retained his innocence,
he had been translated, not knowing death to a blessed immortality, but he
failing in his obedience, considerable not only as a person, but as the nature
of mankind, all transgressed in him. Romans 5.12.
(...), by one man, and in, and by the one sin of that one man, all man sin and
dyed. So that as no man can acquit himself from the contagion of his
unrighteousnes, nor yet from the guilt of personal practice: (...), Samon.
So none may expect to be exempted from the penalty due thereunto: no not the
righteous man who is now to be considered of.

(...)signifies to be right (...), 1 Chronicles. 13.4. And this was ^ight in the
peoples eyes it did please them, or they did approve of it: so the righteous
man is he who is right in the sight of the LORD, he pleases GOD, and he
approves of him: For the righteous GOD loves righteousness, his countenance
does behold the upright, Psalm. 11.7. He looks on him with content, as we eye
the things we love with delight.

2 It signifies the perfect man. Whom that we may the better describe we must
lay down a rule of perfection, according to which we are to judge of him. GOD
being only wise, and good, and all perfection, that absolute Idea, must be in a
Mat. 5.48.
conformity unto him, this conformity we held by the virtue of the Image of
God stamped upon us in our creation, so long as we kept that Image undefiled,
and undefaced. For the model of our nature, we were holy and just, and good:
but soon was this happy condition forfeited by our disobedience, and there
followed such discrasie in our intellectual, such disorder in our practical
faculties; that we could neither know, nor will, nor do, those things which
were of God, who in his gracious goodness that he might repair this unhappy
loss, gave us his Law a clear manifesto of his Romans 12.2.
perfect will, that in our obedience thereunto, we might recover our holiness,
and reform our lapsed nature by a rule of righteousness: a Directory for the
ordering of this present life to futured lisse and happiness, man's desirable
end. The L^w of God is perfect, converting the soul, Psalm. 19.7. (...) The
sum or perfection of perfection, Psalm. 119.96. Thus having found the rule of
practical righteousness, for my Text leads not to speak any thing of
imputative, we must apply man's actions thereunto, that so from his agreement
therewith, we may discover the righteous man, Blessed is the undefiled or
perfect in the way that walks in the Law of the LORD, Psa. 119.1. this man
from the manner of his conversation, God himself in Job briefly describes. The
perfect and upright man is he who fears GOD, and escheweth evil, Job 1.8. He
fears, honors, loves and serves GOD; and shuns, and avoids, whatsoever comes
under the notion of sin: these two turn ever one upon the other, Ye that love
the LORD hate evil, Psalm 97.10, In odio mali dilectio boni comprobatur, Arnob.
in loc.
the hatred of sin is the best argument of our love to GOD. And no other
testimony can we yield of our love to him, if we neglect to hear his
commandments; and where may we better learn the love and service of GOD then
from his Law, for as it is necessary serve him we should: so considering how
disinabled we are in all our faculties, it is not fit we should tak^ upon us to
determine de modo, and state that service, lest not knowing to do what we
ought, we dishonoor him in our honor of him, or set up an Idol of (...), will
worship, which the Lord will not approve of, who as it is most meet, will be
served as himself pleases, again, the knowledge of sin is by the Law, Romans 7.
which in the nature of an exact rule, shows both what is straight and what is
crooked: Sin being nothing else Peccare est tanquam lineas transilire, Cic.
Paradox.
but as it were to pass the line, to transgress that rule of equity, which is
the bound of all our actions. According to this Law the righteous man regulates
himself in an universal, constant, full and final, obedience. 1 He loooks to
all and every precept. I love all thy commandments, and all false ways I
utterly abhor, Psalm. 119.128. 2. He has not heats of Religion but is constant
in his practice: he works righteousness at all times. 3 He takes the
commondement in the full latitude and extent, and looks to the letter, and to
the life of the Law. 4 He continues and perseveres in this obedience unto his
end, perfecting holiness in the fear of God. Which end will discern between
the righteous and the wicked, between him that serves God, and him that
serves Him not, Mal. 3.18.

Which we come to state the difference of the death of the righteous and the
wicked: the maine thing the Text drives at, wherefore I passed the other more
briefly, as taking them upon a firm supposall clearly granted, this will
discover the very soul of the desire, and the height of the blessing of Balaams
wish. The carnal eye will scarce discern the difference, for as dies the
wicked, so dies the righteous, as dies the fool, so the wise, Eccles. 2.15.
that is the end of all, natures debt must be discharged by a dissolution, and a
general guilt of sin lays all under an equal forfeiture, Death passes upon
all men in that all have sinned, Romans 5.12. So that death following ever upon
sn, and both of them being as general as humane nature: we must find some
special difference. Has the righteous man a better death? but yet it is as
questionable which is the best. Suet. in vit.
Julius Caesar on all occasions, when he little thought his own end to be so
near, even the night before he was slain in the Capitol, prefers a sudden
death. Idemin Aug.
Augustus calls it (...), a good death, where the Vbi moriendi sensumceleritas
abstulit. Cic. deam.
sodamnesse takes away the sense of dying, and these two great Caesar's
according to their desires, the last of them not violent, yet both of them had
a sudden death: this, they say, he prayed against, that he might dye Nec morte
violenta nec immatura quod Israelitis promissum fuerat. Grot. ex Gemara.
neither a violent, nor a sudden death, which was promised to the Israelites,
to be sure, this might be a wicked man's end: how suddenly do they perish? they
go down quick into hell, Psalm. 55.15.

The Moralist thought to dye well Been mori est libenter mori. Sen. Epist 61.
was to dye willingly, and Optanda mors est sine metu mortis mori. Sen. Trag.
such a death was to be wished, as was without the fear of death. The good man
may with Moses on the top of Nebo, even see the Land of bliss, yet be loath to
depart: the wicked may without any comfortable assurance of Gods favor,
without any ravishing apprehension of future happiness, and joys after this
life, be willing to leave the world: the very troubles and misery he may here
meet with, may move the man with the burden at his back, to call for death and
to embrace it, (...). Anacr.
hoping that may put an end to all his evils, of which otherwise he cannot
apprehend how to be acquitted, for there the weary be at rest, Job. 3.17.
Therefore they rejoice exceedingly, and are glad when they can find the grave,
verse. 22. when the sorrows of death may compass about the good, and they may
find trouble and heaviness, Psalm. 116.3.

1 From the pangs of death, which that express of humane fear speaks in my
Savior. Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me.

2 From the conscience of their own infirmity.

3 From the fear of divine judgments, at which the Prophet trembled, Psalm.
119.12. Good Agathon, death approaching, being somewhat troubled, his friends
about said unto him, and do thou father fear? to whom he replied, Doroth.
doct. 2
I have endeavored to keep the Commandments, but I am a man, and how know I
whether my works please God: for other is the judgment of God, and other the
judgment of men.

Some may think it a happy death to depart in a full age, in a calm, quietly
upon their beds, with their friends about them, to have a solemn Funeral, an
honorable Interment, a stately Sepulcher, all these may a wicked man have,
when the good by some unhappy accident may be taken off, the waters may swallow
him up, or the beasts devour him, the indiscriminating sword of the enemy, or
the noisome pestilence, common calamities may sweep him away, the fury of
persecution may uncaske his soul, yet this makes not the end of the one happy,
or the other wretched, the Divine must give us some more real difference.

1 The wicked man departs this life in the displeasure of the Almighty, he
labored not to please him while here he lived, and he must not look to dye in
his good pleasure, he would live without Law, and he must perish by the
sentence of the Law, he may expect no mercy at his death, who contemned mercy
while he lived, if he has Psalm. 73.4.
no bands in his death, he has no comfort, having no hope to rest upon, but
what an evil life can afford, which ever ends in misery, if he be taken away
in his green years, yet his sins are ripe, if he has filled his days, and
lives while he be an hundred years old, he shall be accursed, Isay 65.20. He
has heaped up wrath against the day of wrath, and God takes him away as with a
whirlewinde, both living, and in his wrath, Psalm. 98.9.

2 The wicked go down into the inward chamber, or the closet of the chambers
of death, Prove. 7.27. that dungeon or prison where they are fast locked up in
misery and iron, reserved in everlasting chains until the judgment of the
great day, Jude 6. the Prophet says, they go down into hell, Psalm. 55. the
second interpretation of (...) is there in chief, their grave is hell, not
only the outward courts, but the very depth of hell, Prove. 9.18.

3 The grave has dominion over them, Psalm. 49.14. They sold themselves slaves
under sin, and now death has power over them, the first transmits them to a
second death, and eternal misery, the worm does not only feast upon them,
but (...) death feeds, or banquetteth upon them, and is never satisfied nor
they consumed.

4 They have not rest in their death, Nec mihi mors gravis est posituro morte
dolor. Ovid. Metam. 3.
that which men look upon as the end of troubles is to them but the beginning
of misery, the soul of my Lord shall be knit in the hundle of life, but the
soul of my Lords enemies shall be in a sling, 1 Samuel 25.19. The souls of the
enemies of God, as in a sling are ever restless, their good things are at an
end, their Sun is set, and a dark night over-spreds them. If hell be their
grave, though there be horrid darkness, and eternal night, yet no sleep,
there they rest not, who here slept, when they should have watched.

The death of the righteous far otherwise.

1 He lies down in peace, he has been long traveling a tedious pilgrimage,
and he is now arrived at his journies end, he is come (...) to his long home,
Eccles. 12.5. and is quiet, the spirit returns to him that gave it, Eccles.
12.7. as may be read in the letters of that (...)
sacred name, they are all quiescent: so the good man, returning to him his
original, in him rests as in his center: Mark the perfect man and behold the
upright, for the end of that man is peace, Psalm. 37.37. he lies down, and
nothing can make him afraid, he is confident of the favor of God Anima mea
quid dubitas sexaginta annis servisti Christo and mortem times? Hilar. apud
Hier.
as whom he has faithfully served, in a holy endeavor, keeping the Law with
his whole heart, Psalm. 119.34. and where he has fallen short of his obedience,
he has returned by repentance, and supplication to his God, 1 Kings 8.47. and
he hopes that he whose paths are mercy, and truth unto such as keep his
Covenant and Testimonies, Psalm. 25.10. will show mercy unto them that love him
and keep his Commandments, Exodus 20.6.

2 The death of the righteous puts an end to his sin, he has been in a
constant endeavor of deading sin in his mortal body, and now it is done, he
has gained a state of innocence, in perfection: then man had a power not to
have sinned, but now he shall have no power, or rather not so much weakness,
or imperfection that he may further sin, a great blessing which only the pious
soul is truly apprehensive of. Who has observed the perverseness of his will,
and the frowardness of his affections? Who has felt the reluctance of the
flesh against the spirit, and the motions of sin mutining in his mortal body?
Now to be translated into such a condition, as he cannot further displease God,
but freely and faithfully serve him, not being carried away with any
temptations unto sin. Excellent is that passage in Nazianzen. Adam sinning
against God, though he were rejected Paradise, yet he does gain thereby death,
and the cutting off of sin, lest the evil should have been immortal, (...)
Naz. Orat. 42
so the punishment it self became to man a mercy, and he is well seconded by
his comment, Nicetas.
after man was fallen, had he not been obnoxious to a necessity of dying, he
had incurred the greatest misery, viz. sin working, here therefore he has a
benefit which is death, because it stops and breaks off sin, for although
death has the nature of a punishment, yet it became a mercy, not suffering
the sinner to be immortal, for how should we without any, either fear of God
or dread of judgment, have added sin to sin if we had been immortal? who are
so sinful to day, dying to morrow, with the immortal devil, we should even
have vyed offenses, without either endeavor of new obedience, or remorse by
humble repentance. O munde immunde si sic me tenes breviter transeundo quid
facere diu permanendo. Bern.
If the unclean world so entangle us so soon passing, what would it have done
long remaining? if our vile affections so entise us while we are but pilgrims,
what would they have done had we been of constant abode here? Cicero spoke
well, Mihi non a diis immortalibus vita erepta est sed mors donata est. Lib. 3.
de Orat.
if he understood what he said: Life is not taken away from me by the immortal
gods, but death is given unto me, for as it is (...), (...). Chim. Sca. Pad.
Gr. 6.
a powerful act of God, so is it likewise, (...), an act of grace and favor,
a blessing rather then a curse, as if it had been given rather for a Non pro
poena mortem dedit Deus sed pro remedio, Ambr. de side res.
remedy then a punishment, while viper like it kills its mother sin, and
destroys our destruction.

3 Death puts an end to the miseries of the righteous, thus the divine
goodness turns all to the best for them that love him, as man's punishment to
his benefit, by stopping of his sin, so to his greater happiness by ending of
his misery. Augustine from a passage in Plato or Plotinus, that father Jupiter
having compassion on men, made their bands soluble, draws this collection, Lib.
9. de Civ. Dei c. 10.
that the Philosopher thought that this very thing that men are mortal in
body, proceeds from the mercy of our divine Father, lest they should always
be held with the misery of this life. Thus far the Text of Scripture is plain,
that after Adam had tasted of the fruit of the tree of the knowledge of good
and evil, whereby I am sure he became accursed, God thrust him out of
Paradise, and set a guard upon the Tree of life, lest man should taste of that
fruit and live for ever, Genesis 2.22. and so in that he shortened his days, he
ended his misery, which there at once has its period, from whence that custom
took its stirt of planting a laurel Crown at the head of the dead man's
cossin, in token of triumph and victory obtained over the troubles and miseries
of this life, for to be sure in the other he shall meet with none. Paradise
would not admit of pain, much less will heaven. Sorrow was part of the curse:
misery was inconsistent with the state of innocence, it cannot then stand with
eternal happiness. God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes, there shall
be no more sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain, for former
things are passed away, Rev. 21.4. the presence of God shall be our joy, our
delight to do his will: Paris. de Rhet div.
our constant work the praise of our Creator, to sing eternal hallelujahs
unto our God, and the Lamb that sits upon the Throne.

4 The death of the righteous is their birth day, (...). Oec. in coll. 3.
for of a truth the Christians life is hereafter, though in the ordinary phrase
of speech, a man is said to live while here he is, and to dye when he makes an
end of dying, death being not the end of life, but the end of death, and our
birth day unto eternal bliss, for if it be accustomably said, a man child is
borne, when he breaks forth out of the womb of his mother into this light, may
not he be as rightly said to be borne who loosed from the bonds of flesh? is
brought forth into the land of the living? it had obtained a custom in the
Church, that the day in which holy men departed this life, they called it the
day of their nativity: and the usual solemnities they called them Beda hom. in
Ioh. 16.
not funerals, but birth day feasts, to raise this to a higher speculation.
God is the life of the soul, as the soul is of the body. While here we live
our soul is separated from its life, which is God: which St. Paul hints, While
we are present in the world, we are absent from the Lord, 2 Cor. 5, 6. It is
true, he cherishes us with the breathings of his spirit, he streams the rays
of his grace into our hearts, but we enjoy not his glorious presence, which
gives fullness of life and vigor into the soul. Again, the state and
condition here we are in being so transient, our life but a blast, but a
bubble, such a nothing deserves not the title of life, but that state of
incorruption to which death transmits us, that fixed immortality that and that
only is life indeed.

5 Death is gain unto the righteous. It is the end of the day, when they
receive their penny, the reward of that faithful service they have yielded
unto their God, Been moritur qui cum moritur lucrum facit. Sen.
he dies well, says the moralist, who makes a gain by his death, that does the
righteous man he exchanges this cottage of clay for a mansion in the new
Jerusalem, a house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens: he exchanges
his poor possession for a glorious inheritance: he changes this fading
miserable, for an ever blessed life: he O preclarum diem cum ad illud divinorum
animorum con cilium caetumque proficiscar and cum ex hac turba and colluvione
dis^edam, Cic. de Senect.
changes the company and fellowship of sinful men, for the blessed society of
God, and his holy Angels, by whom he shall be most lovingly entertained. Suet.
in Aug.
Augustus at the Epilogue of his life, desired his friends about him to give
him a plaudite, as if conscient to himself that he had acted his part well
upon the stage of this World: the righteous man shall have his plaudite from a
better Theater. God the Father entertains him with a well done thou good and
faithful servant, Mat. 25.21. God the Son entertains him with, come ye
blessed children of my Father. Mat. 25.34. The whole host of heaven
congratulate him: for if there be joy in heaven at the repentance of a sinner,
Luke 15.7. what exultation will there be at the entertainment of a righteous
man into bless? if they rejoice when he is but set in the way, what will they
do when he comes to heaven?

6 Death to the righteous is his marriage day, in which he is conjoined to his
espoused Lord Christ. Death is but the Paranymphus, which presents the
faithful soul unto her bridegroom. Oh happy meeting of a happy day, to be
evermore happy in the embraces of her loving and beloved Lord! Suet.
Augustus took the farewell of his life at the lips of Livia, and dyed in the
complement so he left her whom he loved. The righteous man dies (...) Deuteronomy.
34.5. at the mouth of God In osculo Domini. Virg. in Apoc. 14.
at a kiss of Gods mouth, but it is a kiss of welcome, and friendly
entertainment of him in whom his soul delights, as the indulgent mother
takes her little one into her arms when it is about to sleep: So God takes
his (...) his little righteous ones, when they sleep in death into the arms
of his mercy, and kisses them with the sweet embraces of his love and favor,
and though a while he may lay them by to rest in Abraham's bosom, while the
number of the elect shall be gathered together, yet his eye is ever on them,
and they enjoy his presence, in which is fullness of joy. If I should add no
more, is not this enough to make good, and to give us to join issue with
Balaam, Let me dye the death of the righteous? but we will follow him to the
ultimate period of his wish, and let my last end be like his. Though death be
the end of all; yet not the last that betideth man, (...) and let my
afterward, or let it be to me after death as to him. We will consider then
what follows death, (...) Heb. 9 27. after death judgment. The punctual
circumstance of time is not limited by any verb, neither (...), nor (...), so
that whether it shall follow presently, or in a longer tract, the Text leaves
undetermined, and the term after may as well signify the precedencie of
things done, and order as reference to any particular time. In loc.
Aretius would streighten it by altering the preposition (...) upon that. I
like not this liberty with the sacred Text in the least Iota, neither will that
conclude it. For circumstantiall notes of time, as were easy to evidence, are
in Scripture largely, or more straightly taken for years before or after, and
it is not peremptorily to conclude from the Apostles phrase. It may be more
easily resolved if we consider man according to his essential principles: the
judgment of the soul follows presently upon the dissolution, that receives
sentence, and is carried by the Angels into Abraham's bosom, a place of rest
and happiness, or thrust into torment, the body is to expect its doom, while
that great day of the general judgment, these two being now separated, we
will take some liberty to speak of some things, though of lesser note, and
might not so fully lie in Balaams wish, that betide the body after death. There
being some small difference observable.

1 The grave. What ever the humerous Cynicke thought, Laert. in vita Diog.
who cared not what became of his corpse when he was dead, yet the wiser man
said, that an untimely birth was better then he that had no burial, Eccles.
6.3. it was the curse of that wicked woman, the dogs shall eat Jezebel by the
walls of Jezreel. 1 King. 21.23. and she shall be as dung upon the face of the
field, 2 King. 9.37. it was the doom of Jehojakim, that he should have the
burial of an ass, Jer. 22.19. which implies that the civil interment of the
body, and committing of it to earth was honorable. And as the old Law was full
of types and ceremonies, so they whose souls wereseparated to several
mansions, as if they would express this truth in a type, the faithful were
buried by themselves, from whence was that phrase, to be gathered to their
Fathers, Genesis 25.8. As Jacob gave commandment concerning his bones, that he
would not be buried in Egypt Genesis 47.29.
Gather me not with the wicked, prays the Prophet, Psalm. 26.9. not to take
notice of the solemnities used at their funerals, and to pass the customs
from hence derived to other Nations, look we only to our own. They who deny
the common faith, or whose more vileactions have been a scandal to their
profession, we either bury them not at all, or dishonourably, but they who live
and dye in the faith of Christ, and their good conversation has given us to
hope, that their bodies shall one day be partakers with their souls in bliffe,
we give them a more decent burial in places set a part for that use, the
Church yard, which the Germans call Godw. ant.
Gods Acre, or his field, where the bodies of his Saints are sown corruptible,
to spring and arise again incorruptible and immortal.

2 The resurrection though our bodies do moulder, and resolve into, yet they
do not lose themselves in the dust, they only leave their weakness and
corruption which adheares unto them by the contagion of sin, from which being
purged, the substance of the body returns again: to prove that there is a
resurrection were too large a digression, and a needless labor, it being so
clear a constat among Christians, that we hold it an article of our faith. We
are baptized not only for the remission of sins, but also into the
resurrection of the flesh, 1 Cor. 15. from whence I conceive the Greeks call
baptism, (...), the clothing or putting on of immortality, and again, we lay
down out bodies in the dust, in the sure and certain hope thereof. It was an
ill reading of that Text, the wicked shall not arise in judgment, Psalm. 1.5.
which strained that gloss (...) Cyr. Hier. cat. 18. and Theoph. in Joh. 3.
not to judgment but to condemnation, the true reading is, they sholl not
stand in judgment, according to the Stare in judicio.
Latin phrase, they shall not be acquitted, but fall when they are judged. For
as Aquinas rightly argues Suppl. 3. partis qu. 75. art. 2.
that which is taken from the nature of the species, is alike found in every
individual of the same species: the resurrection is such, and therefore it
belongs to every particular. Every one must arise, the most wretched liver and
the false believer, but here is the difference, Resurrectio and incredulis
parata est gloria autem resurrection is sola credentibus repromissa est: Eus.
Em. hom. 1. de Symb.
though all arise, yet the glory of the resurrection is only promised unto the
faithful. Which was that Saint Paul so earnestly endeavored after, if I may by
any means obtain the resurrection of the dead, Phil. 3.11. that of the wicked
not deserving the title, being but an upstanding to everlasting death. Here the
body being raised by the power of GOD out of the dust, meets it soul again, and
are conjoined together, to the righteous a joyful meeting, one of them being
happy in the other, and both of them in a full expectation of a never ending
felicity. Sad to the wicked soul, being fettered again to the body, like
malefactors accessories in the same guilt, to receive together a just, but
fearful recompense of reward.

3 Judgment is an act of justice terminated upon man. A sentence given by GOD
upon his actions. There is a twofold judgment assigned by Divines; a Session,
and a grand Assize; a particular and a general. For every man is to be
considered as he is a singular person, in himself, and as his sins have had
influence into others. And as he is a member of mankind.

1 As he is an individual, and particular person, so is he adjudged by God
presently after his death, when he is doomed according to what he has done in
the body, although not fully, because not in the body, but only in the soul,
that only appearing, and having its sentence, the body lying asleep in its
dust.

2 As he is a part of mankind, so he is called at the great and general day,
when there shall be a full summons, and an universal appearance of all the
living that ever were, and as general a sentence, neither yet does God judge
twice for the same thing, and inflict double punishment for one sin, but that
which before was not completely inflicted, then shall the wicked be given up to
be tormented, and the good glorified in soul and body both, and thereseems to
be in this equity, that the body which has been a fellow worker with the soul,
either of holiness unto life, or unrighteousness unto death, should have her
part proportionable in the reward, by which general judgment the
righteousness of God shall be acquitted and vindicated from all slander not
only from the testimony of every guilty conscience, but also by the clear
acknowledgement of every one summoned to appear at the bar: Righteous O God
art thou, and just are thy judgments. The secrets of all hearts being then
revealed, and the full number of each man's sins being then made up, for wicked
men finish not their sins with their days, some men's sins following after
judgment, 1 Timothy 5.24. they give while they live bad examples, which are drawn
into practice, they leave behind them the memory of unrighteous deeds which
multiply to posterity, and acknowledge them their first and proper parent. So
the virtuous lives of good men lead others by the hand unto holiness, and
their faith is filed for posterity. Abraham is long since in bliss, yet is his
faith impressed in the hearts of his children who walk (...) In the steps of
the faith of that holy Father, Romans 4.12. how will it add to the crown of
rejoicing as glory, of that blessed Saint to see so many trails after him in
that tread of faith and righteousness which he has before trodden out? how
will it bliss those faithful dispensers of the word, and other holy men, who
by their devout faith and religious practice, have converted many unto
righteousness, to appear with those they have brought to fight under Christ
his banner? might I rather in the rerelead up but one convert, then to march in
the van of all the worlds happiness, or triumphant glory. The Son of man being
mounted on the throne of his Majesty, then follows disquisition of actions.
Heavens records shall be brought forth, the books shall be opened, the book of
life, and according to their works written in that book, the dead shall be
judged. Apoc. 20.12. Not to enter into any nice School disputes concerning this
book what it is, how men's actions are therein registered, and enrolled: when the
Holy Spirit is pleased to besilent, I will not over-sawcily determine. It is
enough our actions are all therein recorded: not a good work, word, alms-deed,
prayer, but it is there noted: not a tear of contrition for sin that falls to
the ground, but GOD latches it: Put thou my tears in thy bottle, are not these
things written in thy book? Psalm. 66.8. As on the other side not a wicked
action, idle word, vile thought, but they are there recorded likewise. These
things thou have done and I kept silence, and thou thoughtest I had been such
an one as thy self, but I will reprove thee, and set them inorder before thine
eyes, Psalm. 50.21. He now unseen, sees, and observes what afterward openly he
will produce: when he shall sit in righteousness to judge the world. When he
shall come to try our actions, and accordingly sever the good and bad with his
discriminating fan in his hand: parting the chafe and soil from the cleaner
grains: where the good wheat shall be laid up in Gods granery: and the evil
like the tares cast into the fire. Having thus spoken of what betides man after
death I now come to close with the ordinary reading, and discover unto you the
ultimate period, the last end of the righteous man. The LORD has taken him
unto himself to be with him eternally blessed, blessed to eternity, but the
difficulty will be to describe unto you what blessedness is, Futura beatitudo
acquiri potest aestimari non potest, Eus. Em.
though here we must labor, and lay earnest for it, yet we cannot rightly
esteem of it, to say it is Est status omnium bonorum congregatione perfectus.
Boet. de cons. Phil. 3. lib. 3. pros. 2.
a perfectstate consisting in the aggregation, and collection of all good
things. While we take it thus up in the gross, it less affects us. And to
take it up in particulars, thinking thereby more fully to explain it, we shall
fall as short. When as Saint Paul, who was rapt up into the third heaven, sits
down in an ecstasy, neither eye has seen, neither ear has heard, neither
has it entered into the heart of man to conceive the good things that GOD has
laid up for them that love him: 1 Cor. 2.9. It were I think impudent temerity
in any one to go about to determine. None I am sure did ever yet by a Jacobs
ladder scale Heaven, and make fuller discovery of that land of the living; that
he might make us a more perfect relation. App. ad Aug. tom. 9.
The kingdom of GOD is greater then all report, it is better then it can be
praised, it surpasses all knowledge, it is more excellent then all glory that
can be imagined: neither ought I therefore to be silent in what I can say,
because I cannot what I would, neither because we say GOD is ineffable,
therefore may we not speak of him what we are able, so that we believe more
then we speak.] And ever bound our words with fear, and piety. What we cannot
conceive GOD has revealed unto us by his Spirit. 1 Cor. 2.10. But it is
observable, where the Spirit has revealed unto us these unconceivable things,
condescending to our understanding, to move us it has set them forth under the
notion of temporal goods, which we make great account of. Which yet in our
conceits thereof if we rest, we are as far beneath them, as earth is heaven.
The Spirit says the righteous shall have a Kingdom, and wear upon their heads
a crown of righteousness, they shall be clothed with long white robes of
innocence, they shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob at his table in
that Kingdom: which shall be richly furnished; to do the will of GOD,
Delectatio erit cibus, Paris.
and our delight in him shall be our meat: and he shall give us to drink of the
rivers of his pleasure. This kingdom shall be theirs by a sure inheritance,
being coheirs with Christ the eternal Son of GOD. They shall enter into their
masters joy, where they shall bear a part in that heavenly quire, to sing
perpetual hallelujahs unto the Lamb that sits upon the throne. Heaven
shall be theirs, a treasury of riches, and all wealth: and to add to the
perfection of these, of that kingdom there shall be no end. The crown of glory
shall be immarcessible, it shall not breed like Jonahs gourd, a worm to eat
it; our garment of immortality no moth shall fret it: those riches no canker
shall destroy them; those joys shall have no alloy of grief to abate them.
Those delights shall breed no surfeit. Those streams of pleasures shall not run
dry, but be mayntained by a continual spring: that day shall know no night,
the Sun shall not be ecclipsed, nor clouded by darkness, for the Lamb is the
light of the new Jerusalem, that eternal city affords all things eternal;
and they shall be for ever to enjoy them. The righteous shall enter into
everlasting life. Aug. Ser. 74.
because men love to live here on earth, life is promised them; and because
they are afraid to dye, therefore eternal life is promised them. What do
thou love to live? thou shall have it. What do thou fear to dye? thou shall
not suffer it. o living life, and everlastingly blessed! where is rest, without
labor; wealth without loss: health, without languishing: abundance, without
want: perpetuity, without corruption, life, without death: where is light,
without darkness: knowledge without ignorance: understanding, without error:
reason, without obscurity: memory, without forgetfulness: where what ever is
desirable is to be enjoyed, and nothing shall be desired that is not meet.
Where GOD shall be seen without end, loved beyond measure, praised without
wearisomnesse, who in that he is the perfection of being, shall satisfy the
understanding; perfection of goodness, shall satisfy the will: and truly
amiable, shall fill our affections. We shall be amazed at his justice, admire
his mercy, be ravished with his goodness. What shall I add more? The
righteous shall sit at the right hand of Christ, they shall not only enjoy
GODS presence, but shall be ever happy in a gracious union, and constant
communion with the Godhead. De cons. Phi. lib. 3. pros. 9.
Boethius rayses a high pitch: because by the gaining of blessedness men are
made blessed, and blessedness is the divinity it self, it is manifest men are
blessed by obteining the divinity: and as by obteining of justice, men are made
just: and by obteining of wisdom, men are wise: so (says he) by obteining the
divinity men are made gods: every blessed man therefore is a GOD, who though
but one by nature, it hinders not but that there may be many by participation.
GOD promises himself indeed to Abraham an exceeding great reward, Genesis 15.1.
of which the Prophet David lays hold, the LORD is the portion of mine
inheritance, Psalm. 16.5. hear Saint John, We are now the sons of GOD, but it
does not yet appear what we shall be: but we know when he shall appear, we
shall be like him: for we shall see him as he is. 1 John 3.2. The sight of GOD
which is the promise of a righteous man, makes him like even unto GOD. I can
raise my meditations no higher, I must here rest: add, only if I may raise
your affections more to desire the righteous man's end, by showing you on the
contrary, the fearful, and miserable end of the wicked man.

1 As he dies in GODS displeasure, so is he deprived of his glorious prefence
for ever. The greatness of this punishment is not to be valued, in that so
great an evil is the privation of any good to be esteemed, as is that good
which it deprives us of: when as therefore the good of which the damned are
deprived is infinite, so must the punishment be: to be cast out of GODS
presence, to be under his eternal enmity, ten thousand hels is not such an
evil; as to have omnipotency an irreconciled enemy, and he who is all
Goodness.

2 He is given over to the tyranny of the Devil: and just that who while he
lived here was subject, served, and obeyed Satan, when he dies should be
enslaved to, and possessed of him. And with whom by a disobedient will he
would partake in sin, he should though unwilling, partake with him in the
punishment, and be tormented of him.

3 Torture in hell fire, which burns, and yet consumes not, but the wicked are
repaired to everlasting flames: as the Poetsfabled of Premetheus, (...), etc.
Hesiod. Theog.
whose liver the devouring Eagle eat in the day, and what was then devoured
grew again in the night: so in the midst of those consuming flames, Damnata
natura dat pabulum and accepit incrementum. Eusebius. Em. ho. 1. ad Mon.
the damned nature yields fuel, and receives increase. If the finger in the
flame (yea, but a little time) is not now to be endured; how unsufferable will
it be, body and soul to be scorched in hell flames eternally?

4 The punishment in all his senses: not only his feeling with smart, but his
sight shall be grieved with most horrid apparitions, his hearing terrified with
bitter outcries, and gnashing of teeth, his smelling offended with
intolerable stench, his taste tormented with hunger and thirst, and infested
with a more bitter humor then gall or wormwood.

5 A collection of griefs, and all miseries shall flow in upon him: I will heap
mischiefs upon them, I will spend mine arrows upon them, Deuteronomy. 32.23. not one,
or a second, or some few, but a heap of mischiefs shall fall upon the wicked:
and GOD setting him up as a butt, will even empty the quiver of the arrows of
his fury upon them. Greatness of grief may now take away the sense of grief,
but then it shall sharpen them.

6 A worm never dying, a conscience of sin: now sins are veyled under the huke
of delight, and appear not so foul, then shall they appear in their
filthiness, to the grief of the guilty: in the sight of which they shall
displease themselves, and repent without any profit.

LORD, what contrarieties seem to accord in the punishment of the wicked to
make them wretched? they see thee and they see thee not: they see thy frown,
and not thy face. They are deprived of life, yet they live: they are dead, yet
they endure, and are sensible of misery. The fire burns them yet consumes them
not: it flames, yet gives no light. A horrid darkness overspreads them, yet
there is a clear medium to see themselves miserable but can see nothing whereby
they may be happy. 7 And that which makes him fully miserable to suffer all
these eternally, the greatest punishment if it may have a period may better be
endured, but so great, and endless is the sum of misery. It may well be noted
for injustice, and tyranny in Tiberius, who would not be reconciled to the
offender: and loved to reserve men to torment. So that a guilty man dying ere
he came to the rack, he cries out, Carnulius has escaped: and passing by the
prison, one entreating of him to hasten his punishment, he made this reply,
Suet. in Tib.
Nondum tecum in gratiam redii. I am not yet returned into favor with thee.
GOD is no Tiberius, no tyrant, yet will not be reconciled to the guilty soul,
the reason is different. For sin being an offense against an infinite
goodness, deserves an infinite punishment, which man being not able to endure,
must suffer eternally. And again, the sinner dying unrepenting sins eternally,
and then it is just that if man sins, GOD should punish unto eternity. Who is
it now that shall deeply consider the blessed departure and happy end of the
righteous: and on the other side the desperate death, and unhappy end of the
wicked, but will conclude, that there was good cause which did move Balaam thus
to wish? and who is not ready to join in request with him, that his last end
may be like the righteous man: What remains shall be to show you, how our last
end maybe like his.

1 Live the life of the righteous, Rest not in a bare wish as Balaam did, good
desires are like good dreams, which vanish when we awake, and come to nothing:
and do but deceive him that trusts in them, the worst of men may wish so well
unto themselves, but I dare not promise them they shall so obtein it. All would
have the Crown, but they will not try the combat: they would have the penny,
but they would not sweat in the vineyard: they would wish the righteous man's
death, but they will not live the life of the righteous. Cor. a Lap.
For to dye well is happiness, to live well is labor: but one is not granted
without the other. Eternity depends upon death: that upon a good or bad life,
once to perish is to perish eternally. Plut. in Lacon.
Iphicrates said it was a speech unworthy of an Emperor to say, I had not
thought, how much more unworthy of a Christian is it to say, I had not thought
there had been such difference between a holy and an unholy life. I had not
thought that Eternity had depended upon this momentany being. To all the
advertisements thou have had before, take this at last, which I shall again
repeat: Upon a holy life depends a good death, and upon that Eternity, and if
thou perishest once, thou perishest eternally. Eus. Em. ho. 7. de Pass.
It is in the power of this present life that that may be happy which is
everlasting; for if thou leadest this present well, the future cannot be
miserable: if thou fear to die evil, fear to live evil, but fear not, he
cannot die evil who lives well. Now as that is a good and wel-led life, which
is passed in holiness, and virtuous actions, that an evil one which is led in
wickedness; answerably the death is to be weighed from the forepassed actions
of life, so that if the life be led in a religious observance of God his Law,
in a holy obedience to his will, the death cannot be bad: for it is a
translation to immortality. But if otherwise, it is necessary it must be evil,
for it transmits to eternal misery: how comfortably could a good old Simeon
pray that hymn, and sing while he prayed, Lord, now let thou thy servant
depart in peace: with what a religious confidence could old Hilarin farewell
with his soul Hier. de Hilar.
who had served his God sixty years? the conscience of that faithful service,
satisfied, that his future being could not be unhappy. A heavenly life here on
earth, must needs give security of a happy life in heaven, he that lives here,
has no cause to fear to die hereafter, (...), Doroth. doctr. 8.
for indeed I call the holy, the only life: the wicked man has a being here,
but only the righteous man lives. We use to count our days, and number our
years according to the time we are on earth. Deceive not thy self who ever thou
art: Compute thou have only lived that day in which thou have denied thine own
will, in which thou have resisted thy corrupt affections, in the which thou
have not transgressed the rule of equity. Compute thou have only lived that
day which malice, and wickedness, envy, or pride has not clouded, which has
not been wasted in sin, in which thou have stood upon thy guard, and have not
been foiled by fleshly temptations. Compute thou have only lived that day,
which pious meditation and holy practice has enlightened; not which the
darkness of sin has turned into a night, apply only unto thy life, that day
the benefit of which by a holy conversation has redounded unto thy soul. The
rest is but idle pastime, a phrase which humors most men well, but such empty
ciphers will prove nothing but real woes, at heavens account. Shall we compute
that a day of life in which men consume eternity, and heap unto themselves
punishments never to have an end, such a life tends unto, and ends in death,
and is in truth but a death, live therefore while here thou art, sow the seeds
of holiness, that thou may reap happiness. Bud forth in the blossoms of a
future life, that thou may gather the fruit, hereafter: the present must
answer to the future, the worldly lusts subdue thy corrupt appetites, let the
spirit of God rule in thy heart, set thy affections on things above, let thy
conversation be in heaven, and hope well, one day thou may come thither, as
Cicero said of Hercules, he had never been enrolled among the gods in heaven,
if he had not laid out his way thither while he lived: so if we walk not in
that holy way while here we live, we shall never be registered with the Saints
in bliss. Beru.
There is no way unto the Kingdom, without the first fruits of the Kingdom,
neither may they hope to reign there as Kings, who have not here ruled over
their properlusts. If ye look God should take you as he did Enoch, you must
as he walk with God: a holy, ever ushers in a happy life. It was a bold and
sharp reply of those Philosophers to Alexander, an exemplary Prince for Arms
and Arts, who passing some territories where his conquering sword had made him
master, hearing of learned men (as his manner was) sent for them, and
propounded to them many questions, they giving him good resolution, as an
argument of his royal satisfaction, he would have them ask him what they
pleased, that he might grant it to them: they jointly asked of him
immortality: the Prince began to smile, before, says he, I thought you wise
men, but now I think you fools, to ask of me immortality, who my self am
mortal. While I consider the condition and manners of the most of men, I may
make the like demand, give me immortality: if nature prompts them, or Religion
has better taught them that they are mortal: I make my reply with them to
Alexander, why then do you live evil, letting loose the reins of all kind
of sin and wickedness, as if you were immortal? as if you had no thought of
death or fear of judgment. For if we weigh well the actions of the most, can
we judge any otherwise of them? for where is he who lives according to the
decorum of heaven? whose practice answers to that holy faith, he would be
accounted to make profession of? Philosophy tells us that naturally men desire
the chiefest good, eternalll happiness. But all this while Religion has been
preached in the world, it cannot work so much upon men's affections, as to win
them to the right means of gaining of it, they would obtein the chief good,
yet they would not be good. Aug. Ser. 12. ae verb. Dom.
Do thou not see how thou ought to blush at thy self, who would have
all things good, yet thy self would not be good? thy house thou would
have filled with goods, and shall it have thee an evil master? What is it that
thou would have ill, not a wife, not a child, not a servant, not a house,
not a garment, not thy shoos, and yet thou carest not though thy self be
evil: think better of thy life then of thy shoos. All things about thee, if
they be elegant and fair please, and will thou be vile and filthy in thy
self? if thy good things could speak unto thee which thou enjoyest, would
they not say unto thee, as thou would have us good, so do we desire thee to
be, and may they not secretly murmur to God against thee? behold, thou have
given so many good things to this man, yet he himself is evil. Cannot he who
gave these good things, and makes them good unto thee, if thou displease him
take away the comfortable enjoyment of them, turn the blessing into a curse,
thy prosperity into thy destruction? get therefore with them his good will, by
doing his good will, that at last he may give thee better, and more real, the
true goods. Conjoyne thy self to the fellowship of Saints, be of the holy
Church here below, that thou may be one of the Church triumphant in glory.
Labor according to the grace of God given unto thee to do the will of God
here on earth, as they do in heaven, that so thou may do it more perfectly
hereafter with them. Cum quibus fuerit vobis consortium devotionis erit and
communio dignitatis, Leo Ser. 5. de Epip.
For with whom we have a consort devotion, we shall have a community of
dignity. If thou would have the righteous man's end, live as do the
righteous: let it be thy delight to do the will of God, order thy actions
according to that perfect rule he has given thee: walk in an universal
obedience to all the Laws. There is, says the Moralist, a concatenation of
virtues, and it is not one but all that entitles the virtuous man. The Jews say
that God uttered all the Commandments in one breath, I am sure they are linked
together. Thou shall not kill Neither shall thou commit adultery, Neither shall
thou steal, etc. Deuteronomy. 5.17, 18. the breach of one dissolves the chain. An
offense is not in this or that only, but in any, and he that offends in one is
guilty of all, Jam. 2.10. in that he offends against justice, and the will of
the Lawgiver, who gave the one and gave the other, and is equally disobeyed in
either. He that observes one commandment, not another, he does his own will,
not Gods, and did his corrupt affections equally prompt him, he would disobey
in what he does observe. Look not only to the affirmative precepts, but also
to the negative, knowing the latter may be as destructive as the former, Peccat
ille qui imperata neglexerit, sed plus peccat qui interdicta non servat Hier.
p. 3. Ep. 2.
if not more: look not only to the greater, but also to the lesser, knowing
that there is an obligation upon thee from God to both. (...), Mat. 5.19. He
that shall unbinde or unloose one of these least Commandments, one, and of the
least he shall be called Minimus nullus, Gloss. Chrysostom.
the least in the Kingdom of God. Contemptus cujuscunque praecepti
praecipientis iniuria est. Hier. par. 3. Ep. 18.
the contempt of any command is the injury of him that does command, and
therefore the holy Prophet, I love all thy commandments, and all false ways I
utterly abhor, Psalm. 119.128.

2 Do righteousness at all times, Psalm. 106.3. Have not heats of Religion, but
ever regulate thy actions, by the rule of truth, with a perpetual constancy;
the school observes well, that affirmative precepts bind always, but not at
all times: negative always and at all times, and it may be observed, all the
moral precepts of God, (the fourth of the first Table, and the first of the
second excepted) for which there is good cause, in that imperious insolent
superiors may counter command the eternal, run in the negative, holding us to
a continual performance. Let opportunity bear no plea, nor privacie give thee
no advantage to commit iniquity: in that the eye of justice ever watches over
thee, though the custom of corrupter times would connive at some faults, yet
ken that Text in the righter reading (...), not (...), Romans 12.11. Serve the
Lord, not the time, though the multitnde of transgressors might seem to bear
thee out: yet know, Vbi mayor est peccantium turba, mayor est divinitatis
iniuria. Salv. de gub. li. 3.
the greater number of offenders the more God is offended, and take not license
for the least offense, knowing the Law being of eternal truth, is not variable
by circumstances of time, place, or looser practice, but ties to a constant and
perpetual observation.

3 Walk in the full latitude of every commandment. Look to every branch,
every Iota, and point thereof, rest not in the outward, but mind likewise the
more inward and spiritual performance: abstain not only from the outward act,
but keep close sentinel upon the heart, which if thou can not keep free
from injected thoughts, yet delight not thy self in them, lest they win
consent, but smother them there, so soon as they be discovered, the Cockatrice
is with more ease and less danger, crushed in the egg ere it be disclosed. My
Savior will not acquit him from adultery, who has abstained from the
forbidden bed, but tells us the lustful look carries a guilt with, and is
adultry in the heart, Mat. 5. man is not innocent, when the act does not
perfect the will, when he brings not forth the evil which the heart
conceives, Concupiscere nefas est, quod fieri crimen est, Hier. par. 3. Ep. 15.
when it is an iniquity to think what it is a sin to do.

4 Continue in this obedience unto thy lives end. Faint not, nor be we ary of
well doing: Finish thy course, be faithful unto the death for the crown of
life, Revel. 2.10. Non inchoasse sed persecisse iuslitia est, Idem Ep. 22.
It is not to begin well, but to persevere in what is well begun, that is
perfect justice. Nay, I may say, In cassum bonum agitur si ante vitae terminnm
deseratur, quia frustra velociter currit, qui priusquam ad metam venerit
desicit. Greg. Mor.
it is in vain to begin if we persist not, as to run in the race if we hold
not unto the mark. Evil beginnings may be corrected by a following practice,
but an evil end transmits us to remediless eternal misery. If the Word of
GOD may carry it, divine Truth speaks thus much. The righteousness of the
righteous shall not deliver him in the day of his transgression, as for the
wickedness of the wicked, he shall not fall thereby in the day that he
turns from his wickedness: neither shall the righteous be able to live in
the day that he sins, Ezekiel. 33.12. the like is to be read, Ezekiel. 18.21, 22,
24. Ill beginnings do not prejudice the true convert, the benefit of good
beginnings are forfeited through future failings. If we at last forsake GOD,
and list our selves in the Devils service, it may be just with him there to
leave us under his power, (...). Jon. Ep. ad Magn.
whose we are, while to him we yield our selves, to have our reward from and
with him. It is not enough to be, and live, but we must likewise dye Saints, if
we expect to be, and live such for ever. It is the end crowns the action,
perseverance confirms the righteous man. Thus the righteous man orders himself
though he rests not in his own righteousness which is of the Law; but that
which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of GOD by
faith, Phil. 3.9. So De sanctis patribus annotandum est ita sub vet. Test.
vixisse ut uon illinc restiterunt, sed aspirarunt semper ad novum adeoque
certam cius communionem amplexi sunt. Calvin. Instit. lib. 2. c. 11. Sect. 10.
the holy Patriarchs which lived under the old Testamentrested not there, but
ever aspired unto the grace of the Gospel, and so embraced its certain
communion. Omnis antiquitas colentium verum DEVM omnis numerus apud secula
priora sanctorum, sacra fide vixit and placuit, and neque Patriarchis, neque
Prophetis, neque quisquam omnino sanctorum, nisi in redemptione Domini nostri
Jesu Christi salus and iustificatiofuit, Leo Sermon. 1. de Pass.
Faith has been the sure means of salvation to so many as have obtained it.
The promise of faith, the law which was after given could not disanull. Gal.
3.17. The object of faith though not so clearly exhibited, until these latter
ages of the World, yet faith in the promise did bear date, and that of grace
was (after the fall) the first, if not the only covenant: without question the
only possible means of obteining justification before God. Order therefore thy
life as if there were no Gospel, but dye as if there were no Law, live as if
there were not another righteousntsse to plead for thee, but dye in the
confidence of thy Saviors merit. Walk toward Heaven in that Nihil crit
incommodi, sivitae sanctitatem, existimemus esse viam, non quidem quae aditum
aperiat in gloriam coelestis regni, sed qua clecti a Deo suo in eius
m^nisestationem ducantur: quando haec bona eius voluntas est, glorificari quos
sanctificavit. Calvin. In stit. l. 3. c 18. Sect. 4.
perfect way, a strict obedience to GODS Law, but let faith open for thee the
gate to blessedness, let such be thy life, that such may be thy last end.

2 Dye the death of the righteous. There is 1 a death for sin, 2 a death in
sin, 3 a death to sin. A death for sin, that is, that we all suffer a just
punishment for our offenses. Aug. de haeres. c 88.
It was a branch of the Pelagian Heresy, that Adam though he had not sinned,
yet he should have dyed; not by the merit of sin, but by a necessity of nature.
Such a principle might better be allowed in a Mors naturae finis est non poena
Sen. sual. 7.
Moralist then a Christian. For though Adam were a mortal Ideo factum est per
peccatum non mortale quoderat, sed mortuum quod non sicret nisi peccaret. Lomb.
Sent. li. 2. did. 19.
creature, yet had he kept his innocence, by grace he had been conserved from
death. For the body is dead, because of sin, Romans 8.10. and so my Savior while
he would stand in our stead to answer for us, he dyed for the ungodly. Rom,
5.10,

2 A death in sin, so we dye yea, daily dye and will not consider it. The
drunkard that drinks down iniquity, and swils himself into the condition of a
beast: thinks not that there is death in the pot 2 Kings 4. The lustful Wanton
that awayts the twylight, and then slips to his carrion, considers not that the
harlots house is the way to hell, going down to the chambers of death, Proverbs
7 27. The doubling tongue that dallies with the heart, feels not when it kills
its own soul. Thus too many Felons play with their own destruction.

3 A death to sin, this is the Saints death: who mortify their members on
earth, and kill sin in their mortal bodies. Pr^cious in the sight of the LORD
is the death of his Saints. Psalm. 16.15. Vbi homo occiditur mundo non
terminatione sensuum sed fine vitiorum. Leo Ser. in not. Machab.
When men dye unto the World, not by an end of being but by an end of sinning:
forsaking those former accustomed ways of wickedness, and living in
godliness, which before they did not, which is a kind of death and
resurrection in us. Blessed, and holy is he who has his part in the first
resurrection, of such the second death shall have no power. Apoc. 20.6. If the
consideration of that blessed life which follows upon the death to sin may
nothing affect us: we might raise (I think) arguments from the other members
of the division to move us. Death in sin is the soul of death, (...), Naz.
Orat. 19.
the death of the soul: it divides GOD from the soul who is the life thereof.
How circumspect, if we observe it, are men to preserve bodily life, and the
life of life how do they neglect. We will avoid the infected house, and the 1
King. 8.38.
plague of our heart we cherish in our bosom. If our body be wounded we run
to the Chyrurgeon, and we wound our souls by our sins which cut deeper then any
two edged sword, killing that which is immortal, and yet we are senseless of
the misery. If nature, or art could help us, we would preserve our bodies
everlasting: and our souls shall we voluntarily murder? Oh! what pity is it to
see how men trifle away life, soul, salvation, and imbezle eternal bliss for
a thing of naught. They dote upon and humor every vile affection, though to
their endless destruction. Man drinks iniquity like water, Job 15.16. like
hungry Rats that raven down their own bane we thirst, we drink, we dye.
Again, for sin we dye, that it is which has caused all those sorrows, and
vexations, troubles, and infirmities; has brought all that inundation of evils
that has broken in upon mankind. That it is which has separated the soul
from the body and laid in its dust. Peccatum mortis pabulum Lact. li. 4.
Sin is that whereby death lives, and we dye: it procured the death of the Son
of God. He dyed for our sins, that we should dye unto sin, that as Christ was
raised from the dead by the glory of the Father: so we also should walk in
newness of life. Romans 6.4. Oh, let not that precious blood of the Son of GOD
be spilt in vain! he gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all
iniquity, Titus 2.14. and he reedeemed us by such a price that he may worthily
possess us. I cannot read that passage in Sermon. 1. de elem.
Cyprian without a moved passion, nor take it into deeper meditation without a
melting heart, where he brings in the Devil at the day of judgment, as it
were, insulting over my ever blessed Savior. I (says he) for those whor thou
see with me, have neither been buffeted, nor scourged, nor born the cross,
nor shed my blood, nor redeemed them by the price of my passion; neither do I
promise unto them an heavenly Kingdom; neither do I recall them to Paradise
restoring immortality: yet what precious and great gifts, gotten in a long
time, and by large expense, by pawning, and imbezelling their goods; even while
they are scorned and derided at, and sometime by a popular fury even ready to be
stoned: show me the like president in the pale of thy Church, those rich men
flowing with abundance, are they so free toward thee? will they give so much
to thee? though they might thereby translate their possessions into everlasting
treasures. Yet in these expenses for me none are fed, none are clothed, none
are comforted, but all things are prodigally and foolishly wasted. In thy poor,
thou art clothed: in thy hungry thou art fed, thou do promise eternal life to
them that labor in thy service: yet thine whom thou do honor with the
recompense of eternal reward, are not to be equalled in number to mine which
perish. Oh what a sad thing is it, that although Christ has done, daily does
and has promised to do so much for us, yet we should voluntarily leave his
service, whose yoke is so easy, and put our necks under the tyranny of Satan's
subjection, the professed enemy of Chrisl, the underminer of our salvation, the
adversary of our souls eternal bliss. who makes himself mirth at our misery,
and only triumphs in our torment let us therefore withdraw subjection from
such a vile tyrant, draw our necks out of the yoke of so wilful, so woeful a
slavery. Let us dead sin in our mortal bodies, that death may have no dominion
over us. So may our departure be in peace, we may have a happy end, a gloriors
resurrection, a gracious acceptance, an acquitting sentence, a crown of
righteousness, and to help us the better in these two to live, and dye the
life, and death of the righteous. Be

3 In a continual meditation of death. Plato.
Which is the life of a wise man, and surely considering the certainty of
death, and the uncertainty of the time he wants discretion who does not
frequently think upon it. Strange it is, the Devil should yet fool us, after
so long an experience with the like temptation that he flattered our first
parents, ye shall not die, only here the difference, they did take that at
once, which we do at smaller portions, as thou shall not dye this year, this
month, this day: so, we receive in smaller pills, what they received in one
bole, and all of us swallow the same dose, but a surer word tells us, we are
here of no continuance, like a poast that stays not a bubble, a smoke, a
vapor, a dream, a shadow, we are something, we are nothing, we are here, we
are gone, (...). Pind. Pyth. Od. 8.
the very dream of a shadow, and yet that we should dote of a long stay here,
of a truth, the life of a Christian is hereafter, in the mean time, the
mediation of death makes a life, it draws us nearer, and sets us in view as it
were of our life, and certainly makes a holy life: for he that continually
thinks he must die, will so live as he is willing to dye: he that looks upon
every day that passes not as one of that number of his days, which his
desiring hope may promise him but as his last, he fits himself accordingly for
it, as Eumolpus, if he spoke not better then he did. Ego sic semper and ubique
vixi tanquam ultimum diem nunquam rediturum consumerem, Petron. Sat.
I have so every where lived, and at all times, as if I had spent my last day,
never again to have been recalled, and surely we never spend a day so well as
that which we think to be our last, those three virtues, says the In Clim.
sca. parad. grad. 6.
Scholiast, are effects of this meditation. 1 That we are without passion. 2
That we pray without intermission.

3 That we keep our selves unspotted from sin.

1 That we are without passion.

1 It unlinkes our love from the world, so transient, so uncertain, so
unsatisfying to the soul of man, so unworthy of our affection, while we look
of it in a deep consideration of our own and its mortality, we discover its
vanity, we conclude its nothing, and we loath it. 2 It allayes our anger, Hi
motus animoruma tque haec certamina tanta pulveris exigui iactu compressa
quiescunt Virg. Georg. 4.
as the tetchy Bees which fight in troops, in their bitter conflicts, cast up a
little dust among them, and you part them presently, nothing sooner cools those
hotter distempers of choler then the dust of mortality, remember thy end, and
let emnity cease, Eccles. 28.6. that which kills them utterly would kill them
instantly, were it well applied; death which shall destroy them with the body,
the thought of it would soon dead them in the body, were it serious. Oh how
sedate, and peaceable would we be, were we christianly mortified. 3 It abates
the fear of death. A fore-warning is a fore-arming against miseries, he that
acquaints his thoughts with them before they come, is better able to endure the
shock. As Palladius reports of an Eremite, who being near his death was merry
and cheerful, his disciples about him trembled, and mourning said unto him:
Do thou suffer, and art nothing moved, and we but suffer with thee and
weep? to whom he replied, I am quiet, because I have often walked this way by
meditation, I have often dyed, so no new thing happens unto me. (...). Clim.
sca. parad. grad. 6.
The memory of death is a daily death, and he that dies daily, dies not
discontentedly: nothing betides him but what he has before thought, and he is
well provided for it: he knows how to dye before he dies, and it naught amates
him.
2 It quickens our prayers, as a spur to our devotion, the soul the more it is
abstracted from the body, the nearer it draws to God, and taking heat, and
warmth as it were from that fountain of light, and life, it is more active and
vigorous in fervent affection.

3 It is a sentinel upon the soul, and keeps the good man that he consents
not to any sin. Titles of honor may court, but they shall not coozen him.
Pleasures of the world may tempt, but they shall not entangle him. Affections
of the flesh may flatter, but they shall not entise him. Facile contemnit omnia
qui semper cogitat se moriturum. Hier. Ep. ad Paul.
He slights them all, he is resolved to persevere in his integrity, and to
preserve himself unspotted as the spouse of Christ.

And cast an eye yet a little further, think on judgment when thou must give
an account Luke 16.2.
of thy Stewardship. Not an evil action which thou have unjustly committed,
but thou must answer for, which though thou happily have forgot, yet are they
not slipped out of the divine memory. Do thou not watch over my sin, My
transgression is sealed up in a bag, and thou sowest up mine iniquity, Job
14.17. When the Pharisees brought the adulteress, and accused her unto my
Savior, he wrote upon the ground: he speaks not, but yet he writes: sinner
observe: although God is silent, yet he writes, he seems to dissemble thy sin,
yet he records it, and at last those records shall be produced, and according
to those things written in that book shall thou be judged. Thy idle words
vanish not, nor dye in the air, they are breathed out into. Yea thy vile
thoughts shall not be smothered in thine own breast, but as they are manifest
and known to him who tries the heart and reins; so shall they be filed upon
thy account to answer for.

To conclude. Think on the death of the righteous, who lies down in peace:
thereby puts an end to his sin, and to his misery. Whose death is his birth day
unto blessedness, the day when he receives a gracious reward of his well
doings: his marriage day unto Christ, and union with God, think on his last
end. Glory and honor, and immortallity, and eternal life, the crown of
righteousness, the kingdom of heaven, to be admitted to the inheritance of
the Saints in glory, to be like the Angels, to sit down on Christ's right hand,
and to reign with him, to see the face of God in bliss for ever, and to be
satisfied with his likeness, is it possible these should not affect thee? if
not, let the death of the wicked affright thee, to ly down in sorrow, and to
go into the inward chambers of death, where the grave shuts her mouth upon
them, and have no rest from their trouble and misery, but it is to them a
beginning of torment, weigh their end, to be deprived of Gods favor, to be
ejected out of his presence, to be given over to the tyranny of the Devil, to
be tortured in hell, where the worm dies not, and the fire is not quenched,
where they shall in soul and body in all parts endure all kind of misery, and
these eternally, without any hope of reconciliation with God, or end of pains.
If the thought of eternity cannot balance thy thoughts what will? O that men
were wise, that they understood this, that they would consider their latter
end! Deuteronomy. 32.29. So consider as they might escape the fierce anger of the
Lord, in that great day to be revealed against offenders, for to understand, as
to do what is right, lest our knowledge be our misery, for better were it not
to have known the way of righteousness, then having known to turn from the
holy commandment, 2 Pet. 2.21. For he that knows his masters will and does it
not, shall be beaten with many stripes. Earnestly endeavor after holiness and
pray to him who is the way, the truth and the life, to establish thee in his
truth, to lead therein the right way, that tends to life.

To close your ears in a short meditation of that which one day will close all
our eyes, death, the weary man's rest, the Christians comfort, the solace of
afflicted souls, the greatest blessing next a Savior, conferd on sinful
mankind, the rode of paradise, the scal of heaven, the gate of happiness, a
haven secure from all tempests, a Physician to cure all diseases, a restoring
cordial in a pill of alloes, working health and salvation to mankind, a good
midwife, by whose hands we are broughtforth into the land of the living a
blessed day whose Sun sets in glory, or happy night whose morning dawns in
bliss, or blessed twilight between time and eternity, blessed lying down,
which arises to immortality, blessed sleep that awakes to eternity. Sweet
death, may I never look a squint on thee, but with an eye full of hope of that
happiness which thou do usher in, that I may as willingly lay down this
body, as leave a prison, be undressed of this clothing of mortality, as I would
of my wearing clothes, and commend my body to the dust, as I would my weary
bones to a bed of down. May I never so dote on this dirty hovell, that I would
not willingly exchange it for a house not made with hands, or be so enamoured
of this cottage of clay, that I would not readily lapse my lease unto my great
Creator.

In the mean time may I so live, that I may die to live to eternity, that I may
die while here I live, that I may live for ever, walking in that right and
perfect way which leads to that door that opens to those heavenly lodgings,
blessed eternity may my thoughts lose themselves, while my soul find it self
blessed in eternity.

(...). Doroth. doctr. 8.

