THE LAVVFULNES of obeying the Present Government. And Acting under it, With
some other ADDITIONS to a former EDITION.

By one that Loves all PRESBYTERIAN lovers of Truth and Peace, and is of their
Communion.

JOHN 7. 24. Judge not according to the appeareance, but judge righteous
judgment. LONDON: Printed for John Wright, at the Kings Head in the
Old-Bayley, 1649.

The lawfullnesse of obeying the present Government.
And acting under it
A Declaration has been lately published, wherein the grounds are expressed of
settling the present Government, with which if any be not so far satisfied as to
think that setlement lawful, yet even to such is this Discourse directed,
which proposes Proofs, that th^ugh the change of a Government were believed
not to be lawful, yet it may lawfully be obeyed.

THe Apostle entreating of purpose upon the duty of submission and obedience to
Authority, Romans 13.
lays down this precept; Let every soul be subject to the higher powers, for
there is no power but of God; the powers that are, are ordained of God; and
hereupon infers, Wherefore ye must needs be subject not only for wrath,
Potestatis nomine, intelligo Magistratum, qui est cum porestate and autoritate;
maluit ^amen Apostolus ipsam potestatem nominare quam hominem, etc. R^lloc. in
locum.
but for conscience sake. And that he speaks not in this place merely of power
or authority abstracted from persons, but of persons clothed with that
authority, appears in that he says; For, rulers are not a terror to good
works. So that he speaks of persons ruling, as well as of the power by which
they rule. And again, He is the Minister of God, and they are Gods Ministers;
and accordingly he directs Timothy, to pray for a blessing upon those that are
in authority. 1 Timothy ^. ^.
Now if the Powers, Rulers, and those that were in authority in that time were
ordained of God, and were to be obeyed for conscience sake, let us consider how
lawfully they came into that power, rule, and authority. This Epistle most
probably, if not certainly, was written in the time of Claudius Caesar, or
Nero, Acts. 18. 1. 2.
the former of which banished the Jews out of Rome, upon which occasion Aquila
and Priscilla came out and met with Paul at Corinth: and by the sentence of the
latter, Paul having made his appeal to Caesar finished his course, and passed
unto a crown of righteousness. And now, behold the lawfulness by which these
two persons came to be invested in their power and authority.

Of Claudius Caesar the Story tells us this; Timore cadis exterritus prorepsit
ad solari^m pr^ximum, interque praetenta foribus vela se abdidit; la^entem,
discurrens sort gregarius miles ^im^dversis pedibus, estudio sciscitandi
quisnam esset, agnovit, extractumque and prae metu ad gen^a sibi accidentem
Imperatorem saluta. vit. Hinc ad alios commilitones fl^ctuantes, nec quic quam
ad huc quam frementes perduxit. Ab his lecticae impositus, and quia servi
diffugerant, vicissim succollantibus, in castra delatus est. tristis ac
trepidus miserante obvia turba, quasi ad paenam raperetur insons. Receptus
intrae vallum inter excubias militum pernoctavit, aliquanto minore spe quam
fiducia. Nam Consule cum Senatu, and cohorribus urbanis forum capitoliumque
occuparunt, asser^uri comunem liber^atem, accitusque and ipse per Tribunum
plebis in curiam ad suadenda quae viderenter, vi se and necessitate teneri
respondit. Verum postero die Senatu segniore in exequendis c^natibus per
taedium ac dissentionem diversa censentium and multitudine quae circumstabat,
unum rectorem jam and nominatim exposcente, a^matus proconciene jurare in nomen
suum passus est, promisitque singulis q^i^adena H. S. primus Caesarum fi^em
militis, etiam premio pigneratus. Sueton in Claudio. Agrippina velut dolor
victa, and solatia conquirens, tenere amplexu Britannicum, veram paterni o^is
effigiem appellare, etc. and Antoniam quoque and Octaviam atti^uit, and cunctos
aditus cust^diis clouserat, crebroque vulgaba^ ire in melius valetu dinem
principis, quo miles bo^a in spe^^ge^et, tem usque prosperum ex monitis
Chaldaeorum attentaret. Tunc medio die^, tertio ante idus Octobr. foribus
pala^ii repent diductis, comitante Burrho Nero egreditur ad cohortem, quae
more mili^i^ excubiis adest, ubi monente praefecto, festis vocibu^ exceptus,
inditur lecticae. Dubitavisse quosdam ferunt resp^ctantes rogitanesque ubi
Britannicus esset? Mox^nullo in diversum auctore, quae offerrebantur secuti
sunt. Illatusquecastris Nero, and congruen^ia tempori praefatus, promisso
donativo ad^ exemplum paternae largitionis Impe^ator consalu^atur. Sententiam
militum ecuta patrum cousul^a, nec dubita^um est apud provi^cias. Tacit. Annal.
Lib. 12.
After the death of Caius Caligula, the Consuls and Senate of Rome entered into
a consultation, how they might restore the Commonwealth to her ancient
freedom, which by the Caesar's had been taken from them. So that the taking in
of an Emperor, and consequently of Claudius for Emperor, was directly against
the wills and resolution of the Consuls and Senate; yet these anciently for
many hundred years had the chief power of Government; But see the way of
Claudius his coming to the Empire; during the Inter-regnum, Claudius being
frighted with the news of Caligula's death, and fearing himself might be
enquired for upon suspicion withdrew, and hid himself behind the Hangings, or
covering of a door; where a Soldier seeing his feet, and desirous to know
what he was drew him forth, and upon knowledge of him saluted him Emperor,
though even then for fear falling down low before him. This one Soldier
brought him forth to his fellow Soldiers, who lifted him up as Emperor; and
thus while the Senate was slow in executing their purposes, and differences
grew among them, Claudius, who was sent for by the Senate to give in his
council concerning the common freedom, undertook the Empire. Thus in one
Soldier at first, and then in more, was the foundation of Claudius his
Imperial power, against the will, consultations, and endeavors of Consuls and
Senate. And for Nero (his Successor) Britannicus, who was nearer of kin to
Claudius, being his Son, was kept in by the cunning of Neroes mother, and by
the same craft Nero being brought forth to the Soldiery, was first saluted
Emperor by them. This sentence of the Soldiers was followed with the consent
of the Senate, and then it was not scrupled in the Provinces; so that the
Soldiery was also the foundation of Neroes Empire. Thus we see Rulers put by
Soldiers into that power which is said by the Scripture to be ordained of God;
and even to these Rulers men must be subject for conscience.

But passing from the Roman state to our own, sure we are that in this Nation
many persons have been settled in supreme power and authority by mere force
without title of inheritance, or just conquest. And it has been observed by
some that accurately have looked into our story, that not any three immediately
succeeding each other, come to the Crown by true lineall succession and order
of blood. Neither is there any great difficulty in finding it, until we come
to Queen Mary, whose title being by an incestuous marriage, these observers
say that Queen Elizabeth should have reigned in her stead; However, we are
clearly told by story, that five Kings on a row (of which the Conqueror was the
first) had no title at all by lineall descent and proximity of blood. The first
came in by force; The second and third had an elder Brother living when they
came to the Crown; The fourth reigned when his Predecessor had a Daughter, and
Heir living which was Mawd the Empress; The fifth being the Son of that
Empress, reigned while his Mother was alive, by whom his Title came. But
leaving these, and Edward the third who reigned in his Fathers life time, and
the three Henry's; fourth, fifth, and sixth, who reigned upon the Lancastrian
(that is a younger Brothers) Title, Let us more particularly consider Henry the
seventh; See Speed in H. 7. n. 1. and Seq.
This Henry came in with an Army, and by mere power was made King in the Army,
and by the Army; so that in the very field where he got the Victory, the Crown
was set upon his head, and there he gave Knighthood to diverse; And upon this
foundation of military power, he got himself afterward to be solemnly
Crowned at Westminster. And soon after upon authority thus gotten, he called a
Parliament, and in that Parliament was the Crown entailed upon him and his
Heirs. Thus both his Crown and his Parliament were founded upon power; As for
any right Title, he could have none; for he came from a Bastard of John of
Gaunt, which though legitimated by Parliament for common Inheritances, yet
expressly was excluded from right to the Crown. And for his wives Title, that
came in after his Kingship, and his Parliament, which before had settled the
Crown upon him and his Heirs. And he was so far from exercising authority in
her right, that her name is not used in any Laws as Queen Mary's was, both
before and after her marriage with the Spanish King. Now this and the rest who
came in by mere power without Title of inheritance, being in their opinion who
are now unsatisfied, to be held unlawful, yet the maine body of this Nation
did obey them, whilst they ruled, yea does yield subjection to their Laws to
this very day. And the learned in the Laws do continually plead, judge,
justify, and condemn according to these Laws; So that herein the very voice
of the Nation with one consent seems to speak aloud; That those whose Title
is held unlawful, yet being possessed of authority may lawfully be obeyed.

And hereunto Divines and Casuists give their concurrence; among them one that
is resolute both for Monarchy and lineall Succession, thus expresses his
judgment, both for seeking of right and justice from an usurper (whom he
calls a Tyrant, in regard of an unjust Title, not in respect of Tyranicall
oppression) and for obeying his commands. First, Dicendum est, licite subditos
ab eo (qui^y rannus jure and titulo est) jus pe^ere, quia quamvis jus and
titulum non habeat, respublica tamen tacit consemit in hoc ut civibus ipsi
Tyranno, Facto, non jure subditis, jus dicat, a^si esset competens j^dex and
^legitimus superior. Item, si mandat^ tyranni sint aequa, and justa, parendum
est. Azor. Inst. Mor. Par. 2. Lib. 11. Cap. 5. Non peceat subditus tyranni, qui
dominium and jurisdictionem alicujus di^ionis usurpavit, petendo ab eo
justitiae administrationem, etc. Si quidem dat operem ut qui pe^^at
jurisdictionem usurpando, non peccet etiam justitiae administrationem
praetermittendo; Ex Navarri manual. cap. 1^. n. 41.

Si mandata principis, alioqui Tyanni, sint aequa and justa, parendum est.
Alsted. Theol. Cas. Cap. 17.


that Subjects may lawfully seek justice of him; And secondly, that if his
commands be lawful and just, they must be obeyed. And another well esteemed in
the Reformed Churches, is of the same judgment.

Paraeus says, Civilem and ^erilem expresso verbo sanxit. Genesis 9.
That it matters not by what means or craft Nimrod, Qui sanguiuem hominis
fuderit, ejus sanguis etiam fundetur a^ homine. Non u^ique a quovis; prohibuit
enim, non occides: Sed a Magistratu divin^^us ordinato. Nec refert quibus modis
vel ar^ibus Nimrod, Ierob^am, ou^ alii regna sibi paraverint. Nam aliud est
po^estas quae a Deo est; aliud acquisitio et usus potestatis. P^rae. in Romans 13.

Potestatis Nimrodi initium fuit quidem malum, etc. Quum igitur quaeritur cui
parendum, non est spectandum qualis sit qui potestatem exercet, nec quo jare
vel in injuria, quis potestatem in vaso^it, quave ratione eam administret, sed
tantum si potestatem habeat. Si enim quis potestate ^lle^, ^am in dubitatum est
illum adeo came potestatem accepisse, unde si^e omni exce^tio ne illite
permi^^as opertet and pareas exanimo. Bucer in Romans 13.


Jeroboam, got Kingdoms to themselves; For the power is onething which is of
God, and the getting and the use of the power is another; And after: The
beginning of Nimrods power was, indeed evil, as to the getting and usurping
power, because abusing his strength, force, and wealth, he violently subbued
others, and compelled them to obey; but not the power or force wherewith he
seemed to be endued by God above others; And another more plainly. When a
question is made whom we should obey; it must not be looked at what he is that
exercises the power, or by what right or wrong he has ^nvaded the power, or
in what manner he does dispen^^ it, but only if he have power. For if any man
does excel in power, it is now out of doubt, that he received that power of
God; Wherefore without all exception thou must yield thy self up to him, and
heartily obey him.

And the same Author again; Ex Apostolo estensum christian^cum quaeritur cui
parendum, in hoc unum respiciend^m esse, quisnam ibi, u^bi ipse agit,
potestatem habeat. id. Ibid.
When a question is made to whom obedience should be given: A Christian is
taught out of the Apostle, that he should look only to this, who has the
power in that place where he lives.

Another thus, It often comes to pass, that Alians or Natives by seditions or
force invade the Commonwealth. But in any of these cases Subjects may not when
they list go about to change the form of the Commonwealth Fit frequenter ut,
vel alieni vel in^igene, (...) seditiones aut vi operta Remp invadant. At
quicquid horum sit, non est sub ditorum vel Reip. forman mutare velle pro suo
arbitrio, vel de sui principis jure seditiosius distu^a^, sed simpliciter
Praesentibus Magistratibus obe^ire debeut in omnibus quae illaesa con^cien^i^,
and salva pietate fieri possant, Gaulter in Romans 13.
nor dispute seditiously of the Right or authority of their Ruler, but should
singly obey the PRESENT Magistrates in all things which may be done without
wrong to Conscience and Piety.

And another thus, Vide^ur Apostolus voluisse tollere frivol^m hominum
curiositatem, qui saepe solent inquirere, quo jure adepti fuerint potestatem,
qui rerum potinatur. Satis qutem nobis esse debit quod praesum. Non enim
cons^enderunt sua ipsi virtute ad hoc fa^^igium sed monu domi^i sunt impositi.
Calvin in To. 13.
The Apostle seems here to go about to take away the frivolous Curiosity of
men, Nihil hic auxie dispu^andum est quo jure, quive injuria principes adepti
sint potestatem suam Illud potius agendum est, ut Magistatus Praesentes
revereamur, Haec enim Epistola scribebatur, cum Romani jam adepti^ssen^
imperium ocbis terrarum, quod eos per vim scimus occupasse, and postea
Imperatores a^^ib^s ^ihilo melio^ibus rerum summam ad se pertraxisse. Paulus
tamen sine omni exceptione praecipit obedie d^m esse magistratibus. Pet. Martyr
in Romans 13.
who often use to enquire by what right those which have command did get their
authority; But it ought to be sufficient to us, that they are in pre-eminence.
For they did not get up to his height by their own strength, but they are set
over by the hand of God. Yet another, (And all these chief pillars of the
reformed Churches) It shall not here be scrupulously disputed by what right or
by what wrong Princes have gotten their power. This rather is to be done that
we reverence the PRESENT Magistrates. For this Epistle was written when the
Romans had now gotten the Empire of the world, which we know they did possess
by force; and that afterward the Emperors by policies nothing better drew to
themselves an universal power. Yet Paul does command that Magistrates without
all exception must be obeyed.

And indeed how can it be otherwise? for when a person or persons have gotten
Supreme power, and by the same excluded all other from authority, either that
authority which is thus taken by power must be obeyed, or else all authority
and government must fall to the ground; and so confusion (which is worse then
tituler Tyranny) be admitted into a Commonwealth; And (according to the
doctrine of King James) the King being for the Commonwealth, and not the
Commonwealth for the King, the end should be destroyed for the means, the
whole for a part. If a Masters mate had thrown the Master over Board, and by
power would suffer no other to guide the Ship but himself; if the Mariners
will not obey him commanding aright for the safe guiding of the Ship, the Ship
must needs perish and themselves with it.

So that whereas some speak of ill consequences, if this Doctrine be received,
Ad pauca respicien^es e facili judicant.
they may here see worse consequences if it be not received; and wise men
should see the consequences on all sides, and judge upon the whole.

And surely whatsoever ill consequences may appear upon obeying, they appear
at more distance, but confusion and destruction come in presenty upon
disobeying. The Commonwealth is presently put unto Ungovernment and Confusion
by inobedidience; or into sedition, Attestatur hoc esse lici^um c^^n unis usus
Omnium qui sub Tyrannis and dubjis dominus degunt dum absque conscientiae
scrupulo passim om, nes ad ^yrannos and dubios dominos recurrunt, acsi essent
Domini. Caje^. Sum. Verbo Tyrannus.
civil war, yea destruction, by striving against a prevalent power.
Therefore as that which has the less ill consequences, not ours only, but
generally all Nations have given obedience to power; and both sought and
received Laws and Government from those, that have overpowred them. But indeed
the question is properly here what is lawful, and not what ill consequences
the corruption of man may work upon that which is lawful. And as to the
lawfulness, we have seen before what Scripture, Divines, Reason, and general
practice have resolved, and taught.

And whereas some speak of a time for settlement, they indeed do rather
speak for a time of unsettlement; for they will have an unsettlement first,
and a setlement after. And whereas like does produce its like; yet they would
have an unsetlement to beget a setlement. They would have confusion,
distraction, destruction to bring forth order and safety. But the former
Scriptures speak not of the future, but of the present time; not of obeying
those that shall be powers, and shall be in authority; but the powers that are,
and those that are in authority. Neither do the Casuists and Divines speak of
obedience to those that shall be settled but those that are in actual
possession of authority. Neither did our Ancestors in the former examples defer
obedience to the Kings that came in by power without Title; but gave it
presently, being presently vested and possessed of authority. Besides, let it
be considered whether that may not be called a settlement, how soon soever it
is, when there is such a way settled that men may have Justice if they will, and
may enjoy that maine end of Magistracy, to live a peaceable life in godliness
and honesty.

And indeed when one is in possession by power, and another pretends a Title,
what can the maine body of a Nation which consists of the Common People do in
this case? What right had William surnamed the Conqueror? what right (we speak
of a Right of equity) had his Son William the second, and Henry the first,
while their elder brother lived, etc. Parliaments as Kingdoms, give their
voice with power; and he who has the force does commonly carried the effect of
Right Speed in H. 4. The King ( H 7.) made speed to London as to the chief
seat and Epitome of the English Monarchy, etc. The Mayor of London and his
Fellowship received him in Violet at Ho^nesey Park; but his entrance (which
was at Shordi^ch) was honored with a very great troop of the Peers and
Nobles in his Train, etc. The whole House of Parliament concurring finally in
establishing by a solemn Act, the Crown upon him and his Heirs for ever. Id.
in H. 7.
They cannot judge of Titles; but they see who does visibly and actually
exercise power and authority. Yea even learned men, and States men have been
found ignorant of the former observations, of the not succeeding three in order
of blood since the Conquest; and then how should the Common people know it? Yet
further, even Peers, chief Cities, Parliaments, and all having to one in
every three, thus subjected themselves upon terms of power and not of right;
what can be expected but that what has been done, may or shall be done
hereafter? especially when in this present age obedience is given to the Laws
and Commands of those Princes. But some say that there are Oaths that justify
disobedience to the present Government. Surely Oaths are sacred bonds and
reverent obligements, and where they do not themselves leave or make us free,
we are not to cut or break them in pieces; Yet concerning these there are
faults on both hands: On the one side the slighting of an Oath, (and such is
the comparing it with an Almanac) which is a light as well as an unproper
comparison; except it were such an Oath as was made only for a year; But we
find some part of the Vow and Covenant to speak of all the days of our
lives, which doubtless may lie on many of the takers for many years; True it
is that the obligation of some things may end, because they can no longer be
kept, as that of the Kings person; Regula juris. Impossibilium ^ullaest oblgatio
for to impossible things there is no obligation: but will any man that
understands, and savours Religion and Piety, say that the clauses which
concern Religion and Piety are expired? Did we promise to God in our several
places and callings, to extripate Profaneness, Heresy, and Blasphemy, and to
endeavor a reformed life in our selves and ours; only till our Enemies were
overcome, and then to make an end? What were this but to say unto God, If thou will deliver us, we will be bound to thee till we are delivered and no longer?
Would this invite God to deliver us from our enemies, or rather to keep our
Enemies still in strength against us? least we being delivered from our Enemies
should not serve him in righteousness and holiness all our lives. Surely this
is too like that course of carnal Israel, Psalm. 78. 34.
of whom it is written, When he slew them, then they sought him, and they
enquired early after God; but their heart was not right with him, neither were
they steadfast in his Covenant. Much more piously and faithfully a reverend and
truly spiritual Divine; A well grounded Covenant is a sure, Mr. Carill in his
Sermon upon Nehe. 9. 38 concerning the Covenant.
a firm and an irrevocable Act. When you have such an All This ( and such you
have) as is here concentred in the Text, to lay into, or for the foundation of
the Covenant; the superstruction (is aeternitati sacrum and) must stand for
ever. October. 6. 1643


But on the other side there are other faults; such are the urging of an Oath
or Covenant against enemies, and not against friends in one and the same
Action; and if not altogether so, yet a slight and diminishing charge of it
upon one, and a vehement and aggravating charge of it upon the other. Another
fault may be, a stiff insisting on one part, and a neglect, or at least
silence in another part; as likewise when by event two parts of it come to be
inconsistent, to choose and enforce the keeping of the lighter or less
necessary part, and to give way to the loss and not keeping of the greater.
There is another, in racking an Oath or Covenant, to make it speak that which
it meant not. And here it were good to consider, whether there be any clause in
any Oath or Covenant, which in a fair and common sense forbids obedience to
the commands of the present Government and Authority, much less when no other
can be had, and so the Commonwealth must go to ruin. Quando res illa quam
quis jurame^^o confirmavit, est nimis ardua; aut quando quis qui juravit, ex
mutatione virium vel for^^ae effectu^ est parum a^^us ad id exequendum; aut
deniq, quando res juramen^o confirmata est juranti impedime^o, n^ bono publico
consulat, tunc est legitima caus^ dispensandi in jur^mento. Sayr. lib. ^. c. 8.
n. 12.
And whether it forbids obedience to the present Authority more then to Laws
that have been formerly enacted, by those which came in Authority merely by
power? If it be said that in the Oath of Allegiance, Si id quod jura mus primo
fueri^li ci^um, poste^ causis aliis intervenientibus illicitum ^i at, aut etiam
impossible, tum nullo modo conscientiam obligat. Alsted. cap: 15. n. 13.
Allegiance is sworn to the King, his Heirs, and Successors, if His Heirs be
not his Successors, how does that Oath bind? either the word Successors must
be superfluous, or else it must bind to Successors as well as to Heirs; and
if it binds not to a Successor, that is not an Heir, how can it bind to an
Heir that is not a Successor? And if you will know the common and usual sense
(which should be the meaning of an Oath) of the word Successors, you need not
so much ask of Lawyers and learned persons, Iusjurandum in foro conscientiae
semper est interpretandum juxta mentem jurantis; at inforo exteriori seu ju
diciali semper est judicandum secundum communem sensum, quem ipsa verba
reddunt, and secundum communem hominum usum.
as of men of ordinary knowledge, and demand of them, Who was the Successor of
William the Conqueror, and see whether they will not say William Rufus, and who
succeeded Richard the third, and whether they will not say Henry the seventh?
and yet (as it appears before) neither of them was Heir. So it seems in the
ordinary acception the word Successor is taken for him that actually succeeds
in Government, and not for him that is actually excluded. And as in Language
the ordinary acception of a word is to be taken for the meaning, Alsted. cap.
15 n. 13.
so that meaning is to be understood as most proper to have been taken in an
Oath. And one who has lately written for infant Baptism, according to our
Saviors rule of salt, and peace, with sharp reasons and mild language, has
these words. If one of our late Kings Sons should be crowned King of Scotland
or Ireland only, he could not be said to succeed the King of England; because
the subject of his Government in regard of latitude, is changed, and he comes
not in his Fathers room as King of England. Mr. Drew. page. 32.


Yet withal this Quaere may be added; While the Son is in the same posture in
which the Father was, how comes this Oath at this time to stand up and plead
for disobedience in regard of the Son, that was asleep and silent in regard of
the Father?

But now let us enter into the question of active obedience, See Master Aschams
Discourse (that has in it both judgment and learning) concerning possession,
part. 1. chap. 6. and sequ. and part 2. chapter 4. pa. 88.
and Acting under this present power and Government. But first let this be
premised, That this present power is in possession of the whole Land, and no
visible force to oppose or overbeare it, and so it is not like that between
David and Absalom, where David had an Army in veiw that might, and did
overcome. And next, That a course of Justice, or giving right is opened at
Westminster, and through the whole Nation; And this being the present state of
the Nation, let us examine whether it be lawful to Act in such a State? True
it is that some hold it wisdom, and some hold it duty, to be quiet, and not
to Act. But, first, it has bin proved before that obedience to such a power in
good things is lawful. Now if obedience in good things be law full, then
Acting for Justice and Order being good things, and commanded, it is lawful to
obey that command.

Secondly, if all should not Act, I think the not Actors would fall short of
their supposed and intended quietness, and the wisdom they placed in it: For
by non-Acting in the way of justice the whole (and themselves among the rest)
would lie open to Injustice spoil and destruction, and so be far from
quietness. And indeed what reason is it, that those that will not Act, because
they hold it unlawful, should expect that others should do an unlawful Act
to benefit them? And why should others give right to them that will not give
right to others?

Thirdly, It is cleared in this discourse, that those who have gotten to be
powers (though by force) yet ought to give justice to those whose Government
they have undertaken. And again, That the people may lawfully demand it. But
is it possible that one or a few persons in supreme power can distribute
justice to a whole Nation without subordinate Agents? So that to say, None may
lawfully Act under the supreme power in distributing of Justice, and
Government, were to say upon the matter, That he should give no justice, and
that the people should have no justice at all. And then how absurd is it to
teach that the people may lawfully seek justice of him, which they cannot
receive? and that he is bound to give justice, but none are allowed by whom he
may give it?

Fourthly, This Doctrine of not Acting is the very Doctrine of Levelling. For
when no man may Act to give justice, may not every man take freely from his
Neighbor, what he list, and so level the Rich with the Poor? unless this
make it unlike, because worse then Levelling, That those who have most force,
will have most; yea some all, and others nothing; and so to avoid Acting under
a supposed Tyrannical Government unto justice and order; there shall be Tyrants
in every place or parish, who shall Act to disorder and oppression, and no
property, justice, nor Government at all left amongst us. And surely I think
David out of his love to Israel would not have wished such an Estate, to Israel
under Absalom, had he the whole in possession, and himself no force on foot
to recover it; nor would he have desired such an unsettlement to procure his
settlement. And hence arises that which they call an Interpretative consent of
the people; because it is understood and supposed that every rational man does
consent, that there should be order, property and right given to every Member
of a Commonwealth under a Tyrant, rather then all to be under confusion
oppression, Robberies, and Murders.

Fifthly, Ezra 7. 25.
how could Ezra and Nehemiah justify their Acting under the Persian Monarch,
who had no right to the Crown of Judah either by blood or just conquest? Yet
Ezra was authorized by him to set Magistrates, Ezra 10. 7, 8.
fine and imprison and put to death; And he exercises authority, in making the
people of Israel to swear, and to enter into a Covenant, and in sending forth
a Proclamation to all the Children of the captivity, that they should gather
themselves together to Jerusalem; And that whosoever would not come within
three days, all his substance should be forfeited. Nehemiah Neh. 5. ^. etc.
also Acts as Governor, and rebukes the Nobles, and Rulers, and sets a great
assembly against them, because of their usury. He also called the Priests and
took an Oath to perform the promise of leaving that Usury. He acknowledges
also that he was Governor there about twelve years, and he gave his Brother
Hanani and Hanaiah Ruler of the Palace charge over Jerusalem. Neh. 7. 2.
So he did both Act himself, and others Acted under him. We find also that at
that time there were Rulers of the people that dwelt at Jerusalem, and Nehemiah
Neh. 13.
contended with the Rulers and Nobles, made Treasurers, commanded the Gates^to
be shut before the Sabbath, threatened to lay hands on the Merchants, that lay
at the Gates, smote certain of the Jews, and plucked of their hair, because
having married wives of Ashdod, their Children spoke half in the language of
Ashdod.

Sixthly, Let us hear what before these times and before our case was in being
has bin taught in point of Acting; and upon what grounds it has bin aproved.
An author eminently learned and skillful in the doctrine of lawgiving says
thus: Nullus potest exequi vel condemnare alium etiam in poena justa, nisi habe
at publicam potestatem quam Tyrannus dare non potest. Sed in hoc etiam
advertendum seu subdis^in guendum est. Nam hoc in rigore verum est, quantum ex
part Tyranni; contingit autem ut Resp. quia non potest illi resistere, toleret
illum and ab eo se gubernari sinat, and tacit consentiat, ac veli^ justitiam
per ipsum administrari propter rationem tactam, quia minus malum est per illum
gubernari, quam omnino carere justa coactione, and directio e, and ^u^c non
erit peccatum obedire etiam in dictis rebus, quia Reip. consensus supplet
defectum, potestatis Tyranni. Suarez. de Leg. lib. 3. cap. 10.
No man may punish or condemn another even with a just punishment, except he
have public power, which a Tyrant cannot give. But in this there must be a
consideration or subdistinction. For in rigor this is true as to the Tyrants
part; yet it so happens that the Commonwealth because it cannot resist him,
does tolerate him, and suffers it self to be Governed by him; and does
tacitly consent, and will that justice be administered by him, for the reason
already touched, because it is a less evil to be Governed by him, then
altogether to want just coaction and direction; and then it shall not be a sin
to obey even in the things aforesaid, because the consent of the Commonwealth
does supply the defect of the Tyrants power.

Another thus, Sententias ejus esse validas probatur. Quia ejus sententiae and
justa mandata et si non habent vim a Tyrannica potestate, habent tamen aliunde
primo and inchoative a jure Naturali, quod supposito tali rerum statu, dictat
esse obtemperandum propter bonum commune; alioqui omnia essent plena furtis e^
latro^i^ijs. Secu^^ and complete a republica, idque vel quia durante illo
statu, tacito quodam consensu dai ei authoritatem, dum vult ut ille justitiam
administret, and officio usurpato debito medo fungatur, vel potius quia tacit
approbat ejus mandata, and acta, legibus and utilitati communi consentanea, and
vul^ sententias justas quibus lites civium dirimuntur, and sontes plectantur,
esse valida^, and subditos obligare nisi enim validae essent and obligarent,
nemo nisi in speciem ob^emperaret sed quisque occulte faceret contrarium, cum
magno Reipublicae incommodo potest autem Republica hanc vim sententiis and
actis Tyranni dare, quia est singulorum superior, etiamsi Tyrannide sit
oppressa, and justas Tyranni sententias pro suis habere.
That his sentences are valid, is proved. Because his sentences, and just
commands although they have not force from a Tyrannical power, yet they have
it from elsewhere. First, and inchoatively from the law of nature, which such a
State of things being supposed, does dictate that obedience must be given for
the Common good, otherwise all will be full of Thefts and Roberies. Secondly,
and compleately from the Commonwealth; and that either because while that
State endures, it gives authority to him by a tacit consent, while it will's
that he administer justice, and use his usurped Office in a due manner, or
rather because it does tacitly approve his commands, and Acts being agreeable
to the Laws and Common good, and will's that his just sentences, whereby the
suites of the people are decided, and the guilty are punished, shall be valid
and bind the subjects; for except they were valid and did bind, no man would
obey, but only in show but every man would secretly do the contrary with a
great inconvenience to the Commonwealth. Now the Commonwealth may give this
force to the sentences, and Acts of a Tyrant, because it is superior to all
single persons, though it be oppressed with Tyranny, and may account the just
sentence of a Tyrant as its own.

Thou will ask, Petes, utrum Tyrannus peccet peccato homicidii, and teneatur
ad restitutionem, si s^ntes secundum ordinem juris interficiat aut bonis
spolier? Respondeo, negamus; Quia Respublica tacit ad hoc tribuit illi
authoritatem dum consentit and cupi^ ut hoc faciat. Le^^ius de Justitia and
Jure, lib. 2. cap. 25. Dubitat. 9.
whether a Tyrant do sin the sin of murder, and be bound to restitution, if
he put to death guilty persons, or deprive them of their goods according to
Law? I answer negatively; Because the Commonwealth does tacitly give him
authority hereunto, while it does consent, and desire, that this should be done
by him.

Thus is the authority of Acting in this case grounded upon a tacit or employed
consent, which consent is the very dictate of nature or common reason, because
it is better to have some justice then none at all, some coercive power and
Government, then that all be left to disorder, violence, and confusion. I will
shut up all with the result of a disputation more full and comprehensive, then
most I have met with on this subject. And therein I present to consideration,
First, The moment and weight of the Authors reasons. Secondly, The probability
and likelihood of the clearenesse of his reasons; bebause they seem to
proceed from a judgment clear and free from the Byas of affection. Yea his
judgment herein did swim against the stream of his affection; for he
persuades an obedience to the Government of a Governor that he loved not. And I
wish this Ingenuity and clearenesse, were at least no less amongst us.

He wrote in the reign of Queen Elizabeth to whom in the language of Rome he
gives the term of impious, etc. and takes notice of her as a Tyrant, and by
sentence of the Church turned out of all right to princely authority, yet after
some praevious Assertions concerning this subject, he comes to

A fourth Assertion. Quarta assertio.


To a Tyrant in facto esse (or possession) by Tyrannical usurping a Kingdom,
Tyrann^ in facto esse, sive quia tyrannice regnum usurpavit, sive quia
Tyranniceillud reti^et, quo jam per sententiam Ecclesiae expoliatus est, regnat
autem quia a subditis non potest repelli, tenentur cives in foro animae si
justa pr^cipiat and judicet, ^bedire.
or tyrannical holding it, being by the sentence of the Church deposed from
it, but yet governing because he cannot be repelled by the subjects, The people
are bound in Conscience to give obedience, if he command and decree things that
are just.

Having laid down this Assertion, Vt Christiani degen^es Asiae tenentur justis
Turcae, and Catholici agentes Angliae, legibus justis illius impiae Reginae
obedire: Probatur. Tenentur Cives in conscientia consentire and servare ea quae
sunt omnino necessaria suae Reip. vel simpliciter and absolute, vel saltem pro
tali statu: sed obedire Tyranno justa praecipienti quandiu repelli non potest,
and haberi legitimus princeps, est pro tali statu and tempore omnino
necessarium Rei^* ad ejus conservationem. Ergo tenentur cives illi obedire.
Mayor cum consequentia aper^a est* Minor probaiur. Primo quia cum Tyrannus ille
sit poten^ viribus, and jam pacifice dominetur, sequeretur maxima perturbatio,
and confusio in Republica non obediendo illi, and plus no^erent cives suae
Reip. non obediendo quam ipsemet Tyrannus cum justa praecipiat, sua Tyrannide.
he proceeds thus; As Christians dwelling in Asia, are bound to obey the just
laws of the Turk, and the Catholics in England, the just laws of that
Impious Queen; This is thus proved; The people are bound in conscience to
agree unto, and observe those things which are altogether necessary, to their
Commonwealth, either simply and absolutely, or at least for that State wherein
they are. But to obey a Tyrant, commanding just things as long as he cannot be
repelled, and a lawful Prince obtained, is for that State and Time altogether
necessary to the Commonwealth, for the preservation of it. Therefore the
people are bound to obey him. The Major with the consequences is manifest. The
minor is proved: First, because that a Tyrant being powerful in strength, and
now peaceably ruling, there would follow an extreme perturbation, and
confusion in the Commonwealth by not obeying him; and the people should more
hurt their Commonwealth by not obeying then the Tyrant himself, when he
commands just things, by his Tyranny.

Secondly, Secundo, quia ad bonam Reip. gubernationem maxim in rebus tam
desperatis and deploratis, expedit tanquam unicum remedium ut sit aliquis Iudex
qui componat lites and controversi as inter cives, and cui ^uno omnes obediant
aliter non possent homines tunc civiliter vivere, nec securi esse in domibus
suis, non esset hospes, ab hospite tutus, n^e vicinus a vicino; At tunc n^^
potest haberi alius judex qui i^ praeste^ nisi ille Tyrannus. Ergo cum justa
praecipiat, non solum exterius, verum etiam in conscientia tenentur, cives
obedire illi.
Because to the good Government of a Commonwealth, especially when things are
so desperate and deplorable, it is requisite, as an only remedy, that there be
a judge which should compose strifes and controversies among the people, and to
whom all then should give obedience; otherwise men in such a time could not
live civilly, nor be secure in their Houses; a lodger could not be safe from
him, with whom he lodges, nor a Neighbor from his Neighbor: But at such a
time no other judge may be had that may perform this but the Tyrant. Therefore
when he commands just things, the people are bound not only outwardly, but
even in conscience to obey him.

Thirdly, Tertio quando Tyrannus jam pacifice gubernat nec potest repel^^ esset
grave sca^dalum, and perturba^io Rep. illi non obedire. Et confirm. Hoc
interest ex communi sententia D. D. inter consensum exp essum Riep, et
interpretativum, quod expressus requiritur ut quis eligatur and instituatur
ve^us princeps, at ut subditi (...) ^antur obedi re etiam non vero principi,
sufficit interpretativus, quandoita exigit b^num commune suae Rep. quia
rationaliter* and prudenter judicantur cives consentire in necessaria suae
Reip. Sed. in hoc casu (u^constat) maxim expedit ad (...) and bonum Reip.
cives tali Tyranno obedire: Ergo per (...) sa^^m interpretativum (...) in
conscientia justis and honestis praecepis illius stare and (...)
When a Tyrant does now peacebly govern and cannot be repelled, it would be a
great scandal and perturbation to the Commonwealth not to obey him. And it is
thus proved; In the common opinion of Doctors there is this difference between
an express consent of the Commonwealth and an interpretative, that an
express consent is required to choose a person, and make him a true Prince;
But that Subjects be bound to obey, even one that is not a true Prince, an
interpretative consent is sufficient, because the public good of their
Commonwealth does require it. For rationally and prudently people are judged
to consent to those things that are necessary for their Commonwealth; But in
this case (as it is plain) it is most expedient for the peace and good of the
Commonwealth that people should obey such a Tyrant. Therefore at le^st by an
interpretative consent they are bound in conscience to perform and obey his
just and honest commands.

All these things are confirmed; First, Con^^rman^^r haec omnia prim^ ex
sacrascrip tura, ex qua and historiis constat Romanos per Tyrannidem occupasse
Iudaeam eo tempore quo Christus, and ^ Johannes Baptista praedicabant; at neque
Christus, neque Johannes neque, Apostoli docuerunt, ne illis obedirent, imo
ipse and reddidit, nec asseruit se liberiu^, quia non esset obediendum
Tyrannice imperanti; sed quia erat Filius dei and Davidis. Joan Bap. Luc. 3.
militibus quaerentibus ab ips^ (quos dubium non est quin essent milites
Romanorum) quid facerent non praecepit ut militiam desererent quasi ministri
principis Tyranni, sed hoc tantum [ut neminen concuterent, and contenti essent
stipendijs suis] ubi potius suasit stare in mili^ia Caesa^is. Pilato etiam qui
nullam authoritatem habebat nisi a Caesare, dixit Christus [non haberes in me
potestatem, etc.] Et. 1. Pet. 2. [subjecti estote sive Regi tamqua^
praeexcellenti, sive ducibus tanquam ab eo missis^] Nullus autem Rex tunc erat
nisi Caesar, neque ullus Dux nisi constitutus ab eo.
out of the sacred Scriptures, out of which and Histories it is manifest that
the Romans by Tyranny did possess Judea in that very time wherein Christ and
John Baptist did preach; But neither Christ nor John nor the Apostles did teach
that the people should not obey them, but the contrary. Christ, Matthew 22. did
teach that Triubte was to be given to Caesar, yea himself did give it. Neither
did he say, that he was free, because obedience should not be given to one that
Tyrannically Reigned, but because he was the Son of God, and of David. John
Baptist, Luke 3, when the Soldiers (which no doubt were the Soldiers of the
Romans) did ask of him what they should do, he did not command them to quit
their Soldiery as servants of a Prince that was a Tyrant, but this only that
they should do violence to no man and be content with their wages. Wherein he
did rather persuade them to continue in the service of Caesar. Moreover, Christ
said unto Pilate who had no authority but from Caesar, thou should have no
power of me, etc. and 1 Pet. 2. Be ye subject either to the King as supreme,
or unto Governors as those that are sent by him. Now there was no King then but
Caesar, nor any Governor but such as was appointed by him.

Lastly, Ad argumen^um in appositum dico judicium Tyranni ex part judicantis
esse revera usurpatum, and sententiame jus nullam, quia proxim^ causa talis
judicij and sententiae, nempe authoritas ejus est revera usurpata and nulla, ex
part verio civium esse illi obedi^ndum in conscientia tanquam justae
sententiae, and legitimo judicio, quia tenentur cives eligere minus malum
temporale, ad vi^andum majus, and per minus malum, quod est obedire illi,
vitant perturbationem suae Rep. quae esset multo majus mal^m. Tum enim quia
judicia hujus possunt quadam ratione dici judicia very judicis, qua^enus
tolerantur a Rep. per consensum interpretavum, qui suffcit ut tenantur cives
obedire illi in conscientia. Ex quo etiam sequitur, non modo ^ives debere il^i
in conscienti^ obedire, ve^um etiam tyrannum ferentem tales sententias non
peccare, quini^o peccaret nisi i^tas f^rret, quandu mu^us principis retinet,
quamvis teneatur in conscientia principatum relinquere, aut eni^i medijs
honestis ut a Rep. in suum principem eligatur. Michael Salon de justitia. (...)
jure. Quaest. 60 Art. 6.
to an Argument objecting that the judgment of a Tyrant is of his part usurped
and void because his authority is usurped he says: That nevertheles on the
peoples part they ought in conscience to obey him, if his sentence were Just
and his Judgment lawful, because the people are bound to choose a less
temporal evil to avoid a greater. By the less evil which is obeying him,
they avoid the perturbation of the Commonwealth, which would be a much greater
evil* And again, because his judgments may in some reason be called the
judgments of a true judge inasmuch as he is tolerated of the Commonwealth by
an interpretative consent, which is sufficient that the people are bound to
obey him in conscience, whence also it does follow that not only the people
ought to obey him in conscience, but that the Tyrant himself which gives such
judgments does not sin, yea rather he should sin if he did not give them, as
long as he retains the Office of a Prince, though he be bound in conscience
to leave his principality, or endeavor by honest means, that by the
Commonwealth he may be chosen for their Prince.

A taking leave of this subject.
I have (I confess) in this subject gone out of the ordinary path of my
employments in meditation and writing, but I did it occasionally out of zeal
to peace; and that which I believe to be truth; being very sorry to see well
meaning and (I hope) pious persons, by not obeying, swiftly and resolutely to
go out of the way of Peace, and (as I suppose) of truth; At least it seemed to
me a sad thing that those who had not searched the grounds of that which they
held to be truth, yet did certainly endanger the loss of peace for that which
they had not searched, and by searching found certainly to be truth. Yet I
wonder not much if truth in this point be not commonly known in this Nation,
since amongst the Protestants in this Nation for these last fourscore years
there has been little debate of it. But having gathered the substance and
sum of those grounds which in my judgment make out this truth, That it is
lawful to obey the present Government, and having showed that this truth has
been anciently held and is not newly invented to serve present turns, and
that either it may be believed, or at least not condemned, unheard and
unknown, I shall now desire leave to retire and return to my more proper
work, whereof I have so much in my hands that I cannot well expect a life now
come far into the year accounted to be the term of life should have time to
dispatch. If the grounds proposed be sound (as we have seen them thought so by
men of great judgment) I hope they will stand against all waves and winds, and
they will find Patrons who have both strength of body and mind to maintain
them; if they be proved unsound, I would not mainetaine them if I could.

FINIS.

