True Copies of the Papers which Brigadier Rookwood, and Major Lowick,
delivered to the Sheriffs of London and Middlesex, at Tyburn, April 29. 1696.
Published by Authority.

WHEREAS the Sheriff of London and Middlesex is charged in a late Printed
Paper, containing a Copy of Brigadier Rookwood's Speech, That he had long
failed of his Trust and Duty, in not Publishing the said Paper: Now the
Sheriffs of London and Middlesex do hereby declare, That when Mr. Rookwood
delivered his Paper at the Place of Execution to them, April 29. last past, the
said Mr. Rookwood did not make it his desire to them, neither did they promise
him, that his Paper should be Printed. However, they do now think fit to
publish true Copies of the several Papers delivered to them by Rookwood and
Lowick, Written with their own Hands. They also declare, That they saw the
Executioner take another Paper out of Rookwood's Pocket after he was dead,
written in a different Hand, by containing the same words with the Paper
delivered to the Sheriffs.

The Sheriffs do further decl^^e, That that Paper published soon after the
Execution of the said Criminals, Entitled, An Account of the Execution of
Brigadier Rookwood, Major Lowick, and Mr. Cranburn, at Tyburn, April 29. 1696.
was taken in Writing, Printed by their Order, and is exactly the Truth of what
passed there.

EDW. WILLS. O. BUCKINGHAM.


Brigadier ROOKWOOD's Paper.
HAving committed the Justice of my Cause, and recommended my Soul to God, on
whose Mercies, through the Merits of Jesus Christ, I wholly cast my self, I had
once resolved to dye in Silence; but second Thoughts of my Duty to others,
chiefly to my True and Liege Sovereign King James, moved me to leave this
behind me.

I do therefore with all Truth and Sincerity declare and avow, That I never
knew, saw, or heard of any Order or Commission from King James, for the
Assassinating the Prince of Orange, and Attacking his Guards; but I am
certainly informed, That he, the best of Kings, had often rejected Proposals of
that Nature when made unto him.

Nor do I think he knew the least of the particular Design of the Attacking the
Guards at his Landing, so much talked of, in which I was engaged as a Soldier
by my immediate Commander, much against my Judgment; but his Soldier I was,
and as such, I was to obey and act according to Command.

These twelve Years I have served my true King and Master, King James, and
freely now lay down my Life in his Cause. I ever abhorred Treachery, even to an
Enemy: If it be a guilt, to have complied with what I thought, and still think
to have been my Duty, I am guilty; no other guilt do I own.

As I beg of all to forgive me, so I forgive all from my heart, even the Prince
of Orange, who as a Soldier ought to have considered my Case, before he signed
the Warrant for my Death. I pray God may open his Eyes, and render him sensible
of the much Blood from all Parts crying out against him, so to prevent a
heavier Execution hanging over his Head, than what he inflicts on me.

Amb. Rookwood.


Major LOWICK's Paper.
In the Name of the Most Holy Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Amen.
IN the first place, I dye in the Religion I was Baptized, (viz.) Roman
Catholic, and humbly beg the Prayers of all Good People for a happy
Resurrection, and of all Catholics for the good of my Soul. As for being
engaged in this for which I dye, it was never so positive that I had a Horse,
from the beginning to the very last, nor never see any so allotted for me, or
the two Men I was to provide, as was sworn again me at my Trial; nor had I any
on that account; nor was I at any of their Meetings when they settled any such
thing: And as for any Order or Commission from King James, I never see any
since I came last into England, which is now about five years; and I am
confident, none that knows King James, will believe he would give any such
Order.

Indeed I must confess, I believed King James was a coming to Assert his own
Right; and I should, if on Shore, have done any thing in my power to have
assisted him, and in order to that, I should have been glad to have a Horse,
but never had any.

And as for being concerned in any Bloody Affair, I never was in my Life, but
have done my endeavor to prevent, as much as I could, on all occasions; and if
the Killing the most miserable Creature in the World (or greatest Enemy) would
now save my Life, Restore the King, and make me one of the greatest Men in
England, I would first choose to dye, because against the Law of God.

If any who are now Sufferers on this account, think I have been too forward,
and a Promoter of this Design, I do now declare it was never my Inclination to
do any rash thing. However, I beg their Pardons, and of all the World I have
offended, either in Thought, Word, or any Action whatsoever, and do freely
forgive my Enemies, and hope through the Mercy of my Savior Jesus Christ, to
have Remission of all my Sius. Good God preserve the King, Queen, Prince, and
Princess, and all that Royal Blood of Stewards, and may England never want one
of that Direct Line to Govern them, and make them once more happy. I have had
the Honor to serve my Royal Master in several Commissions, and the last as
Major, and strive ever to serve him to the best of my Power, and ever to be
Just to those who I had the Honor to Command. Lord Jesus into thy Hands I
Recommend my Spirit! O Jesus receive my Soul!

Robert Lowick.


London: Printed for John Lawrence, and William Rogers; at the Angel in the
Poultrey, and at the Sun against St. Dunstan's Church in Fleetstreet. 1696.


