Medicus Medicatus: OR THE PHYSICIANS RELIGION CURED, BY A LENITIVE OR GENTLE
POTION: With some ANIMADVERSIONS upon Sir Kenelme Digbie's OBSERVATIONS on
Religio Medici.

By ALEXANDER ROSS.

LONDON, Printed by James Young, and are to be sold by Charles Green, at the
Sign of the Gun in Ivie-lane. Anno Dom. 1645.

TO MY WORTHY AND EVER HONORED FRIEND, Mr. EDWARD BENLOWES, ESQUIRE.
SIR,
TO satisfy your desire, I have endeavored, so far as the shortness of
time, the distractions of my mind, and the want of Books would give me leave,
in this place of exile, to open the mysteries of this Treatise, so much cried
up by those, whose eyes pierce no deeper then the superficies; and their
judgments, then the outsides of things. Expect not here from me Rhetorical
flourishes; I study matter, not words: Good wine needs no bush. Truth is so
amiable of her self, that she cares not for curious dressing: Where is most
painting, there is least beauty. The Gentleman, who at last acknowledges
himself to be the Author of this Book, ^his ^eface.
tells us, that many things in it are not to be called unto the rigid test of
reason, being delivered Rhetorically: but, as I suspect that friendship, which
is set out in too many Verbal Complements; so do I that Religion, which is
trimmed up with too many Tropicall pigments, and Rhetorical dresses. If the
gold be pure, why fears it the Touchstone? The Physician will try the
Apothecaries drugges, ere he make use of them for his Patients body; and
shall we not try the ingredients of that Religion, which is accounted the
physic of our souls? I have no leisure nor mind here to expatiate my self: a
sparkle of the public flame has taken hold on my estate; my avocations are
diverse, my Books far from me, and I am here Omnibus exhaustus pene casibus,
omnium egenus: Therefore accept these sudden and extemporary Animadversions, so
earnestly desired by you, as a testimony of his service and love to you, who
will always be found

Your servant to command, Dum res, and aetas, and Sororum Fila trium patiuntur
atra, A. R.

The Contents of the chief things briefly handled here in this Book, are
these:
1 IF the Papists and we are of one faith. 2. If it be lawful to join with
them in prayers in their Churches. 3. If Crosses and Crucifixes are fit means
to excite devotion. 4. If it be fit to weep at a Procession. 5. If we owe the
Pope good language. 6. If we may dispute of Religion. 7. If the Church at all
times is to be followed. 8. Of the souls immortality. 9. Of Origen's opinion
concerning the damned. 10. Of prayer for the dead. 11. Of seeing Christ
corporally. 12. If the soul can be called man's Angel, or Gods body. 13. Of
Gods wisdom and knowledge. 14. How Nature is to be defined. 15. If Monsters
are beautiful. 16. If one may pray before a game at Tables. 17. Of judicial
Astrology. 18. Of the brazen Serpent. 19. Of Eliah's miracle of fire. Of the
sire of Sodom. Of Manna. 20. If there be Atheists. 21. If man has a right
side. 22. How America was peopled. 23. If Methusalem was longest lived. 24. If
Judas hanged himself. Of Babels Tower. Of Peter's Angel. 25. If miracles be
ceased. 26. If we may say, that God cannot do some things. 27. If he denies
Spirits, who denies Witches. 28. If the Angels know our thoughts. 29. If the
light be a spiritual substance, or may be an Angel. 30. If the Heavens be an
immateriall world. 31. If Gods presence be the habitation of Angels. 32. How
they are ministering spirits to us. 33. If creation be founded on
contrarieties. 34. If the soul be ex traduce. 35. Of Monsters. 36. If the body
be the souls instrument. 37. If the seat of Reason can be found in the brain.
38. If there be in death any thing that may daunt us. 39. If the soul sleeps
in the body after death. 40. If there shall be any judicial proceeding in the
last day. 41. If there shall be any signs of Christ's coming. 42. If Antichrist
be yet known. 43. If the natural form of a plant lost can be recovered. 44.
If beyond the tenth Sphere there is a place of bliss. 45. Of Hellfire, and
how it works on the soul. 46. Of the local place of Hell. 47. The souls of
worthy Heathens where. 48. Of the Ch^rches in Asia and Africa. 49. If we can
be confident of our salvation.
The CONTENTS of the second Part.
1 OF Physiognomie and Palmestry. 2. If friends should be loved before parents.
3. If one should love his friend, as he does his God. 4. If original sin is
not washed away in baptism. 5. Of Pride. 6. If we should sue after knowledge.
7. If the act of coition be foolish. 8. Evil company to be avoided. 9. If the
soul was before the elements.
The CONTENTS of the ANIMADVERSIONS.
1 IF the condition of the soul cannot be changed, without changing the
essence. 2. How the light is actus perspicui. 3. If the first matter has an
actual existence. 4. If matter, form, essence, etc. be but notions. 5.
Judicial Astrology impious, and repugnant to Divinity. 6. If the Angels know
all at their creation. 7. If the light be a solid substance. 8. If the soul
depends on the body. 9. If terrene souls appear after death. 10. Departed
souls carry not with them affections to the objects left behind. 11. If slain
bodies bleed at the sight of the murderer. 12. How God is the cause of
annihilation, and how the creature is capable of it. 13. If our dust and ashes
shall be all gathe^ed together in the last day. 14. If the same identicall
bodies shall rise ^gaine. 15. If the form, or the matter gives nu^ericall
individuation. 16. If the matter, without form, has actu^ll being. 17. If
identity belong to the matter. 18. If the body of a child and of a man be ^he
same. 19. Of some Similies, by which identicall ^esurrection seems to be
weakened. 20. If grace be a quality, and how we are ^ustified by grace.
I Have perused these Animadver^^ons, entitled, Medicus Medicatus; an^ those
likewise of Sir Kenelme Digbie^ themselves also animadverted on b^ the same
Author: and finding then learned, sound and solid, I allo^ them to be printed
and published that many others may receive the same satisfaction, content and
delight in reading of them, which profess my self to have enjoyed i^ their
perusal.

John Downame^

Medicus Medicatus.
THough the Author desires that his Rhetoric may not be brought to the test
of reason, yet we must be bold to let him know, that our reason is not given to
us in vain: shall we suffer our selves to be wilfully blind-folded? shall we
shut our eyes, that we may not see the traps and snares said in our ways? he
would have us sleep securely, that the envious man may sow tares among the
good corn: latet anguis in herba; all is not gold that glisters; it were
strange stupidity in us, to break down^ our walls, and let in the Grecian
Horse, and not (with Laacon) try what is within him. Aut hoc inclusi ligno
occultantur Achivi,
Aut haec in nostros fabricata est machina muros.
But now to the matter: (...). 3.
First [ He tells us, that between us and the Church of Rome there is one
faith] then belike he will have us believe with the Romanists, that there be
more Mediators then Christ, that his body is not contained in Heaven, but
every where is newly created of bread; that the Saints are the objects of our
prayers, that the Popes traditions are of equal authority with Scripture, that
Apocryphal books are Canonical, that we may merit both of congruity and
condignity, yea supererogate; that we may pray to and adore Images, and too
many more of these dangerous positions must we believe, if our faith be all one
with that of Rome: this may be indeed religio Medici, the religion of the House
of Medicis, not of the Church of England.

Secondly, Sect
[ He is not scrupulous in defect of our Churches to enter Popish Churches, and
pray with Papists; for though the Heathen temples polluted the Israelites, yet
the Popish impieties are not such as pollute their temples, or our prayers made
in them] Observe here first, that his words imply a necessity of praying in
Churches, whereas Christ bids us pray in our chambers; and the Apostle wills us
to lift up pure hands in every place: Moses his prayer was heard as well on the
red-sea-shore, as Aarons was in the tabernacle; and Job was heard as well on
the dunghill, as Solomon in the Temple. God is not now tied to Mount Sion or
Garizim. Secondly, to pray with Papists, is a countenancing and a confirming of
their Idolatry. Thirdly, it is a scandal to the weaker brethren, and woe to
him by whom scandal comes. Fourthly, it argues notorious dissimulation and
hypocrisy; and we know what simulata sanctitas is. Fifthly, he that prays
with them, must say what they say, Salve regina, and Ave crux, spes unica, etc.
or else he prays not with them, though he be with them. Sixthly, Popish
Churches, being actually employed about Idolatry, do no less pollute and
profane, then the Heathen Temples did; because Popish Idolatry is no less (if
not more) hurtful and impious, then Heathen; for it is grosser Idolatry to
worship Images, the work of men's hands, then to adore the Sun and Moon, the
work of Gods hands. I read of four sorts of Idolatry: 1. Hermeticall, which
is the worship of Images: 2. Poetical, the worship of deified men: 3.
Physical, the worship of the great Platonic animal, the world, or the parts
thereof: 4. Metaphysicall, the worship of Angels, or other created spirits: all
these sorts of Idolatry are practiced by Papists, except the third.

^ect. 3.
Thirdly, [ At the sight of a Cross or Crucifix he can dispense with his hat,
but scarce with the thought or memory of his Savior.] I will not blame him to
remember his Savior as often as he can; but then I would have him remember,
that our Savior has not instituted a painted or carved Cross and Crucifix to
bring us in remembrance of him; but has left us his Word and Sacraments; other
devices are but will worship. Secondly, the sight of a Crucifix adored, should
rather excite his indignation then his devotion. When Moses and Ezechia saw the
golden Calfe and brazen Serpent abused, we read not of their devotion, but of
their just indignation: a wooden cross is but a wooden remembrancer of
Christ; and silence at the sight of Idolatry, is a secret consent: and how can
any be devout in that wherein God is dishonored?

Fourthly, [ At a Procession he has wept, Sect.
when his consorts have laughed, blind with opposition and prejudice.] The
difference only is, that they played the part of Democritus, but the physician
of Heraclitus: now which of these are most blind with prejudice? he that laughs
at the folly of superstitious Processions, or he that weeps out of a
preposterous devotion? But why, Sir, do you weep at such a sight? Is it out of
pity, to see such folly? if so, I commend your weeping; but that is not the
cause of your sorrow, as appears by your Book: Is it then, because you call to
remembrance Christ's sufferings? but as he told the women of Jerusalem, so I
tell you, Weep not for him, but for your self: weep that you have not the
heart and Christian courage to reprove such Idolatry; for, by countenancing of
it with your tears, and not reproving of it with your words, you make it your
own: amici vitia si feras, facis tua.

(...). 3.
Fifthly, [ You think it uncharitable to scoff the Pope, whom, as a temporal
Prince, we owe the duty of good language.] First, how came he to be a temporal
Prince? Sure he, whose successor he claims himself to be, said, that his
Kingdom was not of this world; and refused a temporal Crown when it was
profer'd him, and told his Apostles, that they should not bear rule as the
lords of the Nations did: Non monstrabunt, opinor, ubi quisquam Apostolorum
judex sederit hominum, etc. Saint Bernard will tell you, that the Apostles
never affected such principality. If you allege Constantins donation, I will
remit you to those who have sufficiently demonstrated the forgery of it.
Secondly, we give him no worse terms then Christ gave Herod and the Rabbis
of his time; calling the one a Fox, the others hypocrites, painted tombs,
wolves in sheeps clothing. Thirdly, those which you call popular scurrilities
and opprob^ious scoffs, are [ Antichrist, man of sin, whore of Babylon:] but
these are the terms which the Scripture gives him. Fourthly, I confess [ it
is the method of charity to suffer without reaction] in particular wrongs, but
not when Gods glory is in question. Christ prayed for those that persecuted
him, but whipped them that dishonored his Fathers House. To suffer God to be
wronged, and not to be moved, is not charity, but luke-warmnesse or stupidity.
Fifthly, we give the Pope no other language, then what he has received of his
own party. Victor was checked by Irenaeus for excommunicating the Eastern
Churches. (...) in (...)
Arnulphus Bishop of Orleans, in the Council of Rhemes, calls the Pope
Antichrist: not to speak of Ioachimus Abbas, the Waldenses, Wickliffe, and many
more, who give him the same title. Sixthly, how many Popes have justly deserved
these titles, if you look on their flagitious lives, and heretical doctrine,
that not without cause Ralph Urbin painted the two chief Apostles with red
faces, as blushing at the foul lives of their successors. What duties of good
language do we owe to Zepherinus a Montanist, to Marcellinus an Idolater,
Liberius an Arian, Anastasius a Nestorian, Vigilius an Eutychian, Honorius a
Monothelite, Sylvester a Necromantick, John the 23. that denied the
resurrection, and others? What shall I speak of Sylvester the second, Benedict
the ninth, John the 20. and 21. Gregory the seventh, etc. who gave themselves
to Satan and Witchcraft? I will say nothing of their Apostasies, Idolatries,
Whoredoms, Blasphemies, Cruelties, Simonie, Tyranny, etc.

(...). 6.
1. [ You have no Genius to disputes in Religion] neither had Mahomet to
disputes in his Alchoran: it were well, if there were no occasion of dispute;
but, without it, I see not how against our learned adversaries we should
maintain the truth. If there had been no dispute against Arius, Nestorius,
Eutychus, Macedonius, and other Heretics, how should the truth have been
vindicated? Not to dispute against an He^etick, is not to fight against an
enemy: Shall we suffer the one to poison our ^oules, and the other to kill our
bodies, without resistance?

2. [ In Divinity you love to keep the road] so did not Eliah in his time,
Sect. 6
nor Christ and his Apostles in theirs: If the road be infested with thieves,
holes or precipices, you were better ride about; the broad way is not still the
best way.

3. [ You follow the great Wheel of the Church, by which you move: Sect. 6
] but this Wheel ^s sometime out of order. Had you been a member of the Hebrew
Church, when that worshipped the Calfe, I perceive you would have moved with
her, and danced ^o her pipe: Was it not better to follow the private dictats of
Christ and his Apo^tles, then to move with the great Wheel of ^he Jewish
Church? When the whole world groaned and wondered, that she was made Arian;
was it not safer to steer ones course after the private pole of Athanasius his
spirit, then to move with the great Wheel of the Arian Church? Had you lived
in that time, when the Woman, who had the Eagles wings, was forced to fly unto
the wilderness, being pursued by a flood out of the Dragons mouth; had you (I
say) then lived, would not you rather have followed her, then stay at home, and
worship Christ's Image with the same adoration of (...) nay, worship the Cross
with the same that Christ himself is worshipped? You cannot be ignorant how
disordered the motion was of the great Wheel of the Jewish Church in the days
of Elijah, Manasses, and Hosea. Christ tells us, that when he comes again,
he will scarce find faith upon the earth; how then will the Churches great
Wheel move?

^ect. 7.
[ Your greener studies, you say, were polluted with the Arabians heresy, that
men's souls perished with their bodies, but should be raised again. This
opinion, you think, Philosophy has not thoroughly disproved; and you dare not
challenge the prerogrative of immortality to your soul, because of the
unworthiness, or merits of your unworthy nature.] First, Quo semel est imbuta
recens, servabit odorem
Testa diu: --
your vessel retains yet the sent of that liquor, with which at first it was
seasoned. Secondly, if you have forgot, read over again Plato, and you shall
find, In T^maeo Philebo. in de any c. 4. t. and 66*
that Philosophy can thoroughly prove the souls immortality: read also
Aristotle. Will you have reasons out of Philosophy? take these: 1. The soul is
of an heavenly and quintessentiall nature, not of an elementary. 2. The soul
is a simple substance, not compounded of any principles* therefore can be
resolved unto none: Now, if it were compounded, it could not be actus, (...),
and principium. 3. As the soul has neither matter nor form in it, so neither
are there in it any contrarieties: now all generation and corruption are by
contraries. This is the reason why Philosophy denies any generation or
corruption in the Heavens, because they are void of contrarieties. 4. It is a
Maxim in Philosophy, Quod secundum se alicui convenit, est ab eo inseparabile;
therefore life is inseparable from the soul, because it lives by it self, not
by another, as the body does, or by accident, as the souls of beasts do. 5.
Men's souls have subsistence by themselves, not by their composita, as
accidents, and the forms of beasts have; which is the cause of their decay. 6.
The soul has a natural desire to immortality, which if it should not enjoy,
that desire were given to it from God in vain: At Deus and Natura nihil
faciunt frustra. 7. If the soul perish, it must be resolved to nothing; for it
cannot be resolved unto any principles, as not being made of them: if some
thing can be resolved unto nothing, then some thing was made of nothing; but
Philosophy denies this; therefore it must needs deny that, or the corruption of
the soul, and consequently, it holds the souls immortality. I could allege
many testimonies of Heathens, to prove how they believed the immortality of the
soul, but that I study brevity. Thirdly, let not the merits of our unworthy
nature deter us from challenging the souls immortality; for the evil Angels
have merited worse then we, and yet they cease not for that to be im^ortall.
Though by sin we have lost ori^inall righteousness, or supernatural ^race;
yet we have not lost the essential ^roperties of our natures: and, indeed,
wic^ed men would be glad, that their souls were as mortal as their bodies;
for they ^now, that the merits of their unworthy natures deserve torments,
rather then sleep or rest: therefore this your Arabian opinion is not grounded
upon Philosophy, but rather upon Pope John the 20. his heresy, for which he
was condemned by the Divines of Paris.

Your second error was that of Origens [That God would after some time release
the damned souls from torture. Sect. ^
] S. Austin shows how pernicious this opinion of Origens is; for it opens a
gap to all profaneness, it destroys Gods justice, which cannot be satisfied
without eternity of pain, being the person offended is eternal, and the will
of the sinner in offending is eternal, if he could live eternally: Voluisse^t
reprobi, s^ potuissent, sine fine vivere, ut possent sine fine peccare; I take,
these are the words of Gregory the Great: Besides, this opinion i^ quite
repugnant to the Scripture, which tells us of a worm that never dies, of a
fir^ that is never quenched; of the devil, beast, and false prophet, which
shall be tormented for ever, night and day. Again, if the wicked shall have an
end of their torments, why may you not as well think, that the Saints shall
have an end of their joys? But it is good to be wise with sobriety, and not to
make God more merciful then the Scripture makes him: it is suf^^cient that God
has freed some of Adams race from eternal fire, whereas he might have damned
all; his mercy is to be regulated by his own wisdom, not by our conceits. If
melancholy natures are apt to despair, when they think of eternal fire, let
them be comforted with the hopes of eternal bliss: therefore, as Austin of
Origin* so may I say of all his followers, Tanto errant perversius, quanto
videntur de Deo sentire clementius.

(...). 7.
[ Your third error, whereunto you were inclined from some charitable
inducements, was prayer for the dead] If the dead, for whom ^ou prayed, were in
heaven, your prayers ^ere needless; for there is fullness of joy and pleasures
for evermore: but if these ^ead were in hell, your prayers were fruit^esse; for
from thence is no redemption. ^econdly, if you inclined to pray for the ^ead,
you did necessarily incline to the ^pinion of Purgatory, for that depends on
^his; and so you were injurious to the ^loud of Christ, which has purged us
from ^ll sin; to the merit and satisfaction of Christ, to the grace of God
and justifying Faith. Thirdly, you had no ground in Scripture, or any warrant
from the ancient Church in her purer times, to pray for ^he dead: there was
indeed a commemo^ation of their names, and a meeting of Christians at the place
where the Martyrs ^uffered; but there was no praying either ^o them, or for
them, but only a desire that other Christians might be like them; and their
names were rehearsed, that they ^ight not be obliterated by silence, and that
posterity might know they were in ^lisse, and that thanks might be given to God
for them; that the living might show their charity to them, and might be
excited to an holy emulation of their virtues; (...), (...). lib. ^. cont.
(...). c.
(...), ad acuendam charitatem, and in illos quos imitari possumus, et in illum
quo adjuvante possumus. This then was the better way, to be remembered by
posterity, and not by praying to them, as afterward, when superstition crept by
degrees into the Church.

You have a piece of Rhetoric, ill becoming a Christian physician, (...). 9.
[ You bless your self, and are thankful, that you never saw Christ nor his
Disciples.] Was it because he or they, by curing all diseases freely, would
have hindered your practice? I am sure, Saint Luke, a physician, was not of
your mind, who was an inseparable companion of Saint Paul. Did not many Kings
and Prophets desire to see that which you slight, and could not see it? It was
one of Austins wishes, to see Christ in the flesh. Old Simeon was so over-joyed
with that sight, that he desires to depart in peace, with a song in his mouth.
The three Wisemen were never so wise, as in undertaking so long a journey to
see Christ. It seems you would not have taken the pains with Zacheus, to
climb up a Sycomore tree to see Christ; but he lost nothing by it: for he
that desired to see Christ, was seen by him, and rewarded with salvation. The
^oore Hemoroisse got more good by one touch of Christ's garment, then by all the
physic she had received from those of your profession. [ You would not be one
of Christ's patients in that nature, as you say, for fear your faith should be
thrust upon you.] It Is well you are of so strong a faith, that you need no such
helps; but presume not too much with Peter, to walk on the sea; without Christ's
help you will sink: I will pray with the blind man, I believe, Lord, help my
unbelief.

[ You had as leive we tell you, Sect.
that the soul is man's Angel, or the body of God, as (...), that is, the
first ac^ and perfection of the body.] It seems here by your own confession,
you love to humor your fancy; for otherwise you cannot deny the soul to be
the first act and perfection of the body, whereas no man can conceive* that the
soul should be an Angel, except you will follow Origens opinion, that souls
and Angels are of the same species: which is absurd; seeing the one are made to
subsist without bodies, so are not the other: the one are intellective, the
other rational substances. The Schools will tell you, that the Angels differ
specifically one from another, how then can they and the souls of men differ
only numerically? But this will not relish with you, who loves allegorical
descriptions better then metaphysicall definitions. But tell us how you
conceive the soul to be Gods body: Has God a body? seeing he is free from
all composition, both of essence and existence, of nature and personalty, of
gender and difference; in whom can be no corporiety, because no matter; without
which a body can no more be, then a dream without sleep, or bread without meat
says Scaliger. Now, if any matter were in God* then there must be in him a
passive possibility, and quantity also, and distinction of parts, all which
essentially follow the matter. Besides, God and our souls must make but one
compound; and so God and the creature is but one ^ompounded substance: And
whereas the ^ompound is posterior to the parts com^ounding, it must follow,
that God must (...) after our souls, and must be subject to ^^me cause; for
every compound has a ^^use of its composition. What a strange ^od does your
allegorical description de^ypher to us? Were you not better admit (...)
metaphysicall definition of the soul, to ^it, actus primus corporis naturalis
organici ^^tentia vitam habentis, then such a wild ^^ncie, that anima est
corpus Dei? You were (...) good speak out in plain terms with ^lato, and tell
us, that the world is a great ^^imal, whereof God is the soul.

[ You say that God is wise, Sect. 13
because he know^^h all things; and he knows all things, because (...) made
them all.] But I say, that God ^^oweth all things, because he is wise; for
(...) wisdom is not like ours: ours is got (...) knowledge and long
experience, so is (...) Gods, whose wisdom and knowledge (...) co-eternall;
but in priority of order, ^is wisdom precedes his knowledge. We ^now first the
effects of things and con^usions by discourse* and then come to the knowledge
of the principles, which we (...) wisdom: but God knows the principle^ and
causes of things simplici intuitu, an^ immediately* being all in himself; the
effects and conclusions he knows in the^^ causes and principles. Secondly,
Go^ knows not all things, because he mad^ them all, but he made them,
because (...) knew them; for he knew them before (...) made them: he knew them
from eternity he made them in time, and with time. Again, is there nothing
that God known but what he made? He knows himself he knows those notions
of our mind which we call entia rationis, he knows non^entities, and he knows
evil; and yet these he never made, nor will make.

^ect. 16.
[ You define not nature with the Schools, the principle of motion and rest;
but a straight an^ regular line, etc.] Indeed, this is not to define, but to
overthrow a good definition the end of which is, to bring us to the knowledge
of the things defined: therefore Aristotle in his Topics will have us to avoid
Metaphors, which cast a mist upon the thing defined; every Metaphor being ^ore
obscure then proper words. But I ^ee you delight in such fancies; for you
^efine light, to be the shadow of God: I ^hink Empedocles his definition would
^lease you well, who defines the sea to be ^he sweat of the earth; and Plato
defines the ^oles to be the little feet, on which the great animal of the world
moves it self. Such definitions are good for women and ^hildren, who are
delighted with toys; wise men search into the causes and na^ures of things.
But is not Nature a princi^le of motion and rest? No, say you: What then? [ A
straight line, a settled course, Gods hand and instrument.] Is not ^his
obscurum per obscurius? Nature is not a ^ine, for it is no quantity: nor is it
like a ^ine; for these are entities too remote to make any similitude between
them. Nature is as like a line, as the ten Plagues of Egypt were like the ten
Commandments; a ridiculous similitude. And why is Nature rather a straight,
then a circular line? We see the world is round, the motions of the heavens and
stars are circular, the generation and corruption of sublunary bodies is also
circular; the corruption of on^ being still the generation of another: snow
begets water, and water snow; the river^ return to the sea, from whence they
flow -- Redit labor actus in orbem. And what say you to the circulation o^ the
blood in our bodies? Is not Nature then a circular, rather then a straight
line* Again, Nature is not a settled course, bu^ in the works of Nature there
is a settled and constant course; if you will speak properly, and like a
Philosopher, which you love not to do. And suppose we admit* that
metaphorically Nature is the hand of God, and an instrument; yet it is not such
an instrument, as the hammer is to the house, which cannot move it self: but
as the fire was to the Chaldeans, and the red sea to the Egyptians; for the one
of it self burned, the other of it self drowned, and moved downwards to its
own place, without an external agent: Otherwise you must say, that God burned
the Chaldeans, and God drowned the Egyptians, and so you will make God both
fire and water. Nay, if Nature does not work, and produce its immediate
effects, but God in Nature; then you may say, It is not the fire, but God that
rosts your meat, and extracts your physical spirits and quintessences: [For
you will not have Gods actions ascribed to Nature, lest the honor of the
principal agent be devolved upon the instrument.] And what else is this, but,
with Plato, to make this world a great animal, whereof God is the soul?
Principio coelum ac terras, camposque liquentes,
Lucentemque globum lunae, titaniaque astra
Spiritus intus alit, totamque infusa per artus
Men's agitat molem, and magno se corpore miscet:
Inde hominum, pecudumque genus, vitaeque volantum,
Et quae marmoreo fert monstra sub aequore pontus,
Igneus est ollis vigor, etc.
Now; if Nature be not the principle of motion, what is that which moves or
alters the water from cold to heat, when it is on the fire? Is it not the
nature of the fire? Again, is not form and matter the nature of things? but
these are causes, and causes are principles of motion. Do no^ you know, that
the form actuates the Compositum, and restraines the extravagancie of the
matter? Does not the matter receive the form, and sustain it? but to actuat^,
restrain, receive and sustain are motions, of which you see Nature is the
principle, except you will deny the two internal causes of things; but so you
must deny generation and corruption, composition and mixture in Nature, which
(I think) you will not do, as you are a Physician.

(...). 16.
You say [ that there is in monsters a kind of beauty, for that the irregular
parts are so contrived, that they become more remarkable then the principal
fabric.] It is not their beauty, but their monstrosity and irregularity that
makes them remarkable; for the eye is as soon drawn with strange and uncouth,
as with beautiful objects; the one to admiration and stupiditie, the other to
delight: A woman, as beautiful as Venus, will not draw so many eyes, as if she
were ^orne with a dogs head, and a fishes tail.

[ It Is not (you say) a ridiculous devotion to say a prayer before a game at
Tables. Sect.
] I think ^t is profanation, and taking of Gods Name in vain: For, what do
you pray for? that God would prosper your game, to win your neighbour^ money, to
which you have no right? If Abraham durst scarce ^ntercede to God for the
preservation of five populous Cities, how dare you be so bold with him, as to
solicit him to assist you in your idle, foolish and sinful desires, and, in
diverse respects, unlawful recreations?

[ You will not have us labor to confute judicial Astrology; for, Sect.
if there be a truth therein, it does not injure Divinity.] This is as much as
if you would say, Let us not labor to resist the Devil; for, if he loves our
salvation, he does not injure us. If there were truth in that Art, we would
not confute it; but we see there is so much deceit, vanity and impiety in it,
that Councels, Canons, civil and municipall Laws, and Gods Word condemn it:
therefore we confute it* You had better then in plain terms said, that
Mercury does not dispos^ us to be witty, nor Jupiter to be wealthy then to tell
us, [ that if Mercury disposes (...) to be witty, and Jupiter to be wealthy,
you wi^^ thank God that has ordered your nativity unto such benevolent
aspects.] I know the Star were made to be signs, to measure time to warm and
illuminate, but not to giv^ wealth and wit; promotion comes neithe^ from East
nor West, but from the Lord* It Is he that gives and takes, says Job: It Is he
that fills the hungry, and sends the r^c^ empty away, says the Virgin. His
wisdom has wealth and honor in her left hand* Solomon went not to Mercury,
but to God for wisdom. Was Abraham, ^saac, Jacob, and other rich men in
Scripture, borne under Jupiter? How disposes he us to be wealthy? Passively?
that is, to be capable of wealth, or willing to take it, when it is profer'd
us? then I think, the most men in the world are borne under Jupiter: For, Quis
nisi mentis inops -- Who will refuse wealth, when profer'd, except very few?
Or, disposes he us actively? that is, makes he us fit to raise our own
fortunes? Surely, whereas there be ma^^ ways to attain wealth; wit in some,
learning in others, industry in others, boldness, with hazzarding of their
lives, and vigilancie and pains in others: Again, oppression, robbery,
theeving, lying, and many other ways there be of getting wealth, you must make
Jupiter the cause of all these means: But if he can make us rich, what need
we pray to our heavenly Father for our daily bread? You were as good tell us
of the goddess Pecunia, of the god Aesculanus, and his son Argentarius,
worshipped among the Romans, for being the authors of money, brass and silver,
that if they dispose wealth on us, we will thank the Supreme giver for it, not
them, as to call Mercury and Jupiter benevolent aspects, because they dispose
us to be wealthy and witty.

[ You confess, Sec^
that the Devil would dissuade your belief from the miracle of the brazen
Serpent, and make you think, that wrought by sympathy, and was but an Egyptian
trick.] It seems he dealt otherwise with you then with the Ophit heretics;
he persuaded them that this was a true miracle; and tha^ therefore Serpents
should be worshipped: he would persuade you that this was no miracle, but an
Egyptian trick. Secondly, he might have more easily persuaded you, that the
Egyptians and other Nations, from the report of this miracle, learned their
worshipping of Serpents, then that Moses learned this erecting of the Serpent
from the Egyptians. Thirdly, here could be no sympathy either between the
disease and matter of the Serpent* which was brass, (being there was brass
enough in the Tabernacle, with looking on which their stings might have been
cured:) or between the figure of the Serpent and the wound; for the figure,
being a quality and artificial, could not be the subject of sympathy* which is
a hid virtue, having always a natural substance for the subject of it: and
seeing that sympathies and antipathies follow not the matter of things, and
therefore are not elementary qualities, but the specificall ^orme, there could
be no such quality in that Serpent, having no other essential form but of
brass, which has no such sympathy, as to cure an inflammation by the bare
look on it afar off. Fourthly, where there is a sympathy between two bodies,
there is a delight and an attraction of the one to the other. Rhabarb, by
sympathy, draws choler to it; but what delight or attractive virtue was there
in an artificial brazen Serpent, to draw out the venom of a wound? Fifthly,
where cures are performed by sympathy, there is a touching of the thing curing,
and the thing cured: as Rhododendrum, which kills Asses, being eat by them;
cures men of the bitings of Serpents, being applied to them. Sixthly, had he
told you, that it was not the image of the Serpent, but the imagination of the
beholder that cured him, he had said somewhat; but yet he had deceived you:
for, though the imagination helps much to the curing of some diseases in one or
two, perhaps among a thousand; yet it was never known, that so many people
together, as the Israelites, should have each one of them such strong
imaginations, as to be cured by them: It was not then either the image, or the
imagination that cured them, but their faith in him that was lifted upon the
Cross, as the Serpent was erected by Moses in the desert.

These other persuasions of Satan [ to make you doubt of Elias his miracle, of
the combustion of Sodom, of the Manna in the desart] are impious and
ridiculous; for though Bitumen and Naphtha will suddenly, and at some distance
catch fire; yet hence it will not follow, that Elias used such stuff for the
consuming of his sacrifice; for the stuff, being a fat substance, gathered
from the superficies of the water of Asphaltites lake, or the dead-sea near
Jericho, was as well known to Baals priests, as to Elias, being neighbors to
that lake. Again, the Text says, that the fire of the LORD came down, which
consumed the sacrifice, and dried up the water; and how could Eliah so deceive
such a multitude of people, being there present, as to kindle a fire in the
water with Bitumen, and they not perceive it? And though this stuff will burn
in the water, yet water will never kindle it; for then it should burn
continually in the lake from whence it comes. Lastly, the Text tells you of no
other ^tuffe but of wood and water, and the fire that came down from God.
Secondly, whereas [ Satan would have told you, that ^here was a bituminous
nature in the lake of Gomorrha, before the firing of that place; and therefore
that Sodomes combustion was natu^all,] he showed himself to be that liar from
the beginning; for there was no lake ^here, till these Cities were destroyed,
as ^he Text shows: And it also plainly tells us, that the Lord rained fire
from the Lord out ^f heaven. And if there had been a lake ^here before of an
Asphaltick nature, how will it follow, that the combustion of Sodom was
natural? Was Sodom and the other Cities built in that lake? Who set ^he lake
on fire? How is it, that ever since, that lake has been full of Bitumen? that
it ^ever flamed since? if it did, show us some ^istory for it. Thirdly, though
Manna was gathered plentifully in Arabia in Josephus ^is days, and then was no
miracle; yet in ^he days of Moses, Manna in that same de^art was miraculous,
though not in respect of the matter, yet in regard of the circumstances; for
then forty years together fe^^ such abundance, that was able to feed tha^
populous Nation, the like quantity wa^ never known to fall before or after.
I^ was no miracle for Christ to feed people with bread and fish, but to feed so
man^ thousands with five loaves and two fishe^ was the miracle. Again, it was
miraculous that he, who gathered most Manna, ha^ not too much, and he that
gathered least* had no want. Besides, it was mir^culous* that what was reserved
till the next day turned unto worms, except upon the Sabbath day; and that it
should fall six days of the week, and the seventh day none to be found, was
not this miraculous? Mar^ also how long it was kept in the urne unputrefied.

^ect. 20.
[ You could never be inclined to any position^ of Atheism; for, these many
yea^es, you have been of opinion there never was any.] I wish you could make
this good, and your opinion true; but if there have been no A^heists, how will
you call those fools, who have said in their heart, There is no God* Why did
Saint Paul call the Ephesians before their conversion Atheists, or without ^od
in the world? What was contemptor Deum Mezentius in the Poet, who acknow^edged
no other god but his right hand, and his dart, Dextra mihi deus, and telum quod
missile libro? And Nisus, who thought every man's desire to be his god, -- Sua
cuique deus fit dira cupido? The Athenians, and ^ll others, are to ^lame, who
made severe laws against A^heists. I have read that Galen, the grand Dictator
of your Art, was an Atheist, and ^oo many more. Secondly, Sect.
[ You think Epicurus to be no Atheist, for denying Gods providence over the
trivial actions of inferior creatures.] But, I say, he is no less an
Atheist that denies Gods providence, or any other of his Attributes, then he
that denies his Essence. Though Epicurus and Democritus babbled something of a
Deity, yet in holding the world to be casually and rashly agglomerated of small
atoms, they were very Atheists. And so were Diagoras, Milesius, Theodorus,
Cyrnensis, and many others. (...). 1. de (...). de^m.
Read Tully, and he will tell you* whether Epicurus were not an Atheist, who
wrote against the gods; and that both he and Democritus were Atheists* for
denying that the gods did either help or show favor to men: And, that as
Xerxes was an Atheis^ in his hands, by pulling down the Temples of the gods;
so was Epicurus in his tongue, who pulled them down with his reasons. He
shows also that Protagoras, who doubted of the gods, was an Atheist; and so
are all those, who think Religion to be the invention of wise men, to keep
people in awe. Did you never read of Polyphemus in Homer, who confesses, he
never sacrificed to any other god but to his belly, (...). It is a certain
Maxim in Schoole-divinitie, That providence, which consists in the ordering
of effects to their ends, has as large an extension, as the causalitie of the
first agent: but this gave being to all, even to the meanest things, and so his
providence extends to all, even to the hairs of our head, if you will believe
Truth it self: therefore he is doubtless an Atheist, that can say, Non curare
deum credo mortalia quenquam. Thirdly, [ You say, Sect. 2
that the fatal necessity of ^he Stoics, is nothing else but the immutable
^aw of Gods will.] Then, belike, man sins by ^he immutable law of Gods will. Is
this ^our Religion, to make God the author ^f sin, and to take away from man
totally ^he liberty of his will? But this you do, if ^ou make the Stoicall
necessity the same that the immutable law of Gods will is; ^or the Stoics
held, that what man did, whether it was good or evil, he did it by ^n
inevitable necessity, to which not only men, but even Jupiter himself was
subject, (...). therefor their fate is termed inevitabile, inelu^tabile,
inexsuperabile, inexorabile. This is the Religion of the Turks at this day, if
you ^ill believe Busbequius: but I did not ^hink it had been the Religion of a
Chri^tian Physician till now.

(...). 21.
[ You are not yet assured which is the right side of man.] The right side is
that where the liver lies, which is the fountain of blood, wherein our life
consists; therefore that side is stronger, and more active, and the limbs
thereof bigger; as appears by the right hand and right foot, which are bigger
then the left. I hope you are not so simple as those children in Nineve* which
knew not the right hand from the left: Nature has made this distinction*
therefore the right hand is honorable amongst all men, except amongst those*
who honor the sword, which (being tye^ to the left side) gives it the
preheminencie: but this honor is by accident. Endeavor to know Christ's right
hand from his left, that, in the last day, you may stand there with joy amongst
his sheep.

^ect. 22.
[ You wonder how America should be peopled and inhabited by beasts of prey and
noxious animals, and yet not a horse there.] If you will credit Geographers,
you shall not need to wonder; for they tell us, there is but a narrow passage,
called the Strait of Anien* between Asia and America; so that, without
admiration, men and beasts might be ^ransported, and swim over thither; and
that the people on both sides of the Strait ^esemble each other in feature,
manners, ^awes and customs, and other circumstances, and have the same kinds
of creatures. And is it more wonder for America to ^ave those animals, which
we have not, then for Africa to have those which Europe wants, or Europe to
have those which are not to be found in Asia?

-- Non omnis fert omnia tellus. It seems you are little versed in the
Scripture, when you hold it [ a paradox, Sect.
that Methusalem should be longest lived of all Adams children, and that no man
can prove it.] What need you any other proof then the Text it self, which is
so plain, and the unanimous consent of the whole Church from the beginning? If
you can manifest it to be otherwise, as you brag, do it; -- Et Phyllida solus
habeto. Secondly, [ You make it doubtful, Sect.
if Judas hanged himself.] But the Text is plain, and the word (...) there,
Mat 27.5
is not doubtful, as you say, but both by sacred and profane Writers it is
used for strangling and hanging: so in Homer, -- (...), strangling the young
fawn: (...).
And in Thucidides, (...), some were hanged on, or from the trees. I do not
read this word used in any other sense but for strangling, hanging, or binding
the throat; and so the Church has always expounded it: and yet you will make
it a doubtful word. That other place, which you think overthrowes this, is
that of the Acts: (...). 18.
but indeed, it confirms it; for (...), is fallen down headlong, or flat: So
in Homer, (...)
-- (...). Judas then hanged himself, says Saint Matthew; he fell down
flat, says Saint Luke, this being the sequel of his strangling or hanging:
How then does this overthrow the other? Thirdly, [ You hold it improbable, that
men should build the Tower of Babel in a plain against the next deluge.] Where
then would you have had them build it? On a mountain? It Is like they would
have done so, had there been the same plenty of materials, and other
conveniences on the hills, which they found in the plain. Men must build where
they can, not always where they would. Fourthly, It Is not material, whether
it was a messenger, or Peter's tutelary Angel that was supposed to knock at the
door; for the word signifies both: but the Church has always expounded that
place of Peter's Angel, and she believes that Angels are ministering spirits:
But I think you will hardly find the word Angelus in the New Testament used for a
messenger sent from man, but rather the word Apostolus, except Luke 7. where
John's disciples are called Angels.

[ You cannot prove, Sect.
that miracles are ceased.] Cessante causa, cessat effectus; the end of
miracles was the confirmation of the Gospel: Now the Gospel is confirmed;
therefore you may conclude a cessation of miracles. Secondly, we hear of no
miracles that shall be in these later days, but of lying wonders. Thirdly,
miracles are no essential note of the truth; for John Baptist wrought none,
yet his doctrine was true. The Egyptian Sorcerers, Simon Magus and others,
wrought some seeming miracles and wonders, yet their doctrine was false: (...).
27.
but when you say [ There is not one miracle greater then another] you are
deceived; for though miracles be the extraordinary effects of Gods hand, to
which all things are of an equal facility; yet these effects are different in
themselves* and some greater, some lesser. The creation of the world is a
greater miracle then the fabric of man's body; and it is more admirable to feed
five thousand people with four loaves, then four thousand with five.

(...). 27.
You are so mannerly [ that you dare not say, God cannot work contradictions,
and many things else.] But I think it is good manners to say, God cannot work
contradictions, because these have not a possibility in them to be made; and
therefore are not the objects of his omnipotency: but that is only the object,
which is possibile absolutum. So, I think, it is good manners to say, God
cannot lie, or die, because it cannot ^gree with his active power to suffer, or
to die: So he cannot sin, because it agrees not with right reason. In a word,
Deus nequit facere, quod nequit fieri. I think then it were breach of good
manners to say, that God could do any thing, which were repugnant either to his
wisdom, goodness, or power. And though his power and will make but one God,
yet they are different attributes ratione; for the will commands, and the power
puts in execution.

You say [ that they who deny witches, Sect.
deny spirits also, and are a kind of Atheists.] A strange kind of Atheism to
deny witches! but is there such a strict relation between witches and spirits,
that he that denies the one, must needs deny the other? Sure, the existence of
spirits depends not upon the witches invocation of, or paction with spirits. We
read, that Zoroastres was the first witch in the world, and he lived after
the Flood; were there no spirits, I pray, till then? This is as much as if you
would say, there were no devils among the Gadarens, till they entered into
their swine.

(...). 33.
[ You think the Angels know a great part of our thoughts, because, by
reflection, they behold the thoughts of one another.] That the Angels know one
another, is out of doubt; but how they know one another thoughts, is unknown
to me. This I know, that none knows the thoughts of man, but man himself, and
God that made him; it being Gods prerogative to be (...). If they know our
thoughts, it is either by revelation from God, or by some outward sign and
demonstration from our selves; for, whilst they are immanent, and in the
Understanding, they are only known to God, because he only has the command of
our Wills, from which our thoughts depend.

The light, which we style a bare accident [ you say is a spiritual
substance, (...). 33.
where it subsists alone, and may be an Angel.] Let us see where, and when it
subsists alone, without a subject, and then we will believe you, that it is a
spiritual substance; And if your light may be an Angel, that must needs be an
Angel of light. What a skipping Angel will ignis fatuus make? The Chandlers
and Bakers trades are honou^able; those can make lights, which may in ^ime
become Angels; these wafers, which ^n time become gods.

This Section consists of diverse errors: Sect. (...)
First, you call the Heavens [ the immateriall world:] so you confound the
celestial world with the intellectual, which only is immateriall, and had its
being in the divine intellect, before it was made. Secondly, if the Heavens be
immateriall, they are not movable; for matter is the subject of motion. Why
then do you call the great Sphere the first movable? Thirdly, an immateriall
world cannot be the habitation of material substances; where then will the
bodies of the Saints, after the resurrection, have their residence? Fourthly,
if the Heavens have not matter, they have not quantity and parts. Fifthly, nor
are they compounded substances of matter and form, but simple, as spirits.
Sixthly, though they have not such a matter, as the elementary world, yet
immateriall they are not: they have a matter, the subject of quantity, though
not of generation and corruption. Your second error is [ that you call Gods
essence the habitation of Angels; and therefore they live everywhere, where
his essence is.] Divinity tells us, that Angels are in a place definitive; and
that they, as we all, live and move in him, as in our efficient, protecting,
and sustaining cause, but not as in a place; for Angels move out of one place
to another, and while they are on earth, they are not in heaven: but if Gods
essence be their habitation, then they never change place; for his essence is
everywhere, and so you make them partakers of Gods proper attribute, Ubiquity.
Your third error is [ that God has not subordinated the creation of Angels to
ours, but, as ministering spirits, they are willing to fulfill Gods will in the
affairs of man.] Then, belike, God made them not to be ministering spirits to
the heirs of salvation, but they are so of their own accord: if so, we are
more beholding to them for their comfort, protection and instruction of us,
then to God, who made them not for this end, but (as you say) for his own
glory: But if you were as good at Divinity, as at Physic, you will find, that
Gods glory is not ^ncompatible with their service to us; but ^n this is God
glorified, that they comfort, ^nstruct and protect us; for this charge he has
given to his Angels over us: and so we are bound to them for their care, much
more to him for his love, in creating them to this end. Your fourth error is [
that both generation and creation are founded on contrarieties.] If creation
were a transmutation, which still presupposes a subject, I would be of your
opinion; but seeing it is not, and has no subject, without which contrarieties
cannot be in nature, I deny, that creation is founded on contrarieties; neither
is nonentity contrary, but the total privation of being, which God gave to
the creature.

[ You wonder at the multitude of heads that deny traduction, Sect
having no other argument of their belief but Austins words, Creando
infunditur, etc.] But I wonder as much at you, who is not better acquainted
with our Divinity; for we have many reasons to confirm us against traduction,
besides Saint Austins authority: At first, that the soul is immateriall;
therefore has not quantity, nor parts, nor is subject to division, as it must
be, if it be subject to traduction or propagation. Secondly, the soul existeth
in and by it self, depending from the body neither in its being nor
operation, and by consequence, not in its production, nec in esse, nec in
fieri, nec in operari. Thirdly, if the soul were educed out of the power of
the matter, it were mortal, as the souls of beasts are; which, having their
beginning and being from the matter, must fail when that fails. Fourthly, the
effect is never nobler then the cause; but the soul, in regard of
understanding, does in excellency far exceed the body. Fifthly, a body can no
more produce a spirit, then an horse can beget a man, they being different
species. Sixthly, if the soul were propagated in or by the seed, then this
were a true enunciation, Semen est animal rationale, and so the seed should be
man. Seventhly, if the soul of the son be propagated by the soul, or of the
soul of the parent, then we must admit transmutation of souls, as we do of
bodies in generation. Eighthly, we ^ave the Churches authority. Ninthly, and
the testimony of Gentiles; De ge anim^ c. 3. t. Meta lib. 4.
for Aristotle ^cknowledgeth the Intellect to enter into ^^e body from without:
And Apuleius, in ^is mystical description of Psyche, affirms her to be the
youngest daughter of the great King; intimating, that she is not infu^ed, till
the body be first framed. Many testimonies I could set down here, if I were
not in haste. Tenthly, the Scripture is ^or us, affirming, that the souls
return to God that gave them, but the body to the ^arth, from whence it came;
therefore God keeps the same order in generation, that he did in creation,
first framing and articulating the body and its organs, and then infusing the
soul.

[ But the maine reason that enclines you to the opinion of traduction, Sect.
is the monstrous productions of men with beasts; for in these, you ^ay, there
is an impression and tincture of reason.] So I may say, that Elephants are ^en,
because in them is an impression and ^incture of reason, more then in any such
^onstrous birth. Secondly, if I should grant, that in these equivocall
productions there were more reason, then in other beasts, it will not prove the
traduction o^ the reasonable soul; because the formative power of man's seed,
or the vegetativ^ faculty thereof, which is not the work o^ the reasonable
soul, being conveighe^ with the seed, makes organs semblable to these of men;
and therefore somewhat fitter to exercise functions like those of men* in which
you may see the shadow of reason, but not a reasonable soul, which is not
conveyed by the seed, but infused into the body, when it is articulated
Thirdly, if men's souls, with the seed, b^ transfused into beasts, then these
monstrous productions must be men, and so capable of salvation and damnation,
of faith and the Sacraments, and the other mysteries of Religion.

^ect. 35.
[ You will not have the body the instrume^^ of the soul, but rather of sense,
and this the hand of reason.] As if I would say, The ax^ is not the proper
instrument of the Carpe^ter, but of his hand, and this of the Carpe^ter; Causa
causae est causa causati, what is subject to the sense, is also subject to the
soul* But, if you will speak properly, the body is ^ot the instrument of the
sense, but the ^ense rather the bodies instrument; for* whether depends the
body on the sense, or ^his on the body? the body can subsist without the sense,
not the sense without ^he body. The whelp has a body before ^he ninth day, but
not the sight, because ^he corporeal organ of that sense is not till ^hen
fitted for sight; but to speak Philoso^hically, the sense is the instrument of
the whole compositum.

[ You cannot find in the brain the organ of ^he rational soul, Sect.
which we term the feat of ^eason.] There is no reason why you should, seeing
you confess, that this is a ^ensible argument of the souls inorgani^ie. Show
me the seats of the Intellect, and ^he Will, and I will show you the seat of
Reason. [ Though you can discover no more in (...) man's brain, then in the
cranie of a beast,] yet man's brain differs specifically from that of ^he
beast. Now, why we call the brain^ ^he seat of reason, is, because the
ratio^all soul makes use of the senses and ^he phant^sie, which have their
being in, and their original from the brain.

(...). 37.
[ You find nothing in death able to daunt the courage of a man; and you cannot
highly love any that is afraid of it.] Then you would hardly love David, that
prayed against it: and Ezechia, that wept so bitterly, when news was brought
to him of it. Sure, Christ, as man, was not quite, exempt from the fear of it:
He often avoided it, and wills his Disciples in persecution to fly from it.
The Apostle shows, that the Saints desire not to be unclothed, but to be
clothed upon. There is something in it able to daunt the courage of man, as it
dissolves his fabric; of a wicked man, as it is an introduction to eternal
death; of a Christian man, as it is the fruit of Adams sin, and a part of
that punishment laid on him and us all for sin: (...).
Nullum animal ad vitam prodit sine metu mortis, said he, who feared death as
little as you: And the greatest of all Philosophers not unfitly called it, the
most terrible of all terrible things.

(...). 38.
[ The Philosophers Stone has taught you* that your immortal spirit or soul
may ^ye obscure, and sleep awhile within this house of flesh.] I am sure, the
Scripture teaches you other Divinity, to wit, that the soul returns to God
that gave it. Christ did not tell the penitent Thief, that his soul should
sleep in his house of flesh, but that it should be with him in Paradise. The
soul of Lazarus was not left to sleep in that putrefied house of his flesh,
but was carried by the Angels into Abraham's bosom. Saint Paul desired to be
dissolved, not to sleep in the grave, but to be with Christ; who will not leave
the souls of his sons in that hell, nor suffer them to see corruption; whose
comfort is, that, when this earthly tabernacle of their house shall be
dissolved, they have a building given them of God, made without hands, eternal
in the Heavens. You see then what a bad Schoolmasters the Philosophers Stone
is, which has taught so many to make shipwreck of their estates, and you of
the souls immortality.

[ You cannot dream, Sect
that there should be at the last day any such judicial proceeding, as the
Scripture seems to imply.] It seems then, that, in your opinion, the
Scripture speaks here mystically: but your bare word will not induce us to
subscribe to your conceit, being the whole Church from the beginning, has, to
this day, believed, that Christ shall, in a judiciary way, come as a Judge, and
call all flesh before him; and we shall stand all naked before his Tribunal,
and receive the sentence of life or death. A mystical and unknown way of
trial, will not stand so much with the honor of Christ, as an open and
visible, that all may see and witness the justice of the Judge: First then
observe, we have the literal sense of the Scripture for our belief. Secondly,
the consent of the Church. Thirdly, Reason; for, as the beginning of the world
was, so shall its consummation be: that was not created in a mystery, as some
have thought, but really and visibly; neither shall it be dissolved, but after
the same way it was created. Fourthly, it is fit that Christ, who was not
mystically, but visibly and really judged by sinners, should be the visible
Judge of those his Judges, and of all sinners: therefore, as the Apostles saw
him ascend in glory, not mystically; so they shall see him with real glory
return. Fifthly, this visible proceeding will be more satisfactory to the
Saints, who shall see their desire upon their enemies, and vengeance really
executed on those that afflicted them. Sixthly, and it will be more terrible to
the wicked, who have persecuted Christ in himself and in his members, when
they shall look on him whom they have pierced. Seventhly, if you think this
last Judgment to be but mystical, then you may as well say with Socinus, that
eternal death, and eternal fire prepared for the wicked is only mystical,
and signifies nothing else but the annihilation of the wicked for ever,
without sensible pain; which is indeed to overthrow all Religion, and open a
wide gap for impiety and security.

The antecedent signs of Christ's coming [ you think are not consistent with
his secret coming as a thief in the night. Sect.
] You must know, that the wars, and signs in the Sun, Moon and Stars* are
partly meant of those signs, which were the forerunners of Ierusalems last
destruction. Secondly, if we understand them of the signs of Christ's second
coming, they are meant o^ such wars and apparitions, as have no^ been known in
the world since the beginning, in respect of the extent and numbe^ of them.
Thirdly, though signs go before his coming, yet men shall be so secure and
hard-hearted, eating, drinking, and making merry, as in the days of Noah* that
they will take no notice of warning thereby; then shall Christ come suddenly*
as a thief in the night.

(...). 45.
[ Hardly has any man attained, you say, the perfect discovery of Antichrist.]
These notes which are given by Christ, Saint John, and Saint Paul, do most
agree to the Pope, who sits in the Temple of God, as God, and exalts himself
above all that is called God* in throning and dethroning of Kings, and disposing
of their Kingdoms at his pleasure; in pardoning sins, in making of Saints, and
dedicating temples and days unto them; in dispensing with, cancelling and
making of laws at his pleasure; in tying sanctity, infallibility of
judgment to his Chair, and freedom from error; in appointing new sacraments
and laws in the Church, and domineering over men's con^ciences; in dispensing
with matrimony forbidden by Gods laws, and the law of Nature; in assuming to
himself those ti^les, which are due only to God: These and many other notes
have prevailed so far with Wickliffe, the Waldenses, Hus, Jerome, Luther,
Calvin, Bucer, and other eminent men of our profession, that they thought they
had attained the perfect discovery of Antichrist. If you know any other, to
whom these notes do more exactly agree, name him, and we will free the Pope
from being the man of sin, and child of perdition.

[ A plant, you say, consumed to ashes, Sec^
retains its form, being withdrawn into its incombustible part, where it lies
secure from the fire; and so the plant from its ashes may again revive.]
Admiranda canis, sed non credenda: For, if the form of the plant be there
still, then it is not consumed. Secondly, then Philosophy deceives us, in
telling us, that the matter is only eternal, and the forms perishing.
Thirdly, then Art and Nature is all one, both being able to introduce, or,
rather, educe a substantial form. Fourthly, then the radical moisture and
natural heat, without which the form has no subsistence in the plant, is not
consumed by the fire, but, in spite of all its heat, lurkes within the ashes;
-- credat Iudaeus Apella. Fifthly, then an Art, being an accident, can produce
a substance; and so the effect is nobler then the cause. Sixthly, then from a
total privation to the habit (whose cause was taken away) there may be a
natural regresse. Seventhly, if the form of the plant be in the ashes still,
then it actuates, distinguishes, denomina^es, defines, and perfects the matter
(for the ashes are not the first, but second matter) in which it is; and so it
is a plant still, lurking under the accidents of ashes: as in the Mass,
Christ's body under the accidents of bread. So by your Doctrine, it is no hard
work to believe Transubstantiation, or the stori^s of the Phoenix. Eighthly, if
the form of the plant be still in the ashes, then the form is not in its own
matter, but in another; for so long as the ashes are ashes, they are ^ot the
matter of the plant, but of that ^ubstance we call ashes. Ninthly, by this ^lso
the appetite of the matter is taken away; for to what can it have an appetite,
^eeing it retains the form of the plant? But, I doubt me, your revived plant
will prove more artificial then natural; and, ^ike Xeuxes his grapes, deceive
perhaps ^irds, but not men. So far as I can per^eive in Quercitan and others,
who have written of Chemistry, this form of the plant is nothing but an Idea,
or a delusion of the eye through a glass held over a flame, wherein you may
see somewhat like a plant, a cloud in stead of Juno: A sallet of such plants
may well tantalize you, they will never fill you.

Though it be true, that where Gods ^resence is, there is Heaven; yet we must
not therefore think, that there is not a peculiar ubi of bliss and happiness
beyond the tenth Sphere, wherein God does more manifestly show his glory and
presence, then any where else, as you seem to intimate, Sect. 4
when you say [ that to place Heaven ^n the Empyreall, or beyond the tenth
Sphere, is to forget the worlds destruction, which when it is destroyed, all
shall be here, as it is now there.] First, we deny, that this sensible world
shall be destroyed in the substance thereof: its qualities shall be altered,
the actions, motions, and influences of the Heavens shall cease; because then
shall be no generation or corruption, and consequently, no transmutation of
elements. Secondly, though this sensible world were to be destroyed, yet it
will not follow, that therefore above the tenth Sphere there is not the Heaven
of glory. Whither was it that Christ ascended? Is he not said to ascend above
all Heavens, and that the Heavens must contain him, till his second coming?
Did not the Apostles see him ascend in a cloud? Do not you acknowledge it an
Article of your Creed? Was not Saint Paul caught up into the third Heaven? If
you think there is no other Heaven meant in Scripture then Gods presence, it
must follow, that Christ's humanity is everywhere, because he is in Heaven*
that is, in Gods presence* which is everywhere; and so you are of the
Ubiquit^ries ^aith: therefore we believe, as the Church ^ath always done, that
Heaven is local, ^r a place above this visible world, whi^her Christ is gone
to prepare a place for ^s, which is called the Throne of God; where ^ee have an
habitation made without ^ands, given us of God, eternal in the Heavens. Let us
therefore seek the things (not which be everywhere, but) which are above,
where Christ is at the right hand of God. The Gentiles, Tert^ de a^ cap. 5
as Tertullian witnesses, were not ignorant of the place of blessed souls,
quas in supernis mansionibus collocant, which they placed in these upper
mansions of Heaven: Apud Platonem in aeherem sublimantur, etc.

[ You cannot tell how to say, fire is the essence of Hell; Sect.
nor can you conceive a flame that can prey upon the soul. Flames of sulphur
in Scripture are (you think) to be understood not of this present Hell, but of
that to come.] Though you cannot conceive how, yet you must believe, that the
fire of Hell is corporal, and works on spirits: Perdidisti rationem, tene
fidem, says Austin. Yet the Schoolmen tell us, diverse ways, how the soul
may be affected and afflicted by that fire: First, as it shall be united to the
fire, and shut up as it were in a prison there. Secondly, as it shall retain
the experimental knowledge of those pains, which it suffered in the body.
Thirdly, as it is the principium and original of the senses, which shall
remain in the soul as in their root. Fourthly, as that fire shall be a
representative sign or symbol of Gods indignation against them, and of their
loss of his favor, and of so great happiness, and that eternally, for so
small, foolish and fading sinful delights; these are the corporal ways, by
which that fire shall torment the soul. And if you hold your Masters Tenent,
Mores animi sequuntur temperamentum corporis, you will find no more
impossibility for a corporal fire to work upon a spirit, then for the
material humors of the body to work upon the soul.

As you think Hell and Hellfire to be metaphorical, and in men's consciences
only; so you seem to doubt of the place under earth, (...). 49.
where you say, [ though we ^^ace Hell under earth, the Devils walk is about
(...).] But this is no argument to dissuade ^s from believing Hell to be under
earth, because the Devils are not yet confined ^^ither. By the same reason you
may say, ^^e habitation of Angels is not above, because they are employed here
by God upon the earth. We believe Hell to be un^er earth, because it stands
with reason and Gods justice, that the wicked should ^e removed as far as
might be from the ^resence of the Saints, and the place of ^oy, which is above.
Secondly, as their ^elight and hopes were not in heaven, but ^n earth and
earthly things; so it is fitting that their eternal habitation should be
within the earth. Thirdly, the name (...) ^n Hebrew, (...) in Greek, Infernus
in La^in, Hell in English, etc. do show, that the ^lace of the damned is low,
and in dark^esse. Fourthly, the Scripture still speaks of Hell as a place
under ground, and the ^nhabitants thereof are said to be under the earth, and
the motion thither is called there a descending. Fifthly, the Gentiles were not
ignorant of this, as Tertullian shows, ^pol. 11.
Imum tartarum carcerem poenaru^ cum vultis affirmatis, etc. Iuvenal call^
Hell, subterranea regna. Virgil, Barathrum* and infernas seeds, -- tum tartarus
ipse
Bis petet in praeceps tantum, etc.
Homer calls it a most deep gulf under earth, (...).

(...). 52.
[ You think it hard to place the souls of those worthy Heathens in Hell,
whose worth^ lives teach us virtue on earth.] If there be no salvation but in
Christ; if there be no other name under Heaven, by which me^ can be saved, but
by the name of Jesus; if it be life eternal to know God in him; if he only is
the way, the life, and the truth; if there be no coming to the Father, but by
him; I cannot think it hard, if those worthy Heathens have no place in Heaven,
seeing they had no interest in him, who with his blood has purchased Heaven to
us, and has opened the gates of that Kingdom to all believers. And how
specious soever their lives and actions were in the eyes of men, yet without
Christ ^hey were nothing else but splendida pecca^a, glorious enormities: only
in this I can ^lace them, that it will be easier for them, as it will be for
Sodom and Gomorrha, for ^yre and Sidon) in the last day, then for ^ewes and
Christians, who have known their Masters will, and have not done it: ^ewer
stripes remain for Socrates a Hea^hen, then for Julian a Christian.

[ We cannot deny, say you, Sect. 5
the Church of God ^oth in Asia and Africa, if we forget not the ^eregrination
of the Apostles, the death of Mar^yrs, etc. nor must a few differences
excommu^icate from Heaven one another.] First, we ^eny not, but God has many
who bow ^ot their knee to Baal in those countries, and that his Church is
oftentimes invisi^le. Secondly, we deny, that the pre^ence of Apostles, death
of Martyrs, sessi^ns of lawful Councels, can or have privi^edge those places
from Apostasy. Christ's own presence, and miracles, and doctrine ^n Judea,
have not given stabilitie or per^anencie to the Church there. What Is ^ecome of
the famous Churches of Co^inth, Ephesus, Laodicea, Philadelphia, etc. planted
by the Apostles themselves? Thirdly, it is not for a few or light differences*
that we have separated our selves from the communion of the Church of Rome, and
of those in Asia and Africa, if we can call them Churches, which are rather
Sceletons, then the body of Christ. The differences between the Church of Rome
and us are not few, nor small, as you know: The differences between us and the
Eastern Churches are greater; for most of them are either Nestorians, denying
Mary to be the mother of God, and so in effect making two Christ's, by making
two persons; or else they are Eutychians or Monothelites, affirming but one
nature and will in Christ; and therefore reject the Council of Chalcedon: such
are the Iacobites in Asia, if they be not lately converted, and those other
Iacobites in Africa, under the King of the Abyssins. I will not speak of the
Greek Church, which denies the procession of the holy Ghost: Nor of the Cophti
of Egypt, who are also Eutychians, and reject the observation of the Lords day,
as superstitious, and marry in the second degree. The Georgians in Iberia
baptize not their children till the eighth year of their age, and give them
the Eucharist at seven. The Armenians are little better: As for the Christians
of Saint Thomas, and the Maronites in Mount Libanus, if they have forsaken
their old heresies, they are fallen into those that are little better, by
submitting themselves to the Religion and Jurisdiction of Rome.

[ You are confident, and fully persuaded, Sect.
yet dare not take your oath of your salvation; for you think it a kind of
perjury to swear, that Constantinople is such a City, because you have not
seen it.] To be fully persuaded, and not dare to swear, is a contradiction:
and if you dare not swear, but what you have seen, then you will in a manner
perjure your self, if you should swear, that Christ was the son of Mary, or
that he was crucified on Mount Calva^ie; for this you have not seen. What think
you, if a blind man should swear, that the Sun is a great light; for he has
no infallible warrant from his own sense to confirm him in the certainty
thereof? You have, I perceive, [ so much humility, that you meet with many
doubts.] But indeed, doubting is not the fruit of humility, but of
infidelity: you incline too much to the doubtings of the Church of Rome, which
would rob us of the comforts we reap in our affli^tions, and in death it
self, from the assurance of our salvation: For, if we doubt of our salvation,
we must doubt also of our election, and of the certainty of all Gods promises,
and of the work of the holy Ghost, when he seals in our hearts, that we are
the sons of God. And so, to what serve the Sacraments, if they do not confirm
and seal unto us the love of God in saving us? Nay, our faith has lost its
form and efficacy, if we be still doubting. Saint Paul was not of your mind,
he was persuaded, that nothing could separate him from the love of God in
Christ. And no question but he would have sworn this, if he had been
required. I deny not, but many of Gods servants have their doubtings; but this
comforts them, that Christ prays for them, that their faith shall not fail,
and this assures them of their salvation: Though this fire of the Sanctuary be
not always flaming, it is not therefore extinguished; and though the eye is
not always seeing, it is not therefore blind: -- Nihil est ab omm part
beatum. No perfection here: the fairest day has its clouds, and the strongest
faith its doubts: but to be still doubting, is a sign of a bad Christian; and,
as Seneca will have it, of a bad man; maximum malae mentis indicium fluctuatio.

The second part.
(...). 2.
YOu say, there are mystically in our faces characters which carry in them the
Motto of our souls, wherein one may read our natures, etc. besides these,
certain mystical figures in our hands, which you dare not call mere dashes,
strokes, or at random.] Fronti nulla fides; how many are deceived by the face
and hand? therefore Christ will not have us judge secundum faciem, according to
the face or appearance, but judge righteous judgment. I deny not, but
sometimes the face proves index animi; and by the face, and other outward
signs in Iulians body, as his weak legs, unstable feet, wandering and furious
eyes, wanton laughters, inordinate speeches, etc. Nazianzen conjectured of the
pravitie of his mind, and wicked inclination. And it was no difficult matter*
to collect the roughness of Esau's disposition, by the roughness of his
hands. We may also by the face and hand judge of the temper and distemper of
the body, blood, and other humors; but peremptorily to determine the future
events of things that befall us, or the disposition of the soul, by
Physiognomy or Chiromancy, by the face and hand, is such a superstitious folly,
that the Poet laughs at it, and at him, Qui frontemque manumque Praebebit vati.
Iuve l. 1. sa
For first, many lineaments, yea oftentimes deviations and inordinate
conformities, are in our bodies rather by accident, then by nature. Secondly,
Philosophy, good counsel, and education do much alter the nature of men;
therefore Philemon that famous Physiognomer was deceived in Socrates his face,
thinking that he was a man of a riotous and wicked disposition, whereas his
nature, by the study of Philosophy, was quite altered, being eminent for his
continency, fidelity, and other virtues. Thirdly, man, by reason of his will,
is master of his own moral actions; therefore it is in his power to alter his
own inclinations. Fourthly, supernatural grace does quite transform nature,
and can turn a Wolf into a Lamb, a Saul into a Paul, a Persecutour into a
Preacher. Fifthly, how vain and ridiculous is Chiromancie, in placing the seven
Planets in each palm of the hands, and confining within certain lines and
bounds the power and operation of these Stars; so that Jupiter must contain
himself within his own line, and not encroach upon the line of Venus or
Mercury. If men would be more careful to know and follow him, who only has
the seven Stars in his right hand, they would not so supers^itiously dote upon
such a ridiculous toy as Palmestry; or, by the lineaments of the hands or face,
peremptorily conclude of men's souls, and of their future actions and events.

(...). 5.
[ You hope you do not break the fifth Commandment, if you conceive you may
love your friend before your parents.] The God of love has ordained an order
in our love, that we are to love those most, to whom we owe most; but to our
carnal parents, under God, we owe our being, to our spiritual parents our
well being: therefore they are to have a greater share of our love then our
friends, to whom we are not tied in such obligations. Secondly, whereas God is
the measure, perfection, and chief object of our love, we are to love those
most, who come nearest to him by representation; but these are our parents, who
are to us in stead of God, especially, if they bestow not only being, but also
well being and education on us. But what needs the urging of this duty, which
is grounded on the principles of Nature?

Your phrase is dangerous, as your love is preposterous, Sect.
if it be as you say [ that you love your friend, as you do your God:] For, by
this, you take away the distinction which God has made between the two Tables:
the one commanding us to love God above all; the other, to love our neighbors
as our selves. Nature will teach you, that him you ought to love most, to whom
you owe most; but you owe all to God, even that you live, and move, and have
your being. Secondly, an universal good is to be loved before a particular: A
man will venture the loss of his hand or arm, to save the body. A good
Citizen will venture his life to save his country, because he loves the whole
better then a part; but God is the universal good, our friends are only
particular. Thirdly, we must love our friend as our self, because our
self-love is the rule by which we square our friends love; but we must love
God better then our selves, because it is by him that we are our selves.

(...). 7.
[ For your original sin, you hold it to be washed away in your baptism;
for your actual sins you reckon with God, and you are not terrified with the
sins of your youth.] Original sin is washed away, in respect of its guilt, not
of its being; the curse, not the sin; the dominion, not the habitation is done
away: For whilst this root is in us, it will be budding: the leprosy, with
which this house of ours is infected, will never be to^ally abolished, till the
house be demolished. We must not look to be free from these Iebusites, whilst
we are here: Subjugari possunt, (...).
exterminari non possunt; the old man is not totally cast off, nor the old
leaven totally cast out: For, if there were not in us concupiscence, there
could be no actual sin; and if we say, We sin not, we deceive our selves.
Saint Paul acknow^edgeth a body of death, and you had need ^o pray with David,
Cleanse me from my secret sins: And again, Remember not the sins of my youth,
with which you say, you are not terrified: but though you know nothing by your
self, yet are you not thereby justified; The heart of man is deceitful above
all things: And though your heart cleares you, God is greater then your heart.
The salt-sea can never lose its saltness, the Blackmoore cannot change his
skin, nor the Leopard his spots. Again, we must not think, that in baptism
sin is washed away, by virtue of the water. What water can cleanse the soul,
but that which flowed from our Saviors pierced heart? God in Christ has done
away our sins* the baptism of his blood has purged us from all sin, which is
sealed unto us by the baptism of his Spirit, and represented by the baptism of
water.

[ You thank God, you have escaped pride, Sect.
the mortal enemy to charity.] So did the Pharisee thank God, that he was no
extortioner; yet he went home unjustified. Pride is a more subtle sin then you
conceive; it thrusts it self upon our best actions: as praying, fasting,
almes-giving. As Saul amongst the Prophets, and Satan amongst the sons of God;
so pride intrudes it self amongst our best works: And have you not pride, in
thinking you have no pride? Bernard makes twelve degrees of pride, of which,
bragging is one. And Gregory tells us, that ex summis virtutibus saepe
intumescimus; even accidentally goodness ocassioneth pride, which (like the
scales that fell from Saul's eyes) hinders the sight of our selves, till they be
removed: Nulla alia pestis plura ingenia abrupit, (...)
quam confidentia and astimatio sui.

(...) 8.
[ It Is vanity, you think, to waste our days in the pursuit of knowledge;
which* if we attend a little longer, we shall enjoy by infusion, which we
endeavor here by labor and inquisition: better is a modest ignorance, then
uncertain knowledge.] Would you bring in again ignorance, the supposed mother
of Devotion, but indeed, the true mother of Confusion? I cannot be of your
mind; you will not have us trouble our selves with ^nowledge here, because we
shall have it ^ereafter: But I will so much the rather ^abour for knowledge
here, because I shall ^ave it hereafter. For the Saints beatitude shall for the
most part consist in knowledge; therefore I desire to be initiated, and to have
a taste of that happi^esse here, that I may be the more in love with it. Shall
the Israelites refuse to taste, and look upon the grapes which the Spies
brought from Canaan, because they were to enjoy all the Vineyards there? By the
knowledge of the creature, we come to know the Creator; and by the effects, we
know the supreme cause, whom to know in Christ, is life eternal. For want of
knowledge the people perish: it were madness in me not to make use of a
candle in the dark, because, when the Sun is up, he will bring a greater
light with him. By kowledge we come near to the Angelical nature, who are
from their great knowledge called Daemones, and Intelligentiae. Shall I not
strive to know God at all, because I cannot know him here perfectly? God has
made nothing in vain: but in vain had he given to man a desire of knowledge,
for, Omnes homines natura scire desiderant: In vain had he given to him
understanding, apprehension, judgment, if he were not to exercise them in the
search of knowledge; which, though it be uncertain here in some things, vel ex
part cogniti, vel ex part cognoscentis, yet all knowledge is not uncertain.
The Christians, by their knowledge in Philosophy, and other humane studies, did
more hurt to Gentilisme, then all the opposition and strength of men could do:
which Julian the Apostate knew well, when he caused to shut up all Schools of
learning, purposely to blindfold men, that they might no^ discern truth from
error. And though modest ignorance is better then uncertain knowledge, yet
you will not hence infer, that ignorance is better then knowledge; except you
will conclude, that blindness is better then sight, because blind Democritus
was to be preferred to a quick-sighted Kite.

(...). 9.
[ The perpetuating of the world by coition, you call the foolishest act of a
wise man, and an unworthy piece of folly.] You let your pen ^^n too much at
random: the way which Wisdom it self has appointed to multi^ly mankind, and
propagate the Church, cannot be foolish; if it be in your esteem, ^emember that
the foolishness of God is ^iser then the wisdom of man: for, as ^reat folly
as you think coition to be, without it you could not have been; and sure^y,
there had been no other way in Para^ise to propagate man, but this fool^sh ^ay.
There is nothing foolish, but what ^s sinful; but that cannot be sinful,
which God has appointed. There is sometime foolishness in the circumstances,
but not ^n the act it self, then the which nothing ^s more natural. As it is
not folly to eat, drink and sleep, for the preservation of the individuum;
neither is coition folly, by which we preserve the species, and immortalize our
kind.

[ You fear the corruption within you, Sect. ^
not the contagion of commerce without you.] You must fear both, and shun
both: Our corruption within is often irritated by outward commerce; perhaps our
inward tinder would lie dead, if it were not incensed by the sparkles of
commerce without. (...) that handles pitch shall be defiled; 'ti^ dangerous to
converse with leprous an^ plaguie people. The Israelites are forbi^ commerce
with the Canaanites; and we ar^ commanded to dep^rt out of Babel, lest we be
partakers of her sins: (...).
-- Grex totus in agris
Unius scabie cadit, and porrigine porci,
Uvaque conspecta livorem ducit ab uva.
If you were like the Sun, you might freely commerce with all; for he shines
upon infected places without infection, which you cannot do: and therefore, to
use your own phrase [ your conversation must not be, like the Suns, with all
men,] except it be in causing your light to shine before them.

(...). 12.
[ There is something, you say, within us, that was before the elements.] That
something must be the soul* which, though Plato and Origin thought was before
the body, yet we know the contrary; for God first made the body, and then
inspired it with a soul. To give existence to the soul before the body, can
stand neither with the perfection of Gods works in the creation, nor ^ith the
dignity and quality of the soul: ^ot with the first; for all that God made ^as
perfect: but the soul, without the ^ody, had been an imperfect piece, seeing
was made to be a part of man. Not with ^^e second; for the soul being the
form, (...) was not to exist without its matter, the ^ody: nor was it ^it,
that so noble a guest should be brought into the world, before a ^onvenient
lodging was fitted for her* It Is true, that the soul can, and does sub^^st
without the body after death; but then is necessitated, because the body fails
it, and the house becomes inhabitable; and it (...) a part of its punishment,
and of the bodies ^lso, for sin, to be separated for a while.

Thus have I briefly pointed at your ab^rrations, having snatched some few
^oures from my other occasions (for study cannot in these distracted times:)
it is not ^ut of an humor of contradiction or vain-^lory, nor of any intention
I have to bring ^ou or your Book into obloquie, that I ^ave marked out its
obliquities; but only ^o sa^isfie the desire of my friends (for whom we are
partly borne) who have laid this charge on me; and to let green head and
inconsiderate young Gentlemen se^ that there is some danger in reading you^
Book, without the spectacles of judgment for, whilst they are taken with the
gildin^ of your phrase, they may swallow unawares such pills, as may rather
kill the^ cure them. I have passed by diverse slips o^ less danger and
consequence, because I want time, and would not seem too Eagle-sighted in other
men's failings, whereas I have enough to do with mine own, Respicere id
manticae quod in tergo est. I acknowledge there is much worth and good language
in your Book; and, because you are so ingenuous and modest, as to disclaim
these opinions, if they square not with maturer judgments* I have, with as
great modesty and gentleness as I could, refelled them; having neither dipped my
pen in gall, nor mingled my ink with vinegar. The God of truth direct all our
hearts into the way of truth. Amen.

ANIMADVERSIONS UPON Sir KENELME DIGBIE'S OBSERVATIONS ON Religio Medici.

LONDON, Printed for JAMES YOUNG.

Animadversions upon Sir KENELME DIGBIE'S Observations on Religio Medici.
I Having done with the Physician, was counseled by my friends to view that
noble and ingenuous Knights Observations, who hastily running over Religio
Medici, and having let fall some phrases from his pen, which have or may
startle the Reader; I thought good, upon the solicitation of my said friends,
to point at them by a few Animadversions. It is no wonder that he has phrased
some things amiss; for the best have their failings, -- quandoque bonus
dormitat Homerus. And S. Bernard, we say, saw not all; and what are spoken or
written hastily, are not spoken and written warily; Canis festinans caecos
parit catulos.

3.
1. [ I find Sir Kenelme to be of opinion, that the changing of the condition of
a damned soul from pain to happiness could not be effected, without God had
made that soul another creature then what it was: as, to make fire cease from
being hot, requires to have it become another thing then fire.] I do not see
any reason, why the essence of the soul must be changed, upon the change of
its condition from pain to happiness; for these are accidents, which may be
present or absent, without the destruction of the subject in which they are.
We are all by nature the sons of wrath, by grace and regeneration we are made
the sons of God; not by changing of our natures and essences, as Illyricus
thought: for, though Paul changed his condition and name, he changed not his
nature; for he was the same man, being a vessel of mercy, which he was, being
a vessel of wrath. [ If he says, that in Eternity there is no change;] I
answer, that that continued duration, which we call Eternity, is
unchangeable; yet in the things themselves, which are eternal, there is a
passive power or possibility of change, or else we cannot say, that
unchangeablenesse is a property in God, but communicable to the creature, which
cannot be. As for the fire, it may doubtless for a while cease to be hot, and
yet not cease to be fire: as that fire in the Babylonish furnace, which did not
touch the three Children, and yet burned the Chaldeans; this it could not have
done, had it not been fire.

2. [Aristotle defines light to be actus perspicui, which Sir Kenelme likes
not, Page
because he knows not the meaning.] The meaning is plain, that light is the
active quality of the air or water, by which they are made perspicuous, or
fit mediums, through which we see visible objects; for in darkness, though
the air be a body still, yet it is not the medium of our sight, but only
potentially; let the light come, then it is perspicuous, that is, through which
we may see the objects actually, and so it is actus perspicui: For in
Philosophy, that is called the act, which gives a being to a thing, whether
that being be accidental or essential; so the light, giving an accidental
being to the air, in making it perspicuous, is fitly defined by the
Philosopher, Actus perspicui qua perspicuum: therefore here are no naked terms
obtruded in the Schools upon easy minds, as Sir Kenelme thinks.

(...). 21.
3. When Sir Kenelme thinks [ that the first matter has not an actual
existence, without the form,] he must know, that the first matter is a
substance, and has a real actualitie, or that which is called Actus
entitativus in the Schools, without the form; else it could not be the
principle, or cause of things: for, how can there proceed any effect from that
which has no being? but when the form comes, it receives formal actuality,
without which it is but in possibility, which being compared to this act, it
is a kind of non-entitie.

(...). 22.
4. [ The notions of matter, form, act, power, existence, etc. have in the
understanding a distinct entity, but in nature are nowhere by themselves.
Again, these words are but artificial terms, not real things.] Notions have
their being only in the mind: it is true; but these are not notions: for then,
all things that are made of matter and form, are made of notions; and so
notions are the first principles and causes of all things. So likewise the
objects of the two noblest Sciences, to wit, Physic and Metaphysick, are only
notions and artificial terms, not real things, which cannot be.

5. [ He does not conceive, that wise men reject Astrology so much, Page
for being repugnant to Divinity, etc. To rely too much upon that vain art, he
judges to be rather folly then impiety.] I know not who he means by wise
men; but the Church and Fathers have rejected this art, as repugnant to
Divinity, and impious. Aquila Ponticus, a translatour of the Bible, was thrust
out of the Church of Christ for his study in this art. And how can this art be
excused from impiety, which overthrowes the liberty of man's will, makes the
soul of man mortal and material, by subjecting it to the power of the Stars,
makes God the author of sin, makes men careless of doing good, or avoiding
evil, which ascribes the coming of Christ, the working of his miracles, the
Prophets predictions, the Apostles labors, the patience, sufferings, and faith
of the Saints, to the influence of the Stars? And so in a word overthrowes all
religion and prayer: Orandi causas auferre conantur, says S. Austin; and
therefore this art will rather lay the fault of man's misery upon God, the mover
of the Stars, then upon man's own wickedness, says the same Father. Aug. de
Genesis ad lit. c. 17. Who in another place, to wit, in his Commentary on the
Psalms, shows, that the Converts of S. Paul, Act. 19. had been Astrologers;
and therefore the books which they burned were of Astrology. But is not
Astrology repugnant to Divinity, and impious, when it robs God of his honor?
which it does, by undertaking to foretell future contingencies, and such
secrets as are only known to God, this being his true property alone. By this
Esaias, chapter 41. distinguishes him from false gods, Declare what will come to
pass, and we shall know you to be gods. And he mockes these Diviners, chapter
47. and so does Jeremy, chapter 10. and Solomon, Eccles. chap. 8. and 10. shows
^he knowledge of future things to be hid from man; of which the Poet was not
ig^orant, when he says, Nescia men's hominum fati sortisque futurae: therefore
both the Astrologer, and he that consults with him, dishonours God in a high
nature, by giving credit to, or having commerce with, those excommunicate and
apostate Angels, and so endanger their own souls: Is it because there is no
God in Israel, that you consult with the god of Ekron? Now, that Astrologers
have commerce with evil spirits, besides the testimony of Austin, de civit.
Dei, lib. 5. cap. 7. and lib. 2. de Genesis ad lit. c. 17. and other ancient
Fathers, the proofs of diverse witnesses, and their own confessions, upon
examination, do make it apparent: Not to speak of their flagitious lives, and
their impious and atheistical Tenants; for this cause Astrologers are
condemned by Councels and Decrees of the Church, Conc. Bracar. 1. c. 9. and in
Tolet. 1. sec. part. decret. c. 26.

6. [ The Angels, Page 3^
in the very instant of their creation, actually knew all that they were
capable of knowing, and are acquainted with all free thoughts, past, present,
and to come.] They knew not so much then as they do now; because now they have
the experimental knowledge of almost six thousand years, and many things
revealed to them since their creation. Secondly, they know not our free
thoughts, even because they are free, and variable at our pleasure, not at
theirs: it is only Gods property to know the heart; yet some thing they may
know by outward signs, or by revelation. Thirdly, they know not things future;
for first, they know not the day of Judgment: secondly, they know not future
contingentcies: thirdly, they know not infallibly natural effects that are to
come, though they know their causes; because all natural causes are
subordinate to God, who, when he pleases, can stay their operations. What
Angel could foreknow (if God did not reveal it) that the Sun should stand at
the prayer of Joshua; that the fire should not burn the three Children; or the
Lions devour Daniel? Fourthly, as they know ^ot future contingencies, because
they ^ave not certain and determinate causes: ^o they know not man's
resolutions, which depend upon his will, because the will is only subject to
God, as being the principal object and end of it; and he only can ^encline it
as he pleases: Isa. 4^ 22, 23*
therefore as Esaias of the Gentile Idols, so say I of Angels, Let us know what
is to come, to wit, infallibly of your selves, and all, and we shall know that
you are gods.

7. [ Sir Kenelme says, Page 4
he has proved sufficiently light to be a solid substance and body.] These
proofs I have not seen, therefore I can say nothing to them; but this I know,
that if light be a body, when the air is illuminated, two bodies must be in
one place, and there must be penetration. Secondly, the motion of a body must
be in an instant from the one end of the world to the other: both which are
impossible. Thirdly, what becomes of this body, when the Sun goes down? Does
it putrefie, or corrupt, or vanish to nothing? all these are absurd: Or does it
follow the body of the Sun? then, when the light is contracted into a lesser
space, it must be the greater: but we find no such thing. And if light be a
body, it must be every day generated and corrupted: why should not darkness be
a body too? (...).
But of this subject I have spoken else where; therefore I will say no more
till I see Sir Kenelme's proofs.

(...). 43.
8. [ The soul has a strange kind of near dependence of the body, which is
(as it were) Gods instrument to create it by.] This phrase* I understand not: I
have already proved, that the soul has no dependence on the body, neither in
its creation, essence, or operation; it has no other dependence on the body,
but as it is the form thereof, to animate and inform it. So you may say, the
Sun depends upon the earth, to warm and illuminate it. The body is the souls
instrument, by which it produces those actions, which are called organicall
only; but that God used the body, as it were an instrument, to create the
soul by, is a new phrase, unheard of hitherto in Divinity. God immediately
creates and infuseth the soul into the body; he used no other ^^strument in
the works of creation, but ^^xit, mandavit.

9. [ Sir Kenelme thinks, Page 46
that terrene ^ules appear oftnest in Cemeteries, because ^^ey linger
perpetually after that life, which ^^ited them to their bodies, their dear
con^^rts.] I know not one soul more terrene ^^en another in its essence,
though one ^^ule may be more affected to earthly ^^ings then another. Secondly,
that life, which united the soul to the body, is not ^ost to the soul,
because it still remains in (...); as light remains still in the Sun, when
^ur Horison is deprived of it. Thirdly, if ^^ules after death appear, it must
be either (...) their own, or in other bodies; for else ^hey must be
invisible: if in their own, then ^hey must pass through the grave, and en^er
into their cold and inorganicall bodies, and add more strength to them then
ever ^hey had, to get out from under such a ^^ad of earth and rubbish: if in
other ^odies, then the end of its creation is over^hrowne; for it was made to
inform its ^wne body, to which only it has rela^ion, and to no other; and
so we must acknowledge a Pythagoricall transanimatio^ Fourthly, such
apparitions are delutions o^ Satan, and Monkish tricks, to confirm
superstition.

^ag. 46.
10. [ Souls, he says, go out of their bodie^ with affections to those
objects they leave behin^ them.] Affections, says Aristotle, are (...) in that
unreasonable part of the soul^ or rather, of the whole compositum; for the
soul has no parts: and though whilst i^ the body it receives, by means of
its immediate union with the spirits, some impressions, which we call
affections; yet, being separated, is free from such, and carrie^ nothing with
it, but the reasonableand inorganicall faculties of the Intellect and Will And,
to speak properly, affections are motions of the heart, stirred up by the
knowledge and apprehension of the object, goo^ or bad; the one by prosecution,
the other by avoiding: so that where the heart i^ not, nor the external senses
to conveig^ the object to the fantasy, nor the animal^ spirits to carry the
species of the object from the fantasy to the heart, there ca^ be no
affection; but such is the estate of ^he soul separated; it has no commerce
(...) all with the body, or bodily affections. and of this the Poets were not
ignorant, ^hen they made the departed souls to ^rink Securos latices, and
longa oblivia -- ^f the river Lethe, which is (...), the wished for goddess by
those that are in misery.

11. [ He thinks, Page 4 Page 4^
that when the slain body ^uddenly bleedeth, at the approach of the mur^erer,
that this motion of the blood is caused by ^he soul.] But this cannot be; for
the soul, when it is in the body, cannot make it ^leed when it would; if it
could, we should ^ot need Chirurgions to phlebotomise and ^carifie us: much
less then can it, being se^arated from the body. Secondly, in a ^old body the
blood is congealed, how shall it grow fluid again without heat? or how hot
without the animal and vital spirits? and how can they work without the
soul? and how can this operate without union to the body? If then any such
^leeding be, as I believe that sometimes ^here has been, and may be so again,
I think it the effect rather of a miracle, t^ manifest the murderer, then any
natural^ cause: for I have read, that a man's arme^ which was kept two years,
did, at the sigh^ of the murderer, drop with blood; which could not be
naturally, seeing it could no^ but be withered and dry after so long time: yet
I deny not but, before the body be cold, or the spirits quite gone, it may
bleed; some impressions of revenge and anger being left in the spirits
remaining, which may move the blood: but the safest way is, to attribute such
motions of the blood to the prayers of these souls under the Altar, saying,
Quousque, Domine?

(...). 51.
12. [ No annihilation can proceed from God: it is more impossible, that
not-being should flow from him, then that cold should flow immediately from
fire.] It Is true, that God is not an efficient cause of annihilation (for of a
nonentity there can be no cause) yet we may safely say, that he is the
deficient cause: for, as the creatures had both their creation, and have still
their conservation, by the influx of Gods Almighty power, who, as the Apostle
says, sustaines all things by the word of his power: so if he should suspend
or withdraw this influx, all things must return to nothing, as they were made
of nothing. There is then in the creature both a passive possibility of
annihilation, and in God an active possibility to withdraw his assistance: and
why should we be afraid to affirm such a power in God? Before the world was
made there was annihilation, and yet God was still the same, both before and
since, without any alteration in him: So, if the world were annihilated, God
should lose nothing, being in himself all things. Again* as God suspended his
work of creation the seventh day, without any diminution of his power and
goodness; so he may suspend, if he please, the work of conservation, which
is a continuated production. Besides, as God created not the world by necessity
of his nature, but by his free will; so by that same freedom of will, he
sustaines what he has created, and not by any necessity: and therefore not
only corruptible bodies, but even spirits and angels, have in them a
possibility of annihilation, if God should withdraw from them his conservative
influence. Jeremy was not ignorant of his own and his peoples annihilation, if
God should correct them in fury, Ierem. 10. But, though there be a possibility
in the creatures (if God withdraw his power) of annihilation, yet we must not
think, that this possibility in them flows from the principles of their own
nature; for in material substances there is no such possibility, seeing the
matter is eternal: and much less can it be in immateriall substances, in
which there is neither physical composition, nor contrariety. As the Sun then
is the cause of darkness, and the Pilot the cause of shipwreck: the one, by
withdrawing his light; the other, by denying his assistance: so may God be the
cause of annihilation, by suspending or subtracting his influence.

(...). 78.
13. [ He thinks it is a gross conception to think, that every atome of the
body, or every grain of ashes of the cadaver burned and scattered by the wind,
should be raked together, and made up anew into the same body it was.] But this
is no gross conceit, if he consider the power of the Almighty, who can with as
great facility reunite these dispersed atoms, as he could at first create
them; utpote idoneus est reficere qui fecit. The Gentiles objected the same
unto the Christians, as a gross conceit of theirs, as Cyril shows, (...)
to whom Tertullian returns this answer, That it is as easy to collect the
dispersed ashes of thy body, as to make them of nothing, Ubicunque resolutus
fueris, quaecunque te materia destruxerit, hauserit, aboleverit, in nihil
prodegerit, reddet te, ejus est nihilum ipsum cujus est totum.

14. But Sir Kenelme in his subsequent discourse, to salve this gross
conception, Pa^ 81 83 85
as he calls it, of collecting the dispersed ashes of the burned body, [ tells
us, that the same body shall rise that fell; but it shall be the same in form
only, not in matter; which he proves by some reasons: First, that it is the
form, not the matter that gives numericall individuation to the body.
Secondly, that the matter, without form, has no actual being. Thirdly, that
identity belongs not to the matter by it self. Fourthly, that the body of a
man is not the same it was, when it was the body of a child. Fifthly, he
illustrates this by some Similies: As, that a ship is still the same, though it
be all new timbered: The Thames is still the same river, though the water is
not the same this day that flowed heretofore: That a glass full of water,
taken out of the sea, is distinguished from the rest of the water; but being
returned back again, becomes the same with the other stock: and the glass,
being again filled with the seawater, though not out of the same place, yet
it is the same glass full of water that it was before: That, if the soul of a
newly dead man should be united to another body, taken from some hill in
America, this body is the same identicall body he lived with before his
death.] This is the sum of Sir Kenelm's Philosophy and Divinity concerning
the resurrection; In which are these mistakes: First, the resurrection, by this
opinion, is overthrown; a surrection we may call it of a body, but not the
resurrection of the same body. This is no new opinion, but the heresy of the
Marcionites, Basilidians, and Valentinians, whom Tertullian calls Partianos
sententiae Sadducaeorum, as acknowledging but half a resurrection: Resurrectio
dici non potest, ubi non resurgit quod cecidit, says Gregory. Secondly, Phil.
21.
Christ is said (...), to transfigure or transform our vile bodies in the
resurrection; but if the same numericall body rise not, our resurrection will
be a forming of a new body, not a transforming of the old: Or, an assumption of
a body rather, then a resurrection: Or, if you please, a Pythagoricall
transanimation. Thirdly, the end why man was made, or why his body was united
to his soul, was, that both might enjoy God, the chief beatitude; but man
should be frustrated of his end, if the same body did not rise that was given
him in the creation. Fourthly, if the essential form of man's body was totally
lost, as the forms of other creatures are by corruption, we might have some
reason to think, that the body should not rise the same numerically which
fell: but man's soul, which is his essential form, remains still the same;
therefore the body shall return the same. Fifthly, though the child begotten
be not numerically the same with the parent begetting, because the whole matter
of the parent is not transfused into the child; yet, in the resurrection, the
same numericall body shall return that fell, because the whole matter of it
remains. Sixthly, though the union of the body to the soul in the
resurrection be not numerically the same action that was in generation, yet the
body shall be the same; because the entity and unity of the body is not
hindered by the multiplication or iteration of accidents, such as union is.
Seventhly, our resurrection shall be conformable to Christ's; but he raised up
the same numericall temple of his body which was destroyed; as the same
numericall body of Jonas was disgorged, which was swallowed by the Whale.
Eighthly, if in artificial things the introduction of a new form makes not
the matter to be identically different from what it was, much less can man's
body be any other then what it was, by introducting the same essential form,
which was never lost, though for a while separated. Ninthly, it stands with
Gods justice and man's comfort, that the same body which was the souls
companion in tribulation, should be also companion with it in glory; that the
same body, which was to the soul the organ of iniquity, should be also the
organ of pain and misery; the same souls and bodies that run together in the
same race, let them wear the same crown, and reign together in the same
glory. Let the Baptist have the same head he lost, and Bartholomew the same
skin he parted with. This was Job's comfort on the dunghill, that though
worms destroy his body, yet he should see God in his flesh, whom I my self
(says he) shall see, and mine eyes shall behold, and none other for me,
though my reins are consumed within me.

His second mistake is, [ That the form, not the matter, gives numericall
individuation to the body.] Is the dead body of an Ethiopian numerically the
same with the dead body of a Scythian? he will not say so; then they are
different bodies: but by what? the form is gone: is not then the difference in
respect of the matter and accidents, which remain in the carcass? It Is true,
that the chief cause of individuation is the form in men, yet not as it gives
essence; for so it makes the specificall union by which all men are one; but as
it gives existence to the matter, which it terminates with quantity, and
invests with other accidents, which matter and accidents are the secondary
cause of individuation: but in dead bodies, the form of man being gone, there
remains nothing but the form of a carcass, or the form of mixtion, which
determinating the matter of the carcass with its accidents, makes up the
numericall individuation, by which one carcass is distinguished from another.

His third mistake, [ That the matter, without form, has no actual being.]
The matter, as it is a substance and has entity, as it is the other principle
of generation, and as it is the cause of motion, it must needs have an actual
being, or else it can be none of these: it must be all one with privation, if
it have no actual being. It Is true, it has not that measure of actual being,
which it receives from the form, till the union; and yet I see not how the
matter is at any time without form, seeing it is never without privation,
which presupposes a form in the matter, which is to be expelled for
introduction of another.

His fourth mistake, [ That identitie belongs not to the matter by it self.]
So he may as well say, that entity belongs not to the matter by it self; for
identity follows the entity, as unity does, which is in a manner the same that
identity: he should have said, that matter gives not identity to things,
neither genericall, specificall, nor numericall, for such proceeds from the
form; yet there can be neither of these identities, without the matter: for
the conjunction of the form with the matter makes identity; and yet before the
form be united, the particular parts of the matter have their particular
identities and inclinations to such and such forms: as* man's seed to the form
of a man, not of an horse; an egg to the form of a chick, not of a man; so
after the soul is gone, that identity remains in the matter which was before,
to wit, an inclination to that form which once it had, rather then to any
other; or, rather then any other part of the matter can have to this form.

His fifth mistake, [ That the body of a man is not the same it was.]
Philo^ophers say, that the matter remains after the form is gone; so that a
dead body, in respect of its matter, is the same it was whilst the soul was in
it: If then the absence or change of the form takes not away the identity of
the matter, much less can that identity of the body be gone, whilst the soul
remains in it. They that bring marks and spots in their skins, as Seleucus and
Augustus did, retain them still until their skin be consumed; which shows,
that the body is the same in infancy and old age. If Ulysses had not brought
home, after his twenty years travel, the same body he carried out, his Nurse
had not known him by his foot; nor had his dog fawned on him. I know the
common opinion is, that the body is the same in respect of continuation, and
because it has the same essential form; otherwise there is a continual
deperdition and reparation of the matter by nutrition and auction: but I cannot
find, that there is any deperdition of the solid parts, or any alteration in
the heterogeneall, but only in the blood and spirits, or such fluid parts: And
doubtless, the primogeneall or radical humor, which we bring with us, we
retain still in us, till it be quite wasted, and then there is no reparation;
so that the body is still the same, whilst the soul is in it, both in respect
first, of continuation; secondly, of the form of man; thirdly, of the form of
mixtion; fourthly, of the solid homogeneall parts; fifthly, of all the
heterogeneall; sixthly, of the radical moisture and natural heat: so that if
there be any deperdition, it is in respect of the fluid parts only, and that so
slowly and insensibly, that there is no reason why we should think, the body
of an old man to be any other then what it was in childhood; and if it were
not the same, it could not be the fit subject of generation and corruption,
nutrition, augmentation and alteration.

Lastly, for his Similies, they will not hold: for, a ship which is all new
timbered, though it be called the same in vulgar speech, yet indeed is not the
same; for the form which remains, is only artificial and accidental, which
ought not to carry away the name of identity or diversity from the materials,
which are substantial. Secondly, the Thames is the same river now that
heretofore, not in respect of the water, which is still flowing, but in respect
of the same springs that feed it, the same channel that contains it, and the
same banks that restrain it; so that the Thames is still the same, but the
water without these other makes not the Thames: neither is there any
consequence from a fluid to a solid body. Thirdly, a glass full of seawater,
is the same glass when it is full and empty; but the water is not the same
which is taken out of diverse parts of the sea: I mean not the same individual
water, though it be the same specificall, to wit, of the same sea; no more then
two branches lopt off from a tree are the same, though the tree be the same.
Fourthly, the soul of a newly dead man, united to another body, will not make
it the same identicall body he lived with before his death; for, if the soul
of Dives had entered into the scabby body of Job or Lazarus, had that been his
indenticall body which he left? then that tongue of Job or Lazarus which was,
must be tormented in flames, and that tongue of Dives which was, shall ^cape:
is this justice? If the soul of Lazarus, when it was four days absent from
^he body, had not returned to that body that was his, and which Christ raised,
but to the body of some other, that had been doubtless no resurrection of
Lazarus his body, but a transmigration of Lazarus his soul.

In the Postscript [ Sir Kenelme does not conceive grace to be a quality
infused by God into the soul, but a concatenation rather or complex of
motives, that incline a man to piety, and set on foot by Gods grace and
favor.] It Is true, we are not justified by any inherent or infused quality in
us, which the Romanists call gratia gratis data; for when the Scripture speaks
of our justification, it speaks of that grace, which is set in opposition to
works; not only such as may be done by a natural man out of the light of
reason, but such as are called the gifts of Gods Spirit* for Abraham was
justified not by his works, but by faith; Romans ^ Romans ^
and we are justified by faith, not by the works of the Law. If of grace,
then not of works, otherwise grace were not grace. Faith there, is (...) taken
for a quality, but for the object a^prehended by faith, which is Christ; (...)
grace in the matter of Justification is tak^^ for the free acceptance, mercy
and goo^nesse of God in Christ. By this grace w^ are saved, Tim. ^.
and this was given us before the world was made; therefore this grace ca^
signify nothing inherent in us: But if we^ take the word Grace in a larger
extent, the^ it signifies every thing freely given; for gratia is from gratis,
and so Nature it self, and the gifts of Nature are graces, for we deserved them
not: ^ugust.
Ex gratia nos fecit Deus, (...) ex gratia refecit. So in a stricter sense,
thos^ spiritual gifts of God, which more neerl^ cencerne our salvation, are
called (...) graces, in Scripture: faith, hope, charity, an^ other Christian
virtues, are called graces, and yet they are qualities: the gifts of
prophesying, teaching, or evangelizing, are qualities, and yet are graces: For
to every one o^ us is given grace, Ephesians. ^.7.
according to the measure o^ the gift of Christ. Psa. 4 5.
Eloquence is that grace, which was diffused in Christ's lips. The Gospel is
that grace, ^ohn 1.
under which we are, ^ot under the Law: therefore though the ^^ace, by which
we are justified, is no qua^^ty i^herent in us; yet we must not deny, ^ut
those graces, by which we are sancti^ed, are qualities. But to say with Sir
Ke^elme, [that the accidents of misfortune, the ^entlenesse and softness of
nature, the impre^editated chance of hearing a Sermon, should ^ake up that
which we call justifying grace] ^or of this he speaks) is a harsh and
dan^erous phrase, and contradictory to his ^wne position; for, what is
gentleness and ^oftnesse of nature, but qualities? and yet ^ee will have them
to make up that grace, ^y which man is converted, and so he will ^ave our
conversion or justification to de^end on our selves.

And thus have I briefly pointed at the ^istakes of this noble and learned
Knight, those worth and ingenuity is such, that ^ee will not take it amiss in
me, to vindi^ate the truth, which is the thing I one^y aim at. The Moon has
her spots, and ^he greatest men have their failings. No man is free from error
in this life. Truth could never yet be monopolized; the great Merchants of
spiritual Babylon have not engrossed it to themselves, nor was it ever tied to
the Popes Keys, for all their brags: The God of truth send us a time* wherein
mercy and truth may meet together, righteousness and peace may kiss each
other. Amen.

FINIS.

