GOOD SERVICE HITHERTO ILL REWARDED. OR, An Historical Relation of eight years
Services for KING and PARLIAMENT done in and about Manchester and those parts.

By Lieu: Col. JOHN ROSWORM.



LONDON: Printed in the Year, 1649.

TO THE HONORABLE HOUSE of COMMONS assembled in PARLIAMENT.
Honorable Gentlemen:
THis poor piece, would gladly beg an hour from You, at Your best leisure;
In it You will see the multiplied wrongs, and sad Extremities of a faithful
stranger. The honor of doing me justice is reserved for You. When You read
this, think such a one Your Petitioner, as abhors all faithless and indirect
courses, and therefore must unavoidably perish without Your sudden succor.

It is in You to prevent what I cannot but fear; which done accordingly, the
Earth shall not bear a more thankful Remembrancer, than

Your most humble Servant, John Rosworm.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THOMAS Lord FAIRFAX, General of all the Forces in
England and Ireland. OLIVER CROMWELL, Lieutenant General of the Armies. JOHN
BRADSHAW, Lord President of the high Court of Justice.
Right Honorable,
I Would it were not my unhappines to see the day, wherein I should trouble You
with such a sad story, as here I am bold humbly to present You. In it you will
see, the faithfulness of a Servant, the Rewards of his Service, the
Extremities he is in, and his encouraged hopes of finding relief from you.

His Petitions, I hope, will shortly find your eyes, or ears, or both: Oh let
them not want your hearts, of which I cannot doubt, if your leisure will suffer
you to peruse this naked Relation. I trouble you no more, but with this only
addition, that I shall be ever a most thankful Historian of the reparation you
shall afford me. And be,

Your most faithful and humble Servant, John Rosworme.

Errata.
Page 23. l. 19. Ratcliefs, r. Ratclief. p. 28. l. 8. unthenkfulnesse, r.
unthankfulness. p. 37. l. 2. fram; r. from. p. 40. l. 7. that, r. to that. p.
40. l. 16. others: r. others?

AN HISTORICAL Relation of Lieut: Coll: ROSWORMS Service and Rewards, since
the first beginning of these Wars.
THen certainly, if ever, may a man speak of his well done Services, when
either a just Relation of them, may be the remedy of his present miseries, or a
feeble case of his over-burdened heart: both these at this time have an
influence upon me; glad would I be, if the former end might prove successful.
And truly why should I not hope it? But if Equity and Reason has left England,
if I and mine must rot, starve, perish, famish, that have been a means to
preserve others from such dreadful ends, when they whom I served, both can,
and should, and may, and that most easily, discharge their obligations to me,
and therein succor me. If it must be so, I shall yet have a little ease in
letting the world know both what I have done, and how I have been dealt with;
in either of which if I blot one line with a falsehood, I make no question, but
some of my back-friends will labor to let as many see their teeth, as I defire
may see the truth. Which as briefly and orderly as I can, I shall now begin.

HAving at the beginning of the Irish Insurrection upon just discontents
forsaken that Kingdom, I came into England, and particularly to Manchester,
where I fastened my strangers home; I had not lived there three months, before
the differences of this Kingdom were heightened into a War, and all parts were
full of confusion. The Town of Manchester, amongst others, apprehending a
manifest danger of ruin, from the Earl of Darby and his strength, who appeared
for the King; having none that knew what belonged to Military affairs, either
for offense, or defense, and having observed, and heard of me that I was bred
up in Soldiery from my youth, well skilled in Fortifications, nor contemptibly
furnished with all other military abilities: propounded and concluded with me a
Contract under hand and seal, for half a year, engaging me by the utmost of my
advice and skill, to endeavor the security of their Town, and engaging
themselves, in consideration of my service for that time, to pay me 30 li. we
agreed accordingly. I must be bold to say, that my undertaking of this Service
(though for a poor reward) as it was not small in it self; so it proved in the
consequents as considerable, both to the weakening of the Kings party, and the
strengthening of the Parliaments, as any action in that kind, through the
passages of that year: for (let it be considered) four for one in that Town,
if not more, favored my Lord of Darby, and had publicly vowed to cut my
throat, if ever I attempted any works to keep him out. The other party which
favored my undertakings, were full of fears, and confusions, not knowing which
way to turn themselves: the Town in all it is entrances, open, and without any
defense about it; A powerful Enemy continually expected to come upon them,
which within three weeks of our Contract fell out: surely these were
circumstances, which might easily have made it lawful to fear, and in that
fear to decline a service of this nature: But being desirous to do the Town the
best office, that either I could do, or they could wish, I put my life in my
hand, I over-looked all dangers and difficulties, and undertook this Charge,
which how I have discharged, let the world judge.

By the way observe, that the very next morning after my Contract, my Lord of
Darby sent two Gentlemen to me, with 150 l. as a Present from his Lordship,
with an invitation to attend him at Latham. It Was easy to see, what the drift
of this kindness was. But 30 l. if backed with my promise, contract, or
engagement, I have ever learned to value above all offers; honesty being more
worth than gold. Returning therefore my thanks for the Earls nobleness, and
the money with my thanks, I dismissed these Gentlemen, and addressed my self to
my trust.

My first aim was to set up good Posts and Chains, to keep out the Enemies
Horse; which by the contrivance of a false Alarm, and by the help of the
Countries coming in, upon the ringing of the Bells backwards, devised purposely
for this end, I safely performed, though many tongues had doomed me to death,
if ever I attempted it. This was done upon Wednesday the 22. of September, 1642.

Having by this devise drawn some Armed men into the Town, I earnestly pressed,
that they might be carefully provided for, heartned and encouraged; for I was
confident, that within less then a week, that the Enemy would make a real
approach, and then these men would stead us; they took my advice; and my
prediction fell out accordingly.

In that small time of preparation which I had, I fortified and barricadoed up
every streets end, with the addition of Mud-wals, which were unfinished when
the Earl came upon us, I advised how our men should be assigned through each
part about the Town; But Salford-bridge the only place of manifest danger,
greatest action, and least defense, upon others refusal, I undertook my self:
though by my engagements I was not bound to fight at all, but to advise, and
direct only.

For this service, September: the 28. I took with me 50. Musketeers: we lay
there till Monday without action.

Monday, September: 27. I was necessitated, to send 20. of my Musketeers to
Captain Bradshaw at the Deans-gate which never returned: that afternoon, though
thus weakened, I was numerously assaulted; but through the goodness of him,
who saved us, my 30 Musketeers (having no Brest-work but a Chain) gave them a
sound repulse.

The next day, September. 28. the Enemy played at us with his great Pieces, which
being a strange noise, and terror to my raw men, sixteen of them took their
heels; the rest, some for fear of my drawn sword, others out of gallantry,
resolving rather to dye, than to forsake me, stuck close to me, and to the
safety of their Town. I was now few in number, but found some pity from some
other gallant hearts, who voluntarily came in to my assistance, making up my
number 28. And this was my huge Army even then, when I had not only many
Enemies without, but dangerous temptations within to deal with. For the Enemy
finding their assault not to take success, nor their Cannons to terrify us,
as at the first, several parleys sore against my will, were sent into the
Town: whereof I gave my Soldiers a little notice, with encouragements to stand
out, to the utmost.

Particularly, Wednesday, September: 29. the Earl offered upon the delivery of
some 100 Muskets to withdraw his Forces, and march away. To back this offer,
Colonel Holland understanding my averseness, earnestly pressed me to
condescend to the motion, using withal these three Reasons. First, said he, we
have neither Powder nor Match. I confess I had only six pound of the one, and
18. fathom of the other; but this was only known to my self. Secondly, the
Countrymen (said he, though falsely,) will stay no longer, their own houses and
goods lying open to the mercy of the Enemy. Thirdly, said he, the Enemy is
increased in strength. With these arguments did he not only urge, but almost
command the embracing of the Earls Proposals. I related these things to my
Soldiers, who unanimously resolving never to yield to my Lord of Darby, so
long as I would stand out, and they had an inch of Match, or a shot of Powder:
my heart leaped at such courage, and thereupon I peremptorily refused any terms
whatever. Which so passionately moved Colonel Holland, that he left me in
great anger and discontent. Immediately after this, Master Bourne, an aged and
grave Minister, came down to the Bridge to me, I told him Colonel Hollands
language, and the dangerous concernment it tended to, I advised him, that if he
desired to prevent the mischief which might ensue, he would immediately walk to
the Deansgate, and from thence to the other Centuries, using his best
encouragements to prop up their hearts against any dangers; and assuring them
from me, that whereas the Enemy now, made no assaults, but where I was, I was
confident with the help of Almighty God, and my few men, to defend it against
their whole Power, nor should they ever enter at my guard. The heartned old man
quickly left me, and followed my advice, with such gravity and cheerfulness,
that I cannot but ascribe much to it, as to the means of our preservation.
Having thus prevailed for a refusal of all terms, sent in by the Enemy, our
height of resolution to defend our selves to the utmost was returned to the
Earl; who finding by our actions that we spoke as we meant, within 3. days
after, withdrew this siege, and gave me leave with about ten of my men in open
view, to fetch away a great number of good Arms from them.

Thus was Manchester freed from the danger of her first brunt; wherein how
far I was isntrumental, if impartial men cannot see, I will appeal from
them to my Enemies; If either can deny me an acknowledgement, I am content the
world should be blind, and what I have done should be buried: But was the
safety of Manchester, the whole of Manchesters safety? He that shall view in
a Prospective the state of things at that time in the Kingdom, must yet see
more, my Lord of Essex had then at that instant no great Forces, and those very
remote from those parts. And surely if the actions of Manchester, had not
sufficiently balanced the Earl of Darbies Forces, or had that Town yielded
either to his Assaults or Proposals, Lancashire, and all those associated
Counties, had been at his service; and the whole Souldery therein at his
disposing; which with his own Soldiers would have made up at least 9000 well
armed fighting men, besides Horse. These joined to his Majesty's Body, who
only wanted Infantery, would have made such an Army as in humane reason could
not have found an opposition strong enough from all the Parliaments Forces,
which at that time could be brought together. These concernments I only touch
at, because, though my heart would break, if I should not let the world know,
how I have served, and am served; yet I have no mind to draw my own picture.
Only one thing more let me add, to do my self a little right, since none else
hitherto have done. This Town was not only a foyl to an assaulting Enemy, but
a strength, help, and Magazine to all the adjacent Counties, as they stood
engaged for the Parliaments service. But of this enough.

The Earl of Darby having afforded me a vacancy by his departure, I thoroughly
set my self to raise up my Works of Fortification about the Town, during the
residue of that half year, for which my Contract was made: In which I did not
only prosecute that to my utmost, by my directions, but having declared my
judgment, that unless we did something speedily against the Earl, he would
get head again, and do us new mischief: We thereupon gathered our Forces
together, went out, and upon December. 24. we shattered the Enemy at Shewbent,
and the same night we took Leigh by assault, returning again within three days.

I was now so observed for my faithfulness and success, that Januar. 2d.
following I was unexpectedly honored with a Commission from my Lord Wharton,
to be Lieutenant Coll: of a Foot Regiment to Coll: Ashton, with which Febr. 6.
I was commanded by Sergeant Major General Seaton, to join with Coll: Hollands
Regiment, and to attempt Preston, which was accordingly taken by assault, Febr.
8. And afterward at Sergeant Major General Seatons, and the Deputy
Lieutenants request, was fortified by my direction.

I kept this Command of Lieutenant Coll: during the residue of my half years
service contracted for with the Town of Manchester, which being now expired,
they then observed, what they cannot without shame remember now, that I was
both trusty, and successful. They were loath to for-go such a servant, and
therefore propounded new terms to me, offering me an annuity of 60 li. per
annum, to be paid 15 li. quarterly, during the lives both of my self and wife,
which should survive the longest, if I would by my advice prosecute the
finishing of their Fortifications, and the ordering of all Military affairs
conducing to the safety of the Town, and upon all occasions be ready to give
directions accordingly. At the same time also they with the Deputy Lieutenants
desired me to accept of a Foot Company in the Garrison of Manchester, engaging
themselves to maintain it, as long as it was a Garrison, and to pay me 40 s.
per week in part of my Captains pay, and the rest was to go upon the public
Faith. I was pressed to accept this so importunately on their part, and by one
reason so strongly within my self, which was, that by embracing the first of
these Proposals, I should not leave a desolate Widow without a poor
subsistence, in case a warlike end should befall my self, that I laid down my
Lieutenants Colonels Commission, and closed with their Contract; and is this
circumstance nothing to chain these men to their promises? Those hearts
certainly are deeply rooted in the Earth, which Reason, Equity, Conscience, nay
and shame cannot pull out with such ropes.

My Engagement being past, I returned to my Charge, enlarged my Fortifications,
left nothing unprepared, as time would permit, which might not make an Enemy a
strong work to attempt me.

Whilst I was prosecuting these things, I was solicited, April the 1. 1643.
by the Deputy Lieutenants to attend and assist our Forces, against Wigan; for
indeed the Soldiers declared themselves discontented, if I went not along with
them. I went accordingly, being loath that those should want any of my service,
who had afforded me so much room in their hearts; nor were we without a happy
success in our attempt, for by a gallant assault, chiefly of Colonel Ashtons
men, we took that strong Town in less than an hour: The Town being taken, to
my best remembrance, we sent 500 Musketeers of Colonel Ashtons men to secure
Bolton, not far from us: Whilst the Town was taken, the Enemy having for a
refuge observed and fitted the Church and steeple adjoining for their
advantage, fled thither as many as could, and killed from thence, I dare say,
more men, after the taking of the Town, than we had lost in the whole assault
besides. Whilst we struggled with this difficulty, an Alarm was sent us from
the Enemy, I went speedily with some few Horse to view the state they stood in,
I found them only three slender troops of Horse, who observing us to present a
resolute face toward them, they instantly tried their heels, and gave us
language enough in their disorder, to tell us we need not trouble our selves
with such Enemies. I returned with what have I could, with the truth in my
mouth, but found Colonel Holland in such a shaking agony of fear, that he was
ready to march away with all our Forces, consisting of 2000. Foot, most part
good Musketeers, the rest Club and Bill men, and to my best remembrance about
200. or 300. horse, besides eight Piece of Ordnance, and no want either of
Ammunition or provisions. And surely with this Force I durst have seen the face
of the greatest Enemies we had about us, though conjoined at that time. Having
this confidence, I earnestly desired him not to leave that Garrison so
fearfully, that was won so gallantly; or if he would not stay himself, to leave
me 500 Musketeers, and one troop of Horse, and clear me of the Prisoners, of
which we had already good store, and I would entertain any attempt of the
Enemy, and prosecute the rest of the service touching the Town, which was yet
unfinished. His Answer was, Stay, that stay would, he nor any of his men,
either would or should stay. I could almost have torn my flesh at this answer;
yet suppressing my passion, with deep entreaties, and repeated persuasions, he
was at length wrought so far, as to promise a stay till I had forced those
who had possessed the advantage of the Church steeple wholly to surrender; I
having assured him, that I would either do it, or otherwise in one hour blow
them up: He gave me his hand to assure me of his stay. I thereupon first
summoned them, but in vain. I prepared for execution, the event whereof
startling the Enemy, they all surrendered, being 86. in number. But whilst I
was receiving their Arms, and making preparation for their Convoy, Colonel
Holland (for, alas, who can settle a trembling heart?) marched away with all
the Forces, left me with one Company only, (these also, fearing their
inabilitie to deal with so many prisoners, forsaking me) engaged amongst 400
prisoners, many good Arms, two great Pieces of Ordnance, in the midst of a
Town where generally all the Towns-people were great Malignants. Being thus
wholly forsaken by all, I was forced first to run to find Horse, and then to
fly for my life, which in such a danger was most strangely saved.

All that adhered to the Parliament through the whole Kingdom, and knew the
circumstances of this assault, rejoiced at the taking and supposed keeping of
Wigan, as a confiderable service; It being thought an impregnable piece, the
Enemies pride, and our fear; only Colonel Holland seemed to be troubled that
I perished not in the action; and therefore finding that I survived his
treachery in leaving me in the midst of so many enraged Enemies, as I before
showed; did the best he could to destroy me and my family a worse May. For
presently upon the taking of that Town, as a noble gratuity for that service,
and yet saving my own life, the 40 s. per week as part of my Captains pay (the
only main pillar of my family expenses) was by Colonel Hollands command,
subscribing 2 hands more for the countenancing of his unworthiness, taken away
from me, upon this pretense, that I had not taken the Covenant, and was
suspended for above a year; during all which time notwithstanding, I was still
kept in my employment.

I cannot forget that about that time, and many times since, I received
several Letters of acknowledgement from some eminent persons in the Kingdom,
but I could feed neither my dog, nor my cat with them, much less my horses,
which I have kept always at my own expenses in the service, though afterward
upon second thoughts some of my charges were allowed me: but as for my family,
who could not live upon the bare return of my expenses, I was compelled to try
an unhappy experiment, whether I could feed them with I thank you. But enough
of this.

Wigan service done, and undone, for which I was paid accordingly, I came to
my charge at Manchester, whence not long after I was desired to ride to
Lever-pool, to direct the Fortisications there, I stayed there five days,
without any reward.

March 11. after my return thence, I, besides many more out of Manchester and
the County, was summoned up by Warrant to attend the Committee of Examinations
upon the 15. of April next after, and to give in our Informations touching
Colonel Hollands actions, where all this, and diverse things more were
justified to his face, as his perfidious dealings at Wigan, his actions
touching Mr. Peter Heywood and his eagerness in urging me to deliver up
Manchester, when I kept Salford bridge, at the first. But his great friends in
the house prevailed for his escape, accounting it perhaps a sufficient
punishment that he was so publicly shamed. Whereas if I had been guilty of the
like, I am sure the Law of Arms would have condemned and executed me for bad
service, that am sought to be famished for good.

About July 4 after, the Earl of Newcastle with no small Force made an angry
approach toward Lancashire, our men were sent out to oppose his passage, nor
was I thought fit to be present at this action: The issue was, our men were
soundly beaten at Wicked-hill in Yorkshire, and pursued into Lancashire by the
Enemy, who quickly also possessed himself of Hallifax, about 16. miles distant
from us. When I had received this sad intelligence, I informed my self of the
nature of the passes, by which the Enemy most easily could come in upon us; and
finding them capable of a sudden Fortification, by the consent of the Deputy
Lieutenants, I quickly helped Nature with Art, strengthening Blackestone Edge,
and Blackegate, and manning them with Soldiers, to prevent the Earls dangerous
approach, by which means being diverted, like an angry storm with a gust, he
went to the siege of Hull.

How considerable this diversion of so powerful an Enemy was, let reason
judge; for certainly, whereas he never reached his end at Hull, if he had
gotten in amongst us, we were not only in a manifest danger of being overrun
by an enraged Enemy, but all parts within an ordinary distance, would have felt
the smarting bitterness of his heavy hands.

1643. Jan. 19. following, I received order from Sir Thomas Fairfax to
accompany his Forces to the relieving of Nantwitch, at that time closely
besieged by the Enemy. Where how I discharged the trust reposed in me, I leave
to the testimony of his Excellency, whose name I shall always remember with
honor.

Nantwitch relieved, I repaired to my home, where I have with my utmost skill
nourished a company of vipers, who in recompense would eat my bowels.

From thence I was once more, Aug. 16. 1644. commanded by Sir John Meldrum to
attend him to the siege of Leverpoole, which continued full ten weeks, I there
served as Master of the Ordnance, gave directions for diverse Works. In a word,
I failed not in any thing which could be expected from me during the siege, it
was surrendered November. 4. For all which, and many other services, I am to this
day unrewarded.

And now I come to my last actions, not a little conducing to the great shame
and dishonor of Manchester, and the farther evidences of my own honesty.

After the siege of Leverpoole, the Parliament with a great Force laid siege
to York; to raise this siege, Prince Rupert made an hasty and a furious march,
with a very great Army; so that from the beginning of these Wars, there were
not two such numerous Armies, nor so fiercely resolved each against other, as
met at length upon the occasion of that siege; Prince Rupert, well noting, that
there were two ways to raise this siege, which was the whole of his work and
design; the one by policy, the other by force, left neither unattempted; His
political method lay no where so strongly for his end, as to corrupt me for
the betraying of Manchester, wherein had he sped, York siege would have raised
of it self. To effect this, Prince Rupert joined my Lord Byron to himself in
the transactions; and having the advantage of one Mr. Peter Heywood, by his
means labored with me for the betraying of the Town.

This Mr. Peter Heywood, who at this time sits at his ease, and enjoyes his
own, whilst I for want of it endure extreme misery: was a Captain in
Lancashire for the Parliament, was often in our private consultations; and by
holding intelligence with the Enemy, did us much mischief. He went often to
Chester, Oxford, and other Garrisons of the Enemy, discovering our secret
results. This being at length found out, and proved against him, he was secured
by the Committee; and yet, without the consent of the rest of the Committee,
contrary to an Ordinance touching such cases, released by Coll: Holland; two of
his friends also being bound for his appearance, which never were questioned,
though he presently upon his enlargement went to the Enemy, and was afterward
thought the only fit instrument to work me to this treachery.

His method was, first to take advantage of the injurious and most unthankful
unworthiness, which the Town had used toward me, stirring those passions in
me, which he knew were deeply provoked. This done, he offered in the behalf of
Prince Rupert, that I should have a very great sum of money paid me in my
hand, before my delivery of the Town, that I should have great preferments
under Prince Rupert; besides the perpetual obligations of affection and honor
from many most noble friends, which I should look upon as purchased by the
desert of such a seasonable and useful service.

I was not so little a fool, though I never meant to be a knave, but I gave the
propounder audience, gave some encouragement to the business, so much as to
fish out which way the Enemy would lay his stratagem, and to secure my self
from suspicion on their part, appointed them a time of receiving their hopes.
And I must needs say, I could with more ease have sold them, man, woman and
child, with all they had into their Enemies hands, than at any time I could
have preserved them. But, alas, I should then have been a Manchester man, for
never let an unthankful man, and a promise-breaker, have another name.

When I had found out the bottom of the plot, and searched out the method of
their intention; Immediately I sent for six of the chief men of the Town, laid
open the whole design, told them how to prevent the danger, labored night and
day to get our Cannons to the Work, repaired our Mudwals, as well as time would
suffer. In a word, left nothing uncared for, which was necessary to entertain
an assault. But the Enemy having got some intelligence of our actions by our
treacherous friends, or homebred enemies, when he had marched within one or
two miles of Manchester at his appointed time, having notice of an hot
entertainment, instead of Manchester, steared his course another way.

I must not forget here a new piece of wrong, Manchester and the whole Kingdom
received from Coll: Holland at this time, that very morning which I had
discovered the plot, Coll: Holland had summoned the Soldiers of Salford
Hundred, consisting of almost 4000 Musketeers to my best remembrance. He was
desired by us at Manchester, that these Soldiers might quarter in or near the
Town, that they might assist us in times of danger: But how were we answered?
he disbanded these men, went away, left us to our selves, there being no
established Soldiers in the Town at that time: but that one single Company
under my command, and some few of Major Radliffs Company, which, with all that
could be persuaded to look to the security of their lives and livelihoods, made
not up so many Musketeers, as to double our guards, much less reasonably to
enable us against a resolute Enemies attempt. Nor was our distress without
many aggravating circumstances, for besides the decay of our Mudwals, and the
unmounting of our Cannons, we knew not who to trust. The insinite toil, pains,
and indefatigable industry, night and day, which I used at this time, all that
had eyes in that Town saw, and all that have tongues can witness; insomuch
that the ablest, and richest of those who had engaged themselves for my
Annuity, being overcome with the consideration of my pains, and the shining
evidences of my fidelity, gave me deep protestations and promises, That if ever
the hand of Providence should lead them to peace again, and that Trading might
once again flourish, they would out of their own private purses, enlarge my
reward; particularly four of the six to whom I first discovered the Enemies
stratagem, specified their sums. Mr. Johnson promised me 10 li. Mr. Gaskell
20 li. Mr. Hunt 30. Mr. Hartley 40 li. yearly, as long as I lived. But, alas,
when our distress was over, which lasted a week, this smoke vanished. The
issue was this, that whereas Coll: Holland (who ever has been (as you may see
all along) the bountiful rewarder, encourager, and furtherer of my good
services) had suspended my 40 s. per week, part of my Captains pay, for a whole
year, they drew a most importunate Petition to the House, for the Arrears of my
pay, and continuance of it, for the time to come; recommending me also for some
noble gratuity agreeable to my deserts and quality. This Petition begot me an
Order for my discontinued pay, and a recommendation from the House to
Manchester, for my Annuity: It was dated, Sept. 4. 1644. This being granted me,
through much importunity, and great expenses on my part, my 40 s. per week was
paid me till October. 9. 1647.

I shall only add one more Evidence of my faithfulness to this ungrateful
Town. The Summer after Prince Ruperts diversion, it pleased God to lay his
heavy hand of plague upon us, which, ranging according to his direction, left
no part unvisited; becoming indeed such a sad object, that our very miseries
were as great a guard to us against our Enemies, as the cries of them were
strong for a public commiseration from our friends. The Pestilence in a little
time grew so hot, that it not only occasioned most of the richest to depart
with their whole families, but moved also the Warden and the other Minister to
desire me with my family to withdraw not far from the Town, that, if occasion
were, I might from thence readily serve the danger and extremity, which might
befall it from the Enemy: I think few men would have blamed me, if having
stayed thus long, I had left the Town upon such importunity. But conceiving my
self as strongly tied to look to the goods and estates of those that were gone,
as one of the Ministers thought himself charged to look to the souls of those
there remaining; I waved all fear, and resolved personally to serve my trust,
leaving my death to him, that once gave, and often before had spared my life.
And truly my resolution herein, I must be bold to say, was not a little
courtesy to this Town; as both I foresaw how things would, and afterward did
come to pass. For Major Ratcleifs and his Company having withdrawn, and
quartered themselves without the Works for fear of the plague, my self having
only 12. Musketeers, whose hearts stood fixed to run my hazard, the poor,
many of whom were at the pest-houses without, and the rest within, entered into
a dangerous combination, with about a dozen of the middle sort of men, that
were within, to take advantage of our weakness and nakedness, and to seize
upon the whole riches of the Town, which at that time was very great. In the
prosecution of this villainy, they wanted neither secrecy, unanimity, nor
craft. Not secrecy, for till their design was ripe, I had no knowledge of it;
which argues also their unanimity. As for their craft, a man would have thought
some minor Jesuit had been of their counsel. They had prepared, forsooth, a
kind of Declaration, zeal to the safety of the Town, solicitousnesse to see it
so naked, and unfit to oppose an Enemy, were the embroidered coat of this
pretty brat; and to make up all, they added a resolution to slick to King and
Parliament, and to use the whole fruits of their attempts to serve the Public:
and I, forsooth, had the honor to be nominated their chief Commander. I had at
this time taken physic, but my Sergeant, Mr. Beirom the elder, having
discovered the plot to some in the Town, who quickly came to advise with me. We
with some few others, which we sent for, agreed upon this as the suddenest
remedy, that the twelve chief conspirators should be severally sent for into
one room, at one time, and afterward severally examined, which accordingly
was done; their examinations remaining still upon fyle in Manchester. Whilst
these things were doing, I gave order for my 12 Musketeers privately to attend
me, with whose assistance having secured these heads, the conspiracy vanished
into smoke, which otherwise would have set all on fire.

The plague being ceased, and the chief inhabitants of the Town returned, a man
would have thought that this last Evidence of my faithfulness alone, should
have wrought these men, if not to thankfulness, yet to honesty: But who can
white a Blackmore? or make a rope of sand? Their brows were brass to all
entreaties, their affections flints to all reason, their hearts rocks to all
pity, and their consciences adamants to all obligations, even still my Annuity
was kept from me; which aggravating my many debts and wants to the height of
extremity, in hope of relief I repaired to London. Where prevailing not for a
redress, in three quarters of a years attendance, with my boy and two
horses, at very great expenses; at length (it being true, that Magister artis
ingeniique largitor venture,) it came into my head, to print an angry Paper, the
Copy whereof I have here inserted.

A sad Complaint of Lieutenant Colonel John Rosworme, against several of the
Inhabitants of Manchester.
I Post and send abroad this to the deserved shame of the Tovvnsmen of
Manchester, whose names are under-vvritten, whose heathenish, most unvvorthy
and perfidious dealings, if I could, I would publish to the end of the world:
My complaint is this, let all Readers judge, When the Town of Manchester, at
the beginning of these Wars, was in a most desperate danger and extremity by
reason of the Enemy, I (who have been a known Soldier in Foreign parts) was
then looked upon as a serviceable man for the safety and preservation of that
Town, and was accordingly compounded with, by those underwritten in the towns
behalf, to fortify the said Town, and, in a word, to manage all Military
affairs tending to their safety and preservation: In consideration of which,
they obliged themselves under hand and Seal, to pay me quarterly, every quarter
of a year 15. li. during the lives of my self or wife, which should live
longest; adding with all such Solemn Protestations and Vowed Engagements of
farther thankfulness, that, considering their profession of holiness above
other men, it might easily have wrought an hope in a credulous man, that they
would be more then honest. But all that glistered was not gold; for see the
issue. I discharged my Engagements to the utmost of a man, yea to the utmost of
their hopes. Their Town was secured, themselves preserved, through Providence,
my great pains, industry, and uncorrupted Faithfulness. In the prosecution of
my trust, I incurred frequent and most manifest dangers of my life, from which
my escape has been a matter both of their wonder, and their joy; of all which
I have their own acknowledgements to produce, and testifications of their
thankfulness so deep, as if they had looked upon me, as the only earthly
Landlord of their lives: All this notwithstanding, these men (if they deserve
so good a name) conceiving themselves to have no other use of me, have for this
12. months withheld from me my dearly earned stipend, broken their Covenants,
slighted their Engagements, opposed all fair motions, and frequent entreaties
of my own, refused all Ministerial exhortations, earnestly and often pressing
their duty herein upon them; despised all requests and letters of public and
private eminent persons, not only minding them of, but reproving them for
their backwardness, I may say perfidiousnesse; so that, if I were not
beholding to a more bountiful Providence, then what runs in their honesty, I
and mine might rot, perish, starve or famish, whom by their obligation, as well
as the Common obligations of Equity, they are bound to relieve; what
ingratitude this is, let the world judge; yea, judge your selves, ye worst of
men; did I hazard life, limbs; and all that was dear to me, and do the richest
of you grudge me a few shillings by the year, to buy me and mine food: is this
your equity? have you engaged your selves solemnly for my satisfaction, and
now do you deny it me to my destruction; Is this your honesty? would you indeed
murder me, my wife and children after the highest manner of cruelty, that under
God have been a means of preserving you alive? What? is no other death sit for
me but famishing? have you no easier way to show your unthenkfulnesse then
that? are you so hard-hearted to a stranger, so perfidious to your obligation,
so unthankful for courtesies, such obstinate enemies of reason and equity? do
you profess your selves ashamed to see me, and can you read this without
blushing; ye Adamants, can ye indeed be so flintie? Well, be so for ever, find
out the utmost bounds of ingratitude, be matchless in your treachery; set the
Devil himself a Copy, that you may be the most infamous men of your
generation, and when you have done, triumph in this; That your Consciences are
made of such steel, as can be touched with nothing. As for me, the utmost of
your cruelty, shall I hope, reach no farther then to cause me to be angry with
my self, that I have ever hazarded my blood for such despicable earthworms:
But withal let me tell you, I hope I shall find out a way to make you pay me
against your wills, nor shall your dishonestie for ever help you.

To conclude (for I know though your brows be Basilsico-proof, yet you could be
content, I should end this Language;) if ever you stand in need of the
faithfulness of a man again, may you meet with none that will trust you,
better then you deserve, for since you have in my case, manifested your best
profession to be but hellish dissimulations, what man after me, will ever
credit you? who will ever free me from this reproach of being the last
credulous fool that ever you shall abuse? If any thing here seem either to your
selves or others too sharp, I shall shortly clear your eyesight, and present
you, with a larger Looking-glass wherein you shall see (if you will not shut
your eyes) Circumstances enough, which will more fully discover your
bruitishnesse not only to your selves, but to all that will take the pains to
observe your most detestable unworthiness, so farewell.

The Names of those unworthy Covenant-breakers in Manchester, who have sealed
and subscribed the Covenant in behalf of themselves and the whole Town

Rich: Heyrick Will: Radelyff Rich: Haworth Rouland Hunt John Hartly John
Gaskell Tho: Lancashire Richard Lomax Edward Johnson Lawrence Owen Robert Lewer
Nich: Hawet Edw: Holbroock Roger Worthington Richard Meare henry Bradshowe
Thomas Ellingworth Mich: Buxton Rap. Woollen Hugh H Williams William Dean Thomas
Mynshall.
Land: May 9. 1648.
The shame of this Paper, which the bitterness of my condition, and the
unworthines of their dealing, forced me to Print, together with the concurrence
of the Scottish advance, from which they feared danger, occasioned them to
recall me from London, and to pay me my then Arrears.

But this storm being over, they again most shamelesly slighted their
Engagements; and therefore being utterly worn out with the vexation of their
usage, and finding nothing to work, I sent them a Letter dated, October. 11. 1648
desiring their leave that I might seek employment where I could, and look after
a means of subsistence elsewhere, since their hearts were such, that they could
suffer me, my wife, children, and family to perish before their eyes, who for
six or seven years had been an evident Instrument of keeping them, their wives
and children from the same end. For this purpose I sent them enclosed the form
of a testimony to be subscribed; the result of all was, I neither could get
pay, nor testimonial: what is this, but as much as to say in other words, For
all the good service you have done us, we will keep you here, and famish you?

I have now done my story, what is behind must be for Application. And first I
shall begin with those undertakers of Manchester, who first engaged me; and
first, and last, and all along, have almost equalled my services with their
wrongs.

My Masters.
For it has been my unhappiness to have been your servant. Give me your leave
a little.

(If you have any room in your memories for any thing but debts) you may well
remember the confusions, fears, and extremities, you were in, when you first
desired my service; what a strong Enemy you expected from without, how divided
within, how weakly provided, and unable against either; insomuch that my
Engagement in your service, was as much the wonder of your Enemies, as the
preservation of your selves so far as may be ascribed to a means. Having
undertaken your service, you may remember, if you please, the dangers I exposed
my self to, beyond my covenant, the offers which I refused from many, the
difficulties I ran through, the vigilance and care which I used, the
faithfulness which I discharged, my sticking to your estates during the
plague, when most of you (which was strange) forsook them your selves; and the
success of all through my whole service. You may remember too, what me thinks
you have forgotten, that I had your hands and seals for a poor annuity,
besides the voluntary additionall promises from some of you, of 10 li. from
another, 20 li. from another, 30 li. from another, 40 li. yearly as long as I
lived, flowing from the sense of my care, and faithfulness, once visible in
Manchester, but now removed beyond the Indies. But, I pray you, my masters,
suffer your servant to reason with you: Was I once thought worthy of so much?
And now have I not deserved my poor wages of you? that have kept for some of
you such vast estates? Do you still grudge me the yearly proportion of a few
shillings, that have kept for you so many pounds, so many thousands? Have I
exposed my self for your safety, to the danger of sword, and plague, and will
nothing content your boundless ingratitude, unless withal you throw me and
my whole family into the jaws of famine? You have been thought men of
conscience, why could no ministerial exhortations prevail with you, often
propounded, and urged upon you for that purpose? You have professed your selves
the Parliaments devoted servants, why was their recommendation slighted? You
would not be thought uncivil, why were my Lord Generals Letters so little
regarded? You would not be reported as shameless, why did shame force you to a
piece of your duty, upon the sight of my printed Paper inserted before? whereas
now again like the dog, you are turned to your vomit. You complain of others
for want of justice, why have you used so little to me? You pretend a great
deal of care of your credit, why have you suffered your words, hands, and seals
to be wounded? Religion bids you be courteous to strangers, why have you dealt
thus unmercifully, yea most cruelly with me? who though a stranger, have been
more then a brother, and have then stuck to you, when for fear you have fled
from your selves. Equity, reason, yea selflove, requires you to be thankful
for courtesies, having forgotten all these obligations, I favor you too much
if I say you are out of your wits, for then you will be somewhat excused;
whereas, if you will be thought otherwise, you cannot. When your fears had
rendered you heartlesse, my undertaking your service, and lively encouragements
revived you; when you have been compassed with your enemies, my service has
been your freedom; when you have slept, I have been watching for you; when you
have stretched your selves upon your soft beds, I have made the cold earth my
lodging; when instead of clothes to keep me warm, I have been wet round with
the rain; I did not envy these things to you, I did not refuse these things for
you. I might say much more, if I were not resolved to have this advantage of
you to be able justly to say, I might have said more if I pleased.

But how have you dealt with me? When in my distresses I have made my moan to
you for my dearly earned stipend, your ears were deaf, your hearts pitilesse,
my wife and children could not find the way to your bosoms, though you and
yours have not wanted large room in mine? What was your meaning, were you
ambitious to be the most notable men in all the earth for cruel
unthankfulness? If so, I will do my best to procure you the honor, as far as
my few languages will reach, you shall not fail; or was it because in your
actions to me you would show your selves honest men? You have done it indeed,
ask your consciences else, and they will tell you so; because none else will:
Or was it your purpose to force me to fly the Kingdom, and to leave my wife,
and children to your Parishes charity, when both the husband of that wife, and
the father of those children could find so little of your justice, equity or
honesty? Perhas 'twas this: but yet me thinks having some subtlety of
apprehension, you might have thought, that he that was no traitor to your
bowels, would not be a traitor to his own. Sure then your aim was I should be
driven to rob by the highway, and violently to take from others, what should
be the support of my family. And yet me thinks you could not think this,
seeing you well knew that I have ever been careful of my honesty even to you,
who have failed to me? how then should I be injurious to such, whom perhaps I
have never seen, when I have not wronged you, that have so sore provoked me?
You know I have ever labored to keep others from plundering, how then should I
practice it my self? But perhaps you are still of that judgment however you
use me, that certainly some miracles would be manifested from heaven, before a
man that had served you so faithfully should want, though you should give me
nothing: If these were your thoughts, then by your confession, I must look for
miracles, before you will be honest; and if that follow after, 'twill be the
greatest miracle of all: if none of these are right guesses, for my part I am
at a loss, help me out, and then you shall hear move; till then I leave you.


Having done with these, I shall keep that order in my debates, which I observe
in my wrongs. Manchester was first, and the Parliament in its late state was
next, to them must I be bold to say a little.

To the Honorable House of COMMONS, sitting till the year 1648. and
particularto the Members for Lancashire.
Honorable Gentlemen:
YOu need not be put in mind, I hope, that whatsoever I did for Manchester,
reached at length to your selves, and from you to the whole Kingdom; It has
been easy for many impartial eyes to see, that my actions at Manchester in
the beginning were the very hinges, whereupon the War turned; for had not my
Lord of Darbies Forces been boldly opposed, and at length utterly crushed, by
the activity, boldness, and success of those Forces, with which I always
personally served (where mentioning my self alone, I desire not to rob any
other of their due honor) half an eye may see in humane reason, what condition
you had been brought to, success at first being that which both animated, and
increased your friends.

I must not here forget, any point of right or honor which was showed me, for
I suppose that public testimony, which was given of my stirring, vigilance,
faithfulness, and success begot me unexpectedly my Lord Whartons Commission
to be Lieutenant Colonel to Coll: Ashton. Which command how I used, till I
laid it down, I have touched before, and can confidently leave to any that
knew my actions. But I beseech you forgive me, if as modestly as freedom
forced fram misery, will give me leave, I speak something also of yours.

Having laid down my Commission of Lieutenant Colonel, I degraded my self
into a Captain, that I might be the fitter to discharge my trust to Manchester,
and to attend your service there, where it was of most concernment. I was
content to take 40 s. per week in part of my Captains pay, and the rest upon
the Public Faith; and this with the poor addition of my Manchester annuitie,
was the whole livelihood of my wife, children and family. But as Manchester
suspended the one, so your selves at length suspended the other; upon which
being deprived of all means of subsistence, I addressed two Petitions to your
House, all which were worn out in some of your pockets, and my self at length
after almost 12. months expectation, dismissed with this, That my Petition was
but a private business, from a private man, and the Parliament would not look
upon it; but yet I must acknowledge, I was allowed from you a little money, not
so much as would bear my charges of attendance.

Forgive me now a little freedom, when I did you service, I was a public man,
was I altered because I came in my great miseries to petition for my wages?
especially having forborne you so long, that I ran in debt for the bread which
I did eat, as still I do? Or if I were not that Rosworme which served you, as
actively, faith fully, and successefully as any, must I, because private,
perish for want of justice, when I hope you will grant, I should not famish for
want of pity? Private men that were to pay money, I hope were looked after,
why not private men, that were to receive? If the receiving were a public
advantage, surely paying was a public duty. But did no private men find a
redress from you, for almost 12 months? Nay did no private men in this time
receive extraordinary gratuities, which I also was one recommended for, though
as yet I want my pay? you can tell. Had you not one half hours time to
consider my deep extremities, able, if I, and they were well known, to move a
stone, what? not so little time for me? that have spent days, nights, months,
years, so many, so much time to support that power and wealth by which you were
to relieve me? I have observed a Motto about your English Coins, Justitia
sirmat thronum, the want of this is the mother of all the changes and
revolutions in the world, the corruption of this unsettled the Kingdom at
first; the corruption of this pulled down your selves; and the corruption of
this, if not seasonably looked into, will ruin all. Were they not your solemn
professions at your first sitting, that having felt the weight of oppression
and injustice from others, the bent of your counsels and actions should be,
that Justice might be impartially done to all? Did you not with professions to
this purpose, fish for hearts, and catch thousands? and could you so easily
neglect the doing of justice to one of your faithful servants, especially when
it would have gotten you the additionall honor of another virtue, viz: showing
of pity? But you were busied about the Public; Be it so, yet me thinks, you
could not but see, what I heard a mean man once observe, that the
administration of private justice is a public good; how else could that be
true, that Justitia firmat thronum, But I was a stranger? I pray you how many
of your own Nation betrayed you, whilst I stood firm? How many of them would
have betrayed you, when they could not; whereas I would not, when I could,
though I had strong temptations? How few did you better service moving in no
higher a sphere? How many forsook you upon easy trials, when I stuck to you
against all? If it be a granted principle that I must be slighted, because a
stranger, yet sure I should have been regarded, because a good servant: what
could you imagine I should do? I had spent, sold, and pawned, all that I had,
except what I only mean to part with, when I part with life. I was, and am
still, as deeply plunged into debt, as my friends would give me leave. I had a
wife and children, which though you would not look after, yet I could not so
easily forget, how did you think I should subsist? How should these be fed? I
had no skill to trade, no are to beg, no heart to rob; did you aim that my
miserable necessities should force me that which my soul loathes? Did I hate in
my heart, forbear in my practice, restrain in my Soldiers, all kind of
plundering, even then when we had taken Towns, and might have done it under the
color of war, all which tended not a little to your honor, that you had such
a servant; And could that be thought good dealing, to necessitate me, for want
of my deserved pay, to raise provision for my dear wife and children, by my
violence to others: But you knew not my wants, one of your number, who, it is
to be supposed knew your mind, said I was a private man, and you would not look
upon my Petition, as much as to say, you would not know them. Besides when one
had done good service, to a State long since, you know that a voluntary
inquiry was made; what honor had been done to the man for all this? And
indeed what honor? yea what justice? yea what injustice, rather? For, alas,
how can I say less, under the sense of such a languishing condition; the very
grief whereof, being beyond the anguish of all my wounds, has lately thrown me
into an extreme sickness, and that to the edge of my grave: I shall much
wonder, if now at length, upon the view of your failings, I should not see my
redress, and know my helpers, which accordingly succeeding, I shall not fail
to give the world as thankful a testimony as in this I have giventrue.

John Rosworme.


FINIS.

