A SERMON Preached at a VISITATION In Honiton in Devon, On Wensday in Easter
Week, 1676.

By J. R. Rector of Lezant in Cornwall.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be Sold by Simon Miller at the Star at the West
end of S. Paul's.

1 Cor. 11.16. But if any man seems to be contentious, we have no such custom,
nor the Churches of God.
THe Apostle (to show that God requites a decorum and decent accommodation in
the Act of his worship) sharply inveighs against the Corinthian woman, who from
a Fantastical imitation of the She-Prophets and Priests of the Gentiles, (who
had their faces discovered and their hair dishevelled, when they uttered their
Oracles, or celebrated Rites and sacrifices to their Gods) at the time of their
praying and prophesying were unveiled in the Church, and appeared bare and
open-faced in public, notwithstanding it was then accounted an unseemly and
immodest guise, as he proves it here by several Arguments.

1. A contrario, and that,

1st. From the decency of this Ceremony of having a veil, v. 5. and,

2ly, From the significancy thereof, v. 7.

So in the 2d. place, from an Argument ab absurdo, v. 6.

3ly, He enforced it from the Angelical presence in the Church, v. 10.

4ly, From an Argument a pari, v. 14. q. d. how odd would it be for men to wear
a veil, a woman's dress, so by the like reason is it as uncomely for women to be
without a veil, that is, in the guise and dress of a man; and however the
devils of the Gentiles sometimes take pleasure in this unseemly accoutrement,
in uncomliness and absurd garbs, yet the God whom they worship, with the holy
Angels who are present at their devotions, loves a comely accommodation in such
as worship him.

Lastly, he concludes from the example and custom both of the Jewish and
Christian Churches, neither of which had any such use for their women to be
unveiled in their sacred Assemblies: But if any seem contentious, (that is)
will not be satisfied with these reasons, let him know that we, (that is) we of
the circumcision, have no such custom, nor the Churches of God, (that is) the
Christian Churches; so St. Ambrose and Anselm understand it, or according to
Grotius, there is no Canon for it, nor is it a custom of the Church or
Churches of God, q. d. If any adversus haec, as the Syriack Translation has
it, against all these reasons will contend further, love to argue on, list
still to strive, as the Geneva, here is one reserves an Argument, which is
instar omnium, and should silence all further disputes about it; we have no
Canon nor Constitution to warrant it, neither has it been customarily
practiced in the Churches of God; nay, we and they have the quite contrary rule
and custom, and let this be the final resolution in the Case,

From the Text then and the context we may observe the course St. Paul took to
satisfy a scrupulous conscience touching a Rite or Ceremony.

1st. He urges the reasonableness of the Injunction, and if this Method be not
effectual, men be not convinced by his reasons, then he refers them to the
Canons and customs of the Church, from which they are by no means to swerve.

But methinks I hear some disaffected and contentious spirits (as if they would
tax St. Paul himself of impertinency) to mutter, saying, what means all this
ado about a Rite or Ceremony, since it is of no greater matter? it skills not
greatly, whether men observe it or no, whether covered or bare, sit or kneel,
all is one; but our Apostle lets it not go so, but judging it a matter of
importance, presses the point hard, uses several Arguments, spends many
verses, even half a Chapter about it, and as we may suppose mainly for these
two reasons.

First, because he dislikes any contentions at all, since in its very nature is
included a breach of that peace of which God is, and we ought to be very
tender; for if contentions be not taken off at the first, within a while, at
the 2d. verse from the text we find their mischievous consequence no less then
a Schism, and the next verse assures us, that they will proceed so far as to
flat heresies.

2ly, Because he likes not contentions against the Rites and Customs of the
Church, he well knew Satan's Methods, this Arch-Antichrist understands, that if
he can first get himself children, they will at length grow to men; grant him once
one seemingly modest conclusion about a lesser matter he will be ready with his
bolder Logic to attack greater points: allow him him but the rudeness to throw
the Surplice out of the Church, the next news will be, the house of God is
degraded to a stable: if [down with the Ceremonies] once become Canonical,
'twill not be long ere the respects due to the Sacrament shall be little better
then Apocryphal; if he may but disgrace the former, you shall find him soon
after confronting of the other, so in this Chapter, he falls foul with the
Lords Supper; the Corinthians first praying in public, having their heads
covered, and whilst they approach the Lords throne in so uncustomary (and
therefore irreverent) posture, can we expect better manners at his Table?
accordingly v. 20. etc. they eat and drink there, as if they had been at home,
and that sometimes to excess, so ill were the effects of a contest raised at
first about a circumstance in the worship of God. St. Paul therefore opposing
himself to these practices, after other reasons in the precedent verses, he
lays for his ground this of the Text. We have no such custom, -- or more fully
according to Grotius's Interpretation, we have neither Canon nor Custom for
it; neither we, nor the Churches of God; whence in the first place we infer,
that as the Churches of God have had, so they still have, may, and ought to
have, their respective canons, and constitutions, touching Rites and
ceremonies, whereto due obedience ought to be paid by all such as are in
communion. This is so apparent a truth, that to deny it and judge such
Ecclesiastical sanctions and constitutions unlawful, is to charge all the
ancient known parts of the Church of Christ, with a sinful usurpation of
authority in the Church; for that they enjoyed both in general and provincial
synods what thy judged useful, is manifest, from the canons of the Code of the
universal Church, and of the Roman and Assyrian Churches, and from the more
ancient canons amongst those called the Apostles, and from other Ecclesiastical
rules of discipline frequently mentioned in Tertull. Cyprian and other ancient
Writers: Licet Pastoribus and Episcopis, Aug. Confess Art ult. Apol. ejusdem.
etc. it becomes such to make canons that things be done in order in Church, so
the August. Confess. and for the more due and regular observance of such
Ecclesiastical laws, and canons, it has been the custom of the Churches of
God, and those too, which we rightly call Reformed, to require subscriptions
thereto; thus it was used amongst the Protestants in Poland, where, Falkner p.
86.
after the consent (chiefly touching the Lords Supper) was established in the
synod of Sandemir Ano. Dni. 1570. between the Churches of those three
confessions, the Bohemian, Augustine and Helvetian, it was concluded in another
following general synod, that none should be admitted into the Ministry unless
consensui subscribat: the French Church required likewise a subscription to
their Liturgy, and besides this it has been the custom even of the reformed
Churches, to impose solemn Oaths for the yet closer binding to canonical
obedience; thus in the Behemian Church, after Ordination the Minister was
solemnly admitted to his Ministration by the Visitours, who among other things
committed to him their liber Ritualis, containing their form and Rites of
worship; to the performance thereof, they did oblige themselves at their
Ordination by a Religious oath. So at Strasburgh, after its first Reformation,
they who entered into the Ministry, did by Oath undertake to keep in the
communion and obedience of the Church, and its Governors, according to the Law
of God, and their canons, statutes, and Ordinances: and it is related from the
laws of Geneva (where an established Liturgy is one of their constitutions),
that all there who were received to the Ministry, must oblige themselves by
Oath, to observe the Ecclesiastical Ordinances ordained by the Councils of that
City: and in the Hungarian Church, they bind themselves by oath to the
observation of the Ecclesiastical canons and performing due obedience to the
Bishop: But if the contentious amongst us will condemn all Ecclesiastical laws
and sanctions, and account nothing pure, but what is used in their
conventicles, I dare join issue with them even upon that, and appeal to their
own practice and prescriptions, whether many things are not ordered according
to the humors of the Minister; besides men are very much mistaken to think
ceremonies and constitutions merely indifferent, I mean, in the general; for
however every particular ceremony be indifferent, and every particular
constitution is arbitrary, and alterable, yet that there should be some
ceremonies it is necessary; necessitate absoluta, insomuch as no outward work
can be performed without ceremonious circumstances, some or other; and that
there should be some constitutions concerning them, it is also necessary,
though not simply and absolutely, as the former, yet ex hypothesi, and
necessitate convenientiae, otherwise quot capita, tot schismata; whereof what
other would be the issue but infinite distractions, and disorderly confusions
in the Church, when every one acts as his humor leads him, and that upon this
account Constitutions some or other are necessary, is agreeable to the Apostles
when they met in a Council at Jerusalem for settling the Churches peace; We
read, Acts. 15.28. that they would lay no other burden (...) besides these
necessary things: 'twas not enough with them, that the things would be
necessary when they had required them, but they looked on an antecedent
necessity, which was the only ground of their imposing these Commands upon the
Gentile-Christians: but observe, this antecedent necessity did not arise from
the nature of the things enjoined, but from the expediency and convenience
there was for the Injunction, by reason of the present juncture of affairs, and
to say otherwise, would be to contradict the Apostle, or make him to contradict
himself: from which Apostolical fynod (as may be well noted) the
London-Ministers in their Jusdivinum allow a Synod power of imposing things on
the Church, which they assert to be included in the word (...) and
consequently, that things indifferent in their own nature become necessary to
be practiced after such a decree or Injunction, Cap. 13.
the like do the Assembly grant in their Confession; moreover the Apostles did
not only exercise this power when they sat in Council together, but when they
were asunder also: St. Paul often mentions Constitutions that he made for
diverse Churches, for the Church of Galatia he made an Order, 1 Cor. 16.1.2.
that Collections for the poor should be made on every first day of the week, 1
Cor. 11.
and meant to bring in the same custom into the Corinthian Church: he framed
Ordinances also for that Church: 2 Thessalonians. 3.14.
so for the Church of Thessalonica, where he commanded opposers against his
determinations to be excommunicated; neither could such things as these be
commanded by an unchangeable law, since they are to be taken up and laid aside,
as occasion serves, therefore the Apostle having instructed the Corinthians in
matters of faith and godliness, puts off these other matters till his own
coming, that he might see what is most expedient; the rest will I set in order
when I come, where he promises you see to appoint things belonging to outward
Order; now we know, that he never came to Corinth after that, who then did
order those other things, but the Governors of the Church? he might have
prescribed unto them a complete form for outward Order and Polity, but he
foresaw that the same orders would not suit every state of a particular Church,
and therefore his coming being prevented, his successors had power to
determine of things; and if the same orders and constitutions will not serve a
particular Church at all times, how was it possible for the Apostles to express
all matters of Rites and Orders belonging to the Catholic Church? sometimes
the Church has to do with Pagans, sometimes with Heretics, and those diverse,
by reason whereof the Church has been occasioned to change her Rites, as
namely dipping in baptism, which she has changed from thrice to once, and
from once to thrice; accordingly as the 20th Article ascribes a power to the
Church to decree Rites and Ceremonies, so the 34th says, every particular
Church has authority to ordain, change or abolish Ceremonies or Rites in the
Church: the same in the Articles of Religion of the Church of Ireland printed
in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth: and accords with the Confession of the
Reformed Church of France, published in the year 1562. which adds, Discipl. des
Egl. Reform. de Franc. Chapter des Consistoires Art. 31. as may be seen also in
Confess. Eccl. Gal. inter opuscula Calvini.
qui hoc detrectant cerebrosi and pervicaces apud nos habentur, such as refuse
to obey are accounted with us obstinate and brainsick; and accordingly ought
they to be proceeded against; and in case other Methods do not take, ils seront
retrenches de l' Eglise, they are to be out off from the Church: so our
Savior, he that hears not the Church, let him be unto thee, as a heathen man
and a publican, and what is the condition of such? they are delivered over unto
Satan; a sad condition, if true, and most true it is, verily I say unto you,
whatsoever ye shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven; this is no brutum
fulmen: such a blinding as this, may be a prologue to the casting into utter
darkness: hoc vero erat futuri judicii praejudicium, says Tertullian, this
doom is the forerunner of the day of doom, and a true president of that
sentence, which shall then pass upon disobedient persons, which has been so
deeply resented by some, that we read of many in History, who would not admit
of comfort after Excommunication, till they were reconciled to the Church; and
if I mistake not, the incestuous person mentioned, 1 Cor. 6. and 2 Cor. 2. may
be a pregnant example, after whose excommunication, so deep a sorrow seized
upon him, as that the Apostle himself fearing that he should be swallowed up
with it, for the saving of his soul, gave order for his absolution: such then,
as will not obey the constitutions of the Church, must look to feel the weight
of her censures: but if after this any persevere in their perverseness, then the
Magistrate may doubtless by his power, used with Christian moderation,
endeavor to stop the spreading of the contagion, and do what in wisdom he
thinks meet to preserve the purity and peace of Church and State, urging
against them either that of Romans 14.22. or 1 Cor. 10.32. or that of Gal. 5.12.
I would that they were even cut off that trouble you; whereby doubtless is
meant, not a cutting off from the Church by way of Excommunication, for that
was in St. Paul's power to do, nay, they had cut themselves off from the Church
before, but a cutting off by the civil power which then was heathen, and
therefore he would not have it made use of by Christians, for he would not
allow them to appeal to unbelieving Magistrates, 1 Cor. 6.1.
no, not in Civil, much less in Spiritual matters; and so wishes only there
were a fitting power, that is, a Christian Magistrate to punish or banish those
that trouble the Church of Christ, or since there was no such power, he
inprecates, that God would be pleased to cut them off by his own hand: and in
the Apostles time it is very observable, that there were corporal punishments
miraculously added to the Churches censures, upon the obstinate and
contumacious; not only in the particular Instances of Saul, Ananias, Saphira,
Elimas, but the delivering a person unto Satan, has been ordinarily observed,
to include with the sentence of the Church, a giving him over to some outward
bodily calamities, to be inflicted on him by the evil spirit; of which a
particular instance is given by Paulinus in the life of St. Ambrose, Prope
finem.
concerning the servant of one Stilico: and this is presumed to have continued
in the Church, whilst it subsisted without any influence from the secular
power, but when once the Church came to be incorporated into the Commonwealth,
the miraculous way of adding punishment to the Churches censures ceased, and
the Magistrate took care to enforce the spiritual weapons of the Church with
the more sensibly keen and sharp ones of the Civil State. Thus is it done at
Geneva it self; where the Magistrates show great rigor against them that are
disobedient to the Orders of the Church; insomuch that if any be so unwise as
to despise them, he is openly punished with Banishment, or otherwise. Epist. l.
p. 311.
Si quis praefract auctoritatem Ecclesiaespernat, -- If any one (says Calvin)
do obstinately slight the authority of the Church, unless he leaves his
contumacy, he is banished by the Senate for a year, and if any one show himself
unruly and stubborn, the Senate does take the cause to it self, and punishes
the Party: such offenders therefore, as disobey the Orders and Canons of the
Church, and contumaciously persist therein, ought to be soundly scourged by the
Pastoral rod, and cut off from the body of the Church by the spiritual sword of
excommunication; and if that will not work a reformation, as indeed it is not
likely to do, upon the more obstinate and schismatical, who are like to think
themselves shrewdly hurt, by being cut off from that body, which they choose not
to be of and so being punished into a quiet enjoyment of their sweet
separation, they have but their deserts; if, as examples and warning to others,
they be delivered up into the hands of the civil powers, and so they be haled
to the Judge, and the Judge deliver them to the Officer, and the Officer cast
them into Prison: indeed were the Consciences of men as they should be, the
censures of the Church might be a sufficient coertion upon them, but being as
too many are, hell and damnation-proof, if the Bishop had no other defensives
but Excommunication, no other power but that of the keys, he may (as one
notes) for any notable effect, he is like to do upon the factious and
contumacious, surrender his Pastoral staff, shut up the Church; and put those
keys under the door; Thus then we have seen that the Churches of God have, may,
and ought to have, as formerly, their Canons and Constitutions, to which all
Christians are bound to give obedience, otherwise they incur the Churches
censures, and are worthy to be debarred the privilege of such a society, and
what other punishment the Civil Magistrate thinks good to annex.

2ly, We infer, that the Church has her customs: now in case there be no
certain constitution, a general received custom has the force of a law; thus
all Societies, besides their laws in books, have their customs in practice,
Pand. 1 Tit. 3. de legibus. 35.
and those not to be taken up and laid down at every man's pleasure: the
Civil-Law says this of custom, Imo magnae Authoritatis hoc jus habetur ut non
fuerit scripto comprehendere necesse; so the Apostle here was zealous for
Church-customes, as were likewise all the Fathers of the Nicene Council, (...),
let customs say they prevail, let them carry it: and in those things (says
St. Austin) wherein the holy Scripture has defined nothing, Epist. 85.
mos populi Dei and instituta majorum pro lege tenenda sunt: Vbique Christus
hoc egisse videtur ut ad recept paremias axiomata vel formulas respiceret,
Heinsius.
the customs of Gods people and the appointments of our forefathers must be
held for laws, but we need no other, and can have no greater instance in this
case, then our Savior himself, who, when he came into the world, complied with
the Rites and customs he found, and this is the Topic whence our Apostle
deduceth the last Argument he here uses in a matter of decency: it is in a
word, it is not the custom: which alone ought to suffice in things of that
nature, though no other could be alleged, and which indeed ought to be
alleged alone without any more ado, when we have to deal with contentious
persons St. Paul we find was content to reason with those as were capable of
satisfaction, but for such whom no reason could satisfy, but would be always
contradicting and clamouring, he thought them not worthy of any other answer,
then telling them, such is not, or such is the custom received and practiced
in the Church of God. Now against such contentious spirits amongst us, I shall
make the same plea, and in justification of the known Rites and ceremonies and
constitutions of this Church of England, appeal to the the ancient usages and
customs of other Churches; I Will instance in some particulars.

1st, That of the Surplice, we read of white vestments in St. Chrysostom. and
St. Jeroms time; Polydore, Virgil, and Isidore write, it was ordained by
Stephanus Bishop of Rome in the third Century, to be used by Ministers on their
Ministration; he that reads the 41 Chapter of the 4th Council of Carthage will
find, that it was used at that time; and Theodoret tells us that Constantine
gave one to Macarius Bishop of Jerusalem as a peculiar garment to minister in:
and the Etymology of the word Superpelliceum used to signify a Surplice,
denotes it to be of ancient use: and it is well observed, that in the Arabic
language, the Apostles in opposition to the Chemarims (which Junius renders
Atratos) are termed by a word which some render Albicantes, others viri albis
induti vestibus, men in white vests or Surplices, as is declared by Buxtorfius,
and has been observed by R. D. Kimchi on Zeph. 1.4. The Votaries likewise of
the Lamb of God are represented to St. John, Vid. D. Hammond on Rev. 198 and
upon occasion by several other Reformed Churches. vid. Consens. Sandomir.
as celebrating his solemn service in the Christian Church in this habit.
Moreover the Surplice is at this day used in the Reformed Churches of the
Augustan confession: and whence is our Dominica in albis, our Whit-sunday, but
from the white Robes then worn by all Christians; and if so many used it then,
may not one in a congregation use it now.

Just. Martyr against Tryphon. and in his 2d. Apol. Tertul. de Coron. Mil. and
de Resur. St. Cypr. de lapsis and Epist. 56. ad Thib. S. Aust. Tom. 8. p. 262.
2dly. The Cross, it was often times used by all Christians in the Primitive
times, and particularly in the Office for Baptism, as Tertull. and others
witness; and so the Reformed Churches of the confession of Augsburgh for the
most part use it, and in other parts of Divine Service; and for further
satisfaction, that it is according to ancient custom, I refer you to the 18
Cannon: nor can it be said to be an addition to the Sacrament of Baptism, as
the Rubric before private Baptism declares, nor a distinct Sacrament, having
no invisible grace accompanying it, which is essential to constitute a
Sacrament, neither do we pretend it has; so that it is not unlawful upon either
of those Accounts, its use being (as the words which are spoken at the making
of it expressly declare) only to signify, as among the Primitive Christians; as
when the King having created those noble knights of his Order, bestows upon
them the Garter, and the blew Riband, as badges to be known by of others, and
to put them in mind of the great honor done unto them; in like manner when
the Infant has by baptism been enrolled in the Militia of the king of glory,
this sign of the Cross is made upon his forehead, to declare that he was
consecrated to Christ crucified, that he has put on his Livery, and wears his
Badge.

3dly. The Ring in Marriage: by a large consent of Churches and Nations has a
Ring been thought fit to establish the Matrimonial contract, as a pledge or
earnest thereof; whence 'twas the ordinary custom of the Jews to use the Ring
of espousing, as Buxtorf. witnesses: the like among the customs of the
Romans; Juvenal.
Et digitis pignus fortasse dedisti: but yet notwithstanding no part of their
paganism; as Tertul. evinceth; S. Austin calls it, De Idol. c. 16.
Arram sponsi: In the Reformed Church of Hessen they marry with a Ring, they do
the like in Lithuania, etc.

4ly. The Gloria Patri, and our often repeating of it: the Jews ordinarily used
some such doxology or Hallelujah, and the Non-conformists at this day at the
end of their prayers four or five times in an Assembly use that doxology, to
whom with the Father, and the holy Ghost, etc. In the Arabic version of the
Psalms we have, Glory be to the Father, etc. at the end of every tenth Psalm,
and was probably in practice at the end of every Psalm. If being reasonably
supposed that the words therein contained, ought to excite and stir up all the
faithful who heard them recited, to praise the Lord and magnify his Name.
Damasus appointed it to be so in the 4th. Century, Cass. l. 2. de Instit.
Caenob.
who was then Bishop of Rome, and that the Western Churches used it so, we have
the testimony of Cassianus, who lived above 1300 years ago, When we assert any
thing with much earnestness we usually say, this is the truth, and we will
stand to it. Bishop Sparrow.
and moreover he witnesses, that in all the Churches of France they used to
stand at it, and surely if we may and ought to stand at the rehearsal of the
Apostles Creed, to show our constancy and readiness to maintain that faith
which we there profess, much more at this Hymn, which is both a Compendium or
short profession of our faith, and a song of praise to God.

5ly, Standing at the Gospel; this is likewise very ancient, as appears by the
Decree made for that purpose by Anast^sius, Anno Christi 400. mentioned by
Platina in his life; and if we may believe Durantus, it was in use long before.

6ly, Standing at the Psalms and Hymns; this gesture is taken notice of in
Scripture as very proper for our lands and thanksgivings; Psalm. 134.2.135 1, 2.
at this Office we read all Israel stood in David's time, 2 Chronicles. 7. and so
long after the Levites called to the people to stand up and bless the Lord
their God, Neh. 9.5.

7ly, Kneeling at the receiving of the Eucharist; this has been anciently used
in the Church, and the more generally observed by reason of the Arrians, who
denied the deity of Christ; so ought it to be used against the Socinian
Heretics and Familists; and if you will in opposition to the Pope, who all
insolently show their equality with Christ himself, by receiving it sitting, a
gesture which at the receiving of the Communion has been prohibited, if not
condemned, by a full Synod of Protestants in Poland: moreover it was the
ordinary gesture in the Romish Pagan Idolatry, the ancient laws of their
Pagan-worship requiring, Ut adoraturisedeant, which as Plutarch affirms, was
appointed by Numa Pompilius: and Tertullian informs us, that at their Gentile
Solemnities, even in his time adoratis sigillaribas suis sedendo. And besides
sitting at prayers (when I hope we are lifting up our hearts as we receive the
Sacrament) is against all Scripture. Et procumbentibus interim in genua
distribuunt, Bohem. Confess. Art. 13.

Denique sacra Synaxi Corpus and sanguinem Domini simul percipientes iis
Ceremon. quas Ecclesia Crac viensis in usu habet, who were such as joined
themselves with the fratres Bohemi, vid. at the end of the Acts of the General
Assembly of Cracovia.

Anno 1573.


Presidents and Commands, Psalm. 95.6. and 1 Samuel 7.18. is rather to be rendered,
he stood before the Lord and said, and Vatablus well observes upon it, non
licuit sedentem orare, so in the N. T. Act. 20.36, 21, 5, 9, 40. This was
forbidden in the primitive Church, as Tertull. witnesses, sedentem orare extra
disciplinam, to sit at prayers is against the rules of worship: he that
ministers may sometimes kneel, sometimes stand, but he has no warrant to set
when he prays: thus Solomon at the Dedication of the Temple immediately after
one prayer upon his knees, 1 King. 8.54. he begins another of Benediction
standing, v. 56.57. but what gesture more convenient for the devout receiver
then this of kneeling, who as he kneels may abase himself to the dust, and
again (with the Royal Votary) may lift up his hands to God, and may look up.

8ly, Bowing at the name of Jesus; for this I refer you to the 18th Canon, and
52. Injunction of Queen Elizabeth to certify you, that it has been an ancient
custom of the Church; neither can any more be reasonably objected against it
then going to Church at the toll of the Bell; for as the one tells us the time
when we are to worship God, so the mentioning of the name of Jesus puts us only
in mind of him we owe all reverence to, without dishonouring him as the object
of our worship by any Image of him, which only represents that which is neither
the object nor reason of our worship. In Spain it is the custom as often as they
make mention of their King, they uncover their head, adding withal this short
Salutation, Nuestro senior que dios guarde muchos anios, our Lord whom God
preserve many years: In the Churches of Lithuania, Polonia, and Bremen, where
they have their hats on at Sermon, they always put them off at the name of
Jesus, vid Durel. p. 34.
So Ambassadors at their solemn Audience being covered, yet to show their great
reverence to their King whom they represent, they uncover their heads as often as
they make mention of him; how much more reason have we who profess to be
Christians, at our solemn Audiences and addresses, to use some token of
Reverence and respects to the King of Kings, our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,
as often as we hear him mentioned: the truth is, all the names of God are holy,
yet because the name Jesus exhibites to us the manifestation of God in the most
endearing circumstances, therefore as the Mysteries celebrated on the Altar
caused that preference of it before all other parts of the Church, for to do
our worship toward, (which is to be our next instance) so this name of Jesus
above all other names or words that signify God or his attributes, may well be
made use of to determine the time and occasion, when in the time of Divine
Service we should more exuberantly venture devotion in the worshipping God our
Savior, especially the Scripture seeming to hint some such thing to us.

9ly, Bowing toward the Altar, When ye enter into an house Salute it.

Matt. 10. and why should we not think it a part of Religious manners to do
something answerable, when we come into the house of God. Numb. 20.6. 2 Chronicles.
29.29


or at our entering in and going out of the Church; which though not enjoined by
Canon, but left ad libitum, is yet so far recommended to us as an ancient
custom, as ought at least to put to silence such as are contentious and
quarrelsome, against those that observe it: we read that Moses did reverence
at the very door of the Tabernacle, Numb. 20. and that Hezekiah, and all that
were present with him, when they had made an end of offering, bowed and
worshipped: and for our bowing at our nearer approaches to the holy table, or
the Altar, practiced by Qu. Elizabeth, and King James, and which all the
honorable Knights of the Garter are bound to by their Order, it is of the same
nature with putting off our hats whilst we are in the Church, and only
determines a natural Act of reverence that way, which the Primitive Christians
did use, to direct their worship and Adoration; being an Act of address, and of
tender of honor unto God; it is therefore most fitly to be performed at or
toward the place of our address, viz. the Altar, whereat anciently, as the
Eucharist, so the whole devotions of the Church were performed, and presented
to the divine Majesty; from which spiritual Sacrifices it received the name; so
that all the honor the Altar receives in these adorations made toward it, is
this, D. Moore.
that it is used as a directive Instrument for people to show which way they
are to set their faces when they make these adorations to God, but the worship
is no more done to the Altar by being done toward it, then it is done to the
Church by being done in it.

10ly, Turning and praying toward the East: this has been anciently commanded
by Vigilius Bishop of Rome, Bellar. de cultu Sanct. l. 3. l. 3.
Auno Christi, 540. and some write, that it was a tradition from the Apostles
in solemn and public prayers in the Church, Damascene.
that all should turn their faces toward the East, and for that reason
Churches were built Eastwards, Greg. in his Critic. Notes.
and a Canon to this purpose is ascribed to their name in the Arabic Code, to
which agrees also an ancient profession of the Eastern Church, Epiphanius says,
this was the custom among primitive Christians: so St. Aust. and he gives this
as a reason, because the East is the most honorable part of the world being
the Region of light whence the glorious Sun arises, Aust. lib. 2. de Sermon.
Dom. in mon^e. c. 5.
to be seen in the learned Gregory's Notes; and to make the custom to be of
the greatest antiquity, the same Author observes, that the East in the Hebrew
tongue is called Redem, the face or forepart; the West Achor, the back-part;
the North Smol, the left hand; the South Teman, the right hand; which
impositions (says he) respected either the making the first man toward the
East, or rather the religious posture at that time; and that Adam called the
North the left hand, etc. because he himself in the service of God turned his
face toward the East; and there is great probability that he was no sooner
dispatched out of the dust, but he fell down to the same earth again, and
adored his Master this same way: and it is not to be omitted, that our blessed
Savior is called the East, and that his star appeared in the East, and the
Wise men came from thence; nay more, the Angels that proclaimed his Nativity,
for their Temple is to be seen upon the East of Bethlem; he was born too in the
Eastern parts of the world, nay, in orientati angulo Civitatis Bethlem, says
Bid: but that he ascended up in the Eastern part of the heavens, it has had
the most ancient and full consent of the whole Church; and if he so ascended,
we need not doubt but he will return by the same way that he went: the Angels
intimate as much, Math. 24.27. accordingly we lay in our dead with their faces
toward the East, as if they should stand and rise upon their feet (at the
Resurrection) to meet the Lord in the East: well therefore may we have respect
to that rather then any other Region of heaven in our solemn devotions.

11ly, Reading and Singing the Psalms and Hymns alternately; this agrees with
the ancient practice of the Greek and Latin Churches; so Socrates and Theodoret
testify, and St. Basil having brought it into his Church of Neo-Caesarea to
avoid any thoughts of singularity and novelty pleads for his warrant, Basil. ad
Ne^^.
the Churches of Egypt, Thessolonica, Libia, Palestine, the Arabians, Phenic.
Syrians, Mesop. among whom the custom was. Of Anna it is recorded, that she did
answer in her gratulatory confession to Simeon, that went before her therein,
as Erasmus renders the original: That this was the practice in the Church of
Alexandria founded by St. Mark, we have likewise the report of Eusebius, out of
Philo Judaeus; and the same Philo Jud. averreth, that that song of Moses and
the children of Israel, Exodus 5.1, 20. was uttered with responsal melodies,
alternately repeated, and both the Joma and other tracts of the Talmud mention
the people in the period of their prayers, expressing, Blessed be the name of
the glory of his Kingdom for ever and ever. Ignatius goes further, and tells
us, that this is the pattern set us by the Quire of Angels, who cry aloud one
to another, the Seraphim to the Cherubim, and the Cherubim ecchoing back again
to the Seraphim, Esaias. 6.2.
The reformed Churches of Hessen and Bremen use to sing their Psalms and Hymns
by course, vid. Durel. p 38.
holy, holy, holy: and Pliny writing to Trajan in the Christians behalf, in the
first Century, said, they used to sing and praise Christ secum invicem: and
what exercise more becoming Christian Assemblies, then thus in his Temple to be
every one speaking of his honor, and praising of him: The manner of
performance could not be more decently and to greater Edification provided for,
then is prescribed by Canon or Custom amongst us, were our hearts but once in
tune for so sacred a work, and our practice more uniform, devout and harmonious
in the Celebration of it: In a word, what can more fitly declare our
admonishing one another, then the rehearsal of these Psalms and Hymns
interchangeably and by course together, and that we do all this with grace or
gratitude in our hearts unto the Lord, then the Doxology added in the
conclusion.

1 Epist. chapter 1. v. 1.2.
12ly, The Liturgy it self, as it is a set and prescribed form; it is well noted
on Timothy the first Chapt. of the first Epistle, that that place has a
particular reference of this duty of prayer to the public service of God,
which will appear very rational, if we consider, that the Epistle is an
Exhortation to Timothy who was invested with Episcopal Authority by St. Paul,
and therefore ought to take care that common Supplications, etc. be made in the
public Assemblies; to this purpose is that Gloss of Beza on the words
following: I will that men pray every where, etc. omnem locum intellige sacris
caetibus destinatum, and more fully that of Aretius, who says, that as St.
Paul had given Timothy order in the former Chapter, to take care that sound
Doctrine were preached to the people, so here, ut certam habeant formulam, a
certain form of prayer consisting of those several parts there enumerated: in
pursuance of this Apostolical Exhortation the Churches have still had their
Liturgies, and that replenished with this variety. The Indians of St. Thomas
have their service in the Syriack tongue, and their Liturgy is translated
thence into Latin, and to be seen in Bibliotheca veterum Patrum, so is the
Liturgy of the Cophti or Christians of Egypt, made by Severus Patriarch of
Alexandria; and there is also another attributed to St. Peter published by
Lindanus: The Ethiopian Liturgy which has St. Matthew for its reputed Author,
The Liturgy of St. James begins thus, (...), etc. vid. Christianogr. p. 96.
Cap. 1. p. 28.
set down by Francis Alvarez in the Portugal tongue, and afterward written in
Italian, is mentioned by Cassand. in his Liturgies: Hegesippus notes, that St.
James was called Jacobus Liturgicus for a form of service composed by him for
the Church of Jerusalem, whereof he was Bishop, it is printed in Greek and
Latin; there are likewise Liturgies ascribed to St. Chrysostom, St. Basil or
Greg. Nazianz used in the Greek Church, and one of St. Cyril of which he gives
a large account in his Catechism. The Gregorian or Roman Liturgy, the
Musarabick Liturgy of Spain composed by Isidore Hispalen. the Officium
Ambrosianum, and that of Alcuinus in England, which Bid mentions, together
with the Dutch, Suevick, French and Danish Liturgies: that of Geneva to be seen
in French, Latin and English, set forth by Calvin; that of Scotland compiled
by Knoks; and if these be not instances enough for this custom, Bishop Usher
will assure you, that all the Churches in the Christian world in the first and
best times, had their set forms of Liturgy: and though it be supposed, that
some of those which are extant are not genuine, yet the judgment of the Church
where they are used, is an argument of great authority to any prudent man, if
not that these Liturgies are purely the same with those that were written by
those holy men, yet that there were such Liturgies of their penning: Rev. 15.
Exodus 5.1. Psalm. 145. Jer. 10.6, 7.
moreover have we not a set form of worship and address unto God recorded by
St. John, as sung in heaven, composed out of the songs of Moses, of David, and
of Jeremy, which certainly is a very good President for us, although but
revealed to St. John by way of vision and ecstasy: or if you look back to the
times before the Gospel, nay, before the Law, the Jews have a form of prayer
recorded which they say was used by Noah, you may see it in the original; in
the Notes of that learned Gregory, many of David's Psalms were used, as the
Jewish Liturgy; and the profound Mede gives them that Title; one notable
Instance there is for the antiquity of forms of public and prescribed prayers,
in a Samaritan Chronicle or record, which the renowned Archbishop of Armagh
procured from the Library of the learned Joseph Scaliger: Spicilegium, p. 68.
more you may observe in the Rabbis works, and from them in Scaliger, Seldom,
Fagins, Buxtorfius, and Capellus tells us with Seldom, In his Notes on Eutich.
p. 42. 411.
that Ezra and his house the great Synagogue, appointed 18 Forms of
Benediction: the Jewish Talmud, especially that part called the Mischna is full
of such forms, which carry the names of the ancient Rabbis that composed them:
the first Chapter of the Talmud is entitled (as Buxtorf observes) Berachos, i.
e. of blessings and prayers for the fruit of the earth; and the practice of the
Jews ever since the penning of the Talmud in recording their set forms of
prayer upon diverse occasions, is an Argument that it was their use to compose
such, and use them in more ancient times, as is evident by the many volumes of
public devotions published by them: the Assembly appointed a form of prayer
for the Navy, from which they were not to vary, and Smectimnuus allowed of
imposition in some cases: for they propound this as an expedient, if it shall
appear any Minister proves insufficient, to discharge the duty of prayer in a
conceived way, it may be imposed upon him as a punishment to use a set form and
no other; but what would they have done if the person thought himself
sufficient: Further, that the Lords prayer was prescribed as a form is likewise
acknowledged by the Assembly in their Annotations on that place of St. Luke,
Hier. l. 3. contr. Pelagianos. Austin. Epist. 59. Greg. l. 7. Ep. 63. Ambr. l.
5. de Sacra. c. 4.
and accordingly has it been made use of in the Church of God; St. Cyprian
says, it was used in all the Christian world, and generally used in all
Liturgies and public prayers and administration of the Lords Supper: so St.
Jerome, St. Gregory, St. Ambrose, and Gregory the great, says, it was used by
the Apostles: Fox grants as much in his disputation about the Mass, and the
same Gregory notes moreover, that in the Greek Church it was ordinarily said
by all the people together: Vid. Corpus discipl. of the Dutch Church of London.
the Church of France and other Reformed Churches do repeat it several times in
their Liturgies, and such Protestants as follow the Augustan Confession, and
those of the Reformed Church of Holland say it ordinarily before and after
meals at the end of their Graces: Eusch. delaud. Constant. and de vit. Constable.
l. 4. c. 19. 20. Ibid. c. 17.
to add further, it is not probable that Constantine the Emperor would have
composed (...), godly prayers for the use of his soldiers, if such forms had
not then been used in the Christian Church, as Eusebius reports he did; and the
same Author speaks of (...), prayers that were constituted and appointed:
Origin a 100 years before cites a piece of the usual Liturgy, saying,
frequenter in oratione dicimus da omnipotens, da nobis partem cum prophetis,
etc. and in his book against Celsus, Lib. 6. 23. Canon of the 3d Council of
Carth. Anno Christi 317. the reason which the Council adds is, ne forte alique
contra fidem vel per ignorantiam vel per minus studium sit compositum, the very
same reason which Seldom gives for the Jewish Liturgy from Ezra's time in his
Notes on Eutich.

Vid. D. Hammonds Collect. from hence, in his view of the Directory. Sect. 15.


he declares Christians to use (...) prayers which were ordained or
constituted: St. Cyprian intimates use of forms in the Carthaginian service, by
describing the entrance sursum corda, etc. So Tertullian a form of
abrenunciation in baptism: Justin Martyr has the word (...) Common Prayer; and
the Council of Laodicea speaks of (...) a Liturgy of prayers; and the 18th
Canon thereof is, that none should pray arbitrio, but semper eaedem preces. The
Council of Carthage ordained thus: Quicunque preces aliunde desumit, etc.
whosoever should frame any other prayers, should first consult with his more
learned Brethren, thinking it fit, that in this part of Gods worship,
especially the Spirits of the Prophets, should be subject to the Prophets:
thence we have Calvin's Valde probo, speaking of a form of prayer, in his
Epistle to the Protector: Ignatius in his Epistle to the Magnesians does
earnestly enjoin, (...) that there be one Common prayer in all the Church,
Mileb. Can. 12
and in process of time the Milevitan Council did accordingly take care, that
the prayers of the Church, and no others should be used; Canon. 5. Anno. 324.
and the Council of Gangrene has made one Canon to this end, ne orationes
Ecclesiae contemnantur: yet this I must needs say, we are not so restrained,
but on occasion; even in public we may use our gifts, if they be grave,
modest, discreet and humble; for which we have the Royal approbation of one,
who is the best interpreter of the law, in his (...). Now for the Liturgy of
our Church, it is such, that Mr Fox (though a friend to the Presbyterians) stuck
not to say, it was indicted by the holy Ghost. Bishop Cranmer one of our first
Reformers, and a chief compiler thereof made challenge to defend it, and to
prove it perfectly agreeable to the word of God, and the same in effect which
had been 1500 years in the Church of Christ; B. Gauden.
and says a late Reverend Writer, Let any sober man, that is able, compare the
Liturgy of the Church of England with those now extant, and he will find
nothing excellent in any of them, but is in this of our Church; many things
which are less clear or necessary in them are better expressed or wisely omitted
in this: Neither is there (says another) any ancient classically condemned
heresy to be found in the records of Councils, Church-histories, confutation of
Fathers, which is not by some clause or other of our common prayer excluded;
nor could all its most spiteful adversaries ever yet draw up any material
objection against it, but have still discovered more weakness in themselves
then in that.

But lastly, whilst we are speaking of prayer, let us mind the house of
prayer: that there have ever been in the Church of God places consecrated and
set apart for his worship, whereto all were bound to resort. I might here
ascend up as high as Adam, and bring this custom down to our present age, and
show you, how that before the fall in Paradise God had that which was
analogical to a Church or Temple, a distinct place where he manifested himself
in a peculiar and special manner, Genesis 3.8. Vid. Talmud. Be^achi.
for so the phrase Mippene Jehovah is understood by the Jews; accordingly not
long after, Cain for murder is said to be banished from the presence of the
Lord, Genesis 4.16. and Abel though he sacrificed abroad and in an open place, yet
it seems it was in a place prepared or set apart for that purpose, Genesis 4.4.
but I shall content my self to speak only to the time of the Gospel, and the
next succeeding Ages, not to mention the Gentile Court of the Temple, which our
Savior declared to be a place consecrated by virtue of that Text of Isaiah:
it is well known how that our Savior and his Apostles often repaired for the
public exercise of Religion to the Jewish Synagogues and Temple; besides here
were then other places of prayer set apart by the Jews, and frequented by the
Christians, nay by Christ himself, as Luke 6.12. and continued all night,
(...), in Gods house of prayer; for (...) signifies a house of prayer, as well
as prayer it self: in which sense Juvenal uses the words In qua te quaero
Proseu cha, and it must be so understood here, or else there cannot well be any
true grammatical construction made of the words without wronging, or at least
streightning the sense: Vid. Tremel. in locum.
so Act. 16.13. (...), where a house of prayer was famed or reputed to be the
Arabic locus orationis; the Syriack domus orationis, and St. Paul made it a
place to preach in also: we have the same word again in the 16th. verse; and in
the like manner may we render it, as we went (...), to a house of prayer a
Damsel met us; nay, their going from one place to another to pray, does argue
as much, viz. that they had then some places more peculiar for prayer then
others. Christ and his Apostles found other consecrated places which they made
use of for public and Divine Service; such were the (...) or upper Rooms so
often mentioned in the Old and New Testament, which as the learned Gregory
observes in his critical Notes, were no other then places set apart for prayer
and other religious exercises: now it is certain, that Christ and his Apostles
repaired not to these places in compliance with Moses's Rites, or because of
any command in Moses's law, but that they might perform their Christian
Solemnities in places hallowed or fit for such sacred uses; and it is probable,
that the Apostles themselves in some short process of time, or some other
convert Christians as were contemporary with them, did destinate and set apart
houses of their own, which after Dedication for distinction sake (as they
called the Christian-Sabbath the Lords day so) they called these Christian
Synagogues, (...) Churches, and in some time after (...) that is to say, the
Lords: from whence the the English work Kurk, or with an aspirate, Church,
which is as much as to say, the Lords; now that it is very likely, that
Christians did consecrate and set apart such houses of their own, even in the
Apostles time, appears, because we find the Apostle mentioning some such place
or places distinguished by name from any as were in use among the Jews, as is
evident from 1 Cor. 14.28, 35. and 1 Cor. 11.18. compared with v. 20. this is
made yet more probable from Instances out of ancient history, which speaks of
many Churches even in the Apostles times: St. Martialis who lived near their
time, Epist. ad Tolos. Chap. 8.
makes mention of such religious structures then already in use: Cat. Epist.
5.8.
the like does Niceph. Constantipolitanus; and he instances in one among the
rest founded by St. Andrew. Hist. vit. St. Luke Catch. 6.
Simeon Metaphrastes tells of Temples and Altars built by St. Luke; St. Cyril
says, that that place was a Church consecrated by the Apostles, in which they
were assembled at the day of Pentecost: some likewise think, that the house in
which the blessed Virgin Mother dwelt at Nazareth, was made a Temple, Tursel.
lib. 11. Annal. Vid l. 8. c. 1. and lib. 4. c. 45.
and consecrated by the Apostles: and Alexander reports in the life of St.
Bernard, that St. Marks house Act. 12.12. was a Christian Temple or Oratory,
probably such an one as Eusebius calls (...), for such the Primitive Christians
had in imitation of the Jews, and St. Jerome mentions a famous Church there:
Eusebius likewise speaks of Oratories and Churches which he calls prisca
Aedificia, which denotes they were of some hundred years standing, otherwise
they could not be well termed old or ancient; and therefore they were such
doubtless as were built in the Apostles times: but if we look to the Ages
immediately succeeding the Apostles, even to the time of Constantine, and
lower, I need not descend: we cannot want Instances to prove, that there were
houses consecrated and set apart by Christians themselves, and that they had
every where Oratories and Churches of their own, which they made use of for
their Religious solemnities. Philo the Jew speaking of the worshippers of
Egypt, says, Eusebius. l. 2. 17
in every village they had a Religious house which they call Seminon, which
comes near the Greek (...), which signifies a place of worship: and if Lucian
may be believed, Dial Philos.
he describes one of the Christian Churches richly guilt and adorned in Trajans
time, Socrat. l. 2. c. 8.
who lived Anno 103. nor is it but to be admired how zealous the Emperor
Constantine was for having a house of prayer, Zozomon. l. 3. c. 5.
who as Socrates and Zozomon tell us, built many himself, and such as were very
magnificent; Eusebius. de Vit. Constable. lib. 4. c. 56. Socrat. lib. 1. c. 14.
and being about to make war with the Persians, he caused a Tabernacle or
moving Temple to be made, to carry with him, that therefore he might always
have a holy house for his God, sanctified and prepared for religious worship.
And now as it has been thus the custom in all Ages to have places set apart
for prayer and other religious Rites, so there have been Laws and Constitutions
made, as now at this day in our Church, to enjoin the people to repair
thereunto: 'twas made a law in Israel, that the Tribes should go up to the
Temple, and consonant thereto is Ignatius's Injunction in the first times of
the Gospel, (...) and (...) all to one place, all to the Temple of God, in his
undoubted Epistle reason of the first building or erecting of Churches, Non ut
divisi simus cum convenire oportet, sed ut divisi conjungamur, q. d. to prevent
Conventicles and such like clandestine factious meetings, The Act against them,
calls them seditious Conventicles. Siquis docet domum Deicontemptibile in esse
and conventusqui in ce aguntur Anaathmasit. Cannon. 5. Canon. 38.
and such like the Law of our Land accounts all religious Assemblies in private
houses and places unhallowed and common; for which cause Justinian the Emperor
enacted a Law against them, and the ancient Council of Gangra held in the purer
times of the Church about the year 324. pronounced Anathema against Eustachius
and his adherents, who held that Churches should be neglected, and public
meetings in them left off, and that there should be no other Churches but men's
private houses, and no other meetings but Conventicles: Even in heathen Rome,
the most learned P. Aerodius tells us when a sort of Innovatours kept their
Conventicles in opposition to the way received among them, of worshipping their
Gods, the Senate made an Act there should be no such meeting, as tending to the
disturbance of the State and the public peace; Et si quis tale sacrum solemn
and necessarium duceret: and the Senate gave him leave, it must be with this
condition, that when he performed his offices of Religion his own way, ita id
sacrum faceret dum ne plures quam quinque sacrificio interessent; and if they
were thus sollicitous to preserve and establish, as a sacred inviolable thing,
the Idolatrous worship of their false Gods, what care can be great enough to
secure the solemn worship of the only true God, when it is shaken by such
divisions? moreover in the days of Charles the Great, there was a Cannon made
in the Council of Towers, wherein the people were required to behave themselves
reverently in the Church, to which our 18. Canon well agrees, and both to that
of St. Paul, 1 Cor. 11. but this by the way: since then we have every where
Churches erected and places of public worship, which we are strictly enjoined
by authority to frequent and repair unto, at all set times, and seasons; what
is it less then schism, were there nothing else in it, out of contempt and
opposition to that Communion, to have recourse to private and clandestine
meetings; and though Antiquity mentions unto us private meetings, yet we may
find that they were not set up for a separation, or out of opinion that better
services were performed there then in the Church, but they were necessitated
thereunto by reason of persecution, which oft-times lay sore on the primitive
Christians, otherwise they brought upon them the guilt of Schism, and were
accordingly so censured, and held as Schismatics. Thus were the Samaritans
reputed, whose Schism lay only in their Separating from the appointed place of
worship, and setting up another in opposition to it: for if we audit an account
of the Samaritans guilt according to Epiphanius, Josephus, Scaliger, and
others, Audeam dicere ( says Scaliger) eos adeo ab omni idololatria abhorrere
ut in hac part Judaos ipsos superare, John. 8.48.
we shall find they came at last to differ nothing from the Jews but the place
of meeting; but whether this be such a guilt as should make those terms
equivalent, he is a Samaritan, he has a devil, and is mad: I shall not say but
it is such as makes our Savior say somewhat exclusively, John. 4.22. all the
blessings and Salvations of the law did indeed hover upon Mount Gerizem were
given thence, that was the place of them, but they were cut away when Schism
came; the Church is not a place of blessing when it is built against a Church,
Gerizim is Ebal when it stands in competition with Mount Sion. Thus I have in
some measure I hope, justified the Rites and Ceremonies, and Constitutions of
our Church, by showing how perfectly conformable they are to the customs of
the Churches of God.

All that I have now to add is a short Paraenesis or Exhortation, that you
would all be persuaded to a complete conformity, and for you my reverend
Brethren of the Clergy, as we are set over, so we should be both teachers and
leaders of the people, both by doctrine and example, bringing them into these
paths of religious worship, and directing them to walk orderly therein: as the
Priests lips should preserve knowledge, so we should enable our selves not only
to show, In France such who were entrusted with cure of souls were obliged to
give account at certain times to the Bishop, whether the Rites and Ceremonies
of that Church co which they were subject, were observed. Fran. Synod. Capit.
lib 5. c. 2.
but also defend the lawfulness of our Churches Rites and customs, and of that
good old way which our Fathers walked in, whose steps we follow; this the 8
Canon enjoins us all, to preach up twice a year at the least, upon penalty of
suspensation; but because most of us, if not all, shall amongst our people
find some, who will hate, or at least, dislike us, if we plainly tell them a
truth that thwarts their prejudices, we should therefore prudently insinuate
these things, and by this innocent Lenocinium steal their affections into all
the paths of truth. I cannot see how it is consistent with our duty to conceal
any part or circumstance of religious worship which has so immediate
attendence and reference to practice; much less should we tread in the steps of
those in a sense worse then nonconforming Brethren, who to gain the affections
of the giddy and injudicious, and make their lower parts seem tall and
reverend, discover a dislike to some of the Churches Rites and Ceremonies,
whereby others are traduced by the male-contented party, (who brook every man
the better by how much the less obedient) for persons more superstitious (as
they call it) then they need, by which means also they work a kind of aversion
in those who were in a fair way to be perfectly conformable, and confirm such
who have already forsaken our Communion; let us then above all others take heed
we do not by this means enhanse the repute of a faction, nor let us encourage a
peevish Schismatic by Christening his child without the Cross or Surplice; to
abate the Cross or Ring, to lay aside the Surplice, to curtail the prayers, to
omit the Letany or second service, I know recommends a man farther to some
humors, then all the parts, learning and sobriety of another that is faithful
to his duty; but I beseech all to remember that it is God and conscience, and
the public laws that ought to be satisfied, and not a private interest or a
faction. You have all taken the Oaths of Supremacy and Canonical obedience, and
there is nothing required of you but what the King may lawfully command,
nothing but what the Canons of the Church enjoin, and what your selves when you
entered into the Ministry knew you were all bound to observe; but if there be
any that will not consider and weigh there Engagements, I hope the respective
Churchwardens will look to their Oath, and make a true Presentment, not
forswear themselves to excuse their Ministers; and methinks none can take it
ill, if they will not hazard those very souls which themselves labor to save:
the like care ought the Churchwardens to take in presenting the faults and
faileurs of the people as well as of their Minister, as by Oath they are bound,
which in case you wilfully omit, the 117 Canon declares, the Ordinary may
proceed against you in such sort, as in causes of wilful perjury in a Court
Ecclesiastical it is already by Law provided; but if the Churchwardens do
conscientiously discharge their duty, and delinquents be duly presented, and
then they continue perverse and refractory, and so prove contentious, they are
in the next place to be rejected and censured as Impugners of the Customs of
the Church, according to that of our Apostle in the text: If any seem to be
contentious, we have no such custom, nor the Church of God.

FINIS.

