PANSEEIA: OR: A View of all Religions IN THE WORLD: With the several
Church-Governments, from the Creation, to these Times.

Also, a Discovery of all known Heresies in all Ages and Places: And choice
Observations and Reflections throughout the whole.

The second Edition, Enlarged and Perfected, BY ALEXANDER ROSS.

To which are annexed, The Lives, Actions, and Ends of certain Notorious
Heretics. With their Effigies in Copper Plates.

1 Thessalonians. 5. 21. Omnia autem probate: quod bonum est, tenete. IS
printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed by T. C. for John Saywell, and are to be sold at his Shop, at
the sign of the Greyhound in Little-Britain, without Aldersgate. 1655.

The Booksellers Advertisement to the Reader.
IT is the greatest justice in the world to be just to the dead, since they, if
injured, cannot be their own Compurgators, and that is it has obliged me to
use that tenderness to this great Author, who, to the regret of all learned,
has so suddenly left this world. His great pains in the dilatation of this
Book, are easily seen by the bulk of it, nor had the Epistle and Preface
escaped his second thoughts, had not the lease of his life expired so soon as
it did. And therefore I have not (which is the arrogance of too many) presumed
to make any diversion, or alterations in either, but rather have thought it
just to let them pass in this, as they did in the first Edition, that is to
say, in his own words.

For had I been unjust to the Author in this respect, I had withal been guilty
of as great an injury to the worthy Gentleman (though not of my acquaintance)
to whom he was, when alive, pleased to dedicate it; since I cannot but hope
that he will continue the same tenderness and indulgence toward the Orphan,
as he was pleased to express when he first received it an infant. I shall
further ad, that it will render it self to the Reader much more acceptable, not
only for its Additions, but also, that the Author had thoroughly revised the
same; and that the care and supervising of the Press rested so much upon me,
(not only out of an ordinary care, but singular respect to the deseased
Author) as that I think it needless to prefix an Errata, there having nothing
passed, but what an ordinary capacity may easily correct. As for the Book, I
shall adventure it the Test of the most censorious Mome; and for the Author, in
his life time; there was not found the mouth or pen so black, that durst
asperse his name, or parts; but since his death, One (so much a Hobbist, that I
wish he turn not Atheist) has in print given him a snarling character, whom
leaving to his folly, I shall only desire that this short sentence, de mo^tuis
nil nise bonum; may be his remembrancer for the future.

Besides the Authors endeavors in his (...), It is hoped ere long, that thou
may see a Volume of his Sermons in print, such as will convince the world of
the calumny of that Cynick, but continue his own memory while there shall be
found either lovers of learning, or the learned.

The Reader may likewise take notice of an Appendix, wherein he is entertained
with a strange Tragedy of modern, and some ancient Heretics, acting their
parts in their own proper persons, as near as the skill of the Graver could
represent them. And what could more properly have been annexed? for now having
seen their Foundations or Principles, behold also their Ends: and take Christ's
own counsel, Matthew. 7. 15. to beware of false Prophets, etc. with our Saviors
direction also, verse 20. by their fruits ye shall know them. All which are
tendered to the serious perusal of the Reader: whereof that he may make his
temporal and eternal advantages, shall be the constant prayer of

I. S.

To the Worshipful ROBERT ABDY, Esquire.
SIR,
AS Michael and the Devil strove for the dead body of Moses; and as seven
Cities contested for Homer when he was dead, whom none of them cared for,
whilst he lived; even so does it fare with Religion; for the Carcass or
Skeliton of which, for the bare sound whereof (being now made a mere Echo,
Vox, praetereaque nihil) there is so much contesting, and digladiation in the
World; whereas few or none care for the life and substance of Religion, which
consists in works, not in words; in practicing, not in prating; in Scripture
duties, not in Scripture phrases: She is as our Savior was, placed between two
Thieves; to wit, Superstition on the right hand, and Atheism on the left. The
one makes a puppit of her, sets her out in gaudy accoutrements, bedawbs her
native beauty with painting, and presents her in a meritricious not in a
Matron-like dress; but the Atheist strips her naked of her Vestiments, robs
her of her maintenance, and so exposes her to the scorn and contempt of the
world. But let these men esteem of her as they list, she is notwithstanding the
fair daughter of the Almighty, the Queen of Heaven, and beauty of the whole
Earth. Religion is the sacred Anchor, by which the the Great Ship of the State
is held fast, that she may not be split upon the Quicksands of popular
tumults, or on the Rocks of Sedition. Religion is the pillar on which the great
Fabric of the Microcosm stands. All humane Societies, and civil
Associations, are without Religion; but ropes of Sand, and Stones without
Mortar, or Ships without Pitch: For this cause, all Societies of men in all
Ages, and in all parts of the Universe, have united and strengthened themselves
with the Cement of Religion; finding both by experience, and the light of
nature, that no human Society could be durable, without the knowledge and fear
of a Deity, which all Nations do reverence and worship, though they agree not
in the manner of their worship. All their ways and opinions in Religion, I
have here presented to the public view; but to you Sir, in particular, as to
one, whom I know to be truly religious, not being carried away with the fine
flowers and green leaves, but with the solid fruits of Religion, consisting in
righteousness, peace, and holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord;
this is that which will embalm your name here, and crown your soul with true
happiness hereafter, when all humane felicities shall determine in smoke: in
this book are set before you, light and darkness, truth and falsehood, gold and
dross, flowers and weeds, corn and chaff, which I know you are able to
discriminate, and to gather honey with the Be, out of every weed, with Sampson
to take meat out of the eater, with Virgil to pick gold out of dung, and with
the Physician to extract antidotes out of poison: Thus beseeching God to
increase your knowledge and practice in Religion, and your love to the
afflicted professors thereof, I take leave and will ever be found

Sir, your humble Servant to command ALEX. ROSS.

The Preface to the Reader, concerning the use of this Book.
Christian Reader,
I Understand that some Momes have already past their verdict upon this Book,
affirming that, (seeing the world is pestered with too many Religions) it were
better their names and Tenets were obliterated than published. To whom I
answer, that their assertion is frivolous, and the reason thereof ridiculous;
for the end wherefore these different opinions in Religion are brought into the
light, is, not that we should embrace them, but that we may see their deformity
and avoid them. Shall Logic be rejected for setting down all the ways of
fallacious arguments? Or Philosophy for teaching what are the different poisons
in Herbs, Roots, Minerals, etc. The Scripture names many sins, idols, and
false gods, must it therefore be reproved of impertinency? the Sea Coast is
pestered with many Rocks, Shelves, and Quicksands, must they therefore be past
over in silence in the art of Navigation? Were Irenaeus, Epiphanius, S. Austin,
Theodoret, and other eminent men in the Church, fools? for handling in their
Books; all the heretical opinions that infested Christianity, both before, and
in their times? Do not these Censorious Momes know that truth though comely in
it self, is yet more lovely, when compared with falsehood? how should we know
the excellency of light, if there were no darkness; the benefit of health, if
there were no sickness; and the delights of the spring, if there were no
winter; Opposita juxta se posita clarius elucescunt: The Swans feathers are not
the less white, because of their black feet; nor Venus the less beautiful,
because of her Mole. The Stone is set out by the file, and the picture by its
shadow. To infer then, that because the world is pestered with too many Sects
and Heresies, therefore we must not mention them, is as much as if they would
say, the way to heaven is beset with too many thieves, therefore we must not
take notice of them. But how shall we avoid them, if we know them not; and how
shall we know them, if concealed; its true the world is pestered with too many
Religions, and the more is the pity; yet this Book made them not, but they
made this Book. He that detects errors makes them not. They that informed the
Israelites there were Giants in the Land, did not place those Giants there. But
now I will let these men see the ends for which I have undertaken this task, of
presenting all Religions to their view; and they are grounded on the diverse
uses that may be made thereof. 1. When we look upon the multitude of false
Religions in the world, by which most men have bin deluded; are not we so much
the more bound to the goodness of Almighty God, who has delivered us out of
darkness, and has caused the day Star of his truth to shine upon, and visit
us; who having suffered the World round about us, to sit in the Valley of the
shadow of death, and to be overwhelmed with worse than Egyptian darkness, has
notwithstanding in this our Goshen abundantly displayed the light of his
truth; but how shall we seriously weigh or consider this great mercy, if we do
not as well look on the wretched condition of other men as on our own
happiness, which we cannot do, if we know not the errors which make them
wretched. What comfort could the Israelites have taken in their Land of light,
if they had not known that the rest of Egypt sat in darkness. 2 When we look
upon the different multiplicity of Religions in the world how that in all
times, and in all places, men though otherwise barbarous, have notwithstanding
embraced a religion, and have acknowledged a Divinity; I say when we look upon
this, do we not admire the impudency of those Atheists in this age, who either
inwardly in their hearts, or outwardly in their mouths dare deny the Essence,
or else the providence of God; and count all Religions but inventions of humane
policy. How can those Atheists avoid shame and confusion when they read this
book, in which they shall see, that no Nation has been so wretched as to deny
a Deity, and to reject all Religion; which Religion is a property no less
essential to man, and by which he is discriminated from the Beasts, than
rationality it self. 3. In the View of all Religions, we may observe how the
Children of this world are wiser in their Generation than the Sons of God; for
they spare no pains and charges, they reject or slight nothing commanded them
by their Priests and Wizards; they leave no means unattempted to attain
happiness: See how vigilant, devout, zealous, even to superstition they are;
how diligent in watching, fasting, praying, giving of alms, punishing of their
bodies, even to death sometimes; whereas on the contrary we are very cold,
careless, remiss, supine, and lukewarm in the things that so near concern
our eternal happiness. They thought all too little that was spent in the
service of their false gods, we think all is lost and cast away which we
bestow on the service of the true God. They reverenced and obeyed their
Priests, we dishonor, disobey and slight ours; they observed many Festival
days to their Idols, we grudge to give one day to the service of the true God.
They made such conscience of their Oaths taken in presence of an Idol, that
they would rather loose their lives, than falsify these Oaths: But we make no
more scruple to take the name of God in vain, to swear and forswear, than if
we worshipped Jupiter Lapis, mere stocks and Stones; such reverence and devotion
they carried to their Idols, that they durst not enter into their Temples, nor
draw near their Altars, till first they were purified; they did not only
kneel, but fall flat on the ground before their feigned Gods; they knock their
breasts, beat their heads to the ground, tear their skines, wound and cut
their flesh, thinking thereby to pacify their false gods: Whereas we will not
debar our selves of the least pleasure or profit to gain Heaven; and so
irreverent is our behavior in the presence and house of Almighty God, Before
whom the Cherubims and Seraphims dare not stand, but with covered faces: as if
he were our equal, and not our Lord or Father, for (to speak in the Prophets
words) Malach. 1: 6. If he be our Father, where is his honor? and if he be
our Lord, where is his fear? Doubtless these false worshippers shall stand up
in judgment against us, who know our Masters will, but do it not; is not
their zeal in the practice of religious duties, to be preferred to our
carelessness; and their ignorance, to our knowledge; which without practice,
will but aggravate our damnation, for he that knows his Masters will, and
does it not, shall he beaten with many stripes; We are in the right way to
Heaven; they are in the wrong way; but if we stand still, and walk not, they
will be as near their journies end as we. They worship Idols, we commit
sacrilege: But is not a sacrilegious thief as hateful to God as an ignorant
Idolater? 4. When we look upon the confused multitude of Religions in the
world, let us learn to tremble at Gods judgments, to make much of the light
whilst we have it, to hold fast by the truth, to embrace it with all
affection, and the Ministers thereof; for if once we forsake the right way,
which is but one, we shall wander all our days after in bypath, and crooked
lanes of error, which are innumerable: if we reject the thread of Gods word
presented to us by the Church: a thread I say, surer than that of Ariadne, we
shall be forced to ramble up and down, through the inextricable Labyrinth of
erroneous opinions. It stood with the justice of God, to suffer men who in the
beginning were of one language and religion, to fall into a Babel and confusion,
both of tongues and false religions, for not retaining the truth; to dig to
themselves broken Cesterns, which would hold no Water, for rejecting the
fountain of living Waters; to surfeit upon the poysonable flesh of quails, who
grew weary of the bread of Angels; and with the swine to eat husks, who would
slight the wholesome food of their Fathers house. If the Jews put Gods word
from them, and judge themselves unworthy of Eternal Life, Lo, Paul and
Barnabas will turn to the Gentiles, Act. 13. 46. 5. In reading this Book we
shall find, that the whole rabble of vain, fantastical, or profane opinions,
with which at this day, this miserable distracted Nation is pestered, are not
new revelations, but old dreams, of ancient Heretics, long ago condemned by
the Church, and exploded by the public authority of Christian Magistrates; but
now for want of weeders, these Tares spring up again in the Lords field, and
are like to choke the good corn; unless the Lord of the Harvest send forth
laborers into his Harvest. 6. The reading of this Book, may induce us to
commiserate the wretched condition of a great part of the World buried as it
were, in the darkness of ignorance, and tyranny of superstition: To bless God
for the light and freedom we enjoy, whereas they are not greater sinners than
we; but except we repent, we shall all likewise perish; let us not then be too
highminded, but fear, and when we think we stand, let us take heed-least we
fall: God has already permitted diverse of those old, obsolet, and antiquated
heretical opinions to break in amongst us; the times are now come, that men
will not suffer wholesome Doctrine; but having itching ears after their own
lusts, get them an heap of teachers, turning their ears from the truth, and
giving themselves unto Fables. 2 Timothy 4. Thus is the Lord pleased to deal with
us, he suffers Heresies to repullulate, that they who are approved among us,
may be manifested. He permits Prophets and Dreamers amongst us, but it is as
Moses says, to prove ^s, and to know, whether we love the Lord our God with
all our hearts, and with all our souls, Deuteronomy. 13. To conclude, whereas all men
are desirous of happiness, and immortality, but few walk in the right way that
conduces to it; being there are such multitudes of by-waies, as we may see by
this Book, let us follow the counsel of the Prophet, Ier. 6. 16. Stand in the
ways, behold and ask for the old way, and walk therein, and ye shall find
rest for your souls. And thus good Reader having showed thee the true use of
this book, I leave it to thy perusal, beseeching God to keep us from the
by-waies of error, and to lead us into the way of truth.

A. R.

The desire of some Friends has occasioned the publishing of this list of
Books, compiled by the Author.
1. RErum Iudaicarum, or the Jewish affairs in four Books. 2. An Exposition on
the first fourteen Chapters of Genesis. 3. Rasura Tonsoris. 4. Mel Heliconium.
5. Mystagogus Poeticus. 6. Virgilius Evangelisans. 7. Christiados Lib. 13. 8.
Chymaera Pythagorica. 9. The New Planet no Planet. 10. Meditations on
Predestination. 11. Medicus medicatus. 12. The Philosophical Touchstone. 13.
The picture of the Conscience. 14. Colloquia Plautina. 15. Wollebius Christian
Divinity translated, cleared, and enlarged. 16. Gnomologicum Poeticum. 17.
Enchiridion Oratorium and Poeticum. 18. Isagoge Grammatica. 19. Arcana
Microcosmi. 20. A ^aveat for reading the Al^oran. 21. A Refutation of Doctor
Brownes vulgar errors. 22. A Refutation of the Lord Bacon, Doctor Harvey, and
others. 23. Sir Walter Raleighs History Epitomized. 24. Observations on Sir
Walter Raleigh. 25. The Second part of the History of the World. 26. Leviathan
drawn out with a hook. 27. (...), or, A View of all Religions, etc.
Books not yet published, but ready for the Press, viz.
1. DIvine, Moral, Natural, and Historical exercises on the whole Book of
Genesis. 2. Melissomachia. 3. Religionis Apotheosis. 4. Paraphrasis Virgiliana.
5. Virgilius Triumphans. 6. Psychomachia Virgiliana. 7. Epigrammata Romana.
COLLOQUIA.
1. CVlinaria. 2. Convival. 3. Cubicularia. ia 4. Tertullianicum. 5. Apnleanum.
6. Sidonianum. 7. Petronianum. 8. Persianum. 9. Terentianum. 10 Ciceronianu^
etc
THe Reader may please to take notice that this Book, being the 27. in order,
also the 15. in order, and the 25. which is the second part of the History of
the World, Corrected by the Authors own Hand, and by him owned as the best, and
perfectest Copy: are to be sold by John Saywell at the Greyhound in Little
Britain. LONDON.

These Books are to be sold by John Saywel at his shop, at the Sign of the
Greyhound in Little-Britain, London. viz.
THe History of the World, the second part, being a continuation of the famous
History of Sir Walter Raleigh Knight, together with a Chronology, etc. by A. R.
The true Copy whereof is distinguished by the Greyhound in the Frontispice,
from any other whatsoever, though colored by a pretended representation of the
Author in the Title page.

An exact collection of the choicest secrets in Physic and Chyrurgery (both
C^ymick and Galenick) by Leonard Phioravan^ Knight, Doctor Edwards, and others.

Speedy help for Rich and Poor, as to the Griping of the Gu^s, Cure of the
Gout; etc. by Herma^^^ Vanderheyden an experienced Physician.

Mr. Charles Hoole's Grammar in Latin, and English the shortest, orderliest,
and plainest both for Master and Scholar, of any yet extant.

Also his Terminationes and examplae de ^linat^^^ and con^ugationum, and
Propria quae ^^atibus, Quae (...), and As in praesenti, englished and
explained, for the use of young Grammatians.

And there is now lately printed a new Primer, entitled, Mr. Hoole's Primer;
more easy and delightsome for the learner then any yet extant, having 24.
several representations of Persons; Beasts, Brids, etc. answering the several
letters of the Alphabet in a copper plate, laying also the surest foundation
for true spelling; the defect whereof (in the ordinary teaching) (...) so much
complained of.

The practice of Quietness, by Bishop Web.

The Revelation of certain notorious Advancers of Heresy: with their effigies,
and an account of their Lives, Actions, and Ends: usually annexed to (...), or
the view of all Religions, etc.

The Religions of Asia.
The Contents of the first Section.
OF the Church-Disciplin, Sacrifices, Ordination, Public place, [Buildings
first erected for Divine Service,] and days of Divine Service before Moses. 2.
Of the Church Government under Moses; difference of the High Priest from other
Priests. 3. Of the Church Government from him till Solonion. 4. Of the
Government after. Solomon, till the division of the Tribes. 5. Of Solomon's
Temple, and the outward splendour of the Jews Religion. 6. Of the office of the
Levites, of the Prophets, Scribes, Pharisees, Nazarites, Rechabites, Essenes,
Sadduces, and Samritans. 7. Of the ancient observation of their Sabbath, of the
observation of their Passover, of the feasts of Pentecost, Tabernacles, new
Moons, of Trumpets, and of expiation; of their Sabbatical year, and their
Iubilee. 8. Of their ancient Excommunications, how God instructed them of old,
and of the maintenance allowed by the Jews to their Priests and Levites. 9. Of
the Government after the Jews were carried captive into Babylon. 10. Of the
Jewish Church Government at this day, their Prayers, Sabbaths, Feasts, Book of
the Law, Passover, what observable thereupon, and whether to be permitted
(among Christians) in the exercise of their own Religion, and wherein not to be
communicated with by Christians. 11. Of the Jewish preparation for morning
prayer* Fast in August, Beginning of their new year, Feast of Reconciliation,
Ceremonies in reading of the Law. 12. Their Church officers, Feast of
Dedication, and of Purim, Fasts, Marriages, Divorcements, Circumcision,
Redemption of the first born, their duty toward the sick, and Ceremonies about
the dead.

The Contents of the second Section.
THe Religions of the ancient Babylonians; of the making, worshipping of
images, and bringing in Idolatry. 2. Of Hierapolis, and gods of the Syrians. 3.
Of the Phoenicians. 4. Of the old Arabians. 5. Of the ancient Persians. 6. Of
the Scythians. 7. Of the Tartars, or Cathaians and Pagans. 8. The Religions of
the Northern Countries near the Pole. Three ways whereby Satan deludes men by
false Miracles. The fear of his Stratagems whence it proceeds: His illusions
many, our duty thereupon. 9. Of the Chinois. 10. Of the ancient Indians. 11. Of
Siam. 12. Of Pegu. 13. Of Bengala. 14. Of Magor. 15. Of Cambaia. 16. Of Goa.
17. Of Malabar. Pagan Idolaters believe the immortality of the soul. 18. Of
Narsinga, and Bisnagar. 19. Of Japan. 20. Of the Philippina Islands. 21. Of
Sumatra, and Zeilan. 22. Of the ancient Egyptians. 23. Of the modern Egyptian
Religion.

The Religions of Africa and America.
The Contents of the third Section.
OF the old African Religion. 2. The Religion and Church Discipline of Fez. 3.
Of Morocco. 4. Of Guinea. 5. Of the ancient African Aethiopians. 6. Of the
modern Abissins. 7. Of the Lower Aethiopians. 8. Of Angola and Congo. 9. Of the
northern neighbors of Congo. 10. Of the African Islands. 11. The Religion of
America. 12. Of Virginia. 13. of Florida. 14. Of the Religions by west
Virginia, and Florida. 15. Of New Spain and Mexico. 16. Idolaters, their
cruelty and cost in their barbarous sacrifices. 17. Of the Americans, their
superstitious fear, and Tyranny thereof. 18. Of Jucatan, and the parts
adjoining. 19. Of the southern Americans. 20. Of Paria and Guiana. 21. Of
Brasil. 22. Of Peru. 23. Of Hispaniola.

The Religions of Europe
The Contents of the fourth Section.
THe Religion of the ancient Europae^ns. 2. The Roman chief Festivals. 3. Their
gods. 4. Their Priests. 5. Their Sacrifices. 6. Their Marriage Rites. 7. Their
Funeral Ceremonies. 8. The old Grecian Religion. 9. Their chief gods. 10. Of
Minerva, Diana, Venus. 11, How Juno, Ceres, and Vulcan were worshipped. 12. The
Sun worshipped under the names of Apollo, Phoebus, Sol, Jupiter, Liber,
Hercules, Mars, Mercurius, (...), etc. 13. The Moon worshipped under diverse
names and shapes. 14. The Earth and Fire, how worshipped and named. 15. The
Deity of the Sea, how worshipped. 16. Death, how named and worshipped. 17. The
Grecian Sacrifices and Coremonies. 18. Their Priests and Temples of old.

The Contents of the fifth Section.
THe Religion of the old Germans, Gauls, and Britains. 2. Of the Saxons,
Danes, Swedes, Moscovites, Russians, Pomeranians, and their neighbors. 3. Of
the Scythians, Ge^es, Thracians, Cymbrains, Goths, Lusitanians, etc. 4. Of the
Lithuanians, Polonians, Hungarians, Samogetians, and their neighbors. 5. Of
diverse Gentile gods besides the above named. 6. The ranks and arms of their
gods. 7. With what creatures their Charriots were drawn. 8. Of peculiar gods
worshipped in peculiar places. 9. The. Greek chief festivals.

The Contents of the sixth Section.
OF the two prevalent Religions now in Eorope. 2. Of Mahomets Law to his
Disci^les* 3. Of the Mahumetans opinions at this day. ^. Mahomet, not the
Antichrist. 5. Of their Sects and how the Turks and Persians differ. 6. Of ^he
Mahumetan religious orders. 7. Of their other hypocritical orders. 8. Of their
secular Priest ^. Of the Mahumetan Devotion, and parts there ^f. 10. Of their
Ceremonies in their Pilgrimage to Mecca. 11. The Rites of their Circumcision.
12. Their Rites about the sick and dead. 13. The (...) of Mahumetanisme, and
the causes thereof. 14. Mahumetanisme, of what continuance.

THe Contents of the seventh Section.
The Christian Religion propagated. 2. The decay thereof in the East by
Mahumetanism. 3. Persecution and Heresy the two great enemies thereof. 4.
Simon Magus, the first heretic, with his. Disciples. 5. Menander, Saturninus,
and Basilides, Heretics. 6. The Nicholaitans and Gnostics. 7. The
Carpocratians. 8. Cerinthus, Ebion, and the Nazarites. 9. The Valentinians,
Secundians, and Prolemians. 10. The Mar^ites Colarbasii, and Heracleonites. 11.
The Ophites, Cainites, and Sethites. 12. The Archonticks, and Ascothyptae. 23.
Cerdon and Marcion. 14. Apelles, Severus, and Tacianus. 15. The Cataphrygians.
16. Pepuzians, Quintilians, and Artotyrites. 17. The Quartidecimani and
Alogiani. ^ 18. The Adamians, Elcesians, and Theodocians. 19. The
Melchisedicians, Bardesanists, and Noetians. 20. The Valesians, Catheri,
Angelici, and Apostolici 21. The Sabellians, Originians, and Originists. 22 The
Samosatenians, and Phorinians. 23 The Manichaean religion. 24. The Hierachites,
Melitians, and Arrians. 25. The Audians, Semi-arrians, and Macedonians. 26. The
Ae^ians, Aetians, and Apollinarists. 27. The Antidicomarianites, Messalians,
and Metangismonites. 28. The Hermians, Proclianites, and Patricians. 29. The
Ascites, Pattalorinchites, Aquarii, and Coluthiani. 30. The Floriani,
Aeternales, and Nudipedales. 31. The Donatists. Priscillianists, Rhetorians,
and Feri. 32. The Theopaschites, Tritheits, Aquei, Melitonii, Ophei, Tertullii,
Liberatores, and Nativita rii. 33. The Luciferians, Jovinianists, and Arabicks.
34. The Collyridians, Paterniani, Tertullianists, and Abelonites. 35. The
Pelagians, Predestinati, and Timotheans. 36. The Nestorians, Eutychians, and
their Spawn.

The Contents of the eighth Section.
OF the opinions in Religion held the seventh Century. 2. The opini^ns of the
eighth Century. 3. The Tenets of the ninth and tenth Centuries. 4. The opinions
of the eleventh and twelfth Centuries. 5. Of the Albigenses and other Sects in
the twelfth Century. 6. The Sects of the thirteenth Century. 7. The Sects of
the fourteenth Century. 8. Of the Wicklevites. 9. The opinions of the fifteenth
Century. 10. The opinions of the sixteenth Century, to wit of Luther and
others. 11. Of Sects sprung out of Lutheranisme. 12. Of Protestants 13. Of the
other opinions held this Century. 14. The chief heads of Calvin's Doctrine. 15.
Of other opinions held this age. 16. Of diverse other opinions in this age, and
the causes of this variety, and confusion in the Church.

The Contents of the ninth Section.
THe first original of the Monastical life. 2. The first Eremites, or
Anchorites. 3. The manner of their living. 4. Their Excesses in Religion. 5.
The pre-eminence of the Sociable life to the Solitary. 6. The first Monks after
Anthony. 7. The rules of Saint Bafil. 8. Saint Hieroms order. 9. Saint Austins
order. 10. If Saint Austin instituted his Ermites to beg. 11. Of Saint
Austins Leathern Girdle used at this day. 12. The institutions and exercises of
the first Monks. 13. Why religious persons cut their hair and beards. 14.
Whence came that custom of shaving. 15. Of the Primitive Nuns. 16. Of what
account Monks are at this day in the Roman Church. 17. How the Monks and Nuns
of old were consecrated. 18. The Benedictine order. 19 Of the orders proceeding
from them. 20. Of Saint Bennets rules to his Monks. 21. The Benedictines habit
and diet. 22. Rules prescribed by the Council of Aix to the Monks. 23. The
Rites and institutions of the Monks of Cassinum. 24. The manner of electing
their Abbots. 25. The Benedictine Nuns and their rule. 26. Of the Laws and
Privileges of Monasteries.

The Contents of the tenth Section.
OF new religions orders sprung out of the Benedictines, and first of the
Cluniacenses. 2. Of the Camaldulenses and Monks of the Shadowy Valley. 3. The
Sylvestrini, Grandimontenses, and Carthusians. 4. The Monks of Saint Anthony of
Vienna; the Cistertians, Bernardines, and Humiliati. 5. The Praemonstratenses,
and Gilbertines. 6. The Cruciferi, Hospitalarii, Trinitarians, and Bethlemites.
7. The Johannites, or first religious Knights in Christendom, 8. The Templars.
9. The Teutonici, or Mariani. 10. The Knights of S. Lazarus, Calatrava, and S.
James. 11. The orders of Mendicant Friars, and first of the Augustinians. 12.
Of the Carmelites. 13. Of the Dominicans. 14. Of the Franciscans. 15. Of things
chiefly remarkable in the Franciscan order. 16. Of the Knights of the Holy
Sepulcher, and Gladiatores. 17. Of the Knights of S. Mary, of Redemption, of
the Montesians, of the order of Vallis Scholarium, and Canons Regular of S.
Mark. 18. Of Saint Clara, S. Paul's Eremires, and Boni homines. 19. The servants
of S. Mary, Coelestini, and Jesuati. 20. The order of S. Briget. 21. The order
of S. Katharine, and S. Justina. 22. The Eremites of S Hierom, S. Savior,
Albati, Fra^ricelli, Turlupini, and Montolivetenses. 23. The Canons of S.
George, the Mendicants of S. Hierom, the Canons of Lateran, the order of the
Holy Ghost, of S. Ambrose ad Nemus, and of the Minimi of Iesu-Meria. 24. The
orders of Knighthood, from the year 1400 namely of the Annunciada, of S.
Maurice, of the Golden Fleece, of the Moon, of S. Michael, of S. Stephen, of
the Holy Spirit, etc.

The Contents of the eleventh Section.
OF religious orders and opinions from the year 1500. til this day. 2. The
order of Jesuits. 3. Of their general rules. 4. Of their other rules. 5. Of
their rules for Provosts of houses, Rectors of Colleges, etc. 6. Of their
rules for Travelers, Ministers, Admonitors, etc. 7. Of their privileges
granted by Popes. 8. Of other orders in the Church of Rome. 9. How Abbots are
consecrated at this time. 10. Wherein the Christian orders of Knighthood
differ. 11. Of other orders of Knighthood besides the French. 12. Of the orders
of Knighthood in Germany, Hungary, Bohemia, Poland, etc. 13. The orders of
Knighthood in Italy. 14. Of the Christian Military orders in the East.

The Contents of the twelfth Section.
THe opinions of the Anabaptists, and wherein they agree with the old
Heretics. 2. The Tenets of the Brownists. 3. Of the Familists. 4. The
Adamites, and Antinomians. 5. The Religion of the Socinians. 6. Of the
Arminians Tenets. 7. Of the Church of Arnhem, and the Millenaries opinions. 8.
Of many other Sects at this day amongst us. 9. The opinions of the
Independents. 10. The tenets of the Presbyterians, where by way of a Catechism
is delivered their whole doctrine concerning the Ministry, Episcopacy,
Presbytery, Lay-Eldership, Deacons, Civil Magistrates, the Election of
Ministers, Ordination, power of the Keys, Excommunication. 11. Diverse
erroneous opinions which have been lately revived or hatched since the fall of
our Church Government, etc.

The Contents of the thirteenth Section.
THe Doctrine of the Church of Rome concerning the Scriptures. 2. Their tenets
concerning predestination, the Image of God, original and actual sin, and free
will. 3. Their opinions concerning the Law of God, concerning Christ, Faith,
Justification, and good works. 4. Their Tenets concerning penance, fasting,
prayer, and alms. 5. Their opinions concerning the Sacraments, and ceremonies
used in those controverted. 6. What they believe concerning the Saints in
Heaven. 7. Their Doctrine concerning the Church. 8. What they hold concerning
Monks, Magistrates and Purgatory. 9. Wherein the outward worship of the Church
of Rome consists, and first part of their Mass. 10. Their dedication of
Churches, and what observable thereupon. 11. Their consecration of Altars, etc.
12. The Degrees of Ecclesiastical persons in the Church of Rome. Their sacred
orders, office of the Bishop, and what colors held sacred. 13. Wherein the
other parts of the Mass consists. 14. In what else their outward worship
does consist. 15. Wherein consists the seventh part of their worship, and of
their holy days. 16. What be their other holy days which they observe,
canonical hours and processions. 17. Wherein the eighth part of their worship
consists, their Ornaments and Vtensils used in Churches dedicated to Christ
and the Saints, their office performed to the dead.

The Contents of the fourteenth Section.
OF the Eastern Religions, and first of the Greeks. 2. Of the Church dignities,
and discipline in the Greek Church at this day. 3. Of the other Nations
professing the Greek Religion, chiefly the Moscovites, and Armenians. 4. Of the
Monks, Nuns, and Eremites of Moscovia. 5. Of the form of service in their
Churches. 6. How they administer the Sacraments. 7. The Doctrine and Ceremonies
of the Russian Church at this day. 8. Of their Marriage and Funeral Ceremonies.
9. Of the profession of the Armenians. 10. Of the other Greek Sects, namely the
Melchites, Georgians and Mengrelians. 11. Of the Nestorians, Indians, and
Jacobites. 12. Of the Maronites Religions. 13. Of the Cophti. 14. Of the
Abyssin Christians. 15. Wherein the Protestants agree with, and dissent from
other Christian Churches.

The Contents of the fifteenth Section.
REligion is the ground of all Government, and Greatness. 2. By diverse reasons
it is proved that Religion: of all Common wealths, and humane societies, is the
foundation. 3. That Princes and Magistrates ought to have a special care, in
settling and preserving of Religion. 4. That one Religion only is to be allowed
in a Common wealth publicly. 5. In what Respects different Religions may be
tolerated in private. 6. A Christian Prince may not dissemble his Religion. 7.
Why God blesses the professors of false Religions, and punishes the
contemners thereof. 8. False Religions are grounded upon policy, and what use
there is of Ceremonies in Religion: 9. The mixture and division of Religions,
and of Idolatry. 10. How the Gentile Religion in worshipping of the Sun,
seems to be most consonant to natural reason; with diverse observations
concerning Sun-worship, and the knowledge the Gentiles had of a Deity, and the
Unity thereof, with some glimmering of the Trinity. 11. That the honor,
maintenance, and advancement of a Priesthood, is the maine supporter of
Religion. 13, That the Christian Religion is of all others the most excellent,
and to be preferred for diver reasons, being considered in it self, and
compared with others; with an exhortation to the practice of religions duties,
which is true Christianity.

The Contents of the First Section.
Of the Church Discipline, Sacrifices, Ordination, Public place, [Buildings
first erected for Divine Service,] and days of Divine Service before Moses. 2.
Of the Church Government under Moses; difference of the High Priests from other
Priests. 3. Of the Church Government from him till Solomon. 4. Of the
Government after Solomon, till the division of the Tribes. 5. Of Solomon's
Temple, and the outward splendour of the Jews Religion. 6. Of the Office of the
Levites, of the Prophets, Scribes, Pharisees, Nazarites, Rechabites, Essenes,
Sadduces, and Samaritans. 7. Of the ancient observation of their Sabbath, of
the observation of their Passover, of the feasts of Pentecost, Tabernacles, new
Moons, of Trumpets, and of Expiation; of their Sabbatical year, and their
Iubilee. 8. Of their ancient Excommunications, how God instructed them of old,
and of the maintenance allowed by the Jews to their Priests and Levites. 9. Of
the Government after the Jews were carried captive into Babylon. 10. Of the
Jewish Church Government at this day, their Prayers, Sabbaths, Feasts, Book of
the Law, Passover, what observable thereupon, and whether to be permitted
(among Chirstians) in the exercise of their own religion, and wherein not to be
communicated with by Christians. 11. Of the Jewish preparation for morning
prayer, Fast in August, Beginning of their new year, Feast of Reconciliation,
Ceremonies in reading of the Law. 12. Their Church Officers, Feast of
Dedication, and of Purim, Fasts, Marriages, Divorcements Circumcision,
Redemption of the first born, their duty toward the sick, and ceremonies about
the dead.

SECT. I.
Quest. WAs there any Religion, Church Government, of Discipline in the
beginning of the World?

Answ. ASIA, the religions thereof
Yes: For then was the Word preached, and Sacraments administered. We read of
Sacrifices offered by Cain and Abel; and likewise the distinction of clean and
unclean beasts. By Faith Abel sacrificed, Heb. 11. Noah's sacrifice was
pleasing to God, Genesis 8. This could not be will worship, for such is no ways
pleasing to God; it was therefore according to his Word and Commandment. There
was also Excommunication; for Adam and Eve for their disobedience were
excommunicated out of Paradise, which was then the type of the Church; and
every soul not circumcised the eighth day, was to be cut off from the people of
God, Genesis 17. The Word then being preached (for God preached to Adam in
Paradise, and doubtless he preached to his Children out of Paradise) the
Sacraments administered, and Excommunication exercised, which are the three main
points of Church discipline, it follows there was then a Church and Church
Government.

Q. Was there then any Ordination?

A. Yes doubtless; for God is the God of order; nor was it fit, Ordination in
the beginning of the World.
that he who mediated between God and the people, by preaching, prayer and
sacrifices, should thrust himself into that office without ordination;
therefore God ordained Adam, he some of his Children, as Cain and Abel; and
whereas Genesis 4. we do not read that Cain and Abel; did sacrifice, but only
brought their Offerings; to wit, that Adam might offer them up to God for them:
it argues, that as yet they had not received ordination: and its likely that
ordination then was performed by (...) or Imposition of hands; which custom
the Jews retained in ordaining their Levites, Number. 8. 10. and after them, the
Christians in ordination of Ministers, Act. 6. 6. 1 Timothy 5. 22. which ceremony
the Gentiles used in Manumission of their servants, and the Jews in ordination
of their Synedrion or the Judges imposed their hands; so Moses and Joshua laid
their hands upon the 70. Elders: and Moses is commanded by God to lay his hands
upon Ioshuah the Son of Nun, Numb. 27. 18.

Q. Was there then any public place of Sacrificing?

A. Yes upon the same ground, that God, who is the God of order, Churches.
will have all things done in his Church with order and decency; the meeting
also together in one place to hear, and pray, and offer sacrifice, did maintain
amity amongst Gods people. Besides we read Genesis 25. 22. that Rebecca, when the
children strugled in her womb, did not stay at home, but went, to wit, to the
public place where Gods worship was, to enquire of the Lord; and because in
this place God used to show his presence to his people, by some outward sign,
it was called Gods presence; therefore Genesis 4. 16. Cain went out from the
presence of the Lord, that is, he was excommunicate out of the Church: but we
must not conceive, that as yet there were any material buildings for Gods
service; for in the beginning men conceived it unfit to include God within the
narrow bounds of a material Temple, whom the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain;
therefore they worshipped him in the open air, either upon hills, for they
thought low places were unbeseeming the most High God: hence they called every
hill Gods hill; or else if they were necessitated to sacrifice on the sea
shore, or in some low plain, they made their Altars so much the higher; which
from their altitude, they called Altaria; and these places of Divine worship
they named Templa from contemplation. The very Gentiles thought it unfit to
confine the Sun their chief God to a narrow Temple, seeing the whole world was
his Temple: and after they had built Temples for their Deities, they would have
them for a long time to be (...), or open-roofed.

Q. Why were the Groves and high places condemned in Scripture?

A. Because they were abused both by Jews and Gentiles to superstition, Groves
and high places condemned in Scripture.
idolatry, and all uncleanness; therefore God commands them to be cut down,
Exodus 34. 13: Deuteronomy. 7. 5. and 12. 3. and. 16. 21. Josiah destroyed them, 2.
Kings 23. 8. 14. Against their idolatry under green trees the Prophet Isaiah
complains, chap. 57. 5. God by Ezekiel threatens destruction to the
idolaters on the high hills, and under green trees, chap. 6. 13. such are also
reproved by Hosea, chap. 4. 13. its true that in the beginning the people of
God had no other Temples but hills and groves; Abraham sacrificed upon an hill;
Genesis 22. he planted a grove to call upon the name of the Lord, Genesis 21. Gideon
is commanded to build an Altar upon the top of the rock, Josh. 6. 26.
Notwithstanding, when these places were abused to idolatry, God would have them
destroyed, Levit. 26. 30. Hos. 10. 8. Amos 7. 9. Ezekiel. 6. 3, etc. because he
would not have his people to give the least countenance to the Gentile
idolatry; for suppose they had not upon those places erected any idols, yet
they must be destroyed, because such places were abused to idolatry; besides
God had given them a Tabernacle and Temple in which he would be worshipped, and
to which they should repair from all parts to call upon his name. This Temple
also was built upon a hill; they should therefore have contented themselves
with the place that God assigned them, and not follow their own inventions, or
the ways of the Gentiles, who afterward in imitation of the Jews built their
Temples on hills, as may be seen by the Samaritans and others: Neither would
God be worshipped in groves, because these were places fitter for pleasure and
dalliance then devotion; they were dark and obscure places, fitter for the
Prince and works of darkness, then for the God of light, or children of the
day.

Q. When were buildings first erected for Divine Service?

A. About the building of Babel, Buildings first erected for divine service.
as Lactantius and some others think: for then Ninus erected statues to the
memory of his Father Jupiter Belus, and to his Mother Juno; these statues were
placed over their Sepulchers, and divine honors assigned them; and at length
enclosed within stately buildings, which were their Temples; these they built
within consecrated groves; such was the Temple of Vulcan in Sicily, of Cybele
in the grove of Ida, of Jupiter Hammon in the grove of Dodene, of Apollo in the
grove of Daphne, etc. these dark groves were fit to strike a terror in the
worshippers, and to perpetrate their works of abomination; and because they had
continual lights burning in them, they were called Luci a Lucendo, afterward
they became Asyla, Sanctuaries or places of refuge; which some think were first
erected by Hercules his children, to secure themselves from those that he had
oppressed. We read that Theseus his Temple and Thebes built by Cadmus were
Asyla or Sanctuaries; in imitation of whom Romulus made one. Aen. 8. Hunc lucum
ingentem quem Romulus acer Asylum Rettulit. Christians also in the time of
Basil and Sylvester the first, made their Temples places of refuge; which so
increased, that Monasteries and Bishops palaces became Sanctuaries; but the
exorbitancy of these was limited by Justinian, Charles the Great and other
Christian Princes, who were content there might be Sanctuaries, because God had
appointed Cities of refuge; but the abuses they removed.

Q. Was there any set day then for Gods worship?

A. Doubtless there was, though we do not read which day of the week it was;
for though God blessed and sanctified the Sabbath day, because of his own rest,
and in that it was afterward to be the Jews Sabbath; Set day of worship.
yet we read not that it was ever kept before Moses his time. However it is
likely this day was observed before the Law among the Hebrews, for Exodus 16. as
much Manna was gathered on the sixth day as served for two days.

Q. What sacrifices were used in the beginning?

A. Burnt offerings, Genesis 8. and 22. Peace offerings also, Genesis 31 54. For upon
the peace made between Jacob and Laban, Jacob offered sacrifice. Sacrifices.
First fruits also were offered, Genesis 4. 4. and Tithes, Genesis 14. 20. and 28.
22. The burnt sacrifice called Gnol^h from Gnalah to mount upward (because it
ascended all in smoke) was burned to ashes, except the skin and entrals. In the
peace offering also which was exhibited for the safety of the offerer, the fat
was burned, because it was the Lords, the rest was divided between the Priest
and the people; the breast and right shoulder belonged to the Priest; to show
that he should be a breast to love, and a shoulder to support the people in
their troubles and burdens: For this cause the High Priest carried the names
of the twelve Tribes on his breast and shoulders. The first fruits were an
handful of the ears of corn as soon as they were ripe; these they offered to
God, that by them the whole might be sanctified. Tithes were paid before the
Law, by the light of nature; because by that light men knew there was a God, to
whom they were bound in way of gratitude to offer the tenth of their increase,
from whose bounty they had all. They knew also that the worship of God and
Religion could not be maintained, nor the Priests sustained, nor the poor
relieved without Tithes.

Q. What form of Church Government was there among the Jews till Moses?

A. The same that was before the flood, to wit, praying, sacrificing, Jews,
their Church government from the beginning till their destruction.
preaching in public places, and solemn days; to which Abraham added
circumcision. In every family the first born was Priest; for this cause the
destroying Angel spared the first born of the Hebrews in Egypt.

Q. What government had they under Moses?

A. The same that before, Under Moses. Priests among the Jews.
but that there was chosen by Moses a Chief Priest, who was to enter the
Sanctuary once a year with his Ephod, to know the will of God. This was Aaron,
whose Breeches, Coat, Girdle, and Myter were of Linen; when he entered into the
Sanctuary, the High Priest had his second High Priest to serve in his absence.
There were afterward appointed by David four and twenty Orders of Priests,
every one of which Orders had a Chief, or High Priest; the Priesthood was
entailed to the house of Levi, because the Levites were chosen in stead of the
first born, because they killed the worshippers of the Golden Calf, Levites
among the Jews.
and because Phinehas killed Zimri and Cosbi. The Priests are sometimes called
Levites, and sometimes they are distinct names; for we read that the Levites
paid tithe of their tithes to the Priests, their common charge was to pray,
preach, sacrifice, and look to the Sanctuary, in which they served with covered
heads and bare feet; their Office was also to debar lepers, and all other
unclean persons from the Tabernacle for a certain time. Secondly, to
excommunicate great offenders, which was called cutting off from the people of
God, and (...), to cast out of the Synagogue. Thirdly, to anathematize
obstinate and perverse sinners, who being excommunicate would not repent.
Alexander the Coppersmith was anathematized by Paul, or delivered to Satan, 1 Timothy 1. 20. Tim; 4. 14. The office of the Levites also was to help the Priests
in gathering of tiths, and to carry water and wood for the Tabernacle.

Q. Wherein did the high Priest differ from other Priests?

A. The high Priest only had power to enter into the Sanctuary; Difference of
the high Priest from other Priests.
he only wore a blew robe with bells, a golden Ephod, a breast plate, a linen
Myter, a plate of Gold on his head: by the Crown or plate was signified Christ's
Kingly office, by the breast plate his Priestly, and by the bells his
Prophetical office: the high Priest also was only anointed, after the order of
Priesthood was settled; but before this, every Priest was anointed, he also wore
about his paps a broydred girdle, to signify that his heart should be girt and
restrained from the love of earthly things, They that took Sanctuary, were not
to be set at liberty till the death of the high Priest; to signify that by the
death of our High Priest Jesus Christ, we are made free. The high Priesthood
was tied to the line of Aarons first born, the other Priests were of Aarons
other children; the Levites were of Levies other posterity; the high Priest
might marry none but a Maid; other Priests migh marry a Widow, Levit. 21. The
high Priest might not miourn for the death of his kindred; other Priests might
mourn for their Father, Mother, Son, Daughter, Brother, and husbandlesse
Sister; in other things they agreed; For all Priests must be without blemish,
all must be presented to the Lord at the door of the Tabernacle, all must be
washed, all must be consecrated by offering certain Sacrifices; all must have
the blood of the Ram put on the tip of the right ear, the thumb of the right
hand, and great toe of the right foot, Exodus 29

Q. What Church government was there after Moses?

A. In the Desert Eleazer succeeded his Father Aaron, Church go^^^ment after
Moses.
and substituted under him Phinees to be chief of the Levites. After the
Israelites entered the Land, the Tabernacle stayed some years at Silo; then did
Ioshuah divide the Land, and designed certain Cities of refuge, which with some
other Cities he assigned to the Priests and Levites. The Priesthood did not
continue long in the house of Aaron, but after the death of Eleazer, and three
Priests his Successors, this office devolved to Eli, of the family of Ithamar;
who being careless, suffered diverse abuses to creep into the Ecclesiastical
Government, till God raised Samuel, who reformed both the State and Church, by
appointing Schools of Prophets, and Consistories of Levites. From Silo the
Tabernacle was translated to Nob, from thence to Gibeon, when Nob was destroyed
by Ioab, and at last it rested in Jerusalem. So that all this time there could
be no settled Church discipline among the Jews. The Ark also was oftentimes
removed, to wit from Canaan to the Philistines, from thence to the
Bethshemites; afterward it stayed twenty years at Kiriathjeharim; after this it
remained three months with Obed-Edom, and at last it was brought by David into
Jerusalem. Under David and Solomon.
All this time neither Tabernacle, nor Ark, nor Priesthood were settled, till
David assembled the Levites, and out of them chose Abiathar for High Priest,
and Tsadoc for chief of the inferior Priests, who were to deliver the Ark to
the Levites to be carried on their shoulders, and withal appointed Singers, and
other Musicians: in all 68. of the Levites. He appointed also for the service
of the Tabe^^acle in Gibeon, Tsadoc and his Brethren. At last, David being
assured by Nathan that his Son Solomon should build the Temple, he ordered that
24000. Levites should be set apart for the service of the Temple: to wit, 4000.
door-keepers, and as many Singers, and 6000. Judges and Governors, and the rest
for other Offices. Abiathar is made high Priest, to wait on the Ark at
Jerusalem. Tsadoc is chief of the inferior Priests to serve in the Tabernacle
at Silo. Tsadoc was Saul's high Priest, descended from Eleazer Aarons first
born; Abiathar of the stock of Ithamar, and Eli fled to David, who entertained
him for his high Priest; after the death of Saul, David retained them both,
thinking it did not stand with his honor and piety to reject Saul's high
Priest. This Tsadoc under Soloman was anointed the second time Priest, as
Solomon was the second time anointed King, 1 Chronicles. 29. 22. and Abiathar is
deposed for the sins of Eli and his Sons; and so in Tsadoc the Priesthood is
translated from the house of Ithamar, to Aarons family again. There were also
Treasurers ordained, some for the first fruits and tenths, and others for the
moneys that were given to the Temple toward the redemption of vows, first
born, and sins: The Priests and Levites were maintained out of the first fruits
and tithes; the other treasure was for maintaining the daily sacrifices and
other charges of the Temple; the Gibeonites, with others, appointed by David
and Solomon, did help the Levites in their Ministration: the Priests, and in
their absence, the Levites did administer justice, both in Jerusalem, and in
the Cities of Refuge, and ordered Ecclesiastic affairs. There were also
sometimes Extraordinary Prophets, besides the Ordinary. Its probable that the
ordinary Prophets were of the Tribe of Levi, because the administration and
care of holy things belonged to them; but extraordinary Prophets were of other
Tribes; these meddled not with sacraments and sacrifices, which was the Priests
office, nor had they their calling by succession, as the Priests; nor was the
gift of Prophecy only tied to the man, as the Priesthood was: for we read of
Miriam, Hulda, and diverse other women Prophets: and in the Primitive Church,
though women must not speak in the Church by preaching, praying, or exhorting
in an ordinary way as the Ministers use, yet they were not debarred to utter
their extraordinary prophesies, if so be their heads were covered in sign of
modesty; but otherwise the Apostle will not have women to speak in the Church,
because they must be in subjection to their Husbands; and this punishment is
laid on them for being deceived in Eve, and harkning to the counsel of Satan.
For, if women did preach, they might be suspected to speak by that Spirit that
deluded Eve.

Q. What was the Ecclesiastic Government after Solomon?

A. The renting of the ten Tribes from the other two under Roboam, After
Solomon.
did much impair the beauty and magnificence of the Ecclesiastic state.
Besides that, it was much defaced by idolatry; but reformed by Hezekias,
Josias, and Iehosaphat, who took away the high places. Under Athaliah it was
almost extinguished, had not Iehojada the high Priest anointed Ioash, who again
reformed Religion. He being denied all aid from the Levites out of their
treasure toward the repairing of the Temple, caused a Chest to be made, into
which money given in that kind should be put, and employed by the high Priest,
or by the chief of the inferior Priests, and the Kings Scribe or Secretary,
toward the reparations of the Temple, whereas before it was collected by the
Levites. King Vzziah would have burnt incense on the Altar, but was prohibited
by Azariah the high Priest, and eighty other Priests. This Vzziah named also
Azariah, though a King, yet was justly resisted by the Priests for his pride,
sacrilege and ambition, in meddling with their function; whereby he violated
the Laws of Politic government which a King should maintain; for confusion
must arise, where offices are not distinct, but where men are suffered to
incroach upon each others function. 2. He had no calling to the Priesthood; and
no man takes upon him this office but he that is called of God, as was Aaron.
3. He violated the Law of God, who confined the Priesthood to the house of
Aaron, and Tribe of Levi, excluding from that all other Tribes. 4. He was
injurious to Christ, whose type the high Priest was, in offering sacrifices and
incense, representing thereby our high Priest Christ Jesus, who offered up
himself a sacrifice, of a sweet smelling savor unto God. So Iohojada the high
Priest did well to depose Athaliah, who was a stranger, an idolater and
usurper; this was lawful for him so to do, being high Priest, whose authority
was great both in civil and ecclesiastic affairs; but this is no warrant, for
any private man to attempt the like. Besides Iehojada was bound to see the
young King righted, both as he was high Priest, and as he was his kinsman.
Hezechias restored all according to King David's institution; he raised great
Taxes toward the maintenance of Gods worship, and permitted the Levites to
flea the burnt offerings, which before belonged only to the Priests office, and
caused the people to keep the Passover in the second month, whereas by Moses
his institution it should be kept the first month. He permitted also many that
were not sanctified or cleansed, to eat the Passover against Moses his Law,
which were innovations in Religion. Josias reformes all abuses, abolisheth
idolatry, repaireth the Temple, reads publicly the Law of Moses, which was
found by Hilkiah the high Priest, and makes a covenant with God to keep the
Law. Under King Eliakim or Ioachim Religion was so corrupted, that the Priests,
Levites, Prophets or Scribes with the Elders of the people condemned the
Prophet Jeremy to death. Under Zedechiah both the Church government, and state
fell together in Judea.

Q. In the mean while what Church government was there among the Ten Tribes?

A. The Kings of Israel, our of policy, least the people should return again to
Jerusalem, Church government among the ten Tribes.
and the two Tribes, defaced their Religion with much Idolatrous worship, for
executing of which they had their Priests and inferior Ministers answering to
the Levites; but they suffered no Priests or Levites of the order of Aaron to
live amongst them. Yet they had their Prophets also and Prophets Children or
Scholars: Their two chief Prophets extraordinary, were Eliah and Elisha. They
had also their Elders, who had power of Ecclesiastical censures, but both
Elders and people were ruled by the Prophets, who recided in the chief Cities
at last the ten Tribes lost both themselves and Church discipline, when they
were carried away by the Assyrians. When Salmanasser carried away the
Israelites into Assyria, some remainders of them stayed behind in their own
country; but being overpressed with multitudes of strangers sent thither to new
plant the country, the small number of the Ephramites left behind, were forced
to comply with the new inhabitants, in their idolatrous religions; now that the
Israelites were not quite driven out of their native country, may be seen in
the History of Josiah, 2 Chronicles. 34. 6, 7, 33, and 2 Chronicles 35. 18. and 2 Kings
23. 19, 20.

Q. Wherein did the outward splendour of the Jews Religion consist?

A. In the wealth and magnificence of their Temple, Solomon's Temple, and the
outward splendour of the Jews Religion.
which for the beauty, riches, and greatness thereof, was one of the wonders
of the world; for besides the abundance of Iron work, there was in it an
incredible quantity of brass, silver, and golden materials. The great Altar,
the Sea or Caldron, the Basis, the two Pillars before the Temple, the twelve
Oxen, the ten Lavers, the Pots, the Shovels, the Basins, and other Utinsels of
the Temple were all of brass, 1 Kings 7. as for silver, Josephus tells us lib.
8. and 9. that there were in the Temple ten thousand Candlesticks whereof most
were silver, wine Tankards eighty thousand, silver Phials ten thousand, two
hundred thousand silver Trumpets, forty thousand Snuffers or pot-hooks, which
he calls musical instruments; besides incredible numbers of silver Plates and
Dishes, silver Tables, and the Doors of silver. This we know, that David left
seven thousand talents of refined silver for the Temple, besides what Solomon
added, 1 Chronicles. 29. as for gold, we read that the Oracle and Altar were
overlayed with gold, so were the Cherubins, and the whole house overlaid with
gold, and the very floor also, 1 Kings 6. besides the golden Altar. Solomon
made the Table whereon the shewbread was of gold; the Candlesticks also, with
the flowers, and lamps, and tongs, with the bowls, snuffers, basins, spoons,
censers, and hinges, all of pure gold, 1 Kings. 7. I need not speak of the rich
woods and precious stones in the Temple. The Contriver of this Fabric was God
himself; the form of it was four square; the Courts four; one for the
Gentiles, another for the Israelites, the third for women, and the fourth for
the Priests: the Gentiles might not enter into the Israelites court; for that
was counted a profanation of the Temple; yet our Savior who was frequently
conversant in the court of the Gentiles, accounted that a part of his Fathers
house and the house of prayer, and it was out of this Court that he whipped the
buyers and sellers; this was called Solomon's porch, John 10. Acts 3. because in
that place Solomon stood when he dedicated the Temple and used there to pray,
or because it stood undemolished by the Chaldeans, when the rest of the Temple
was destroyed. In the Priests Court stood the Altar of burnt offerings and the
brazen Sea. In the Sanctuary called the Oracle (because there God delivered his
Oracles) stood the Ark, the Censer, Propitiatory and Cherubines; it had no
light nor window in it; hither the high Priest only had access, and that but
once a year, where he burned incense, so that he neither could see not be seen.
In the holy place which was also without windows, there burned lights
perpetually, to represent the celestial lights; but in the most holy there was
no light at all, to show that all outward light is but darkness, being
compared with that light which God inhabiteth, and which no man can approach
unto. Within the Ark were the two Tables of the Law, the pot with Manna, and
Aarons rod. The Tables and the rod represented Christ's active and passive
obedience; the golden pot with Manna, his two natures. The Temple was built
after the manner of the Tabernacle; but that did far exceed this in stability,
magnitude, glory, and continuance: In the Tabernacle were but two Cherubins, in
the Temple four; in the Tabernacle there was but one golden Candlestick, and
one brazen Laver, but in the Temple there were ten of each. So this Temple of
Solomon's far exceeded the other built by Zerobbabel, wherein was wanting the
Cloud, the celestial fire, the Ark and the holy Oil; besides in number of
Prophets, magnifick structure, and wealth, it was far inferior to the first,
and yet in respect of Christ the second did far exceed the first, who supplied
the want of the Cloud, fire, oil, Prophecy, Vrim, and Thummim. He being all
these in a more excellent manner; but we must note that though the pot with
Manna and Aarons rod were kept in Moses his Ark; yet in Solomon's Ark were only
the two Tables of the Law, 1 Kings 8. 9. In the Women's Court stood the
Gazophylacium or treasury, containing the Alms or Gifts that were offered.

Q. What else may we observe of Solomon's Temple?

A. That this Temple was to the Jews as their Cathedral or Metropolitan
Church; the Synagogues which were not in Jerusalem till after the captivity,
did resemble our Parish Churches; in which the Scribes taught, as the Priests
in the Temple; and as there was a high Priest for the Temple, so there was for
the Synagogue a high Ruler called Archisynagogus. In the Synagogues also they
had their distinct Courts, as in the Temple, and an Ark for the book of the
Law; and the same holiness ascribed to the one as to the other, but that they
could sacrifice nowhere but in the Temple upon the brazen Altar in the Court of
the Priests; which Altar was called Ariel or the Lion, because like a Lion it
devoured the flesh of the sacrifices. Upon the golden Altar incense was
offered; Christ was represented by both Altars; his humanity and passion by the
brazen; his divinity, resurrection and ascension by the golden Altar, and the
incense thereof mounting toward Heaven. In the Court of the Priests called the
holy place, stood the Table of Shewbread, on which were twelve loaves, which
represented the twelve Tribes; upon each loaf was a dish of franckincense,
showing Christ's intercession for his people. The Candlestick and Pincers or
Snuffers represented the doctrine and discipline of the Church. Some divide the
Temple but into three parts, excluding the Court of the Gentiles; to wit, into
the outward Court of the Israelites, the holy or Court of the Priests, and the
holiest of all, into which the high Priest entered once yearly with blood,
incense and smoke. It was death for any other to enter there, and even for the
high Priest himself, if he entered above once in a year; yet Pompey and
Heliodorus took the boldness to enter thither; but the one never prospered
after, and the other fell mad; so dangerous a thing it is to be too bold with
Religion. The brazen Laver and the Shewbread in the Priests Court represented
the two Sacraments of the Church, to wit, Baptism and the Eucharist. The Women
showed their devotion in bestowing their looking-glasses (which were not of
glass, as ours are, but of polished brass) upon the brazen Laver, Exodus 38. 8.
a looking-glass shows us the spots of our faces, but Baptism washes away the
spots of our souls. Two other Temples were built in opposition to that of
Jerusalem; namely, the Temple of Samaria, built by Sanballat upou mount
Garizim; the other at Heliopolis in Egypt, by Onias the fourth, whom Antiochus
had put from the high Priesthood. The second Temple of Jerusalem built by
Zerobbabel, was begun in the second year of King Cyrus, Ezra 3. 8. and was
finished in the ninth year of Darius Histaspes, which was 46. years in all;
whereas the first Temple was begun and finished in seven years. Herod spent
eight years, whether in repairing of the old, or in building of a new, is
uncertain; yet Josephus tells us that Herod pulled down the old temple, and
built a new one; which was six and forty years in adorning and perfecting. of
which the Jews are to be understood, John 2. 20.

Q. What did the Temple and the Vteasils thereof represent to us?

A. As the flitting Tabernacle shadowed out the Church militant, What
represented by Solomon's Temple and Vtensils thereof.
so the fixed Temple resembled the Church triumphant; the three Courts
represented the threefold estate of mankind; to wit, his state in sin before
the Law, by the outward court of the Gentiles: his state under the Law by the
inward court of the Priests; and his state under grace by the holy of holies.
The Temple as it was built by Solomon a peaceable Prince, resembles the
Christian Church erected by Christ the Prince of peace. The one was built
without noise, so was the other. The Temple was built upon a hill; and the
Church, says Christ, is like a City built upon an hill. In the Oracle or most
holy place, was neither the light of Sun, Moon nor Candle, resembling the new
Jerusalem in the Revelation, having the glory of God, and the Lamb for the
light thereof, Rev. 21. 23. In this place stood the Ark and golden Censer, with
the Tables of the Law, Aarons rod, and the pot with Manna; the mercy Seat
covered the Ark, whereon were the golden Cherubins; Christ's Kingly Office was
represented by the Ark crowned with gold; his Priesthood by the censer, and his
Prophetical office by the mercy seat, whence God spoke to the high Priest; the
Tables of the Law and Aarons rod shadowed out his active and passive obedience;
the Cherubins looking on the Ark, did signify Jews and Gentiles looking on
Christ their King. The pot with Manna did adumbrate his divinity by the one,
and his humanity by the other. The Propitiatory covered the Law, and so has
Christ hid and concealed the condemning power thereof; in the Sanctuary or holy
place was the Table with the twelve Loaves representing the Twelve Tribes, and
in them all true Israelites, or Church of Christ; on the one side having the
golden Candlestick, on the other the Altar of incense, besprinkled yearly with
the blood of the Sacrifice: and representing the preaching of the word and
prayer, which by the death of Christ are made acceptable to God. In the same
place also stood the brazen Altar of burnt offerings and the brazen Sea; the one
resembled Christ, by whom we are justified; the other holiness of life, by
which we are sanctified* or the Altar of burnt offerings did signify our
Eucharist, and the brazen Sea our Baptism. The fire that burned continually on
the Altar did signify Christ's divinity; for our God is a consuming fire, says
the Apostle. The holy Oil with which the Priest was anointed, shadowed the
graces of the Spirit poured our on Christ's humanity; with this oil of gladness
Christ was anointed above his fellows.

Q. What was the office of the Levites?

A. Besides that they helped the Priests in gathering of Tithes, Office of the
Levites.
some of them did carry wood and water for the Tabernacle, which they were
bound to carry up and down with its Utensils, to pitch and take it down whilst
it was movable; they were distinguished according to Levies three sons, into
the Gershonites, Cohathites, and Merarites; the first carried the hangings and
coverings. The second, the chief things of the Sanctuary: the third had the
charge of the wood-work. In David's time some were Judges, some Treasurers, some
Singers, and some Porters, 1 Chronicles. 23. 26. The Singers and Porters were
divided into 24. order^ 1 Chronicles. 25. and 26. The elder Levites were to oversee
and teach the younger, Who from the thirtieth year of their life, till the
fiftieth did bear about the Tabernacle. Under them were the Gibeonites or
Nethinims, whose office was to draw water and hew wood for the house of God.

Q. What were the Prophets, Scribes and Pharisees?

A. Not only were they called Prophets to whom God revealed himself and his
purposes in an extraordinary way, Prophets.
but those also that expounded the Scripture, they were also called Fathers,
Doctors of the Law, Disputers, Wise men and Rabbis from their greatness in
knowledge; Which title the Pharisees did appropriate to themselves; their
Scholars were called children and sons of the Prophets. The name of Scribes was
given to Scriveners, Scribes.
and public Notaries; these were called Scribes of the people, Mat. 2. 4. and
likewise those that did write and expound the Law; such a Scribe was Esdras,
Esdr. 7. 6. these were called Doctors of the Law. The Pharisees were so called
from separation, Pharisees.
and by the Greeks (...), that is, Sepa^^rists, for they separated themselves
to a strict kind of life, and to the study of the Law, having no commerce with
other people, nor communicating with them in diet, apparel, nor customs. They
held a fatal necessity with the Stoics, and transammation with the
Pychagoreans; hence they thought that either the soul of John Baptist, or of
Elias, or of Jeremy had animated Christ's body. They preferred Traditions to the
written Word, and placed most of their holiness in washing, counting it a less
sin to commit fornication, then to eat with unwashed hands; from their daily
washings they were named Hemero-Baptists; they always washed when they returned
from the market, thinking themselves polluted with the touch of other people.
They are noted Mat. 9. 11. for holding it unlawful to eat with sinners, and
Mark 7. 4. for their superstitious washing, of cups, pots, brazen vessels and
tables, and Luke 18. 12. for fasting twice in the week, and Mat 23. 5. for
their broad Phylacteries, which were scrolls of partchment, wherein the law was
written, so called from (...), to keep or reserve, for by these they kept the
Law in their memory; they are noted also for their large borders and fringes,
Mat. 23. 5. they wore their Phylacteries on their foreheads and left arms; and
Hierom observes in Matthew. 23. that they used sharp thorns in their fringes,
that by the pricking thereof they might be put in mind of the commandments.

Q. What were the Nazarites, Rechabites, and Essenes?

A. The Nazarites were votaries, Numb. 6. so called from Nazar to separate;
Nazarites:
for they separated themselves from wine and strong drink from coming near the
dead, and from the rasor; some were Nazarites for their life, as Sampson, John
Baptist, etc. others only for a time, to wit, thirty days, as Absalom who cut
his hair the thirtieth day of his vow, such a Nazarite was Paul, Act. 21. 24.
Nazareth was a village in Galilee where Christ was conceived and bread, and
therefore was called a Nazarite, Mat. 2. 23. and his Disciples Nazarites, Acts
24. 5. but indeed he was the only true Nazarite; because he was pure, holy,
and separate from sinners, but he was no legal Nazarite, for he drunk wine and
went near the dead. These Heretics were also called Nazarites, who taught that
with the Gospel should be joined the Law of Moses, Rechabites.
Acts. 15. 2. Of the Rechabites, so called from Rechab their Father, We read
Ierem. 35. 2, 3, 4, etc. these neither drunk wine nor lowed seed, nor built
houses, nor planted vineyards, but like strangers lived all their days in
Tents. The Essenes, Essenes.
so called from their skill in curing of diseases, (for they were much given to
the study of Physic) in their opinions were Pythagoreans, ascribing all things
to fate, offering no sacrifices but of inanimate things, shunning oaths,
pleasures, and wine, contenting themselves with water only, and mean apparel;
their garments were white, and had all things in common amongst them. They
worshipped toward the East, observed the Sabbath more strictly then others;
kept seven Pentecosts every year, to wit, every seventh week one, and generally
they abstained from marriage: yet some did marry for procreation. They were
superstitious in preserving the names of Angels: they were much given to
silence with the Pythagoreans, chiefly at table: none were admitted into their
Society without four years probation: there were some of these Essenes
contemplative only, and lived in gardens, or remote villages, who contented
themselves with bread and salt, others were active, and gave themselves to
manual labors; these lived in Cities, and fared better, and eat twice a day.

Q. What were the Sadducees and Samaritans?

A. The Sadduces were so called either from Isedek justice, Sadduces.
because they would be accounted the only just men in the world, or from
Sadock the Author of their Sect, who was the scholar of Antigonus Socheus:
these rejected all Traditions and Scriptures, except the five books of Moses,
denied the Resurrection, pains or rewards after this life, Angels and spirits,
fate likewise or destiny, ascribing all to man's freewill. They held also that
the soul died and perished with the body. The Samaritans held with the
Sadduces, Samaritans.
that there was no Scripture but the Pentateuch, that there was no Resurrection
nor life Eternal, nor any Traditions to be admitted, yet they dissented from
the Sadduces in acknowledgeing Angels; in worshipping only upon mount Garizim,
whereas the Sadduces worshipped also in Jerusalem, and kept fair
correspondency with the other Jews: whereas the Samaritans and Jews did so
hate and abhor each other, that there was no commerce between them, but did
curse and excommunicate each other. Of these Jewish Sects see Iesephus, Philo,
Drusius de trib. Sect. Munster, Sigonius, Buxtorsius, and others.

Q. How did they anciently observe their S^bbath?

A. The day before was the preparation of the Sabbath, Jews, their ancient
observation of their Sabbath.
called (...), which began about the sixth hour, that is our twelfth. That day
they might not travel above twelve miles, least by coming home too late they
might want time for preparation to the Sabbath, which began in the evening, and
which for the excellency thereof, was called the Queen of Feasts, and gave
denomination to the whole week; on the Sabbath they must not travel above two
thousand paces or cubits, for so far was the distance of the Ark from the Camp.
They were so superstitious in the keeping of their Sabbath, that they would not
fight that day, and so suffered Jerusalem to be taken twice. Whereas they knew
that God commanded them to encompass Jericho seven times that day; and that
works of charity, necessity, and of Religion were to be done that day, the
preparation for the Sabbath was proclaimed by sound of trumpet, and to show
their zeal to that day, they would keep some more hours then were enjoined,
which additament they called Sabbathulum. They would not dress meat that day,
because then it did not rain Manns in the desert besides the seventh day, which
was the Sabbath or rest for men and beasts; they had every seventh year a
Sabbath, wherein the ground rested, and their great Sabbath in the end of seven
times seven, called the Iubilee, in which debtors, prisoners, and morgagers of
lands were made free; when the Passover fell upon the Sabbath, this was called
the great Sabbath, John 19. 31. and then there was a preparation for the
Passover, John 19. 14. but there was no preparation due to the Passover but in
respect of the Sabbath; which had this privilege above all other festivals;
because God had particularly sanctificed this day for his service; being both a
memorative day of Gods rest from the works of creation, and figurative of our
rest in Heaven; this day is abolished in respect of the ceremonial and judicial
part thereof; but in respect of the morality it remains still.

Q. How did the Jews observe their Passover?

A. Their observation of their Passover.
They eat the first Passover standing with their loins girt, shoes on their
feet, and staves in their hands, to show they were in haste to be gone; but
afterward when they were secure out of danger, they eat the Passover sitting,
or leaning after the Roman manner: which posture our Savior observed when he
eat the Passover. The beast that must be eat was a Lamb or Kid, as being
cheapest; and because it must be eat up at one time, this Lamb was to be kept
four days, to wit, from the tenth day till the fifteenth, that they might have
the longer time to think on their deliverance, by looking on the Lamb, and
withal to search if any defects were in it; for the Lamb must be without
blemish; but this custom did not hold long: it must be also a male, and not
above a year old. There must not be fewer then ten at the eating of the Lamb.
it was killed between the two evenings, that is, between three of the afternoon
till sunsetting, which was the first, and from thence till day light was quite
spent, which was the second evening. This killing of the Lamb was rather a
Sacrament, then a Sacrifice, as not being performed by a Priest, but by private
men, and not in the place appointed for sacrifices, but in private houses. The
blood of the Lamb was sprinkled on their thresholds; this ceremony was used but
only the first Passover as I can find; the Lamb was roasted, not boiled, for
the more expedition; and nothing of it must be left, least it should hinder
them in their journey; and it must be eat with sower herbs, to put them in mind
of their bitter servitude in Egypt: the bread that was eat with it was
unleavened, to show their haste in removing thence; the whole solemnity from
this was called the feast of unleavened bread, and likewise the Passover:
Albeit properly the Passover was only the first day, yet the whole eight days
were so named. This sacrament was a true representation of Christ the immediate
Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the world; who is the true Passover,
because the devouring Angel of Gods wrath has past over our sins; he was
killed and roasted by the fire of his Fathers wrath; he is our true food, whom
we must eat with sour herbs, and our loins girt, to show how ready we must be
to undergo the bitterness of afflictions, and to subdue our carnal lusts; we
must eat him without leaven, that is, without pride and hypocrisy; now is the
time to eat him by faith: for this is the evening of the world, in which our
Passover was sacrificed for us. The first and last day of this feast, were the
two great days; but the days between them were only half holy days: Other
ceremonies of this feast we will see anon in the observation of Easter by the
Modern Jews.

Q. What were the feasts of Pentecost and Tabernacles?

A. Their feast of Pentecost.
Pentecost was kept in memory of the Law given on Sinai fifty days after the
Passover. The first day of the Passover was called (...), the second (...); the
first Sabbath after this second day, was called (...); that is the second first
Sabbath, Luke 16. 1. and because their harvest began at Easter, and ended at
Pentecost, therefore they are commanded Levit. 23. 10 to offer a sheaf of the
first fruits of their harvest, upon the morrow, or second day of their great
feast, and on the Pentecost to offer two wave-loaves; the first offering was to
sanctify their harvest, the second was in token of thanks to God for the
finishing of their harvest. Their feast of Tabernacles.
The feast of Tabernacles was kept in memory of their forty years abode in the
wilderness, when they lived in Tents, and by day were shadowed by a cloud. The
first and last days were the chief days, especially the last, called therefore
the great day of the feast, John. 7. 37. and in these long feasts the first and
last days are called Sabbaths. In this feast their custom was to hold in their
hands branches of trees which they called Hosanna; with this Hosanna they
honored Christ; they made booths (therefore the feast was called (...)) in the
open air, in which they lived seven days together, except in time of rain; weak
and impotent persons were excused and exempted from these booths, which were
made up of Citrine trees, Palms, Mirtles, and Willows. The next day after the
feast, they compassed the Altar seven times with Palms in their hands, in
memory of the encompas^ing of Jericho. During the time of this feast, many
bullocks were offered, as may be seen Numb. 29. on the last day of the feast
they read the last Section of the Law, and began the first, and drew water out
of the river Siloah, which in the Temple they delivered to the Priests, who
poured it with wine on the Altar, the people singing, [with joy shall you draw
water out of the wells of Salvation] Isa. 12. 3. This feast was kept the
fifteenth day of Tisri the seventh month; but Jeroboam kept it the fifteenth
day of the eighth month; some think that this feast was kept as a thanksgiving
to God for their Vintage, and Plutarch calls it (...), a bearing about of
Thyrsi, that is, of Spears wrapped about with Ivy in honor of Bacchus. But of
these passages see Hospinian de orig. fest. Munster in Calendar, and on
Leviticus, Fagius on Leviticus, the Thalmud tract. de tabern. Scaliger de
emend. temp. Josephus in antiq. Buxtorfius, Tremellius, etc.

Q. What were their new Moons and Feasts of Trumpets and Expiation?

A. Every new Moon was a festival among the Jews, in which as on the Sabbath
people repaired to the Prophets for instruction, Their new Moons.
2 Kings 4. 23. then it was not lawful to buy or sell, Amos 8. 4 yet the first
new Moon in the beginning of their seventh month called Tisri, according to
their Ecclesiastical account, but the first month in their civil computation,
Their feast of Trumpets.
was called particularly the Feast of Trumpets; for though at other feasts they
sounded trumpets, yet at this feast there was more sounding, to wit, all the
day, not so much in memory of Isaacs deliverance from death on mount Moriah,
nor for the Law given with sound of trumpets on mount Sinai; for the feast of
Pentecost was instituted for that, but for the greater solemnity of the new
year, from whence they reckoned their Sabbatical years and Jubiles, and dated
all their deeds and bargains. This sounding then of trumpets was a solemn
promulgation of the new year, and a preparation for the three ensuing feasts
that month; to wit, of Expiation the tenth day, of Tabernacles from the
fifteenth to the one and twentieth, and the great feast on the two and
twentieth day; but I think this was no particular feast, but the conclusion of
the feast of Tabernacles. Of the sacrifices to be offered in the new Moons read
Numb. 28. 11, 15. as for those words of David, Psa. 81. 3. blow the trumpet in
the new Moon, they are most likely to be meant of the first new Moon or feast
of Trumpets. The feast of Expiation was kept the tenth day of Tisri; Their
feast of Expiation.
and it was so called because the high Priest then entered into the Oracle, to
expiate his own and the peoples sins; for himself he took a young Bullock and
a Ram; for the people he took a Ram for a burnt offering, and two he Goats for
a sin offering; the two Goats he presented at the door of the Tabernacle before
the Lord; one of these (lots being cast) was sent into the wilderness; this
was called the Scapegoat, upon whose head the Priest laid all the sins and
evils of the people, to be carried away by the Goat into the wilderness: The
other Goat was sacrificed. On this day was their great fast, Act. 8. 9. wherein
they abstained from all kind of work and delights, so that they might not
kindle fire, nor dress meat; notwithstanding their afflicting themselves, the
joyful Jubilee was this day proclaimed. Of the rites used at this day by the
Modern Jwes, we will speak hereafter.

Q. What was their Sabbaticnl year and their Idbile?

A. Jews their Sabbatical year.
Every seventh year was a Sabbath or rest: for then the land did rest from
plowing and sowing; then poor debtors that were native Jews and not Proselytes
or strangers, were released, if they were not able to pay: by this God would
exercise the charity of his people to the poor, and have them rely on his
providence: who gave such increase to the sixth year that it brought forth
provision enough for three years, and therefore all things were this time held
in common, and they lived as Adam did in Paradise, or as people in the golden
age, when the earth sp^nte sua of its own accord brought forth all things;
omnis tulit omnia tellus. Of this years fertility see Levit. 25. 20. The Hebrew
servants were this year to be set free, Exodus 21. 2. and the Law to be read
publicly, Deuteronomy. 31. 10. The Jubilee so called from Iobal a Ram, Their Iubilee.
because of the sounding of Rams horns at that time was instituted Levit. 25.
8. for the comfort of prisoners, servants, and debtors; for then all things
were brought back to their former estate; and therefore perhaps it is called
Jubilee from Iobhel, to deduce or bring back; all lands that had been sold or
morgaged, were restored to the right owners, by which means Families and
Tribes were preserved entire without commixtion or confusion, and their ancient
inheritances remained whole. This feast was kept every fiftieth year, but was
proclaimed the forty ninth, on the day of expiation; and was a type of that
great liberty and delivery we have by Christ; which is begun in this world, and
consummated in that which is to come, where we shall enjoy eternal rest, and
shall obtain remission of all our debts, and the possession of that ancient
inheritance prepared for us before the foundation of the world. This year of
Jubilee also was to put them in mind of their deliverance from the captivity
of Egypt. As in the Sabbatical year, so likewise in this all things were
common: the servant whose ear was bored, is now set free; and the slave that
was sold for six years, is now dismissed, although those six years were not yet
ended. The beasts also had liberty to feed where they pleased. But as the Jews
did keep no Jubilee in the captivity of Babylon; neither have they kept any
since Christ. As for their feasts of Purim, and dedication, or renovation,
called therefore in Greek (...), we will speak anon. These were all the
Festivals kept by the Jews; the three chief besides the Sabbath, were the
Passover, Pentecost, and Tabernacles in commemoration of three great benefits,
without which no Society or Commonwealth can subsist, to wit, Liberty, Laws,
and Defense or Protection. Now for diverse reasons God instituted so many
feastival days. First, because he would have his people keep in mind the
benefits he bestowed on them. Secondly, to give him thanks; which they solemnly
did chiefly at Easter, by offering their first fruits; at Pentecost by offering
Loaves; at the feast of Tabernacles by sacrificing in that they had now
gathered in all their fruits. Thirdly, by these festivals the love and amity of
Gods people were the more preserved in their often meetings. Fourthly, and so
was their devotion the oftener exercised in sacrifices, by which the Levites and
poor were releeved. Fifthly, unity of Religion was also by this means
preserved. Sixthly, and their obedience also in this was tried. Seventhly, but
chiefly Christ the promised Messiah was in these Feasts represented; for every
sacrifice and oblation did shadow forth his death and passion, by whose blood
alone, and not by the blood of Goats and Rams, we have obtained eternal
redemption.

Q. What sorts of Excommunication was used among the Jews.

A. At first they excluded the delinquent out of their Synagogue, Their
excommunications of old.
John 9. 22 but not quite out of the Temple, for he might stand in the gate in
time of Divine service; this censure lasted thirty days and more, if the party
repented not; and if he died without repentance, he wanted the ceremonies of
common burial, and a stone was laid on his coffin, signifying he deserved
stoning. They had a higher degree of excommunication, which Saint Paul calls [a
giving over to Satan] 1 Cor. 5. 5. by the Greeks the party so excommunicate
was called (...), and such were not permitted to come near the Temple. Curses
also were denounced against them; Hymenaeus, Alexander, and the incestuous
person are those excommunicated. Their highest degree was Maran-atha, that is,
the Lord comes, 1 Cor. 16. signifying that the Lord was coming with vengeance
against such; these were totally secluded from the people of God, which is
called a cutting off from the People and a blotting or razing of their names
out of the book of life; answering to those three degrees, the Greek Church
had; their (...), 2. (...). and 3. (...). So the Latin had their Abstenti,
Excommunicati, and Anathemata, the reason why God would have this strict
discipline used in his Church is First to terrify the evil doers; Secondly, to
preserve the sound sheep from being infected by the scabbed. Thirdly to keep up
the reputation of his Church, which otherwise might be scandalized for
conniving at sin. Fourthly, that Gods judgments may he either diverted or
prevented, for he is just, and will not wink at sin. Fifthly, that the
excommunicate person by this severity may be brought to repentance and
amendment of life. They had a peculiar way in excommunicating the Samaritans,
to wit, by sound of trumpet, and singing of the Levites, who first by word of
mouth pronounced a curse against the Samaritans, and those that eat or
conversed with them; showing that they shall never be Proselytes in Israel, nor
have any part in the resurrection of the just. Then they wrote this curse, and
caused it to be read add pronounced in all parts of Israel.

Q. How did God instruct the Jews of old?

A. Jews, how instructed by God of old.
Sometimes by visions and dreams, sometimes by secret inspiration, sometimes by
a voice from Heaven; sometimes by Vrim and Thummim, that is, light and
perfection, which were the precious stones on the breast plate of the high
priest; but ordinarily he taught them by his word, either written by his holy
Penmen, or unwritten, namely by Tradition; for God delivered his will this way
to Moses, and he to Ioshuah, who imparted this to the Elders, and they to the
Prophets. From the Prophets the great Synagogue received these Traditions, till
at last they were committed to writing, for the benefit of those Jews which
dwelt in Judea, about the year of Christ 230. This was called the Thalmud of
Jerusalem; but 500. years after Christ, the Jews at Babylon made a more exact
collection, and this they called the Thalmud of Babylon, which contains all
their Canon and civil Laws, and is with them of no less authority then the
Scripture. They have besides this, their Kabbala, which is a mystical kind of
learning, consisting most in certain letters and syllables, out of which they
raise many mystical whimsies. The Thalmudists expect a temporal kingdom, the
Kabbalists a spiritual, who also hold that there was an invisible world created
2000. years before this, because the first word in Genesis is Bereshith, and
the first letter thereof is beth, which stands in their Arethmetick for 2000.
R. Jonathan compiled the Thalmud of Jerusalem; the other of Babylon was made up
by R. Ass; which is divided into six parts, sixty Books, and five hundred
thirty and two Chapters. It Is thought that Ezra deliverd this Thalmud to Simon
the High Priest, and he to his successors, till at last it came to old Simeon,
(who took up Christ in his arms) and from him to his scholar Gamaliel. It Is
most likely that Pythagoras had his Kabbalistical Philosophy from the Jewish
Rabbis; but of these passages see Galatinus de arcanis, Munster, Fagius, D.
Kimchi, and the Thalmud it self.

Q. What maintenance did the Jews allow their Priests and Levites?

A. Their maintenance or allowence to their Priests and Levites.
Besides certain Cities and shares in their sacrifices and oblations, they
allowed them the first fruits and tithes, the first fruits of the threshing
floor, Number. 15. 20. comprehending the first fruits in the sheafe, offered at
the Passover in the beginning of harvest; and the first fruits of loaves at
Pentecost in the end of their harvest, besides the first of the dough, Numb.
15. 20. Nehe. 10. 37. Romans 11. 10. these first fruits were called heave or
wave-offerings, because they were shaken up and down, to show that God was Lord
of Heaven and Earth; or else from hand to hand to all corners of the earth, to
signify that the whole earth was the Lords. The firstlings of man and beast
God challenged as his own, Exodus 13. because he spared the first born of the
Israelites, when he smote those of Egypt. The firstlings of clean beasts were
sacrificed, the fat whereof was burned, but the flesh was given to the Priest.
But the firstlings of men and unclean beasts were redeemed for five silver
shekels of the Sanctuary, paid to the Priests for each of them, Numb. 18. 15,
16. when they carried up their first fruits to Jerusalem, they had a pipe
playing before them, and a bull with gilded homes, and a garland of Olive
branches on this head. As for their tithes, the husbandman according to
Scaligers reckoning, out of 6000. bushels in one year, paid for his first and
second tith and first fruits 1121. bushels, which is above a sixth part of the
whole, besides the tith of their cattle, and fruit of their trees; and so
strict were the Pharisees in the payment of their tiths that they tithed mint,
anise and cumine, Matthew. 23. 23. out of the first tith paid to the Levites, by
the husbandman, was paid a tith to the Priest by the Levites. The second tith
was paid by the husbandman, either in kine or in money as he pleased. This tith
was not so great as the first; for if he paid 590. bushels for his first tith,
he paid but 531. for his second tith: but this second tith every third year was
spent by the husbandman at home upon the poor, and not in Jerusalem on the
Levites. This year was called the year of tiths, Deuteronomy. 26. 12. and though at
this day the Jews have no lands, yet they pay carefully the tenth of their
increase.

Q. What Church government had the Jews after they were carried captive into
Babylon?

A. They had no settled government in Babylon, being then in misery and
captivity; Church government in, and after the captivity of Babylon.
yet they had some Elders and Prophets, as may be seen in Ezekiel. 8. 1. After the
captivity, they reformed all things according to King David's institution; but
the number of singers, doot keepers and other officers came far short of the
former: This government continued in some measure, till the time of Antiochus
Epiphanes, who sold the Pontificare to Jason the brother of Onias the high
Priest: he die degrecs brought in the Greek government, and so did the third
brother Menelaus; at last it was totally subverted in the eighth year of
Antiochus, and again restored by Matathius, and more fully by Judas, Jonathan
and his brother Simon; in Jonathan the Priesthood was translated from the
family of Tsadoc to the posterity of Ioiarib, who came of Eleazer. And the
government held out in some sort till Herod the first overthrew it, by
thrusting out the lawful Priests, and substituting at his pleasure unworthy
men. The like was done by the Roman Governors; then were the Levites deprived
of their tiths by the chief Priests. The singers were permitted by Agrippa the
younger, to wear a linen garment as well as the Priests; they retained then
some Priests and Levites; they had also Scribes and Lawyers, who exercised
Ecclesiastic Jurisdiction with the Elders of the people. They had also
Synagogues of their profession abroad in Alexandria, Cilicia, and other places,
Acts. 6. 9. and in Judea too, whither the people met to pray, and hear the Law
and Prophets read. The Synagogues had their Rulers, Acts 13. 15. who did
interpret the Law; they were also called Prophets, Scribes, and Lawyers: but
the Government of the Jewish Church was much pestered by the Samaritans,
Esseans, Sadduces, and Pharisees: Nazareans who rejected the books of Mojes,
Hemerobaptists, who washed themselves daily, and the Herodians, who held that
Herod was Christ; the Esseans contemned marriage, and thought themselves holier
then other men, therefore called (...), Saints, they would have had all things
equal. The Samaritans rejected all Scripture, except the Pentateuch, and were
the sworn enemies of the Jews. The Pharisees were so called from Separation,
for they separated themselves from other men, accounting all profane but
themselves. They placed all Sanctimony in outward shows. The Sadduces, so
called from Justice, denied providence, subjected all things to our will,
denied the souls Immortality, Angels, and the Resurrection. The Scribes
perverred all by their sophistical glosses on the Law. Of these things, see
Sigonius, Bertram, Josephus and others.

Q. But what Church government have the Jews at this day?

A. In Rome, Jews their Church government at this day.
Venice, Worms, Mentz, Frankford on the Moen, Fridburg, Amsterdam, and in
diverse places of Poland, Bohemia, and elsewhere, they have their Synagogues,
where they use to pray together, and to hear the Law read. Before they come
thither, they wash themselves, and scrape their shoes with an iron fastened in
a wall before the Synagogue. They enter with great reverence, bowing themselves
toward the Ark, where their Law is kept, and are tied to a set form of prayer,
which they must read in their books; they that cannot read must hearken
diligently, and say Amen, though they understand not what is read; for their
Liturgy is the old Hebrew, which they generally understand not. They utter
diverse brief benedictions, and after them some short prayers; and because they
cannot sacrifice, being banished from Jerusalem, the place appointed for
sacrifice, therefore in stead thereof they read the Law concerning sacrifices
and offerings; and some Expositions thereof out of the Thalmud, which they
understand not. They pray in particular for the rebuilding of Jerusalem, and
their return thither, which they daily expect, for which they express great
joy and vociferation. Then they read a long prayer, collected out of the
Psalms, with some part out of the first Book of the Chronicles, chapter 30. Then
they conclude with singing these words of Obadiah, verse. 17. But upon mount
Sion shall be deliverance, and there shall be holiness; and the house of Jacob
shall possess their possessions, etc. And the house of Esau shall be stubble,
etc. And Saviors shall come upon mount Sion to judge the mount of Esau, and
the Kingdom shall be the Lords. Other Songs also they sing, much to this
purpose; and when they sing or say these words, [Hearken O Israel, the Lord our
God is one God] they turn their heads to the four corners of the world,
intimating thereby that God is every where King. There be some of their prayers
which they are bound to say every day twice, standing strait, thinking that
thereby they shall merit. But when they utter these words of Isai. 6. 3. [Holy,
Holy, Holy, Lord God of Sabbath, the Earth is full of the Glory] they leap
three times. They hold, that whosoever does speak whilst they are praying,
shall eat burning coals when they are dead. After this, they utter an
execrable praver against all Christians and baptized Jews. Then they pray for
peace, bowing their head to the left, then to the right hand, and depart out of
the Synagogue with their faces still toward the Ark, like crabs going backward.
They use also to go slowly out of the Synagogue, lest by making haste, they
might seem to be weary of praying. When they mention the adoration which is
given to Christ by Christians, they spit on the ground in detestation thereof.

Q. What circumstances do the Jews now observe in praying?

A. They pray being girt, Jews their manner of prayer.
standing upright, with their faces toward Jerusalem, laying their hand on
their heart, and bowing their head. They hold it a great sin in praying to
belch, yawn, spit, or break wind, because they hold the Angels to be there
present; but if any be necessiated to break wind, he must beg pardon of God,
who has made him a body so full of holes; he that prays must make no
interruption, though a Serpent should bite him, or the King of Israel speak to
him. They are bound to utter an hundred blessings every day. In praying they
must not touch their naked skin. They hold sneezing in prayers to be a good
sign, but breaking wind to be ominous; and they believe, that whosoever says
heartily Amen to their prayers, hasteneth their Redemption.

Q. What is the time and order of their Evening prayer?

A. About five in the afternoon the Doorkeeper of the Synagogue with a hammer
knocks at their doors, Their times of prayer.
warning them to repair to Evening prayer. When they are come, they sit down,
and begin their service with these words of the 84. Psalm: [Blessed are they
that dwell in thy house] Then the Precentor, having said or sung some Psalms,
and half that holy prayer called Kaddesh, the whole Synagogve says eighteen
prayers, according to the number of bones in a man's back. And then the
Praecentor comes down from his Pulpit, and falls upon his knees before the Ark,
after the example of Ioshuah, Josh. 7. 6. and lays his left hand under his
face, because it is said, Cant. 2. 6. His left hand is under my head. This the
people do likewise, and with their faces covered, and toward the ground, they
say the sixth Psalm. Having ended their Evening Prayer, and pawsed a while,
they begin their night prayers, which they should say after supper; but because
it would be inconvenient to return late to the Synagogue, and many times they
are drunk after supper, therefore before they depart they say some prayers; but
if any have a quarrel with his neighbor, he takes the Liturgy-book and shuts
it, clapping his hand upon it, intimating hereby that he would pray no more,
till his neighbor were reconciled to him.

Q. Why do the Jews, beside the Sabbath, keep holy the Monday and Thursday?

A. Ezdras appointed that the people should meet three times in the week, Jews
hear the Law three times a week.
to be taught the Law, because in the Desert of Sur the people wandered three
days without water, that i^, say they, without the Law. And because Moses went
up the mountain the second time to renew the Tables of the Law, and to pacify
Gods anger for the peoples worshipping the Golden Calf on Thursday, and
returned thence on Monday; therefore the devoted Jews use to fast these two
days, as the Pharisee did in the Gospel*

Q. What Ceremonies observe they about the Book of the Law?

A. In every Synagogue the Book of the Law is kept within a Chest; Their
ceremonies about the book of the Law.
this Book is the Pentareuch, written on parchment in great Characters, and
carried to and fro on two staves, fastened at each end of the parchment. Before
the door of the Ark or Chest, hangs a piece of Tapestry, on which diverse birds
are figured, because birds were pictuted upon the Ark of the Covenant. This
book is wrapped in linen, which is covered with Silk, Velvet, or Tissue. The
office of carrying the Law, is sold to him that gives most, and the money is
bestowed on the poor. The two staves are called the trees of Life. When the
Praecentor brings the book out of the Ark into the Pulpit, then they all sing
these words, Numb. 10. 35. Let God arise; and let his enemies be scatrered,
etc. After some Anthymns are sung, one comes between the Chasan or Chief
Singer, and him who bought the Office of carrying the Law, and kisses (not the
parchment, for that were too great presumption) but the clothes in which it is
wrapped; then with a loud voice he blesses God, who has chosen them before
all others, and given them a Law. Then the chief Singer reads a Chapter, and
the Book is kissed again, with blessing of God for giving the true Law. Then it
is elevated on high; the whole Congregation shouting; This is the Law that
Moses gave to Israel. The Women in the mean time being in a distinct Synagogue
by themselves, are not permitted to kiss the Book; nor to be there with the
men, to show what modesty ought to be there; but if he who carries the Book,
should by chance stumble with it, a long fast must be enjoined* that fall being
held ommous, and a presage of great calamities. When the Book is wrapped up
again within all its coverings, young and old kiss it, touching it only with
their two fingers; and whilst it is carried back to the Ark, they all sing
again, Return Lord to the many thousands of Israel, Number. 10. 36. So prayers
being ended, as they are going out of the Synagogue, they say, The Lord
preserve my going out, and coming in, from henceforth and for ever, Psalm 5. 9.

Q. What is their manner of observing the Sabbath at this day?

A. Because Moses commanded the Israelites to gather as much Manna on the sixth
day as might serve them also the seventh, Their manner of observing the Sabbath.
therefore all that they eat and drink on the Sabbath, is prepared and dressed
on the Friday; and if the servants work be more then they can perform before
the Sabbath, their Masters, be they never so great and rich, must help them,
that the Sabbath be not broken; yet they have three Feasts that day, one in the
Evening when they begin their Rest, the second at Noon, and the third in the
Evening when they conclude their Sabbath. All that day their, Tables remain
covered; If they do not wash their heads, hands and feet; If they pair not
their nails, beginning at the fourth finger on the left hand, which pairings
must not be trod upon, but either burned or buried; if they change not their
clothes; if the men cut not their beards, and the women if they comb not their
heads; if they sharp not their knives, and make every thing clean in their
houses on the Friday, they esteem the neglect of any of these circumstances a
violation of their Sabbath. Before the Sun go down, the women kindle their
Sabbatarian lights, which is an ancient custom, as may be seen in Persius,
Satyr 5. Herodis venere dies, unctaque senestrae
Depositae pinguem nebulam vemuere lucernae.
Except we understand here by Herod's days, Herod's birthday, which was
carefully observed by the Herodian Sect. Now the reason why the women kindle
the lights, is because the first woman extinguished the light and glory of man
by her disobedience. They also use to hasten their Sabbath, and to enlarge it,
by ad^ing a part of the work day, that the souls in Purgato^y may have the more
liberty and refreshing, who all that time cocl: and refresh themselves in
water, for which cause the Jews are forbid by their Rabbis to draw all the
water out of any place, but to leave some for refrigeration of these scorched
souls. They believe that a good and evil Angel stand before their Synagogues,
observing who pray and hear most diligently. These Angels wait upon such to
their houses, where finding all clean and neat, they depart joyfully, though
the evil Angel be not concerned, but is forced to show a seeming content. They
do not put out their lights all that day, nor must they snuff them, least they
should thereby break their Sabbath, nor must they that day catch a Flea, or
kill a Louse. If a Jew in his journey be overtaken by the Sabbath, he must
stay, though in the midst of a Field or Wood, though in danger of thieves,
storms, or hunger, he must not budge. They begin their feasting on the Sabbath
with conse crated Wine, and two loaves of Bread, in memory of the double
portion of Manna they gathered for the Sabbath: which day they think is not
sufficiently observed, except they eat and drink largly in the day time, and
kiss their Wives often in the night. In their Synagogues they have read to them
seven of their Chapters by seven several men, who come in at one door, and go
out at another. These Lectures are out of Moses and the Prophets, Act. 13. 27
and 15. 21. they pray for the souls of those who have violated the Sabbath, who
being in Hell, have so much ease by their prayers, as to turn from one side to
the other. But their Service lasts not above the sixth hour, which is our
noon; for by their Law they must neither pray nor fast beyond this hour. If any
dream of such things as they count ominous, such as the burning of the Law, the
falling of their houses, or teeth, they must fast till the evening, and so they
must fast the next day, as a punishment for fasting on the Sabbath. After
dinner the most of their discourse is about their use-money, and other worldly
business. In the evening they repair to their Synagogues again, and thence to
their third feast. They conclude their Sabbath with singing, or caterwaling
rather, which they continue as long as they can, for ease of the defunct souls:
And withal they pray that Elias would hasten his coming, even the next Sabbath
if he please, that he might give them notice of the Messiah his coming. Then
the richer sort lighting a torch, taking a silver box full of spices with one
hand, and a cup of wine in the other, they say certain blessings to God for the
benefits of Light, Wine, Spices, and the Sabbath, and with some ridiculous
ceremonies they end the Sabbath, and begin their week. Some wash their eyes and
face with that consecrated wine, counting it medicinable: others sprinkle it
about their houses against all Charms, and Witchcraft. They smell to the
spices, that they may not faint when one of their souls deparreth, which it
does at the end of every Sabbath, and returns at the beginning of the same,
so that every Sabbath day they have two souls; besides they think that Hell
fire stinks in the week days, but not in the Sabbath, therefore they smell to
the spices when the Sabbath is ended. They pour out some of their consecrated
wine on the ground, to refresh Core and his accomplices, who live yet under the
ground in fire. On the Sabbath they will not light their Candles, make their
fires, milk their Cows, snuff their Candles; dress their Meat themselves, but
have Christians to do such trivial things, and then they brag that they be the
Lords of the world, and the Christians be their servants.

Q. How do the modern Jews keep their Passover?

A. The richer sort spend thirty days in preparation, Modern Jews, how they
keep these Passover.
and buying of the purest wheat for their unleavened bread, with which also
they furnish the poorer sort, who cannot buy. Their first born only fast the
Eve before. The Sabbath which immediately precedeth the Passover, is very holy
among them. In this they have long Sermons concerning the Passover, and use
thereof; this they call the great Sabbath. They are very curious in cleansing
their houses, and washing their utensils three days before Easter, being more
careful with the Pharisees to wash the outside of the platter, then to purge
out the rapine and intemperance that is within. The night before the Passover
they take great pains to find out all the Leavened bread that is in their
houses. They search and sweep every corner and Mouse-hole for crumbs with wax
candles; if they find none, they purposely fling down some, that they might
not seem to have prayed and labored in vain: All the crumbs they find, they
lay up carefully against the next day, and burn them. They are very curious
about the grinding, kneading, and baking of the unleavened bread; the corn must
be ground three days before it be baked. The Mill stone must be cleansed from
all former Meal, and so must the Chest that holds it. The water that is used,
must be brought in consecrated vessels, about the going down of the Sun,
covered. The Master of the Family must draw the water himself. The form of
their unleavened cake is round, and full of holes to let in air, least it
should swell. No other ingredient is permitted in the flower, but water. About
ten or eleven they dine, but soberly, that they may with the better appetite
eat their unleavened bread in the Evening. But first they repair to their
Synagogues, where they sing and pray; only the women stay at home to cover the
tables, to hang the walls with Tapestry, and to expose their cupbords of Plate,
and other riches to be seen, to put them in mind of that wealth which was in
the Temple when it was robbed and demolished. Each Master of the Family, if he
be rich, has his chair of state, wherein he sits like a Prince, to show that
they were now redeemed from the bondage of Egypt. The poorer sort sit
majestically also in their seats.

Q. What is the manner of eating the Pascal Lamb at home?

A. When it begins to grow dark, Their manner of eating the Paschal Lamb.
they run home from the Synagogue; a platter is uncovered, wherein are three
Cakes, the uppermost representing the High Priest, the middle the Levite, and
the lowermost the people of Israel; in another dish is a roasted leg of Lamb or
Kid, with an hard egg; there is also a dish of Pap or thick stuff, made of
diverse fruits with wine spiced, and chiefly Cinnamon, representing the straw
and brick of Egypt: in another platter there are Letrice, Parsley, Ivy,
Raddish, and such like herbs, with another dish of vinegar, to represent the
sower herbs caten heretofore with the Lamb. Every one has his draught of wine.
The middle cake is broken into two pieces; the one whereof the Master hides in
a Napkin, to show how the Israelites fled with their dough unleavened out of
Egypt. Then laying hold on the other piece of Cake, they sing, Such was the
bread of affliction our Fathers eat in Egypt. Here we are now, the next year we
shall be in Canaan. The platter with the Cakes is carried from the Table to the
Children, that they night demand what that is, as we read Exodus 12. 26, 27.
When the Cakes are set down again, they sing a song of their deliverance; and
drink another glass of Wine, leaning like Princes in their chairs. Then some
of the Cakes are eaten with thanksgiving, and some of the Herbs dipped in the
Pap. And at last the third Cake is broken, and some more of the herbs are eaten.

Q. By these passages it seems that the Jews do not observe the Passover, as
they were commanded by Moses.

A. Its true; Their Modern Ceremonies are Rabbinical.
for the most of their modern Ceremonies are Rabbinical rather then Mosaical.
They say that now they are not tied to the Rites of Moses, because they are not
in their own Land, but live amongst profane Gentiles, for so they call
Christians. But indeed, the true cause why they keep not the old Passover, is,
because Christ our true Passover is sacrificed for us, who has put an end to
all the old Ceremonies; and it is observeable that those Jews who now live in
Canaan, even in Jerusalem, do use altogether the same Rabbinical Rites, and do
not sacrifice at all, seeing Christ the Lamb of God, who takes away the sins
of the world, is the only perfect and satisfactory sacrifice.

Q. What may we observe concerning the Jews at this day?

A. That they are a blind, hard-hearted, stiff-necked people, who, as the
Apostle says, Observations concerning the Jews at this day.
have always re^isted the Holy Ghost, and are given up to a reprobate sense;
they will not yet part with the veil of Moses which is over their eyes; who
after so many miracles wrought by Christ and his Apostles, after the
accomplishing of all prophesies and types in him, after the finishing of the
time prescribed by Daniel, of seventy weeks, after sixteen hundred years
expectation of a Messiah, since the end of those seventy weeks, after so many
calamities which they have suffered for their obstinacy and blasphemies against
the Son of God; after so many delusions by Ben Cozbah, David, Moses, and other
fa^^ Prophers, who gave themselves out to be the Messiah, after so many
testimonies and confessions of their own writers that Christ Jesus was the true
Mestiah, yet they will not acknowledge it, but continue still in their obstinacy
and cruelty against Christ and his members; they ^rag themselves to be the seed
of Abraham, and glory in their seal of circumcision given to him; but if they
were of Abraham, they would do the works of Abraham; they would believe with
Abraham, who saw the day of Christ and rejoiced; they can claim no share in the
covenant made with Abraham, because they deny and persecute him who is the
foundation of the Covenant; they condemn Christians for making and honoring of
the image of Christ and of his Saints; which is not so much out of zeal against
images, for they allow the images of the Cherubins which were in the Tabernacle
and Temple, but rather out of spite against Christ and his Saints. They count
it idolatry to honor Christ in his picture or image, and yet they consider not
that themselves are the greatest Idolaters in the world, in worshipping God
according to their own fancy, and not according to his word, which teaches us
that he is to be worshipped in the unity of Essence, and Trinity of persons,
which they deny; thus they worship though not images, yet their own
imaginations: how often have their Progenitors attempted to reestablish their
ancient government, but still in vain, and to their own destruction? witness
what they suffered under Vespasian and Titus, what under Julian, when by his
permission they began to rebuild their Temple; what under Hadrian when they
rebelled, and attempted to set up their earthly Monarchy; what under Trajan and
Marcus Antoninus; what under King Philip called Longus in France, when they
poisoned the Wells; what shall I speak of their barbarous cruelties, and
inhumane savagenesse under Andrew their Captain, in the time of Trajan, when
they murdered many thousands of people, eating their flesh, wearing their
skins, and girding themselves with their guts yet bleeding: of these passages
we may read in Sozomen, Dio, Marcellinus, Paulus Aemilius the French Historian,
and others; as they have still been the greatest enemies that ever Christianity
had, so do they continue their harred against us at this day; but being kept
under they dare not do the mischief they would; yet they curse us still, and
hold that the best of Christians is no better then the Serpent, whose head
deserved to be trod upon. They think they do God good service if they can cheat
a Christian; and they make no conscience to forswear themselves, when they take
an oath upon any of our Bibles, thinking they are bound to keep no oath but
what they take upon their own Torah or book of the Law which is read in their
Synagogues. Neither will they swear willingly, but in the Hebrew tongue,
counting all other languages profane, especially the Latin which they hate,
because the Romans and Latin Church have been their greatest subduers and
conquerers. They call us Gentiles, Edomites, and Devils, and Anathematise us
daily. They will not call Mary the Mother of Christ, but in derision, The
mother of him that was hanged. They are merciless Extortioners, and cunning in
the Art of poisoning Their Religion consists most in needless and ridiculous
ceremonies, in Rabbinical fables, Cabalistical whimsies, Thalmudical
Traditions, large Fringes, and Phylacteries, and in a mere outside; whereas
mercy and justice, and weighty things of the Law are neglected and slighted.

Q. May Christian Primes, with a safe conscience permit Jews to live within
their Territories?

A. Yes; Jews, whether to be permitted to live among Christians.
conditionally that they communicate not in Religion, nor marry together, nor
be too familiar; and that these Jews be obedient to the civil power, quiet,
modest, distinguished by some outward badge, and not to be admitted to any
public office or charge; for they have been tolerated both by the Civil and
Canon Law. 2. The Jews in the old Testament had leave to commerce with the
Gentiles. 3. We ought to permit them, upon hope we may convert some of them to
the knowledge and love of Christ. 4. We ought by all means to commiserate
their condition, because to them pertains the adoption, and the glory, and
the convenants, and the giving of the Law, and the service of God, and the
promises; whose are the Fathers, and of whem as concerning the flesh, Christ
came, etc. Romans 9. 4. 5. we must consider, that by their fall salvation is come
to the Gentiles; and if the fall of them be the riches of the world, and the
diminishing of them the riches of the Gentiles, how much more then fullness?
Romans 11. 12. let us not then insult over their miseries, nor boast against the
branches; for we are but wild Olives graffed upon them; and if God spared not
the natural branches, take heed least he also spare not thee, Romans 11. For
blindness is happened but in part upon Israel, until the fullness of the
Gentiles do come in, Romans 11. And then all Israel shall be saved; that is, most
of them according to the Scripture phrase; For the Angel tells Daniel, that
every one of his people shall be delivered, whose names shall be found in the
book, Dan. 12. 1. so them all the Jews before the last judgment shall be
saved, and shall acknowledge Christ the true Mesliah; yet not all without
exception; but all whose names are written in the book of life: this
restriction shows, that some will not be saved. 5. By suffering the Jews to
live amongst us, we shall be the more induced to acknowledge the goodness of
God toward us Gentiles, in receiving us to mercy, when he cast off his own
people. By this also we are taught to fear and tremble at Gods judgments;
because for unbelief they were broken off; we stand by faith; let us not be too
high minded but fear; for if we continue not in his goodness, we shall also be
cut off, Romans 11. Lastly, from the Jews we have our Scriptures; they can be
our witnesses to the Gentiles, that cut Scriptures; are not devised and
compiled by us, but by our enemies; out of which Scripture, even to the great
grief of the Jews, we can clearly prove that Christ is the true Mesliah;
therefore it is convenient that we permit them to live amongst us:

Q. May Christian Princes permit the Jews to exercise their own Religion?

A. They may, Whether to be permitted amongst Christians to exercise their own
Religion.
if so be they dishonor not Christ, nor traduce or molest his Church: For they
were better exercise their Religion, then curn Atheists; principally seeing
they worship the same God with us, though not in the same manner, and read the
same Scriptures though not in the same sense. For this cause the Primitive
Church, and the Imperial Laws suffered them; and Christ himself permitted their
Doctors to sit in the chair of Moses, and to teach his Doctrine, and counseled
the people to obey the same; besides, by permitting the Jews to use their
Religion without molestation, by using them courteously, they may be the sooner
enduced to embrace Christ; and indeed our cruelties against them, and the
wickedness of our lives have been, and are still great obstacles to their
conversion. But Christian Princes must be careful that they be not suffered to
blaspheme Christ, or abuse his Church; for they are keepers of both Tables, and
they do not carry the sword in vain; they should also use all the gentle means
they can, to bring them to the knowledge and love of Christ, by instructing
them in the grounds of Christian Religion; but violence must be avoided; for
faith comes by persuasion, not by compulsion; neither must their infants be
forcibly baptized against their Parents consent, but when they come to years of
discretion they should cause them to be instructed in the principles of
Christianity, nor must their Parents be suffered to hinder them; but whilst
they are infants, they must not be baptized against their Parents will, because
that were to take away the right of paternity, which parents have over their
children both by the Laws of God, of Nature, and of Nations; besides the
children of Jews who are enemies of Christ, cannot be comprehended within the
Covenant, and therefore are not capable of the sign of the Covenant, till they
be of years; and if then they embrace Christ, they are included in the
Covenant, and so made capable of the seal thereof. Besides, the forced baptism
of Jewish children would be a great scandal to Christian Religion, which would
be traduced as a violent way to force infants to receive that of which they had
no knowledge nor could give their consent to; and so these children when they
come to years of discretion, might justly repudiare that Religion, which was
forced on them, when they had neithe knowledge of it, nor gave consent to it.

Q. In what things must not Christians communicate with Jews? Wherein
Christians are not to communicate with Jews.


A. They must not eat, nor drink, nor bath, nor cohabit together, nor entertain
friendship and familiarity, least by these means Christians should be infected
with their errors and superstition, or least they should seem to countenance
their wicked opinions. 2. Christians must not serve Jews in any kind of
service; for then they will brag that they are the Lords of the world, and
Christians their slaves: besides, it is unseemly that the children of the free
born (for so we are, being made free by Christ) should serve the sons of the
bond woman; for they are true Israelites, and the sons of Abraham, who have the
faith and do the works of Abraham: who are Israelites not after the flesh, but
after the spirit. 3. Christians must not employ Jews for their Physicians; for
this were to engage them: besides, we know out of Histories how dangerous such
Physicians have proved to Christians, who by reason of their inveterate malice,
make no conscience to poison them, but rather think they are bound to do so. 4
Christians must take heed how they traffic with Jews, least they be cheated by
them, or least they partake of the sins and superstition of the Jews, by
selling them such wares as they know they will abuse to their superstitious
worship. 5. Let not Christians borrow money of Jews, except they mean to be
undone by them; for they have ever been, and are to this day, unconscionable
Extortioners. 6. Christians ought not to read their blasphemous books, but to
suppress and burn them; for by them our blessed Savior in his person, offices,
preaching, and miracles is highly dishonored, and his Church traduced:
therefore Pope Gregory the ninth, about the year of Christ 1230. caused the
Thalmud in which Christian Religion is so much blasted, to be burned; which was
performed accordingly by the Chancellor of Paris; and about the year 1553. Pope
Julius the third, commanded that all the Jewish blasphemous books, with both
the Thalmuds should be searched out, and flung in the fire: and that their
estates should be consiscared who did harbor or read, print or write such
wicked books, or bring them from foreign parts into Christian Territories.

Q. How many days do the Jews spend in their Easter solemnities?

A. Eight; Jews spend eight days in their Easter s^lemnities.
the two first, and the two last are wholly kept with great Ceremony, the other
four are but half holy days; all this time they sup-plentifully, and drink
strenuously, till it be midnight, but they drink up four consecrated cups of
Wine, two before supper, and two at, or after supper: each of these cups is
accompanied with a prayer, and the last with execrations against Christians; at
supper they eat the other half Cake; and keep open all night their doors and
gates, as being persuaded that then they are safe and secure from all danger,
and that they are ready to entertain Eliah, whose coming they expect then.
During this time they eat up the whole three cakes mentioned before, and have
diverse disputations about what work is fit to be done that time, full of
ridiculous subtilties. If during this time they find any leaven in their
houses, they touch it not, but cover it till they burn it. Now because they are
not certain which is the true fourteenth day of the Moon, when they begin their
Easter, they keep the second day as solemnly as the first; and because they
know not the true seventh day, therefore least they should mistake, they
observe also the eighth day, after which day they bring leaven into their
houses again: the men fast three times after, to expiate for their intemperance
during the feast; and for the space of thirty days, they neither marry nor
both, nor cut their hair, because Rabbi Akibha lost by death all his Disciples,
being eighty thousand, between Easter and Pentecost.

Q. How do they now observe their Pentecost?

A. Pentecost, Their Pentecost.
so called in the new Testament, from the fifty days between Easter and that
feast, in the old Law it is called the feast of Harvest, and of first fruits,
Exodus 23. 16. because then their Harvest began, and the time they offered their
first fruits of the Earth. The Jews are very exact in numbering each week and
day from Easter to Pentecost, praying continually that God would bring them
home again to Jerusalem, that in their own Land they might offer to him their
first fruits as Moses commanded them. They keep two holy days at Pentecost,
because they know not which is the true day. They produce their Law twice: and
by five men they read so much as concerns that festivity. They strew their
Houses, Synagogues, and streets with grass, fill their windows with green
boughs, and wear on their heads green Garlands; to show that all places about
mount Sinai were green, when they received the Law. They eat that day
altogether white meats of milk, to show the whiteness and sweetness of the
Law. They make a Cake, or Pie having seven Cakes in one, to signify the seven
Heavens into which God ascended from mount Sinai.

Q. How do they keep the feast of Tabernacles?

A. This third great feast, Their feast of Tabernacles.
which was kept anciently in Booths or Tents made up of green boughs, in memory
of the forty years peregrination in the De^art, is now observed by the Jews
eight days together. The two first and two last are solemnly kept; the other
four are but half festivals. They first repair to their Synagogues; then after
some praying and singing, they run home to their Tents, but do not stay there
all night, as their Ancestors were wont to do. They use to take in one hand
boughs of Palm, Olive, and Willow, and in the other a Pome-citron* then they
bless God, and shake the boughs toward the four cardinal points of Heaven:
then having placed the Law upon the Pulpit, they go round about it seven times
in seven days, in memory of the Walls of Jericho, encompassed seven times. Then
having shaken the branches in their hands, they pray against Christians. This
feast is kept about the middle of September; in which month they believe shall
be fought the great battle between Gog and Magog, in which Gog shall be slain,
and the Jews restored to their own Land. About night they go abroad in the Moon
light, believing that God does reveal to them by the shadows of the Moon who
shall live or die that year, for then they begin the computation of their year.
The shaking of the branches toward the four corners of the world, signifies
the destruction of the four great Monarchies, (to wit) the Assyrian, Persian,
Grecian and Roman. They make great use of Citrons in this feast, for they send
sixteen men every year into Spain to bring with them as many of these as they
can: for by the Citrons, they say, are represented just men, who are as full of
good their works, as this fruit is full of seeds.

Q. How do they keep their new Moons?

A. Their new Moons are but half holy days with them; Their new Moons.
for in the morning they go to their Synagogues, the rest of the day they spend
in eating, drinking, and gaming: The day before the new Moon they use to fast;
when they first see her, they utter a Benediction, and leap three times toward
her, wishing that their enemies may come no nearer to hurt them, then they are
able to come near and hurt her. The women have more right to keep this day holy
then the men, because they would not part with their Earrings and Jewels
toward the making of the Golden Calf; but willingly parted with them toward
the building of the Temple. They give a ridiculous reason, why sacrifices were
commanded every new Moon; because, say they, the Moon murmured against God in
the beginning; therefore he took her light from her, and appointed sacrifices to
expiare her crime.

Q. Why do the Jews fast in the month of August?

A. Because they hold the world was made in September, Fast in August.
therefore they make that month the beginning of their year; and believe, that
about that time God will come to judge the world; for this cause they fast and
pray diverse days before, and baptize themselves in Lakes and Rivers; and where
these are wanting, they make pits, which they fill with water; in these they
dip themselves over head and ears, thinking this a means to expiate their
sins; they frequent their Synagogues and Church yards, desiring God to pardon
them for the good Jews sake who are buried there, and in the same they
distribute large Alms to the poor. In some places there they cause Rams horns
to be sounded when they go to their Synagogues, to put the greater terror in
them, when they consider their sins, and the horror of Gods judgments. Their
fasting ceremonies being ended, they shave and bath themselves, and begin their
year with much mirth and jovialty.

Q. What solemnity use they in beginning their new year?

A. Because they are commanded by Moses, Their solemnities in beginning the new
year.
Lev. 23. 24. to keep holy the first day of the seventh month, therefore they
begin their Civil year from that day, which after evening peayer in their
Synagogues they initiate with a cup of wine, wishing to each other a good year.
The younger sort repair to the chief Rabbi for his blessing, which he bestows
on them by prayer and imposition of hands. Being returned home, they fall to
eating, drinking, and making merry. On the Table is set down a Rams head, to
put them in mind of that Ram which on this day was sacrificed in Isaacs stead,
and to signify that they shall be the Head, and not the Tail of Christians.
They feed that night plentifully on fish and fruit, to show that they will
increase and multiply in good works, as the fish do in the Sea; and that their
enemies shall be cut off from all help, as the fruit is plucked off from the
tree. In the morning they go betimes to their Synagogues to sing and pray; the
Law is taken twice out of the Ark, and some Lessons read; after which, one
sounds a Rams horn on the Pulpit; if he sounds clear, its a good sign; if
otherwise, they hold it ominous, and a sign of a bad year. This horn-trumpet is
also in memory of Isaacs delivery by the Ram this day, as they hold. The rest
of the day they spend in good cheer and mirth. After dinner they go to the
waters, there to drown their sins. If they see any fish in the water, they
shake their clothes, that their sins falling upon those fishes, may be carried
away by them into the Sea, as of old they were by the scapegoat into the
wilderness. At night they feast again, and so initiate the year with two days
mirth.

Q. How do they prepare themselves for Morning prayer?

A. They hold it necessary that every Jew from the fifteenth of June, Their
preparation for morning prayer.
till Pentecost, should rise before day; because then the nights are long, but
from Pentecost till the fifteenth of June, they may rise after day; their
rising will be the more acceptable to God, if they have weeped in the night,
for with such the stars and planets do weep; they must let their tears fall
down their cheeks, because then God is ready with his bottle to receive them;
these tears may serve them for good use; because when at any time, the enemies
of Israel send out Edicts to destroy the Jews, God is ready with these bottles
to pour them out upon these writings, and to blotuot the Edict that the Jews
may receive no hurt thereby. They hold the morning the best time to enter into
the house of God, because David faith, Thou will heat my voice betimes in the
morning. In the evening they say God commands all the gates of Heaven to be
shut; which are guarded by certain Angels, who are silent till after midnight,
then a great noise is heard in Heaven, commanding the gates to be opened: this
noise is heard by our cocks here below, who presently upon this clap their
wings and crow, that men thereby may awake; then the evil spirits who had leave
to wander up and down in the night, whilst Heaven gates were shut, lose all
power of doing hurt: as soon as they hear the cock crow, they must say this
prayer as they are taught by their Rabbis: Blessed be thou O God, Lord of all
the World, who have given such understanding to the cock. When they change
their shirts, the walls and bed-posts must not see their nakedness; but they
must change within the bed-cloaths. They must not in the morning put on the
left shoe before the right; but at night they should put off the left shoe
first. As they are going out of their chamber in the morning, they must with a
submissive mind bow their head to the ground, in remembrance of the devastation
of the Temple at Jerusalem; but no man must offer to say his prayers till first
he has eased himself at the stool, and washed his hands, because upon them
evil spirits sit in the night time; and his face also, because it was made
after the image of God; but they must be careful that the right hand with which
they touch the Law, and write the name of God, may no ways be defiled. And
when in private they are easing of themselves, they must not then think of God,
or of his Law, for that will shorten their life, as their Rabbis say. If any
man touch his eye in the morning with unwashed hands, he shall be blind; if his
ears, deaf; if his nostrils, they shall still be dropping; if his mouth, it
shall stink; if any part of his skin, it shall be scabbed; they must not
presume to pray but in their four cornerd cloak, from which hangs certain
borders, laces, or Phylacteries, which they call Zizim; they must also have
their Tephillin tied to their heads and hands; these are scrowls or bundels of
prayers, but of these and many more of their superstitious ceremonies, see
Buxtorsius in Synagoga Iudaica.

Q. How do they prepare themselves for the feast of Reconciliation?

A. The first ten days after the beginning are penitential, Their feast of
Reconciliation, and Ceremonies therein.
in which they fast and pray. The ninth day every man, young and old, takes a
Cock in his hand; every woman and maid a Hen. After some impertinent sentences
pronounced out of Scripture, each one whirls the Cock about the Priests head,
saying, This Cock shall die for me; then the Cocks throat is cut, his body
flung to the ground, and at last roasted: His guts are cast upon the top of the
house, that the Ravens may carry them away, and their sins together. They
labor much for white Cocks, which they hold to be pure from sin; red Cocks
they detest, as being full of sin. The reason why they sacrifice a Cock, is,
because the Hewbrew word Gheber signifies a man, and in the Thalmud a Cock; so
to them the death of a Cock is as much as the death of a man. After this, they
go to the Church yard, confess their sins, and give to the poor the price of
their Cocks, because of old they used to give their cocks to the poor. In the
afternoon they dip themselves again in water, and prepare lights for their next
days service in the Synagogue, where, in the evening they meet, and reconcile
themselves to each other, where has been any offense; he that seeks to be
reconciled, is sufficiently satisfied, though the other be obstinate; and
thinks himself acquitted, in seeking for that the other has refused. If the
party wronged die* he that did the wrong goes to his grave, and before ten
witnesses confesses his fault; they confess also their sins to each other, in
some secret place of the Church: they go two and two; the one boweth his body,
turning his face to the North; whilst he is confessing and beating of his
breast, receives thirty nine stripes on the back, of his fellow with a leather
thong, whom he repayes in the like manner. Having done, they return home, and
make merry with their roasted cocks and hens. Over their clothes they put on a
white shirt or surplice, to show that now they are white and pure from sin.

Q. What other Ceremonies use they in the feast of Reconciliation?

A. The ninth day the men in the Synagogues, the women at home, about evening,
light wax candles, over which they pray, stretching out their hands toward the
lights; which if they burn clear, they take it for a good sign that their sins
are pardoned, and that they shall be happy: if the lights be dim, or the wax
melt, it is ominous. Then they fast, go barefooted, abstain from oil, bathing,
and carnal copulation: they spend much of the night in singing and praying, and
most of the next day, while the Priest extends his hands to bless them, they
all lay their hands on their faces, as not daring to look on those sanctified
hands of the Priest. At this time they fast 48. hours together, and some have
been observed to stand upright and pray above 24. hours without intermission.
Some write that they use at this time to bribe Satan, that he may not accuse
them for their sins.

Q. What Ceremonies use they when they have read over the Law?

A. They divide the Pentateuch into 52. Sections. Their Rites after the Law is
read over.
according to the 52. Sabbaths of the year. The last Lesson, which falls out on
that day that immediately follows the feast of Tabernacles, about the 23. of
September. is accompanied with singing, and the Priests dancing. All the books
are this day brought o^t of the Ark with dancing about it; in the interim,
whilst the books are out of the Ark, a candle burns within it, to show that
the Law is a Light. In the Synagogue they fling Nuts, Pears, and other fruit
to the Youth, who, in scrabling for the same, fall often times together by the
ears. That day their Ecclesiastic Offices are proposed to sale, which
occasioneth much strife and malice among them. The money raised on the Offices,
is for the repair of their Synagogues, and relief of the poor. At last they
conclude all with good cheer and wine at supper, and are merry, if while the
Law was carried about, he did not stumble that carried it, for that is held
very ominous.

Q. What are these Church offices which they sell yearly?

A. First, Church Offices sold among the Jews.
the Office of lighting the candles. Secondly, Of furnishing the consecrated
wine, which is spent in their Sabbaths, and other Festivals Thirdly, the Office
of folding and unfolding the Book of the Law. Fourthly, of lifting up, and
carrying about the said Book. Fifthly, of touching the sacred staves on which
the Book or Parchment is rolled. Young men are greedy of this office, because
they think the touching of these staves will prolong their life. Sixthly, the
Office of reading the Law. And seventhly, of supplying his place who is
negligent in his Office.

Q. Why do they keep the feast of Dedication?

A. They keep it in memory of Judas Macchabaeus, who dedicated the Temple the
25. of November. Their feast of Dedication.
After it had been possessed and polluted by the Grecians, it was then ordained
by Judas and his brethren, and all the people, that this feast should be kept
yearly for eight days together. At that first Dedication was found a small
vessel of Consecrated oil; which of it self was not sufficient to hold out
above one night, but by miracle it maintained the Lights for the whole eight
days. Now this feast consists in drinking and gormandising, and in pompous
superstition about their lights. Yet Christ honored this feast with his
presence, John 10. 22. not to countenance the abuses thereof, but the
institution it self; for all places set apart for the service of God, ought to
be consecrated and dedicated to him by prayer and decent ceremonies; therefore
Moses dedicated the Tabernacle to God, and Solomon the Temple with great
solemnity and prayers; when the Temple was rebuilt, after the peoples return
from Babylon it was dedicated again; and now the third time it was dedicated,
when it was profaned by Antiochus. These second Dedications are called (...)
that is, Renovations. The Temple was also newly consecrated or dedicated under
Ezechia, after it had been profaned by Achaz, 2 Chronicles. 29. The Priests and
Levites spent eight days in this dedication.

Q. What is their feast of Purim?

A. That is of Lots; Their feast of Purim.
for Haman by lot had appointed the Jews to be massacred all through the
Persian Kingdom in one day, to wit, the thirteenth day of the twelfth month,
which is Adar or February; but the Plotters were massacred themselves by the
Jews the same day. For at Sufae, Haman with his ten Sons, and five hundred men
more were slain, and three hundred the day after: and on the same day through
the rest of Assuerus his Dominions were slain by the Jews 75000. So because
this day they destroyed their Enemies, and the next day rested themselves,
therefore at this feast they keep two holy days, or rather days for Bacchus. In
their Synagogues they set up lights in the night time, and the whole book of
Esther is read. As often as they hear the name of Haman, they keep a cruel
noise, and stamping with their feet. They read all that passage of the death of
Hamans Sons at one breath, to signify the suddenness of that death. These two
days are spent in singing, playing, eating and drinking. The men wear women's
apparel, and the women men's, against the Law of God, which they think at this
time of mirth they may lawfully violate. And that the poor may be merry also,
the richer sort furnish them with meat and drink; and so with this ryotous
Bacchanal, they conclude their Anniversary Feasts; for this is the last of the
year, having none between this and Easter.

Q. What Fasting days do the Jews observe now?

A. They keep the four Fasts mentioned by Zachary chap. 8. 19. to wit, Their
fasts.
that of the tenth month, on the the tenth of December, in memory of Jerusalem
besieged that day by Nebuchadnezzar. Secondly, they fast the seventeenth day of
the fourth month, or June, in memory of the two Tables of the Law broken, for
the loss of their daily sacrifice; for burning of the Law; for setting up
idolatry in the Temple; for besieging Jerusalem the second time, and for
breaking down the walls thereof. They count the days from this till the ninth
of the next month all unlucky; so that they avoid all great business; and
Schoolmasters during that time will not beat their Scholars. Thirdly, they
fast the ninth day of the fifth month, or July, because then the Temple was
burned; therefore they go barefoot, sit on the ground, read Ieremiahs
Lamentations, and in the Church yards among the dead they bewail the loss of
Jerusalem. From the first till the tenth of this month, they abstain from
flesh, wine, shaving, bathing, marrying, and pleading, and from all kind of
delights. Fourthly, they fast the third day of September, because G^doliah,
Governor of those Jews that were not carried away in Captivity, was
treacherously murdered, as we read Jeremy 40. and 41. Besides these fasts, they
have others, but not so generally observed; for some of their preciser sort
fast every Monday and Thursday. Some fast the tenth of March, because Miriam
died that day, and the people wanted water in the Desert. Some fast the tenth
of April, for the death of Eli, and his two Sons, and the loss of the Ark.
Some fast the eighteenth of this month, for the death of Samuel. At Jerusalem
the Jews used yearly to fast in remembrance of the Translation of the Bible
out of Hebrew into Greek by the seventy Interpreters: This fast was observed
the eighth day of Tebheth or December, and was a day of much heaviness among
them; which must proceed from their pride or envy, or too much superstition,
disdaining that their Law should be imparted to the Gentiles, and that this
Translation was a profanation thereof. So superstitious they are in their
fasts, that they will read no passages in the Bible but such as are sad and
sorrowful; as the destruction of Jerusalem, Ieremies Lamentations, etc. and
not any passage that is joyful, such as their delivery from Egyptian slavery,
or Hamans tyranny. The only fast that God commanded was that upon the day of
Expiation; other fasts were enjoined by the Prince upon emergent occasions; as
the fast commanded by Iehosophat, by Ioachim and other Princes. Diverse other
private fasts they have upon private occasions. Their fast is from all meat and
drink till the evening that the stars appear.

Q. What is the manner of their Marriages?

A. They are married in the open air, Their Marriages.
either in the streets or gardens, by their Rabbis. The Bridegroom wears about
his neck a hair-cloath, the end of which the Rabbi puts on the Brides head,
after the example of Ruth, who desired to be covered with the skirt of Boaz his
garment. Then the Rabbi takes in his hand a glass full of wine, over which he
pronounces a blessing, praising God for this Conjunction, and gives it to the
Bride-man and his Spouse that they may drink. Then he takes from the Bridegroom
his gold ring, and asks of the standers by if it be good, and worth the money
given for it, and so puts it upon one of the Brides fingers: then are the
marriage writings read openly! Then the Rabbi takes another glass of wine, over
which he prays, and presents it to the married couple to be tasted; but the
Bridegroom takes the glass and dashes it against the wall, in memory of the
destruction of Jerusalem, and for the same cause in some places ashes are put
on the Bridegrooms head; so the Bride in sign of sorrow puts on a black cloak,
and the Brideman a black hood; they are married in the open air, that by
looking up to Heaven, they may be put in mind of multiplying like the stars.
The other ceremonies used before and after marriage, are not to our purpose, as
not being Ecclesiastical. But we must know that besides the principal Wife,
they have others that are subordinate, which we may call Concubines, who have
not the command of the family, nor gifts, or presents from the Husband, as
Rebecca had from Isaac, nor matrimonial writings, as the chief Wife has; nor
may their Children inherit, but receive gifts only; thus Abraham dealt with
the sons of his Concubines, Genesis 25. Their custom also is first to be
contracted, and after some space of time to be married; which contract was
confirmed either by writing, or by a piece of money, or by copulation; but this
last was punishable. Their marriages are accompanied with blessings and
praises; therefore if they are married within doors, that house is called
Beth-Hillulim, the house of praises.

Q. How do they make their Bills of Divorce at this day?

A. After the same manner that they did in the time of Christ; Their Bills of
Divorce.
when any man is weary of his Wife, he writes a Bill of twelve lines only,
neither more nor fewer; this he delivers to his Wife before three witnesses,
who subscribe and seal the same, whereby he gives her free power to go whither
she will, and to dispose of her self as she pleases, but she must not marry
again till after ninty days, that it may be known whether she be with child or
not; the Woman also might give a Bill of Divorce to her Husband, of which our
Savior speaks, Mark 10. 12. and withal shows that such Bills of Divorce
were not commanded but tolerated by Moses for the hardness of their hearts;
and tells them plainly that whosoever puts away his wife, and marries another,
commits adultery, and so does she if she marries another, Mat. 5. 31. Peter
Martyr in 1 Cor. 7. 10. is mistaken when he says, that there is never any
mention in Scripture, that the woman gave a Bill of Divorce to her Husband; but
our Savior tells us, that if the woman put away her Husband and marry another,
she commits adultery; but the man and woman could not put away one another
without a Bill of Divorce, and that before witnesses.

Q. After what manner is the Wife separated from her deceased Husbands brother?

A. The widow with five witnesses repairs to the chief Rabbi, Their separation
of the wife from the deceased Husbands brother.
who asks her certain questions, as whether her Husband has been dead three
months, whether his brother be a single man, whether the man present be her
husbands full brother, of what age they are of; and whether they think
themselves fit for procreation? Then he asks of the woman if she be fasting,
for otherwise she must not spit in his face. Then he asks of the man if the
woman present were his brothers Wife, if he will marry her, or suffer his shoe
to be pulled off. If he say he will not marry; then a shoe is brought, and put
upon his right foot being bare; then the woman comes, saying, this my brother
in Law refuses to raise up seed to his brother, and so bowing her self, pulls
off his shoe, and spits in his face; saying, so shall it be to him that will
not build up his brothers house; and thus they are parted.

Q. What is the manner of Circumcising their Children?

A. The Child is first washed, Their circumcision and Rites thereof.
and laid in clean linen; for if he be foul, or defile himself while he is
Circumcised, the Mohel or Circumciser is to suspend or interrupt his prayer,
till he be washed again. In the morning of the eighth day, the Godfather
seateth himself down in a seat placed near the Ark, and the Mohel near him.
Twelve wax candles are brought in, to represent the Twelve Tribes. Then two
cups of red wine, the circumcising knife, with two dishes; the one of oil, the
other of sand. When the Child is brought to the door by the women, the
Congregation rises up, the Godfather takes the Child and sits down in his
seat. There is also a seat prepared for Eliah, whose coming they expect at the
circumcision. The child is then named, and usually by the name of some of his
Ancestors, so that Luke 1. 61. it was wondered at, that Zachary should name
his Son John, seeing none of his kindred was named with this name. The eighth
day was so strictly observed, that if it fell on the Sabbath, the child was
then circumcised; not sooner least God should be thought to be tied to the
Sacrament, and because the Child the first seven days after the birth was held
legally unclean, and yet remaining in his blood, Levit. 12. 2, 3. and 22. 27.
nor later, least the parents should be longer withheld from the comfort of the
Sacrament. The Penalty of contempt or neglect of circumcision was a cutting off
from the people, Genesis 17. 14. that is, by excommunication, or bodily death of
the parents. Therefore God would have killed Moses for not circumcising his
son; or else by the death of the son himself, when he comes to years of
discretion, if he be not circumcised either by himself, or by his parents, or
by the Judges.

Q. How does the Mohel cut off the foreskin?

A. He first rubs it, that it may be the less sensible, then blesses God for
the Covenant of Circumcision, and withal cuts off the forepart of the skin, and
flings it into the Sand, in memory of that promise, Gen 32. 12. I will make
thee as the sand of the Sea; then he spits some red wine on the wound, and
washes it, and some also on the Child's face, if he faint, and takes the
bleeding member into his mouth, and sucks the blood from it, which he spits
into the other cup of wine. Then he tears off the remaining skin with his
sharp-pointed nails, and lays the clouts dipped in oil on the wound, and
binds them. Then he blesses God again, and the Godfather takes the other cup
of wine, and prays for the Child. And the Mohel moisteneth the child's lips
with wine and his own blood, and prays again. If the child be sick on the
eighth day, his circumcision is deferred till he recover. If he die before the
eighth day, he is circumcised at the grave, but without prayers.

Q. How do they redeem their first born?

A. When the Child is one and thirty days old, How they redeem their first born.
he is set upon a Table by the Father before the Priest, with as much money as
two Dollers and a half. After some questions propounded by the Priest to the
Father and Mother, amongst others, whether he esteems more of his money, or of
his Child; he answers, of his Child; then the Priest takes the money and lays
it on the Child's head, and pronounces that he being the first born, and
presented before the Lord, is now redeemed: if before this time the Father
dies, then the Mother signifies by a scroll about the child's neck, that he is
the first born, and not redeemed; who when he comes of age, is bound to redeem
himself. He is held to be of just age when he is thirteen years old, for then
the parents stand no more charged with his sins, but must himself bear his own
burden.

Q. What duty is performed to the sick?

A. The Rabbis are bound to visit and comfort them, and prepare them for
making their will, Their duty to the sick.
if they be rich: They exhort them to be constant in their faith, especially
they must believe that their Messiah is yet to come; therefore must make both
confession of their faith, and of their s^^s. They pray that their death may be
a sufficient expiation for their sins, and that they may have a share in
Paradise, and in the life to come.

Q. How do they use their dead?

A. When the Party dies, Their Ceremonies about the dead.
his kindred tear off a little piece of their garments, because Jacob tore his
garments when he heard of Joseph's death. They mourn also seven days because
Joseph did so for his father. All the water in the house they pour out into the
streets. They cover his face, and bow his thumb, that it resembles the Hebrew
Shaddai, that so they may terrify Satan from coming near the Corpse. His other
fingers are stretched out, to show that now he holds the world no longer,
having forsaken it. They wash the body with warm water, and anoint the head
with wine, and the yolk of an egg; and cloth him with the white surplice he
wore on the day of Reconciliation, and then they Coffin him. When the Corpse is
carried out of the house they cast a shell after him, signifying that all
sorrow should be now cast out of that house. In the Church yard a prayer or two
is said; then the Corpse is buried, the next of kin casts in the first earth.
In their return they cast grass over their heads; either to signify their
frailty and mortality, For all flesh is grass, or else their hope of the
Resurrection. When they enter the Synagogue, they skip to and fro, and change
their seat seven times. The Mourners go barefoot seven days; abstain from wine
and flesh, except on Sabbaths and Festivals. They bath not in 33. days, nor
pare their nails. They burn candles for seven days together, thinking that the
departed souls return to the place where they left the body, and bewail the
loss thereof. They believe that no Jew can be partaker of the Resurrection,
who is buried out of Canaan, except God through hollow passages of the earth
convey his body thither; grounding this conceit upon Jacobs desire to Joseph
that he should bury him in Canaan, and not in Egypt. They borrowed diverse
Gentile customs in their Funerals, as cutting or tearing their skin, hiring of
women to sing, and minstrils to play; also shaving; going bare footed, and
bare-headed with dust on their heads, washing, anointing and embalming, besides
beautifying of their Sepulchers, and adding of Epitaphs, etc. they used also
burning of the dead, as may be seen in 1 Samuel 31. 12. and Amos 6. 10. they bury
apart by themselves, and not with those of another Religion. Their common
Epitaph is, Let his soul be in the bundle of life, with the rest of the just,
Amen, Amen, Selah. Other vain opinions and ceremonies they have, but not to our
purpose. Of which see Munster, Buxt^rfius, Margarita, Galatin, Hospinian,
Fagius, D. Kimchi, Aben Esra, etc.

The Contents of the second Section.
The Religions of the ancient Babylonians; of the making, worshipping of
images, and bringing in Idolatry. 2. Of Hierapolis, and gods of the Syrians. 3.
Of the Phenicians. 4. Of the old Arabians. 5. Of the ancient Persians. 6. Of
the Scythians. 7. Of the Tartars, or Cathaians and Pagans. 8. The Religions of
the Northern Countries near the Pole. Three-ways whereby Satan deludes men by
false miracles. The fear of his Stratagems whence it proceeds; His illusions
many, our duty thereupon. 9. Of the Chinois. 10. Of the ancient Indians. 11. Of
Siam. 12. Of Pegu. 13. Of Bengala. 14. Of Magor. 15. Of Cambaia. 16. Of Goa.
17. Of Malabar. Pagan Idolaters believe the immortality of the Soul. 18. Of
Narsinga, and Bisnagar. 19. Of Japan. 20. Of the Philippina Islands. 21. Of
Sumatra, and Zeilan. 22. Of the ancient Egyptians. 23. Of the modern Egyptian
Religions.

SECT. II.
Quest. WHat kind of Religious, or rather Superstitious government was there
among the Ancient Babylonians?

Answ. They had their Priests called Chaldeans, and Magi, who were much
addicted to Astrology and Divination, Babylonians, their ancient Religion.
and had their Schools for education of the Youth in this knowledge. They
worshipped diverse gods, or idols rather; the two chief were Belus or Bell, or
Baal, by whom they meant Jupiter; the other was Astaroth, or Astarte, by which
Juno was understood. They were bound also, by their superstitious discipline,
to worship the Sun; and so was the King to offer to him every day a white horse
richly furnished. They worshipped also the Fire, under the name of Nego; and
and the Earth, by the name of Shaca. To this Goddess they kept a feast for
five days in Babylon, where, during that time, the Servants were Masters, and
the Masters Servants. They worshipped also Venus; for maintaining of whose
service, the women prostituted themselves to strangers, and received much money
thereby; to this purpose they sat and exposed themselves at the Temple of
Venus, which they call Militta. Their Priests used to have their Processions,
and to carry their Idols on their shoulders, the people before and behind
worshipping. The Priests also there used to shave their heads and beards, and
to stand in their Temple with Axes, Scepters, and other Weapons in their hands,
and Candles lighted before them. They held a Divine Providence, but denied the
Creation. Ninus was the first Idolater, who after the death of his Father
Belus, set up his Image, and caused it to be adored with divine honors here at
Babylon, and in the rest of his dominions. The making, worshipping of Images,
and bringing in Idolatry.
Thus we see that the making of images, and the worshipping of them, was the
invention of the Gentiles; for indeed they were men whom the Pagans affirmed to
be gods; and every one according to his merits and magnificence, began after
his death to be worshipped by his friends, but at length by the persuasion of
evil spirits, they esteemed those whose memories they honored, to be lesser
gods; this opinion and idolatry was fomented by the Poets; and not only a
preposterous love, and a vain admiration of the worth and merits of dead men
brought in idolatry, but likewise Deisidemonia, or a foolish and preposterous
fear; primus in orb Deos fecit timor; for the Gentiles did fear their Religion
would be in vain, if they did not see that which they worshipped; they would
therefore rather worship stocks and stones, then an invisible Deity; but it is
ridiculous, says Seneca, Gen^ posito simulachra adorare and suspicere, fabros
vero qui illa secerunt contemnere; to worship and admire the image, and to
slight the image maker; whereas the Artificer deserves more honor then the
Art. Against this madness the Prophet Isaiah speaks chap. 44. men cut down
trees, rind them, burn a part of them, make ready their meat, and warm
themselves by the fire thereof; but of the residue he makes a god, an idol,
and prays to it; but God has shut their eyes from sight, and their heart
from understanding. Diverse ways they had in worshipping of their Idols,
sometimes by bowing the head, sometimes by bending the knee, sometimes by
bowing or prostrating the whole body, and sometimes by kissing the idol, or by
kissing their own hand, if they could not reach to kiss the idol; of this Job
speaks; if my mouth has kissed mine hand when I beheld the Sun shining, or
the Moon walking in her brightness, Job. 31. 27. but of the Babylonish
idolatry see Diodorus, Philostratus, Eusebius, Isidor, Scaliger.

Q. How does it appear that the Gentile Idols were dead men?

A. By their own testimonies; The Gentiles Idols were dead men.
for Hermes in Asclepio as Apule^us records, confesses, that Aesculapius
grandfather to Asclepius, and that Mercury his own grandfather, who had divine
worship at Hermopolis in Egypt, were men whose bodies were buried, the one in
Lybia, the other in Egypt, in the Town Hermopolis, so called from him; but
under these names Spirits or Devils are worshipped, which I did draw or entice
into their Statues. Plutarch witnesses that the Egyptian god Osyris was a man,
who because he distinguished every Region in the Camp by their colors, in
which Dogs, Oxen, and other beasts were painted; therefore after his death he
was honored under these shapes. In Cyprians book concerning the vanity of
Idols, Alexander is informed by Leo the chief Egyptian Priest, that their gods
were no other then men. The Greek Poets in rehearsing the Genealogy and
offspring of their gods, do intimate that they were men. King ^aunus in Italy,
made his Grandfather Saturn a god, and so he did deifie his father Picus, and
his wife Fauna, who from her gift of prophesying was called Fatua and afterward
Bona dea. When the Senate made an Act that none should be worshipped at Rome
for gods, but such as the Senate did allow, did they not by this Act intimate
that their gods were but men, and subject to their approbation. Cicero in his
books of the nature of Gods, shows that all their Deities, both great and
small were but men; their Temples were their Sepulchers, and their Religion but
Superstition. Virgil by confessing that the Trojan gods were subdued by the
Grecians, does acknowledge they were but men* Sibylla calls the Gentile gods
(...), that is, the idols or images of dead carcasses; the whole story of
Jupiter, to wit, his birth, education, actions, and death, do testify he was
but a man; and if we look on his adulteries, incests with his own sister Juno,
and his daughter Minerva* if on his Sodomy with Ganymedes, his ravishing of
Europa and many others; if on his impiety against his father Saturn, whom he
drove out of his kingdom, and forced to hide himself in Italy; if, I say, we
consider these things, we must needs say, that he was so far from being a god,
that he scarce deserved the name of a man, but rather of a savage beast, and
indeed not unlike in ^alacity to the Goat his Nurse. Such another god was
Saturn, a cruel murderer of his own children, and whose chief delight was to
have little children sacrificed to him. What was Mercury but a These, Venus a
Whore, Bacchus a Drunkard? Vulcan was but a Smith, Apollo a Shepherd and
Mason, Mars a Soldier, Neptune a Mariner, Minerva a Spinster or Weaver, Saturn
a Husbandman, Aesculapius a Physician, etc. in a word, as these were men, so
they had no other Deity but what they had from men; therefore I will end with
that witty saying: Si Dii, cur plangit is! si mortui, cur adoratis? if these
are gods, why do you bewail them? if men, why do you adore them? But against
these deified men, the fathers of the Church have written sufficiently; chiefly
Clemens. Augustine, Eusebius, Tertullian, Cyprian, Lactantius, Arnobius,
Nazianzene, etc. who tell us that there was no Religion at all among the
Gentiles, seeing every kind of impurity and impiety was patronized by their
gods, and as Greg. Nazianzene says in his third Oration against Julian, (...)
that is, to be wicked was not only counted no disgrace, but it was also
honored with Altars and Sacrifices: Therefore justly might the Apostle call
the worshippers of such gods, Atheists, because they did not worship the true
God, but such as were no gods at all, and scarce worthy to be called men.
Goodly gods (says the same Father) who would be drawn to Aethiopia so far off,
for the love of good cheer; these sure were belly-gods; and withal would
undertake a quarrel for the Strumpet Lacaena.

Q. What Religious worship, or idolatrous rather, was used in Hierapolis of
Syria?

A. In this holy City (for so Hierapolis signifies) was a magnificent Temple,
Hierapolis, the Religion thereof.
built by Deucalion, or, as some write, by Semiramis, or, as others, by
Bacchus. Queen Stratonice repaired; or re-builded rather, this Temple, being
decayed. Here men used to geld themselves, and put on women's apparel, such
Priests were called Galli; Here stood two Priapi or Phalli, and within the
Quire (into which the chief Priest only might enter) stood Jupiters statue,
supported with Bulls, Juno's with Lions, having in one hand a Scepter, and a
Distaff in the other: In the Temple stood Apollo, clothed and bearded, whose
Oracles were much consulted; if the Petition was liked, the Image would move
forward; if otherwise, backward. Here also stood diverse other Idols; 300.
Priests were maintained here; who did Minister all in white, with their heads
covered, and sacrificed twice a day, with singing and musical Instruments, if
to Juno; but to Jupiter no music. Their high Priest was elected every year,
whose clothing was Purple, and a golden Myter. Not far from the Temple was a
deep Lake, in which were kept consecrated fishes: in the midst thereof stood a
stone Altar, crowned continually with Garlands; on this odours did still burn.
They had diverse feasts: the greatest was that of the Fire; where they set
diverse trees hung with diverse sorts of beasts for sacrifice on fire, after they
had carried about these Fires (in Procession) their Idols. Here the gelded
Priests wound each other, and diverse young men at this feast geld themselves.
Here was much confused Music, Disorder, Fury, and Prophesying. Into the Temple
none might enter in 30. days, in whose Family any died, and then his head must
be shaved. He that but looked upon a dead Corpse, was excluded the Temple a whole
day. To touch a Dove was abomination, because Semiramis was transformed into a
Dove; and so it was to touch fishes because of Derceto, the Mermaid and Mother
of Semiramis, half a Fish and half a Woman. To Hierapolis were diverse
Pilgrimages; each Pilgrim was tied to cut his hair on his head and brows; to
sacrifice a sheep, to kneel and pray upon the fleece thereof; to lay the head
and feet of the sheep upon his own head, to crown himself, to drink cold wa^er
only, and to sleep on the ground till his return. The young men were bound to
consecrate their hair, then to cut it in the Temple, and to offer it in a box
of Gold or Silver, with their names inscribed thereon. Some other foolish
circumstances there were in their superstitious Church discipline, if I may so
call it: Of which see Lucian in his Syrian Goddess; out of whom I have this
description. By this, and by what we are to speak of the Gentile idolatry, we
may admire the madness of those men, who being made after the image of God, do
subject and enslave themselves to dead images, to senseless blocks and stones,
which have eyes and see not, ears and hear not: then not without cause did
David say, that they who made them are like unto them; he means those that
worship them; for not the Artificer, but the Worshipper makes the Idol; So the
Poet, Qui fingit sacros auro vel marmore vultus,
Non facit ille De^s; qui colit iste facit.
And it is strange to see how cold and sparing we are in the worship of the
true God: how zealous and expensive they are in the service of their false
gods; they can cut their flesh, and cry from morning to evening with Baals
Priests; they can part from their gold and silver, their jewels and earrings
to make them a golden Calf, yea they can offer their sons and daughters to be
burned in the fire to Moloch; and yet there is no sin so repugnant to God as
Idolatry; for it is repugnant to his entity, because an Idol is nothing in the
world, says the Apostle; it is repugnant to his unity, because he is but one;
but false gods or idols are many; it is repugnant to him as he is verity,
because Idols are lying vanities; it is repugnant also to him, as he is life,
because Idols are dead and senseless things; it is repugnant to his purity;
for Idols are called filthiness, pollution, and abomination in Scripture; it
is also repugnant to the love he carries to his Church: for it causes
jealousy in him, and therefore he calls Idolatry Whoredom, and Idoters
Adulterers; and they that worship Idols are said to go a Whoring after other
gods; it is likewise opposite to gods goodness; therefore idolatry is
particularly called sin, as if it were the only sin in the world, so Exodus 32.
22. This people is prone to sin, that is, to idolatry: so Lament. 1. 8. my
people have committed a sin, that is, Idolatry: and as it is most repugnant to
Gods nature, so it is to almost all his commandments. To the first; because it
makes other gods then he. To the seond: because it makes graven Images, and
worships them. To the third: because it takes Gods name in vain, by giving it
to the creature even to stocks and stones. To the fifth: because it gives the
honor due to parents, uno senseless Idols; for the Idolater says to the
stock, thou art my Father, and to the stone thou have begotten me, Jer 2. 27.
To the sixth commandment, because the Idolater is a horrible murderer, in not
sparing his own children. To the seventh, for Idolatry is not only spiritual
Adultry, but the cause also of carnal pollution, and of unnatural lust; for
among the Indians they practiced Sodomy in the sight of their Idols, as a part
of that worship due to them. Lastly it is against the eighth commandment; for
the Idolater is a sacrilegious thief, stealing from God his due, and giving it
to his Idol, as the Prophet complains Hos. 2. 8. There are three sins
inseparable companions of Idolatry; namely, Witchcraft, Coveteousnesse, and
carnal Pollution. For the first, The Apostle Gal. 5. 20. joyneth Idolatry and
Witchcraft together: The Ephesians as they were given to Idolatry, so they were
to Magical Arts: and as soon as they forsook their idolatry, they forsook also
their witchcraft, and burned their conjuring books, Acts 19. 19. as Manasseh
reared up Altars for Baal, so he used enchantments, and dealt with familiar
spirits, and Wizzards, 2 Kings 21. 6. hence proceeded diabolical inspirations,
and Enthusiasmes, Oracles, and many other enchanting tricks. As for
covetousness, it is no wonder that it accompanies idolatry; for it is a kind of
idolatry, and so the Apostle calls it; The covetous man worshippeth his god
Plutus, or Mammon, with as great devotion as any Idolater does his Idol: he
says to the wedge, thou art my hope, and to the gold, thou art my confidence;
he sacrifices to his god the poor whom he oppresses, his own soul also, and
his body too, which he macerates with care, and deprives of things necessary.
King Ahaz no sooner gave himself to Idolatry, but he presently shows his
sacrilegious covetousness in robbing the house of the Lord of its wealth, 2 Chronicles. 28. As for carnal uncleanness, how much that has been practiced by
Idolaters, is known to them that have read Histories; for they did not think
their daughters fit for marriage, till first they had been prostituted before
their Idols; and though adultery, fornication and Sodomy were thought sins, yet
these were held virtues, and a part of religious worship in the presence of
their gods; and it is no marvel; for their very gods were incestuous,
Adulterers, and Sodomites; and diverse Strumpets after their death were deified,
as Lactantius instanceth in Laurentia, the Wife of Faustulus, who for her
whoordomes among the Shepherds was called Lupa, that is a Whore. Such another
was Leaena among the Athenians; such was Faula, Hercules his Whore, and Flora,
who left her estate to the Romans. In a word, Idolatry has been the cause of
all sin and mischief in the world; from whence proceed murders, rapine,
oppression, injustice, intemperance, uncleanness, sorsery, avarice, etc. but
from this, that men forsook the living God, who is the punisher of vice, and
rewarder of virtue; and served false gods, who had been wicked men themselves
whilst they lived, and patronized wickedness when they were dead?

Q. What Idolatrous Gods or Devils rather, did the ancient Syrians worship?

A. Their chief god was Baal-Zebub, or Beel-Zebub, the Lord of Flies, Gods of
the Syrians.
either because his Temple was much infested with Flies, or else from the power
he had in driving away Flies. He was a great god at Ekron, and is called in the
Gospel, Prince of the Devils. Some take him for Jupiter, others for Priapus,
others for Sumanus chief god of the Manes, which some think to be Pluto. 8.
Baal-Phegor or Peor, that is, the gaping or naked Lord, so called from the
naked posture in which he was worshipped* h^ was the God of the M^abites. His
Temple is called Beth-Peor, Deuteronomy: 3. 29. some take him for Priapus. 3. Baal or
Bell, which signifies Lord, was a great god or Idol amongst the Babylonians,
Sidonians, Samaritans, and Moabites, and sometimes among the Jews; some take
him for Mars, others for Jupiter, who by the Phoenicians is called Baal Samen,
that is, Lord of Heaven, by which I think they meant the Sun. 4. Baal-berith,
that is, Lord of the Covenant, Judge. 9. 4. by whom they meant Jupiter, whose
office was to confirm Covenants, and to punish the breakers thereof, Audiat
haec genitor, qui foedera sulmine sancit, Virg. Aene. 12. So Aristophanes calls
upon Jupiter to send his Thunder upon Perjurers, (...). Therefore among the
Romans, the Herald or Foecialis in making of Leagues, used as he was killing
the Hog, by which they used to confirm their Covenants, to call on Jupiter. 5.
Dagon from Dag a Fish, because from the navel downward he was made in the form
of a fish, but upward like a man; this was a great Idol among the Philistines,
and is thought to be the same that Neptun or Triton. Others who derive the word
from Dagan, that is, corn, of which he is said to be the inventer, make him all
one with Saturn. 6. Astaroth or Astarte was Goddess of the Sidonians; the word
signifies a flock of sheep or sheep fold; this is thought to be all one with
Juno, Venus, or Lucina, under which names and the form of a sheep, they
worshipped the Moon, as they did the Sun under the name of Jupiter, and form of
a Ram. She is called also by the Greeks (...) from (...), Heaven, where her
abode is (...), from her dominion over the Stars. 7. Ad^ammelech, that is, the
Kings cloak, or power. Anamelech, the Kings Oracle or Answer; these two Idols
were worshipped at Sepharvaim a Town of the Assyrians, 2 Kings 17. these gods
were also honored in Samaria, and so were Succoth-Benoth, the Tabernacle of
Daughters, Nergal the light of the grave, Ashima a fault, Nibhas, the fruit of
vision, Tartak, that is, Chained. All which may be seen in the above named
chapter of the Kings. 8. The Moabites worshipped Chemosh, the Ammonites
Milchom, 2 Kings 23. Nisroch was Senacharibs Idol, 2 Kings 19. Remphan or
Repham is the same that Hercules the god of Tyrus, from Rephaim, that is.
Giants. Moloch or Molech from Molach to reign, was a great idol among the
Moabites, and Ammonites, and is thought to be the same that Saturn, for their
images and sacrifices were much a like; to whom the superstitious Gentiles, and
the Jews also offered their sons and daughters to be burned. Thamuz mentioned
Ezekiel. 8. 14. is by Hierom taken for Adonis, so called from Adon, that is, Lord,
by which they understood the Sun, as likewise by Hercules; many other idol gods
they worshipped: but these mentioned are the chief.

Q. What kind of Discipline was used among the Phoenicians?

A. By their execrable discipline they were bound to offer yearly Sacrifices to
Saturn, Phoe^icians, Their Religion and Discipline.
or the Devil rather, of young Infants: and in the Temple of Venus, to practice
not only Whoredom, but Sodomy also; the Phoenicians were bound to prostitute
their daughters to Venus before they married them. In the Temple of Venus were
celebrated the annual Rites of Adonis, with beatings and howlings, to whom they
perform solemn Obsequies. The next day they say he is alive, and then they
shave their heads. The women that refused to be shaved, were tied to prostitute
themselves to strangers for one day, and by this means money was raised for
Venus. The fun also is much worshipped amongst them, whose Priest is crowned
with gold, and is clothed with a long sleeved garment down to the feet. They
were also tied by their Discipline to worship Astarte in the shape of a sheep,
and Dagon in the form of a Mermaid, This idol was called Atergatis, and
Dercetis: in honor of which the Phoenicians abstained from fish, yet her
Priests did eat of the fish which they set all day before her. She had also
offered to her fishes of gold and silver. Of these passages, see Eusebius in
his Preparation, Diodorus Siculus, Lucian, Pliny, Athenaeus, and others.

Q. What was the Religion and Discipline of the old Arabians?

A. They worshipped the Sun and Moon, Arabians, their Religion and Discipline.
Serpents, Trees, and other such like Deities. The Nabathaeans burned
Frankincense to the Sun on his Altar. They do not bury their dead, but lay
them, even their Kings, in dunghills. Adultery is death among them, but Incest
Is no sin. They are circumcised after the example of Ismael, at thirteen years
of age. Their Priests are clothed with linen: they wear Myters and Sandals;
they abhor Swines flesh: they pay the tithes of their Frankincense to their god
Satis: the Priests are not to take it by weight, but by measure. They are tied
by their discipline not to gather Cinnamon, till first they sacrifice; then
they divide it with a consecrated spear, and assign to the Sun his portion. In
Panchaea is a rich and stately Temple, adorned with Statues, and the Priests
houses about it. The Priests here rule all, both in Politic and Ecclesiastic
Affairs. They are bound to spend their time in singing Hymns, and rehearsing
the Acts of their gods. It is not lawful for them to go out of the sacred
bounds allotted them: if they do, they may be killed by Law. They hold Mice to
be arrant enemies to their gods, therefore they kill them. Of this subject see
Solinus, Athenaeus, Diodorus, Boeinus, and others.

Q. What was the Religious discipline of the ancient Persians?

A. They had neither Temples, Altars* nor Images, holding these improper for
their Gods: Persians, their ancient Religion.
but on the tops of hills offered sacrifices to Heaven, and to the Sun, Moon,
Fire, Earth, Water, and Winds. The Priest uses neither Music, Vestments, nor
Libaments, b^t only his Tiara, or Head attire, crowned with Myrtle. He prays
for all Persians, chiefly for the King. He cuts his sacrifice into small pieces,
and puts herbs under. One of the Magi is bound to stand by, and to sing a Hymn
of the Genealogy of their gods; for without a Magus* the sacrifice is not
lawful. Every man celebrates his own birth day. To lie, and to be in debt, are
heinous crimes with them; so it is to spit, wash, or piss in a River, which
with them are hallowed. The Magi may with their own hands kill any thing,
except a man, and a dog. They leave no part of their sacrifices for their gods,
but divide it by the direction of their Magus amongst themselves; for they hold
that God is satisfied with the soul of the sacrificed beast. To blow the fire
with their breath, or to cast any dead thing in^ to it, or dirt, was death.
They sacrificed chiefly to the Fire and Water; the fire they cherish with dry
sticks without their barks, with tallow also and oil. When they sacrifice to
the Waters, they slay the beasts in a ditch, and lay the flesh on Myrtle, and
Laurel* the Magi burn the same, then they pray and sprinkle on the earth, Oil,
Milk, and Honey. They used not to slay their sacrifice with a knife, but with a
mallet or club. The Magi keep the sacrifice still burning, and pray every day
an hour before it. They adored the Sun, whom they called Mithra, at his rising,
and offered to him white Horses, whose sacred Chariot was drawn with white
Steeds before the King when he went to sacrifice. They had diverse festival
days, the chief whereof was that of the Sun. The next was that they called the
Destruction of Vices, when they killed poysonable creatures and sacrificed. Of
these Persian Rites see, Herodotus, Athenaeus, Pausanias, and others.

Q What was the Old Scythian Religion?

A. They worshipped first of all Vesta, Scythians, their old Religion.
then Jupiter, Apollo, Venus, Mars, and Hercules: they had neither Images,
Altars, nor Temples for any of their gods, except for Mars, whose temples they
erected of bundles of twigs, heaped up together. In stead of his Image, they
set up an old iron sword, to which they offered yearly sacrifices of cattle,
and horses; and of men every hundredth Captive, with whose blood they besprinkle
Mars his sword. Then they cut off the right shoulders of the slain men, and
s^ing them into the air. They used to wound first, and then to strangle the
beast which they sacrificed, praying to that god to whom they offered the
beast; they kindled no fire of wood, for the Country yielded none, but they
burned the bones of the beast to boil the flesh withal; if they want a vessel,
they boil the flesh in the beasts paunch; they use no Vows, nor any other
ceremonies. Their chiefest sacrifices were Horses. But of this, see Herodotus
and others.

Q. What Religious discipline had the Tartars, or Cathaians?

A. They worshipped the Sun, Tartars, their old Religion.
Stars, Fire, Earth and Water, to whom they offered the first fruits of their
meat and drink each morning before they eat and drink themselves. They believe
there is one God, maker of all things; yet they worship him not, nor pray to
him. They place Idols at their Tent doors, ^o preserve their cattle and milk.
To these silk and felt Idols (for of such materials they make them) are offered
the first fruits of milk, meat and drink, the hearts also of beasts, which they
leave before them all night, and then eat them in the morning; they offer
horses to the Emperors Idol, which none afterward must ride; they do not
break, but burn the bones of their Sacrifices; by their discipline they must
not touch the fire with a knife, nor meddle with young birds, nor pour milk,
drink, or meat on the ground, nor break one bone with another, nor make water
within their Tents, and diverse other such traditions, which if violated, are
punished with death, or else redeemed with much money. They believe another
world, but such as this is. When one dies, he has meat set before him, and
mares milk: his friends eat a horse, and burn the bones thereof for his soul:
they bury also with him a Mare, a Colt, and a Horse bridled and sadled; his
gold and silver also; and they set upon poles the horse hide that was eat, that
he may not be without a Tent in the other world; they use to purify every
thing by making it pass between two fires. When they pray, they are enjoined
by their Discipline to lift up their hands and smite their teeth three times.
They use to feed the Ghosts or Spirits with Mares milk cast in the air, or
poured on the ground. They have their religious Votaries and Monasteries,
amongst which there is an Order called Senscin, which eat nothing but bran
steeped in hot water. They worship not Idols, nor do they marry; but they hold
transanimation, and diverse other ridiculous opinions, as may be seen in
Johannes de Plano Carpini, whom Pope Innocent Anno. 1246. sent Ambassador to
the Tartarian Court. See also M. Paulus Venetus, Vincentius, Bellouack in
specbist. Math. Paris and others. There is one thing commendable in their
Discipline, that they force no man to embrace their Religion. But Ortelius
mentions a strange custom amongst them, that their Priests on high trees
preach to them, and after Sermon besprinkle their auditors with blood, milk,
earth, and cow dung mixed together, and no less strange it is that they do not
bury their dead but hang them on trees.

Q. Had the Pagans any knowledge of the Creation?

A. It seems by these Tartars and diverse other Gentile Idolaters, Pagans, their
knowledge of the Creation.
of which we are to speak, that many of them had some knowledge of the
beginning of the world, which they learned, not from the Jews, with whom they
had no commerce, but from the heathen Philosophers and Poets; and these were
led to believe this truth by the guide of natural reason; for when they
considered the continual vicissitudes in the world, the alteration, generation,
and corruption of things, the nature of motion and of time, whereof the one
presupposes a Chief Mover; for nothing can move it self; the other consists
in Priotity and Posteriority, which depends upon motion, and suteth not with
Eternity; when they observed also the Harmony, Order and Beauty of things, and
how every motion and mutation aimed at a certain End, they concluded that this
great Universe could not be ruled, or have existence by chance, but by
providence and wisdom; and that therefore this must needs have a beginning;
otherwise we could not know whether the Egg or the Bird, the Seed or the
Plant, the Day or the Night, the Light or the Darkness were first. And seeing
the world consists of corruptible parts, how can the Whole which is made up
of such Parts be Eternal? They found also that it was repugnant to reason, for
so many Eternals and infinite Entities to exist actually together; for every
Entity in the world must be Eternal, if it self be eternal. Besides, that it
is against the nature of Eternity to admit magis and minus, degrees, auction or
diminution; which it must needs do, if the world be eternal; for if there have
been infinite annual revolutions of the Sun, and infinite monthly revolutions
of the Moon, there must needs be something greater then Infinity; for the
revolutions of the Moon, are far more then of the Sun; by these reasons they
were induced to acknowledge a beginning of the world; of which Merc.
Trismegistus in Poemandra speaks plainly, in saying, That God by his word
made and perfected the world, dividing the Earth from the Heaven, and the Sea
from the Land, etc. Orpheus in his Argona^tes sings, How Jupiter hid within
his breast the world which he was to bring forth, (...), into the pleasant
light, etc. this same song is sung by Hesiod, Homer, AEschilus, Sophocles,
Euripides, and other Poets. Pythagoras as Plutarch, and Laertius testify,
taught, That the world was made by God. Thales, Empedocles, Anaxagoras, and the
other ancient Philosophers, ascribe a beginning to the world, some from one
element, some from another. The Platonists always held the creation of the
world; and the Aristotelians affirming there is a first mover, must conclude,
that the world which is moved, had a beginning; they say also that the world
does depend upon God; how then can it be Eternal? seeing dependence and
eternity are incompatible. Aristotle in his Book de mundo, and in his
Metaphysics says, That God is the cause and Author, not only of living
creatures, but also of nature it self, and of the world. Cicere in his Books
of the nature of the gods confesses, That every thing had a beginning, and
that man was not created by chance, but by a supreme power. Seneca, Macrobius,
Virgil, Ovid, and other Latin Poets, except Lucretius, affirm the same
Doctrine. The Stoics also asserted the original of the world, and so did the
Epicures, though these held a beginning fortuital, not providential, ascribing
the original of things to chance, not to counsel. This same doctrine of the
creation is at this day believed by Turks, Arabians, Persians, Armenians, the
most barbarous people of both Indies, as we may see in the progress of this
Book: and the greatest opponents to this doctrine of the worlds creation, as
Pliny, Lucretius, Galen, and others, are forced sometimes to doubt the truth of
their own Tenets.

Q Were all the Tartars of one Religion or Discipline?

A. No; Tartars, their diversities of Religion.
For that vast Country contains several Nations, who were, and some of them
yet are of several Religions. Some Christians, some Mahumetans, and others
Pagans, among whom also are diverse Sects and Religions. In Sachion they have
diverse Monasteries of Idols; to whom they dedicate their children, and on
festival days sacrifice Rams to these Idols, for their childrens preservation,
the flesh whereof they eat^, but reserve the bones as holy relics: the
Priests Fee is the skin, with the head, feet, and inwards, and some part of the
flesh also. Before the Corpse of any great man be buried, they set a table
before it, furnished with all sort of meats, with the odor of which they think
the departed soul is refreshed and heartned against the burning of the body.
They cast into the fire with the body pictures of his men, women, horses, and
other things to serve him in the other world. In Tangoth they worship Idols
with many heads and hands; they have Monasteries where the Monks are walled up.
In Succuir, they make perfumes of Rheubarb for their Idols. In Caindu they
prostitute their wives, sisters, and daughters to strangers, as an honor due
to their Idols. In Cathai and Mangi, the sick vow to offer their blood to their
Idols if they recover; their Sorcerers also cause them to offer to these Idols
sacrifices of Rams with black heads, which with spiced drinks they eat up
merrily, with singing and dancing, and fling the broth of the sacrifice in the
air. In some Provinces of Cathaia the Monks wear strings about them full of nut
shells, on which they are still praying: they worship still toward the north,
but keep their Church doors open toward the south. Of these see Paulus Venetus
and Will, de Rubruquis, who both traveled in these Countries.

Q. Of what Religion are the Northern countries near the Pole?

A In Nova Zembla (as the Hollanders who traveled thither relate) there is no
Religion prescribed by Law; Religions of the Northern countries near the Pole.
but they worship the Sun so long as he is with them, and in his absence the
Moon and north Star. To these they offer yearly sacrifices of Deer, which they
burn except the head and feet; they sacrifice also for their dead. The Samodyes
which are subject to the Muscovit, are much addicted to witchcraft and
idolatry; among them each kindred have their Temple where they sacrifice; their
Priest is he that is eldest, whose ornaments are small ribs and teeth of fishes
and wild beasts hanging about him; with a white Garland on his head; in his
divine service he does not sing but house, and that so long till he become like
a mad man, and then falls down as if he were dead, but rises again, or dereth
five Dear to be sacrificed, and then thrusts a sword half way into his belly,
still singing or howling rather; the sword he takes out again, heats it in the
fire, and then thrusts it in at the Navel, and out at the Fundament; then he
lets two men standing by him, pull off his head and left shoulder with a small
line, by which they pull the head and shoulder into a kettle of hot water, but
he reviveth again, and comes out whole as he was before; with such juggling
illusions do they deceive the people. But of these see Richard Iohnsons
relation in Hakluit, tom. 1.

Q. How many ways can Satan delude men by such false miracles?

A. Three ways. 1. Three ways whereby Satan deludes men by false miracles.
By local motion, suddenly removing one object from the eye, and substituting
in stead thereof another; thus are we deceived in many supposed
transformations; as when we think we see Women transformed into Cats, or Hares,
or any other creature; the Woman is suddenly conveyed away and the Cat put in
her place; such were these transmutations of Ulysses fellows into beasts, and
of Diomedes his company into birds. 2. By darkning the Medium or Air, that we
cannot see the object, or by condensing of it so, that the object appears
bigger then it is, or by altering of it so, that the object appears quite
other then it is; as we see strange things through some glasses; or lastly, by
working on and disturbing of the fancy, which is no hard matter for Satan to
do, being a subtle spirit of long experience, and full of knowledge. 3. By
working on the outward sensitive organ, either by altering situation thereof;
thus by elevating or depressing the eye, we see things double, and otherwise
then they are; or by disturbing the visive spirits, or by casting a mist before
the eye. By such tricks the Egyptian Sorcerers made the people believe they had
done the same miracles that Moses did. And so the Witch of Endor deluded Saul,
by presenting to him the resemblance of Samuel; whereas it was not in the power
of Satan to disturb the soul of any just man, and to take it from that place of
rest and happiness, where it is under the immediate protection of the
Almighty; yet many learned men are of another opinion, that Samuel did truly
appear, God so permitting that Saul might be convinced of his wickedness, and
desertion from God, by the same Prophet, whose counsel he had heretofore
despised. Now though Satan deludes oftentimes with false miracles, yet I deny
not, but that sometimes by Gods permission he does strange wonders; by the help
of natural causes, as he can raise storms, so he did against Jobs Children; he
can carry his Witches in the Air, so he did carry Christ to the pinnacle of the
Temple, and thence to an high Mountain; so the Angel carried Habakkuk; he can
also make beasts to speak, by guiding their tongues, so the Angel made Balaams
Ass to utter certain words; but he can do no miracle, that is, he cannot
produce such effects as exceed the activity of natural causes; so he cannot
raise the dead, or give them life again; he cannot restore sight to the blind,
where there is a total privation, nor can he transform men into beasts, being
the body of a beast is not capable of an humane soul; nor can the soul of man
animate a beasts body, there being no relation between the matter and form,
nor is there any disposition, appetite, or aptitude in that matter to receive
such a form. This is only the work of God, who changed Lots Wife into a Pillar
of Salt, and Nebuchadnezzar into a beast. Satan has no power over celestial
bodies, though he be Prince of the Air; he cannot create, nor do these things,
which God has reserved for himself. Therefore when we hear of men transformed
into beasts, or raised from the dead, and such like miracles as exceed the
course and activity of nature, we may be assured these are not true miracles,
but Satanical delusions, especially if they be done to confirm error,
wickedness and superstition; for the end of all true and divine miracles are
to establish truth and holiness. Therefore when we read of bringing down the
Moon, of driving the Stars backward, and such like impossibilities believed
among the Gentiles, we must conclude they were mere delusions of Satan. Such
were those wonders adscribed to Simon Magus, of making images to walk, of
turning stones into bread, of being transformed into a Sheep, Goat, and
Serpent, of raising souls from the dead, and such like stuff; all these were
mere juggling tricks and Satanicall deceptions.

Q. But why are we so afraid of Satan's Stratagems, seeing the most of them are
but illusions?

A. This fear in us proceeds partly from the guilt of our own conscience; The
fear of Satan's stratagems (though illusions) whence it proceeds.
for Adams sin brought fear both on himself and on his posterity; therefore
after he had fallen, he confesses, that as soon as he heard the voice of God
in the Garden, he was afraid and so we his children do often times fear, where
no fear is, and are afraid sometimes at our own shadows, or at the shaking of a
leaf Partly this fear proceeds from want of faith, which Christ reproved in
his Apostles; who when they saw Jesus walking in the night time on the Sea,
they were afraid, thinking they had seen a Spirit. Besides, the implacable
hatred of Satan against mankind, his delight he takes in affrighting and
hurting us, either in our persons, or in our estates, that irreconcilable
enmity which is between the Serpent and the Woman's seed, is a great cause of
this fear in us. Lastly, we are naturally fearful in the dark, because our
imagination works upon it self, having no outward object to divert it; hence
Satan who is the Prince of darkness, uses the opportunity of the night to
hurt or to delude us; thus he affrighteth us in the dark in our houses with
strange apparitions, motions and sounds; whence some houses have blin said to
be hanted with Spirits. So in the night he affrighteth travelers with ignis
fatuus, or jack in the candle, as we call it, which though it be a natural
Meteor, yet Satan can move it to and fro purposely to draw travelers into
precipices or waters. So in the night time he affrighteth mariners at Sea, by
insinuating himself into these fiery Meteors, which like candles or balls of
fire, run up and down the ship; these were deified by the old Pagans; if one
single flame appeared, they called it Helena, and held it an ominons fign of
destruction, as she was to Tr^y; if there were two, they named them Castor and
Pollux, and placed their statues in their ships, as we read Act. 28. And Sea
men use to tell us of many strange sights and apparitions they have seen in the
Ocean. Satan also uses to affright men in Churches and Church yards in the
dark, by representing to their fantasy the shape of dead men in their winding
sheets; in the night also strange voices and sounds are heard near deep waters,
or rivers, which are taken as presages of some shortly to be drowned there; the
like I have heard my self, and have found the event to fall out accordingly;
for one day traveling before day, with some company near the River Don by
Aberden, we heard a great noise, and voices call to us; I was going to answer,
but was forbid by my company, who told me they were spirits, which never are
heard there, but before the death of some body; which fell out too true; for
the next day, a gallant Gentleman was drowned with his horse, offering to swim
over. It is strange what Plutarch writes of the voice which from the shore
called upon Thamus the Egyptian ship-Master (who then had cast Anchor at
Praxeae) telling him that the great god Pan was dead. Though the night Mare,
which is called Incubus and Succubus, be a natural disease; as Physicians know,
yet Satan has often times made use of this infirmity, to abuse the bodies of
men and wom^n in their sleep. By all which we see his malice against mankind,
and the causes of our fear; which has wrought so powerfully among the ignorant
Pagans, that they have planted their whole Religion in the worshipping of these
evil spirits; for their gods were none other, as Porphyrie she ^eth, l. 2. de
abstinen. and l. 2. de sacrificio. For, says he, These wicked Spirits delight
in shedding of blood, in filthy and obscene speeches, exhorting men to lust,
vice, wickedness, and flagitious actions, etc. they persuade men that the
supreme God delights in such impieties, etc.

Q Since the Stratagems and illusions of Satan are so many, what is our duty in
this case?

A. Our duty is. 1. To be assured that nothing can come to pas^e but by the
providence of our Heavenly Father, Our duty respecting the many stratagems and
illusions of Satan.
who has numbered the hairs of our heads, and has Satan in a chain, so that
without permission he could neither afflict Job in his person, children, nor
cattle, nor durst he enter into the herd of swine without leave from Christ. 2.
Let us remember what Christ has promised, to wit, that he will be with us, to
the end of the world; and if he be with us, who can be against us? Christ came
to destroy the works of the Devil; to cast out the strong man, and to tread
down Satan under our feet; he has promised not to leave us Orphans; he is the
good Shepherd that laid down his life for his sheep, which he holds so fast
that no man shall take them out of his hand; his name is Emanuel, God with us.
He was amongst his Apostles, Luke. 24. when they were assembled together, and
in great fear; and so he will be in the midst of two or three gathered together
in his name. He is the watchman of Israel, that neither slumbers nor sleeps;
therefore with David let us lie down and take our rest, for he will make us to
live in safety. Though we walk through the valley of the shadow of death, let us
fear no evil, because the Lord is with us. Let us not be moved, because he is
at our right hand; he is our buckler, and our exceeding great reward, therefore
let us not fear 3. Let us put on the whole Armor of God, chiefly the shield
of faith, that we may quench all the fiery darts of the Devil, and let us fight
against Satan, as Christ did with the sword of the spirit, which is the word of
God. Let us resist the Devil and he will flee from us. 4. We must remember that
God does sometimes permit Satan to buffet us as he did Paul, that he might try
our patience, and obedience, that we may be the more watchful of our selves
against that roaring Lion, which compasses the earth to and fro, seeking whom
he may devour; that we may be the more earnest in prayer, that we may adhere
the closer to God, and that we may acknowledge his fatherly care and goodness,
who will not suffer us to be tempted above measure, comforting our selves in
this, that his grace is sufficient for us. 5. We must remember that God has
given his Angels charge over us, to hold us up in their hands, least we dash
our foot against a stone. Christ was no sooner tempted by Satan, but the Angels
came and ministered to him. When Jacob was persecuted by his brother Esau, God
sent a multitude of Angels to guard him. The Prophet Elisha was encompassed
with fiery Chariots, or Angels in that shape, from the Syrian Soldiers. Let us
not then fear, so long as we know that the Angels of God are round about those
that fear him, and delivers them; and that the same Angels will be ready at
our death to convey our souls as they did Lazarus, into Abraham's bosom. 6. Let
us support our selves against Satan, by the assurance of Christ's death, and the
remission of our sins; for blessed is the man whose sins are forgiven him;
therefore let us not be afraid, for there is no condemnation to them that are
in Christ Jesus. It is God that justifies, who can condemn? if Satan objects
against us, that sin has abounded, let us answer him in the Apostles words,
grace has much more abounded. 7. Let us as our Savior counsels us, watch
and pray continually; our spiritual enemies are many, vigilant, malicious and
powerful; nothing will give them advantage over us, but security and neglect of
prayer; vigilance and prayer are Armor of proof against all tentations; with
these Saint Paul armed himself when he was buffeted by the Angel of Satan;
therefore says Saint Hierom, When thou walk abroad, let prayers arm thee;
when thou returnest home, let prayers meet thee: Egredientes domo armet oration,
regredientibus de platea occurrat oration. Lastly, let us take heed we do not
countenance or approve, or have any commerce with Necromancers, or such as take
upon them to raise Spirits; for God often times punishes such vain curiosity;
let us beware of too much retiredness; for Satan is most ready to tempt us
when we are alone; so he tempted Eve when she was alone in the Garden, and
assaulted Christ when he was alone in the Desert. Let us take heed also of too
much sadness and melancholy; for though this be a natural infirmity, yet
Satan by it takes occasion to work mischief; as we see in Saul, who is said to
have an evil spirit, when he was in his melancholy fit; and we know that in the
Gospel mad men, Phreneticks, and Lunaticks are called Demoniacks, because the
Devil took occasion by their madness to advance his kingdom of darkness. And
let us chiefly endeavor to have a good conscience which is a continual feast,
to live a holy life, and to be just in all our ways, and so we shall not need
to fear Satan's Stratagems or illusions; for the righteous man is bold as a
Lion*

Q. Of What Religion were the Chinois?

A. They were always and still are Idolaters, except as few gained to
Christianity by the Jesuits, Chinois their Religion
and a few Tartars that are Mahumetans. That vast Dominion is full of Temples
and Monasteries, replenished with multitudes of Idols, which their cunning
Priests feed with the smoke of meats, but they eat the meat themselves. The
Priests here have so much power over their gods, that they may beat and whip
them when they do not answer their expectation. They have one Idol with three
heads, which they much reverence. These represent their three great
Philosophers, Confusius, Xequiam, and Tanzu. Their chief gods are the Sun,
Moon, and Stars. They worship also the devil, not out of love, but fear, that
he may do them no hurt; therefore they place his picture in the fore Castle of
their ships. They are Pythagoreans in the opinion of Transahimation; therefore
some of them will not kill any living thing. For this cause at Quinsay in a
walled Park belonging to a Monastery, the Monks feed 4000 living creatures of
diverse kinds, out of their charity to the souls of Noble men, which were entered
into the bodies of these creatures. Their Monks are shaven, are bound to wear
beads, to be present at burials, to maintain Celibate whilst they are Monks, to
pray two hours together before day. Of these religious Orders there be four
sorts, distinguished by their colors, black, white, yellow, and russet. These
have their Priors, Provincials, and General; he is carried on men's shoulders
in an Ivory Chaite, and is clothed in silk. Their maintenance is not only
the Kings allowance, but also the benevolence of devout people, which they
procure by begging and praying for them. They have their Nuns also, and
Hermits, and consecrated Hills, to which the people make diverse Pilgrimages.
There are many Colleges for learning, which is of high esteem among them.
Their Secular Priests wear long hair and black cloth, their Regulares are
shaven, but neither must marry. They are bound to observe all Feastivall days,
such as the New and Full Moons, the Kings birthday, but chiefly Newyears day,
which is the first day of the New Moon in February. The people here are very
Superstitious in ob^rving their birthday, and in performing the Fun^al
Obsequies of their Parents, whom they adore, and bury in the fields, with all
solemnity and excessive charges. No man is tied to any particular worship among
them, but he may be of what Sect he will. They have abundance of Hospitals for
the poor, and no beggars to be seen among them. But for any knowledge of
heavenly joys, or hell torments, they have very little or none at all. They
are very much afraid when there is any Eclipse of the Sun or Moon, which they
hold to be man and wife; for then they think that these two gods are angry with
them. Of their many superstitious Ceremonies, and vain opinions in Divinity,
see the Discourse of China, Boterus, Ortelius, Maffaeus, Linschoten, and the
Jesuits Epistles.

Q What was the Religion of the ancient Indians? Indians their Ancient religion


A. They worshipped their own gods, till Bacchus and Alexander subdued them,
and then the Grecian deities were honored amongst them; chiefly Jupiter, Juno,
Neptune, and Berecynthia. Hercuses also they honored in the form and bigness
of a Giant. The River Ganges, and their tallest trees were honored as Gods
among them; therefore it was death to cut down any of them. Dancing to their
Idols was held a part of Divine worship; but the Brachmans among them
worshipped no Images* nor any living creature, were very temperate in in their
diet, and gave themselves to contemplation of divine things. They abstain from
Wine and strong drink, and women, and lie on skins. Their Gymnosophists were
Philosophers, who accustomed their bodies to endure all hardness, and their
eyes to gaze on the Sun from morning to evening. Of the Indian Religion see
Alexander ab Alexandro, Pliny, B^emus, etc.

Q. What is the Religion of Siam? Siam its religion.


A. This kingdom of the East Indies (except where the Moors inhabit, and some
Christians) is also idolatrous. But especially they worship the four Elements,
and accordingly there be four differ^nt Sects. Each one desires to be buried
in that element which he worshippeth: hence some are buried, some burned, some
hanged in the Air, and some drowned in the Water. They hold that God made all
things, that the good are rewarded, and the wicked punished. That each man has
two spirits waiting on him, a good and a bad. That the world shall stand 8000
years, and then shall be burned into ashes, whence shall come forth two eggs,
and out of them one man, and one woman, who shall again replenish the Earth.
Their religious Orders are so strict, that it is death among them to speak to a
woman. They feed on Rice only, and herbs which they beg from door to door.
They must not buy nor sell, nor take Rents. They are tied to rise at midnight
to pray to their Idols. They go still barefooted, and in poor clothes. Every
King of this Country at his Coronation is bound to erect a Temple, with high
Steeples and multitudes of Idols. Their priests go in yellow, being a sacred
color, resembling the Suns light. They may not nourish any female thing, not
so much as a hen. He that drinks Wine, is stoned to death. See the discourse of
China, Boterus, Maginus, and others.

Q. What is the Religion of Pegu?

A. The religious Ceremonies of this kingdom consisted in multitudes of
Temples, Pegu, its Religion.
Images, and begging preachers, who are still preaching and begging. Their Alms
are brought to them in the Pulpits, whilst they are preaching. The people when
they enter into their Churches, at the door wash their feet, and by lifting up
their hands to their heads, salute the preacher first, and and then the Sun.
When any enters into that Order of Talip^n, or preacher, he is first carried in
solemnity about the streets on horseback, with Pipes and Dr^ms, then upon men's
shoulders to his house, which is without the Town. They keep holy day every
New Mood. They believe multitudes of gods and worlds succeeding each other;
that this world has been governed by four gods already who are gone, the fifth
is not yet come after whose death the world shall be burned. After this life
they hold some shall live in carnal pleasure, some in torment, and others shall
be aunihiarid. They hold Transanimation, and are bound to fast thirty days
every year. They know no women; for whom they allow Nunneries. The People drink
the water wherein their Preachers wash themselves, co^nting it holy They feed
the Devil each morning with baskets of rice, that he may not hurt them that
day. When they are sick, they build him Altars, and pacif^e him with flowers,
meat and music. Their Idols are honored with diverse festivals, in which wax
lights are burned all night, and the gates stand open, that all those may see
and have access to the idol, who bring presents with them.

Q. Of what Religion are the people of Bengala?

A. They are not content to worship the River ^ahges, Bengala, and its Religion.
but to its image also they give divine honors. The River is visited by many
Pilgrims, who think themselves happy if they can wash themselves in it. If any
can drink of the water thereof at the point of death, he thinks presently by
the virtue thereof to obtain heaven. There is also a Well which they adore; in
If they wash away all their sins, and are all clean, both without and within,
if they wash in it, and drink thereof. They carry away the sand of this Well as
a sacred Relic, and in recompense leave flowers behind them in the Well; For
fear Jest their idols should saint with too much heat, there are some who with
fans blow the wind for refrigeration. All are bound to enter bare^ooted into
the idol-Temples. The more horrid and ugly the idol looks, the more he is
worshipped. Sick people are brought and laid before the idols, which are
honored with lights continually burning before them. Their marriages are made
in some Water, wherein the Priest and the married couple hold a Cow with her
Calfe by the tail, and pour water upon it; then the Priest tieth the ma^ried
persons clothes together; then going round about the Cow and Calse the Ceremony
is ended. The Priest has for his Fee the Cow and Calf; the poor some Alms,
and the idols some Money. About Iemena, they use to pray naked in the water and
to do penance by lying flat on the ground, (...) the earth, holding up their
hands to the Sun, and turning themselves about forty times. Who desire more of
this stuff, let them read Linschoten, R. Fitzh. (...),

Q. Of what Religion is the kingdom of Magor? Magor, and its Religion.


A. They are for the most part Pythagoreans, holding Transanimation; they
acknowledge one God, but have many fabulous conceits of him; as that he has
appeared in the world in diverse monstrous shapes, to wit, of a Fish, a Snail, a
Hog, a Monster resembling Woman in the lower part, and a Lion in the upper.
They worship diverse idols, one chiefly representing a Woman with two heads and
many hands: to this image ne^r the City Tahor repair many Pilgrims. The King
worshippeth every morning the image of the Sun, and of Christ also the Son of
righteousness, which he sets on the crown of his head. See Oranus in his
Narration of Magor.

Q. What is the Reiigion of Cambaia?

A. The people here are so superstitiously Pythagoreans, Cambaia and its
religion.
that there are among them some religious orders, who are afraid to kill a
Gnat, or Worm. They are much addicted to fasting and almes-giving. Their
religious persons called Verteus, leave no hair on their heads and faces, but a
little on their crown. They will not drink their water cold, fearing, least
thereby they should slay the soul of the water, which is quickened by boiling.
The people here redeem birds and beasts appointed to be slain; and if any bird
be sick or hurt, they carry it to the Hospital. They redeem also Malefactors
condemned to dye, and sell them for slaves. For fear least they should tread
upon Ants, they will rather go out of the way, then go near their Hills. They
drink no Wine, nor will eat Eggs, least there should be blood in them. Neither
will they eat of Radishes, Onyons, or any herb that has red color in it. See.
Maffaeus, Linschoten, and Purchase.

Q. What is the Religion professed in Goa?

A. Here are Christians, Jews, Mahumetans, Goa the religion thereof.
and Pagans, who pray to the Sun and Moon, and worship diverse idols of horrible
Aspects; but their custom is to pray to the first thing they meet with in the
morning, though a Goose, or an Ass, and all the day after they pray to it; but
a Crow they cannot abide, the sight of that will make them keep in all day.
They salute the first appearance of the New Moon with prayers on their knees.
Near to every Idol is a Cistern of water, in which they that pass by wash
their feet, worship, and offer Rice, Eggs, or such like. When they sow, mow,
marry, go to sea, and when the women lie in, they feast their idols with
music, and other solemnities, fourteen days together, and so do seamen after
they return home. See Linschoten.

Q Of what Religion are the people of Malabar?

A. Pythagoreans they are, Malabar its religion.
holding not only the immortality of Souls, both of beasts and men, and
transanimation, but also a divinity in Elephants, Kine, and other beasts;
therefore at Calecut, the chief City of this Dominion, and head of a small
Kingdom of the same name, there is a stately Temple of 700. pillars dedicated
to the Ape. Their Bramanes, or Priests (the successors of the old Brachmannes)
are in such esteem here, that the King will not converse with his new married
Wife, till one of the chief Bramanes has had the first nights lodging with
her. They hold that God made the World, but because the trouble of governing
thereof is so great, therefore has given the charge thereof to Satan, whom
they worship with flowers on their Altars, and sacrifices of Cocks. The
Bramanes wash his image, sitting in a fiery Throne with three Crowns and four
Horns, in sweet water every morning. The King of Calecut eats no meat till it
be first offered by his Priests to this Idol. Debtors that will not pay, are
arrested by a rod sent from the chief of the Bramanes* with which a circle is
made about the Debtor, in the Kings name and the said Priest, out of which he
da^e not go, till the debt be satisfied; otherwise he is put to death. Every
twelfth year in the City of Quilacare is a Jubilee kept to the honor of their
Idol; in which, the King of that place, upon a Scaffold covered with silk,
before the people, washes himself, then prays to the Idol, and having cut
off his nose, ears, lips, and other parts, at last cuts his own throat as a
sacrifice to his idol. His successor, by their discipline, is bound to be
present, and to act the same tragedy on himself at the next Jubilee. See
Castaneda, Barbosa, Boterus, Lin^^hoten, and Purchase.

Q. How ca^^ these Idolatrous Pagans to believe the immortality of souls?

A. By the mere force of natural reason; for they observed that the soul is
incorporeal, not only free from al dependence on the body, Pagans (though
Idolatrous) believe the immortality of the soul.
in respect of its essence, but also in regard of its inorganical operations,
to wit, of Understanding and Will: they found that the more the body decayed
and grew weak, the more vigorous, active, and strong was the soul; that it lost
nothing of its operations by the loss or decay of the outward senses, that it
could comprehened all the world within it self, that it could move it self in
an instant, from one end of the world to the other; that it can make things
past many years ago, as if they were present; that it can conceive spiritual
Essences, and Universalities: all which do prove how far the soul exceeds the
body and bodily senses, which can reach no farther then to sensible qualities,
singularities or individuals, to things present only, to bodies only. Besides,
they observed, that the soul could not dye, or perish, or corrupt and putrify
as bodies do, because it is immaterial, simple, without composition of
different substances, and free from contrary and destructive qualities, which
are the causes of death, corruption and putrefaction in bodies. Again, every
body is quantitative, sensible, and may be measured, and filled; but the soul
has no quantity, nor is it sensible but by its effects, nor can it be
measured, nor can the whole world fill it, nor does it increase or decrease as
bodies do; nor can it receive hurt or detriment, from any outward thing; and
whereas bodily senses are weakened by any vehement object, as the eye by too
much light, the ear by a violent sound, etc. the soul is perfected by its
object, and the more sublime or eminent the object is, the more is the soul
corroborated in sits understanding; neither is the soul subject to time and
motion, as bodies, are; for it makes all times present, and is not capable of
generation, corruption, alteration, etc. moreover, there is in the soul even of
Epicurus himself, a desire of immortality, which desire cannot be in vain, nor
frustrated, because natural, and consequently necessary; and we know that God
has made nothing in vain, but this desire must be in vain if frustr^ted. And
we find that many who have denied the souls immortality in their health and
prosperity, have been forced to confess it in their sickness and troubles,
and on their death bed* If we look upon the writings of the learned Gentiles,
we shall find them professing this truth; this we may see in the fragments of
Zoroastres, in Trismegistus, in Phocillides, who thus sings. (...).
That is,
The soul is immortal, and void of old age, and lives always.
And again.
(...).
That is,
The souls remain void of fate in death.
The Pythagoreans believed the same, as we see by their opinion of
Transanimation. Socrates and Plato speak most divinely of the soul essence and
immortality; so does Aristotle in his books De anima; so do the Poets, so does
Cicero in Some. Scip. Erigamus in cae^um oculos, tanquam in Patriam, in quam
nobis aliquando redeundum est; Let us (says he) lift up our eyes toward
Heaven as our country, to which at last we shall return. So he says, The body
is frail, but the spirit is immortal. So Seneca, Animus unde demissus est^ ibi
illum aeterna requies manet; Eternal rest remains for the soul there from
whence it came. Animus sacer and aeternus, and cui non possit inijci manus.
Many such passages may be seen in his writi^gs: and that generally the Gentiles
believed this truth, is plain by their opinion they had of torments in Hell,
and of joys in their Elysian fields.

Q. Of what Religion are the people of Narsinga, and Bisnagar? Narsinga and
Bisnagar its Religion.


A. This rich Indian Kingdom, having these two names from the two Chief Cities
thereof, is infested with horrible Idolatry. Here is an Idol, to which
Pilgrims resort, either with their hands bound, or ropes about their necks, or
knives sticking in their arms and legs, which limbs, if they fester, they are
accounted holy. Gold, Silver, and Jewels are given by these Pilgrims, to
maintain this Idol and his Temple. All these gifts are cast into a Lake, and
kept there, for the uses aforesaid. This Idol is carried yearly in procession,
with Virgins and Music going before. Under the Idols Chariot Pilgrims strive
to be crushed to death, whose bodies are burned, and the ashes kept as holy
Relics. Some do cut their flesh in pieces, and stab themselves with knives,
to the honor of this Idol, and cast into its face the pieces of their cut
flesh. Women also do prostitute themselves to procure money for the Idols
mainteinance. He thinks himself blessed that can but touch the Idols Chariot;
whereas in other parts of the Indies the Wives burn themselves alive with their
Husbands bodies, or else they are shaven, and live ever after in perpetual
disgrace. At the To^n Casta, the Women are content to be buried alive with
their deadhusbands. In some places, when men make Vows to their Idols, they pay
them, by suffering the Priests with sharp hooks fastened to the cross-yard of a
Mast, to lift them up by both shoulders, till the blood run down on the Mast;
then he is let down, and lifted up again by the middle to give thanks to his
Idol for accepting his sacrifice. The Chief Priest of those parts dispenses
with Marriages at his pleasure; and when he gives license to the Woman to marry
again, he feales it with a hot iron on her shoulder. They have diverse
feastivals, some to their Kine, some to the Sun, and to other of their gods.
When the Sun and Moon are eclipsed, they say it is because they are bit by that
celestial sign called the Dragon. See Vertomannus, Fernandes, and the Writers
above named.

Q. What Religion is professed in Japon?

A. The same Gentilism that is professed in the rest of the Indies, with some
variation of Ceremonies; Japon its religion.
but Christianity has got some footing there, by the industry and painful
labors of the Jesuits. The heathen Japonians worship an Image with three
faces, by which they mean the Sun, Moon, and the Elementary world. They have
multitudes of Cloisters and Colleges. They have also diverse festivals to their
Idols which they carry in Procession, some on horse back, others in Chariots.
They believe there are diverse, Paradises, to which every peculiar god carries
his own worshippers; with which imaginary happiness the silly people are so in
love, that many use to drown themselves, others to cut their own throats, or to
break their necks by casting themselves down from high towers, to this they are
encouraged by their cunning and coverous Priests, who out of this suck no small
advantage. Some in narrow holes receive breath only by a Cane, and so continue
fasting and praying till they die. The Priests strangely extort confession from
the people, by putting some of them in scaleshanging from high Rocks: from
whence they being cast down by their Gogins, which they say are men disguised
like devils, are broken all to pieces. They have a Feast in which they burn
multitudes of Lamps at their doors, and walk all night up and down the stree^s
to meet the souls of their friends lately departed, before whom they set meat
and drink, and invite them to their houses, that in their three years journey
to Paradise they may not faint for want of provision, seeing that in less time
then three years they cannot pass thither. Of these passages see Massaeus,
Acosta, and the Jesuits Epistiles.

Q. What Religion is professed in the Philippina Islands?

A. There are Christians, Philippinae, their religions.
Mahumetans, and Pagans in those Islands, who worship the Sun, Moon, and Stars,
which they hold to be the children of the Sun and Moon. Their Priests are for
the most part women, who are Sorcerers and Prophetesses. They worship also the
Devil in ugly shapes, and so they do that thing which they meet with first in
the morning, except it be a Lizard, or other kind of worm; for the sight of
these is held so unlucky, that it makes them leave off all business, and
return home. They use to deck their Idols with Ostrich feathers. At the
sacrificing of a hog they sound Cymbals, two old women, with Pipes of reed
reverence the Sun, and in their sacred garments, with hair-laces and horns on
the head of the Elder, dance about the hog, muttering certain words to the Sun.
Then a cup of Wine is poured on the Hogs head, by the Elder of these two Hags,
who atlast kills the beast, and takes i^to her mouth a burning torch, which she
bites. The other Witch with the Swines blood marks all that are present in the
forehead and then they fall to dressing of the Hog, which the women only eat
up. See Ant. Pigafetta, and Oliver Noorts Navigation.

Q. What Religon does Sumatra, and Zeilan profess?

A. Along the Sea coasts there are Moors and Christians, Sumatra and Zeilan
their Religions.
but Pagans in the inland Countries; here the Sea is covered with multitudes of
Islands, in some of which the Priests are tied to nourish their hair, and to
have smooth faces like women. They guild their teeth, and are burned in pi^ch,
if they have carnal commerce with a woman. In Zeilan or Ceylon, the blinded
people undertake Pilgrimages of a thousand leagues, eighteen miles whereof they
wade up to the middle in dirty stinking water, full of Blood-Leeches, and seven
leagues they clamber up a steep Mountain, by the help of nayls and thorns tied
thereto, there being no other passage. And all this toil is to visit a stone on
the top of this hill, having in it the print of a man's foot, who they say came
thither first to instruct them in Religion. Near the stone is a springing
water, in which they wash, then pray, and with sharp pointed instruments cut
their flesh, and draw blood, thinking thereby that God is pleased, and that all
their sins are pardoned. In this water the poor are permitted sometimes by the
King to gather precious stones* whereof there is store, to pray for his soul.
There are in this Island many Temples, Priests, and Idols, Monasteries also of
yellow Monks shaven, and still praying on Beads, who have their Processions in
great solemnity, with dancing and music, the Abbot riding upon an Elephant in
rich attire, carrying a golden rod in his hand, lifted over his head; they pray
here to the devil when they are sick, and to the Image of the Elephants head
for wisdom. They have a huge Statue bearing a sword in its hand; they think the
world shall not end so long as this Image is in safety. See Massaeus,
Vertimannus, Odoricus, Spilbergius etc.

Q. Of what Religon where the Ancient Egyptians?

A. Egypt may be called the mother of all superstition and idolatry; Egyptians,
their ancient Religion.
for they entertaining au opinion, that all things at first had beginning there
of slime or mud by the heat or influence of the Sun, Moon, and Stars, mixing
the Elements in the composition of bodies, ascribed divinity to these Celestial
Luminaries and Elements, and so erected Temples, Images, Holy Days, and other
divine Rites to them, worshipping the Sun and Moon der the names of Osiris and
Isis. The Grecians under the names of Apolio and Diana, the four Elements by
the names of Vulcan, Juno, Neptune, and Ceres. The five lesser Planets by the
names of Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and Mercury. At length they multiplied
their gods so fast, that every Beast, Spring, River, Tree, Trade or Profession
in the world, Disease in the body, Faculty and Passion in the Mind, had its
peculiar Deity. And so mad they were upon idolatry, that of a man's Yard they
made a god, under the name of Phallus and Priapus, in memory of Osiris his
Privities, which after much toil were found by Isis in Nilus, being drowned
there by Typhon his brother, who had cut his body into many pieces, and buried
them in many places. They worshipped Beasts, Birds, Vermi^, Leeks and Onyons.
Their Priests were shaved, and clothed in pure Linen, abstained from fish,
Wine, and Onyons. Their Kings after election were chosen into the society of
Priests. They held two beginnings: they consecrated red Bulls, flung the heads
of their Sacrifices into Nilus, and abstained from salt. See Arnobius,
Eusebius, Plutarch, Iamblichus, and many others.

Q. What devotion did the Egyptians use to their deified Beasts.

A. They were fed by their Priests in their Temples with choice food: when any
dies, it is wrapped in clean Linin and embalmed, and buried in a consecrated
place, with much lamentation. All shave themselves in that house where a Dog
dies. Their god Apis being dead and lamented, another was found by the
Priests, and brought to Memphis, where he was placed in Vulcans Temple, and
seven days kept holy for him. By their Law he must live but a prefixed time;
then he is drowned in a sacred spring, and buried with much lamentation. All
beasts are not worshipped in all parts, of Eygpt, but in some places the
Crocodile, in other places the Goat, in some Satyrs, in others Cynocephalus, or
Anubis, with his Dogs-head. The Serpent was a great god amongst them, so was
the Bull, the Dog, the Cat, the Hawk, and Ibis, and two fishes peculiar to
Nilus, to wit, Opyrinchus and Lepidotus. They worshipped the Hippopotamus,
Frogs, Beetles, and other vermifie. Their Priests were bound to offer a Cock to
the Sun, a Dove to Venus, a Peacock to Juno, etc. And bloody Busiris sacrificed
men to Nilus. Quis illaudati nescit Busiridis aras? The Egyptians hate Swine so
much, that if by chance one should touch them, he instantly washes his
clothes: and Sow-heards are forbid their Temples. They circumcise male and
female, and offer wine to the full Moon. The Priests wash themselves thrice in
the day time, and twice in the night. They must not eat milk, eggs, or oil,
except with Salads. Their Priests were Judges, their Gymnosophists were
Philosophers, who had their College in a Grove near the banks of Nilus: The
Egyptians observed diverse feasts to Isis, Diana, Latona, Mars, Minerva,
Mercury, Bacchus, Osiris and his Nurse. In these feasts was much disorder and
vanity, some beating of themselves, some cutting their fore heads with knivs;
some dancing, some singing, some drinking, some quarrelling. In the feast of
Bacchus they were all drunk. In that of Mars all mad, knocking down one another
with clubs. In the feast of Isis they showed their folly in tumbling an Ass
down from a Precipice. In that of Minerva, in burning lights with oil and salt.
But of these, and other ridiculous, or rather impious Rites, see Hospinian,
Coelius Rhodiginus, Plutarch, Herodotus, Diodorus Siculus, Eusebius, Strabo,
Lucian, and others*

Q. How long continued this heathenish idolatry in Egypt?

A. Till the Sun of Righteousness shined upon it, Egyptian Idolatry,
continuance thereof.
and by the bright beams of his Gospel dispelled and scattered all the dark
mists of idolatry, so that Alexandria the chief nursery thereof, by the
preaching of Saint Mark, became a Patriarchal seat, whose successors have
continued till this day; but their residence now is at Cairo, where the
Metropolitan of Aethiopia, or Archbishop of the Abissins receives his
confirmation from the Patriarch of Alexandria. It Is true that Gambyses, son to
Cyrus King of Persia, destroyed many of the Egyptian Idols, and Ochus his
successor killed their Apis^^ but these were shortly after restored by
Alexander the great, whose successors, the Ptolemies upheld the same idolatry,
and so did the Romans, till by the preaching of the Gospel, darkness was
forced to give place to light.

Q. What Religion is there now professed in Egypt? Egypt its modern religions.


A. Here at this day Christians have their Churches, Jews their Synagogues, and
Mahumetans their Mosques: of these last there be four sorts differing in their
Laws, Liturgies and Ceremonies. There is a Sect in Chairo which lives
altogether on horse flesh. And another who go naked, giving themselves to
fleshly lusts openly. The Christians there are Eutychians, and are circumcised;
but it is thought that they have forsaken circumcision by the persuasion of the
Popes Legates at a Synod held at Cairo, Anno. 1583. These are called Cophti,
not from their Profession, but from their Nation: for in the Thalmud Egypt is
called Gophti, and the Egyptians in old time, Aegophtia. They are not rigid
Eutychians, which were condemned in the Council of Chalcedon, for affirming one
Nature, and one Will in Christ: but they are modern Eutychians, called
Iacobites, from Iacobus the Syrian, who held that Christ was true God, and true
man; yet he and his Scholars will not in direct terms affirm there are two
natures, lest they should fall into the error of Nestorius, of the two Persons.
These fast every Wednesday and Friday, and have four Lents in the year. They
make Infants Deacons, and baptize them not before the fourtieth day, and then
give them the Eucharist. They leave out the words in the Nicene Creed, From the
Son. They condemn the Council of Chalcedon, and admit no general Council since
that of Ephesus. They read publicly the Gospel of Nicodemus. They receive the
Eucharist in both kinds, and in leavened bread* To the sick they neither
administer the Eucharist, nor Extreme Unction. They deny Purgatory and Prayer
for the dead. They Marry in the second degree of consanguinity. And in their
Church government are subject to the Patriarch of Alexandria. There are not
above three Christian Churches at Alexandria, and so many at Cairo; about fifty
thousand Christians in all. Of these passages see Boterus in his Relations,
Thevet in his Cosmography, Chytraerus of the State of the Church. Baronius in
his Annals, etc. And Brerewoods Collections out of them.

The Contents of the third Section.
Of the old African Religion. 2. The Religion and Church Discipline of Fez. 3.
Of Morocco. 4. Of Guinea. 5. Of the ancient African Aethiopians. 6, Of the
modern Abissins. 7. Of the lower Aethiopians. 8. Of Angola and Congo. 9. Of the
northern neighbors of Congo. 10. Of the African Islands. 11. The Religion of
America. 12. Of Virginia. 13. Of Florida. 14. Of the Religions by west
Virginia, and Florida 15. Of New Spain and Mexico. 16. Idolaters, their cruelty
and cost in their barbarous sacrifices. 17. Of the Americans, their
superstitious fear, and tyranny thereof. 18. Of Jucatan, and the parts
adjoining. 19. Of the southern Americans. 20. Of Paria and Guiana. 21. Of
Brasil. 22. Of Peru. 23. Of Hispaniola.

SECT. III.
Quest. WHat was the Religion of the old Africans?

A. Their chief gods were the Sun and Fire, Africans, their Religion.
to which they erected Temples, and kept the Fire continually burning on Altars
to that purpose. The Planets were the Numidian and Lybian gods. From Gentilisme
they were converted to Judaism, then to Christianity, and at last to
Mahumetanisme. We read that Matthias the Apostle preached in Aethiopia, and
Simon another Apostle in Mauritania; about the time of Constantine Christianity
was generally received in the hither and lesser Africa; and was by the Goths
infected with Arianisme, which made way for Mahumetanism. The Poeni, or
Phonicians and Carthoginians, whilst Gentiles, offered men sacrifices to
Saturn, and in their supplications they put infants in the arms of Saturns
brazen image made hot with fire, and so were burned to death. At Tunis near the
Lake ^itonia Miuerva taught the use of Oil, and invented the Art of Spinning;
therefore she was worshipped as a goddess. Venus was a great deity in
Phoenicia, Juno in Carthage. At this day they are Mahumetans, whose Religion
consists most in washing and frequenting of the Mosques. See Alexander ab
Alexandro, Ih. Leo, S^idas and others.

Q. What is the Religion and Church Discipline of Fez?

A. They are at this day Mahumetans in their prosession, Fez, the Religion and
Church discipline thereof.
and in their Devotion no ways sparing; for there are in the City of Temples
and Chapels about 700: whereof some are garnished with many pillars and
Fountains of Marble. Each Temple has one Priest to say Service, and look to
his Churches revenue, which he bestows upon the Church Officers; namely, the
Porters, Cryers, and the Lamp-lighters; these are night Officers; but for the
day Cryers, who from their Steeples call the people to prayers, these have no
pay, but only are freed from tenths and all other payments. In the great
Church, which is about a mile and half in compass, and has 31 great gates,
(the roof whereof is upheld with twenty Arches in breadth, and 38 in length)
are lighted every night 900 Lamps; some of the grea^est are of brass, with
sockets for 1500 Lamps. About the walls are diverse Pulpits for their Readers,
who begin their Lectures shortly after break of day in the Summer: they read
after Sunset, Mahumets Law, and Moral Philosophy are read: then to the winter
Lectures are allowed large revenues, books and Candles. The Priest of this
Temple takes charge of the Orphans money, and of the poor, to whom he deals
Corn and money every Holy Day. This Temple has a treasurer, and under him eight
Notaries, and six Clarks, twenty (...) for the husbandry, twenty Limekills, and
twenty Brick-kills, for repairing of the Temple, the Reven^es of which are 200
Ducatsaday. O^^er Temples of the City are hence furnished when they want. Here
are two stately Colleges for porfessors of diverse Sciences, and diverse
Hospitals for strangers, and the ^ick with all accommodations. Their Marriages
are performed in the Church. They have great feasting at the circumcision of
the males. They observe diverse Feastivals, at some of which the youth do with
Cudgels and other weapons knok down one another, so that many murders are
committed. They make Bone-fires on the Feast of St John Baptist, and on
Christmasse^Even eat Sallades of green Herbs. On Mahumets birthday, the Poets
make Sonnets in his praise, which they rehearse publicly, and are rewarded
accordingly. In Fez are 200 Grammer-Schools; the youth are bound in seven years
to learn the Alcoran by heart. On Mahumets birthday every boy carries a wax
torch to school, which they light before day, and let them burn till
Sunrising, all this while singing Mahumets praise. Candles are presented to
the King that day, of incredible height and bigness, who that night hears
all the Law read. By Mahuments Law Soothsayers are inprisoned, and yet here are
many of that profession. There are here diverse Sects of Mahumetans, some like
our Anabaptists, condeming all learning, and trusting to Enthusiasmes; others
who think by their fasting and good works, that they are so holy and perfect,
that they cannot sin. There be some who hold all Religions to be true, because
every one takes that to be God which he worships, and they teach that the
Heaven with the Planets, Stars, and Elements are one God. They have also their
Hermits. By their Discipline, Women may not enter their Mosques, because of
their often pollutions, and for that Eve first sinned. The day after a child is
born, the Priest is sent for to pray. The child is washed by the women, who
name it, and then it is circumcised; but sometimes the circumcision is put off
for diverse years. They are very strict in their fastings, not tasting any
thing, though they should faint, till the Stars appear: the Mufti, or
High Priest sits with the King every day in judgment, except the Friday, then
the King sits alone. See (...), etc.

Q. What are their times of Prayer? Their times of prayer.


A. Two hours before day, then they pray for the day. 2. Two hours after day,
then they give thanks for the day. 3. At Noon, then they give thanks for that
half the day is past. 4. At four in the afternoon, then they pray that the Sun
may well set on them. 5. At twilight they give thanks after their daily
labors. 6. They pray-two hours after twilight, and then they desire a good
night; thus they pray six times in 24. hours, and so devout they are, that when
they hear the Sexton from their Steeples cry to prayer before day, then may no
man touch his wife, but prepare to prayer, by washing, or other devotion,
either at Church or in his own house; after this his prayer, the Talby or
Priest sits down and resolves for half an hour all doubts that are moved in
matters of their Law. He is counted profane, and disabled from being witness,
who prays not six times a day. See Purchase in his Pilgrimage.

Q. What is the Religion of Morocco?

A. The same is there professed that is in Fez, Morocco, its Religion.
but they are not altogether so devout in Morocco, as in Fez; for they have not
that number of magnificent Temples, Colleges, Hospitals, and Schools; yet some
they have, especially one Temple very large and stately, in Morocco, with a
magnificent Steeple of incredible hight: they have also their Hermites and
other Religious men* in all these they come short of Fez, by reason they are
often molested by the incursions of the Arabians. They here also among them, as
in Fez, multitudes of Jews, who ^^cked over thither when they were driven out
of Spain by Ferdinand, and out of Portugal by King (...) There be also among
them many Christians, but in miserable captivity and slavery; whereas the Turks
elsewhere in spiritual affairs subject themselves to the Caliph of Cairo; these
African kingdoms acknowledge only their subjection to the Caliph of Bagda^ or
Babylon. The Turks of Morocco and Fez, think they merit Heaven if they kill
many Christians; therefore they run with as great alacrity to war against
Christians, as to a wedding, believing if they die in that war* they shall
immediately possess Paradise which is indeed the general belif of all Turks*
See Les Estats du Monde, Boterus, Leo, etc.

Q. What Religon is professed in Guinea?

A. Gentilism; for they adore strawen rings instead of God; Guinea, its
Religion.
Of whom they speak blasphemously, calling him evil; and black, and the Author
of their miseries: And that they are no ways beholding to him for what they
enjoy, but to their own industry. They put within their Rings Wheat, Water, and
Oil, for their god to feed upon. Such Rings are worn by many as preservatives
against danger. Their Priests use to preach to them on festival days, and
after Sermon to besprinkle the infants with Water, in which a Newt does swim.
They consecrate to their Idol the first bit and draught of their meat and
drink. But I believe, this black god they rail against, is the devil, whom
their cunning Priests represent to that ignorant people in some black and ugly
shape; Sometimes of a black dog. If they paint themselves with Chalk, they
think they do good service to their God. When he is angry with them, they use
to bribe the Priest with gold; so fishermen use to do, when they have no
success at sea. The Priest with his wives walks in Procession, knocking his
breast and clapping his hands, then hanging some boughs from the trees on their
necks, and playing on a Timbrel, the Priest flings Wheat into the sea, to
appease the angry God. They have certain trees in great veneration, consulting
with them, as with Oracles, using diverse foolish ceremonies. They worship a
certain bird, which has feathers like stars, and a voice like a Bull. The
Tunie is a sacred fish with them, and not to be touched. So are the mountains,
whose tops they daily feed, or the Priests rather, with meat and drink. When
one dies, the Priest makes gods of straw to accompany the dead in the other
world, wine and good cheer are sent with him, and servants, with his wives; if
he be the King, these are slain to wait upon the King, and their heads advanced
upon Poles round about the grave. They hold it a sin to spit on the ground. The
Tuesday is their Sabbath. They use circumcision and some other Turkish
ceremonies. See G. Arthus Dantiseanus, Mercator, Bertius, etc.

Q. Of What Religion were the African Ethiopians anciently?

A. Gentiles; Aethiopians of Africa, their ancient Religion.
for they worshipped some immortal gods, as the Sun, Moon, and the World; some
mortal, as Jupiter, Pan, Hercules; But some of them who dwelt near and under
the line, did not worship, but curse the Sun still when he rose, because his
excessive heat offended them. When their Queen went to Solomon, she being
instructed by him in the knowledge of the true God, upon her return planted the
Jewish Religion in her country; but the Eunuch of Queen Candace being baptized
by Philip, brought home with him the Christian Faith, which hitherto they have
retained. See Diodorus, Boemus, Strabo, Sardus, Damianus a Goes, etc.

Q. What Religion do these Aethiopians, or Abyssins profess?

A. Christianity; Their Religion at this day.
yet Gentilisme is retained in some part of Prestor-Iohns ample Dominions. The
Christians circumcise both male and female on the eighth day, in memory of
Christ's circumcision. The males are baptized forty days after, and the females
eighty. They abstain from certain meats, and use some Mosaical Ceremonies. They
are very rigid in their Fastings, they begin their Lent ten days before ours,
some Friars eat no bread all the Lent, some not in a whole year; but are
contented with Herbs, without Salt or Oil: They keep a fast of three days after
Candlemasse, in memory of Ninevehs repentance. Some Friars all that time eat
nothing, and some Nurses give their Children suck but once a day. He that
marries three wives is excommunicated. Queen Candace after her conversion
consecrated the two magnificent Temples of the Sun, and Moon, to the Holy Ghost
and the Cross. Afterward these two Temples were given to the Monkish Knights
of Saint Anthonies Order, with two large Monasteries. The Abyssins in their
Liturgy mention the three first general Councils, but not that of Chalcedon,
because they are Eutychians, or Jacobltes. Their Patriarch is only a Monk of
Saint Anthonies order, and so is the Patriarch of Alexandria, by whom the
Ethiopian is consecrated, and is in subjection to the Sea of Alexandria. They
observe here both Saturday and Sunday with equal devotion. In the Eucharist the
Priest administers leavened bread, except on the Thursday before Easter; for
then it is unleavened, because that day Christ instituted the Supper. An^ the
Deacon gives the Wine in a Spoon. They receive all standing, and in the Church
only* all that day after they must not spit till Sun set. They give the
Eucharist to Infants immediately after Baptism. They believe traduction of
Souls. They are careful to confess their sins to the Priest, and still after
confession receive the Eucharist. The Patriarch only excommunicates, and none
but murderers usually. Inferior Priests and Monks labor for their
maintenance, but the Bishops, Deanes, and Prebends, have large revenues and
benefices. They permit their Clergy to marry once, and have pictures in their
Churches, but not images. Betwixt Easter and Whitsuntide, they eat flesh on
Fridays. Every Epiphanie day, they baptize themselves in Lakes or Rivers. So do
the Muscovites in memory of Christ's baptism the same day. They use no
Confirmation, nor Extreme Unction. See Damianus a Goes, Alvarez in his
Ethiopian History, and others.

Q. What is the Religion of the lower Aethiopians?

A. These were not known to the Ancients, The lower Aethiopians, their Religion.
but they are found by Navigators to be for the most part Gentiles, though
diverse Moors live among them; Yet some of them worship but one God. They
superstitiously observe diverse days of the Moon. They feast the dead with bread
and boiled flesh. They punish witchcraft, theft, and adultery with death. They
may marry as many wives as they please, but the first is the chief, and the
rest are her servants. They pray to the dead in white garments. In Monomotapa
and some other places thereabouts, the Jesuits have converted diverse to
Christianity; many whereof are fallen back again to Gentilisme. See E^anuel
Acosta of the Eastern affairs, and Boterus, etc.

Q. What is the Religion of Angola and Congo?

A. In Angola they are all heathens. Angola its Religion.
In the midst of their towns they worship wooden Idols resembling Negroes, at
whose feet are heaps of Elephants teeth, on which are set up the skulls of
their enemies killed in the wars. They believe they are never sick but when
their Idol is angry with them, therefore they please him by pouring at his feet
the Wine of Palms. They use to wash and paint and new cloth their dead, and
bury with him meat, drink, and some of his goods, at whose grave they shed the
blood of Goats. They are much addicted to divination by birds; and their
Priests are in such esteem, that they think life and death, plenty and famine
are in their power. In the Kingdom of Cong^ they worship some monstrous
creatures in stead of God. Congo, its religion.
But they were converted to Christianity by the Portugal, Anno 1490. At the
City of Banza, afterward called Saint Saviors, was erected a Cathedral Church
for the Bishop, who was there received by the King in great magnificence. This
Church had 28. Canon Residents. All their Idols of beasts, birds, trees, and
herbs, with their conjuring characters were burned. Diverse Religious persons
and Jesuits were sent from Portugal thither to erect Schools and Colleges for
Divinity and the Arts. See Purchase, Lopez, Maffaeus, Osorius of the acts of
Emanuel.

Q. What Religion do the northern neighbors of Congo profess?

A. In Loango under the Line, The Religion its Northern Neighbors.
they worship idols and are circumcised. Every tradesman appeaseth his god
with such things as belong to his trade; the husbandman with corn, the weaver
with cloth, etc. At the death of their friends they kill Goats, to the honor
of their idols, and make diverse feasts in memorial of the dead. They will
rather dye then touch any meat which is prohibited by their Priests. At Kenga
the Seaport of Loango, there is an idol kept by an old Woman, which is once a
year honored with great solemnity and feasting. There is another idol at
Morumba thirty leagues northward, where boys are sworn to serve this God, and
are initiated with hard diet, ten days silence, abstinence from certain meats,
and a cut in their shoulder, the blood of which is sprinkled at the Idols feet.
Their trials of life and death* are in the presence of this Idol. At Anzichi,
they are circumcised, worship the Sun and Moon, and each man his particular
Idol. In some of these neighboring countries the people are man-eaters, and
worship the Devil, to whom when they offer sacrifice, they continue from
morning till night, using charming Vociferations, dancing and piping. See
Lopez, Barros, and others.

Q. Of what Religion are the Islands about Africa?

A. In some of them are Mahumetans, in some Christians, African Islands, their
religions.
but in most Heathens. In Socotera an Island near the mouth of the Red Sea,
whence we have our best Aloes, they are Iacobites, and are governed by their
Abuna or Priest. They much reverence the Cross. They have Altars in their
Churches, which they enter not, but stand in the Porch. In Madagascar or the
great Island of Saint Laurence, there are many Mahumetans upon the coast, but
more Idolaters within the Land, who acknowledge one Creator, and are
circumcised: but use neither to pray nor keep holy day. They punish adultery
and theft with death. In the Isle of Saint Thomas, under the Line, are
Christians and Moors. In diverse Islands are no people at all. In the Canaries
are Christians; before they were idolaters and had many wives, whom they first
prostituted to their Magistrates; and this uncivil civility they used to
strangers instead of hospitality. They bury the dead by setting them upright
against a wall, with a staff in their hand; and if he was a great man, a vessel
of milk by him. Madera is also possessed by Christians, and so be the other
Islands on this hither part of the African coast. see Ortelius, Mercater, and
other Geographers.

Q. What Religion was professed among the Americans?

A. Before the Spaniards came thither, America, the Religion thereof.
they were all Pagans; who as they were distinguished into diverse Nations, so
they worshipped diverse gods, after diverse manners; but they did generally
acknowledge the Sun and Moon, for the chief gods. In Canada they worshipped the
Devil, before the French came thither, and in most places there as yet, they
worship him; who when he is offended with them, flings dust in their eyes. The
men marry two or three wives, who after the death of their husbands never marry
again, but go still after in black, and besmear their faces with coal dust and
grease; they do first expose their daughters to any that will lie with them,
and then give them in marriage. They believe that after death their souls
ascend into the Stars, and go down with them under the Horizon into a Paradise
of pleasure. They believe also that god stuck a multitude of arrows in the
beginning into the ground, and of these sprung up men and women. They have
diverse ridiculous opinions of God, as that he once drank much Tobacco, and then
gave the pipe to their Governor, with a command that he should keep it
carefully, and in so doing he should want nothing; but he lost the Pipe, and so
fell into want and misery. Such senseless conceits have these people, who as
they are savage in their carriage, so in their understandings they are little
better then beasts. They use to sing the Devils praises, to dance about fires,
which they make to his honor, and leap over them. They bemoan the dead a great
while, and bring presents to the grave. Many of these ignorant souls were
converted to Christ by the industry of the Jesuits, Anno 1637. and 1638. See
Father Paul's relation of new France. See also Champlain and Jacques Cartier, etc.

Q. What is the Religion of Virginia?

A. Before the English planted Christianity there, they worshipped the Devil,
Virginia, its Religion.
and many idols, as yet they do in many places there. They believe many Gods,
but one principally who made the rest; and that all creatures were made of
water, and the Woman before the Man, who by the help of one of the gods,
conceived and bore children. They are all Anthropomorphites, giving to their
gods the forms of men, whom they worship with praying, singing, and offerings.
They hold the souls immortality, rewards and punishments after this life, the
one in heaven, the other in a burning pit toward the west. The Priests are
distinguished from other people by garments of skins, and their hair cut like a
comb on their crowns. They carry their gods about with them, and ask counsel of
them. Much of their devotion consists in howling and dancing about fires,
with rattles of Gourd or Pompian rindes in their hands, beating the ground with
stones, and offering of Tobacco, Deer suet, and blood on their stone Altars.
They undertake no matters of consequence without advice of their Priests, the
chief whereof is adorned with Feathers and Weasels tails, and his face painted
as ugly as the devils. They bury their Kings (after their bodies ate burned and
dried) in white skins, within arches of mats with their wealth at their feet,
and by the body is placed the devils Image. The Women express their sorrow
with black paint and yellings for twenty four hours. None but the King and
Priest may enter these houses, where the Images of Devils and their Kings are
kept. Instead of saying Grace at meat, they fling the first bit into the fire;
and when they will appease a storm, they cast Tobacco into the water. Sometimes
they sacrifice children to the devil. But of these passages, See Hackluit, and
Purchase out of him.

Q. What is the Religion of Florida?

A. Their chief deities are the Sun, Florida, its Religion.
and Moon, which they honor with dances and songs. Once a year they offer to
the Sun a Hearts hid stuffed with herbs, hanging Garlands of fruits about his
horns, so presenting this gift toward the east, they pray the Sun to make
their land produce the same fruits again. But to their Kings, they use to
Sacrifice their firstborn males. Much of their devotion like the rest of
barbarous Salvages consists in singing, dancing, howling, feasting, and
cutting of their own skins. Adultery in the woman is punished with whipping. In
some parts of this Country the next of kin is permitted to cut the adulteresses
throat, and the woman to cut the adulterers. In some parts also of this Country
they worship the devil; who when he appears and complains of thirst, humane
blood is shed to quench his thirst. When a King is buried, the cup wherein he
used to drink, is still set upon his grave, and round about the same are stuck
many arrows; the people weep and Fast three days together, the neighbor Kings
his friends cu^ off half their hair. Women are hired, who for six months howl
for him three times a day. This honor the King and Priest have, that they are
buried in their houses, and burned with their houses and goods. See Benzo,
Morgares, Hackluit, etc.

Q. Of what Religion are the Nations of west Virginia and Florida?

A* Few of them are yet known, Religions of the nations by west Virginia, and
Florida.
but such as by Navigation are found upon the Seacoasts, and some Islands
conquered by the Spaniards, are worshippers of the Sun, and Water: because the
Sun by his heat, and the Water by its moisture produce all things; therefore
when they eat; drink, or Sacrifice, they use to throw up in the air toward
the Sun, some part of their food. The Spaniards took advantage of this
Superstition, and made these people believe they were messengers sent thither
to them from the Sun; whereupon they submitted, holding it impious to reject
the Messengers, which their chief God had sent them. They worship also here
Idols, and in some places the devil, and observe the same superstitious
Ceremonies in the burial of their dead, that their neighbors do. See Hackluit.

Q. What was the Religion of New-Spain?

A. They were gross and bloody Idolaters before the Spaniards brought them to
the knowledge of Christ, New Spain, it^ Religion.
who requires of his Disciples no other Sacrifice but that of a contrite heart;
he having shed his own blood, that we might spare the shedding of ours. These
wretched Americans acknowledged one chief God, yet they worshipped many:
Principally the Sun, to whom they offered the heart of the Sacrifice; even of
men: neither did they eat or drink, or smell to a flower, till they had cast up
in the air to the Sun some portion of their meat and drink, and some leaves of
their flowers. At Mexico they worshipped many Idols, but three principally: The
first was called Vitziliputzli, placed in an azure-coloured Chair, with
Snakes-heads at each corner. On his head were rich plumes of Feathers with
gold; in his left hand was a white Target, in his right a Staff; at his sides
he had four darts. Perhaps by this Image they represented the nature of God; by
his blew Chair they might signify heaven his seat, by the Snakes-heads, his
wisdom; by the feathers and gold, his glory; by the Target, protection; by the
Staff, direction; and by the four arrows, his power, extending over the four
parts of the world: East, West, South, and North; or else, which is more
likely, they represented the Sun by this Idol, whose abode is in the azure
sky, and his arrows or beams are extended to the 4. quarters of the world: the
feathers may signify his lightness; and the gold, his glory; his target and
staff may show that the Suns heat is both defensive and offensive. Near to this
Idol stood a Pill^r of less work and beauty, on which was another Idol, called
T^aloc; perhaps by this they meant the Moon. They had a third Idol, of black
stone, with four darts in his right hand, looking angerly; this they worshipped
as the god of Repentance; this Idol, with the others, was richly adorned with
gold any jewels. In Cholula they worshipped the god of wealth or merchandising;
they had also an Idol of Paste, or Dough, which was consecrated and made every
year, to which rich presents were brought* and stuck in the paste. They made
gods also of their chief Captives, to whom they gave divine Honors, for 6.
sometimes for 12 months, praying and sacrificing to him, and carrying him in
procession; but at last the Priests kill him; the Chief Priest pulls out his
heart, offers it smoking to the Sun; then is he opened, cut in pieces, and
eaten. They adored many other gods and goddesses with many heathenish
Superstitions. Of which see Joseph Acosta in his History of the Indies, Gomara,
Peter Martyr of Millan, etc.

Out of this discourse we may see what cruelty is used among Idolaters in
their barbarous sacrifices; Idolaters, their cruelty and cost in their
barbarous sacrifices.
how lavish also they are of their gold, silver, and jewels, with which they
adorn their Idols; this has bin always the Devils policy, by outward
splendour and wealth to draw ignorant and covetovs minded people to follow
idolatry; for such a bewitching quality there is in the splendour of gold,
silver, and stones, that both the eyes and hearts of men are drawn after them;
to this purpose Lactantius l. 2. instit. auri, gemmarum et eboris pulchritudo
ac nit^r perstringit oculos: nec ullam religionem putant ubi illa fulserint;
itaque sub obtentu deorum, avaritia et cupiditas colitur; the beauty of Gold,
Jewels, and Eborie, do so dazell men's eyes, and captivat^ their hearts, that
they think there is no Religion, where these shine not; therefore under
pretense of worsh ^ing gods, covetousness and desire is worshipped. Hence
Idolatry may be truly called covetousness^ this by the Apostle is called
Idolatry. Not without cause then did God forbid the Israelits to make to
themselves gods of gold and silver, as knowing what force these metalls have to
draw men's minds after them. And indeed some of the wise Gentiles themselves
laughed at the vanities of those who bestowed so much gold on their Idols;
autum Vasa Numae, Saturniaque impulit ^ra, says Persius, Persius, his notable
saying.
the gods were better worshipped in Numas earthen vessels, then they were
afterward in gold; and he that offers to God a sincere heart, is more
accepted then he that bestows on Jupiter a golden beard; dicite pontifices, in
sacro quid facit aurum; and yet the excess of gold and silver in their Statues
and Temples is stupendous; as Lipsius shows de magnit. urb. Romae. and the
Romans were come to that hight of superstition, that they thought a Bull was
not a fit sacrifice to their gods, if his horns had not been gilded, or his
forehead adorned with plates of gold: see Virgil: Et statuam ante aras aurata
front iuvencum. and Livie l. 5. shows that to Apollo was sacrificed, not
only an ox with gilded horns, but also caprae albae auratae, white goats
with horns gilded, and Val. Flac. l. 3. Arg. speaks of lectas aurata front
bidentes of sheep with gilded horns. And long before the Romans, this golden
superstition was used, as may be seen in Homer Iliad. 3. where Nestor promises
to sacrifice to Minerva an ox (...), pouring gold about his horns. Joseph
Acosta relates in his History of America, what magnificent Temples and rich
Images of gold and precious stones the Indians dedicated to their Idols.
Against all such vanities Arnobius in his Book against the Gentiles disputes
elegantly, showing that God is not taken with such toys as Temples, Altars,
and sacrifices; but cultus verus in pectore est, his true worship consists in
the breast, and as our Savior says, neither in the Temple of Samaria, nor of
Jerusalem, but in spirit and truth. Quin damus id superis de magna quod dare
lance
Non possit magni Messalae lippa propago;
Compositum jus, fasque animo, sanctosque recessus
Mentis, and incoctum generoso pectus honesto!
Haec cedo ut admoveam templis, and far litabo.
An honest upright sincere and sanctified heart says Persius, is above all the
Temples and sacrifices in the world.

Q. What Priests had they at Mexico, and hat Sacrifices?

A. Besides their inferior Priests, Mexico its Priests and Sacrifices.
they had one chief, whose habit was a Crown of rich Feathers on his head,
Pendants of Gold, with green stones at his ears, and under his Lip an Azure
stone; his office was to receive the body of the dead King at the Temple door,
with a mournful song, to open the breast of the sacrificed man, to pull out his
heart, to offer it to the Sun, and then to sting it to the idol, to which the
man was sacrificed. The inferior Priests in the interim holding the legs,
arms, and head of the Sacrificed wretch, whilst his heart was taking out. They
used also to ^^ay of the skins of men, and cloth some therewith, who went
about dancing, and forcing people to offer them presents, or else they would
strike them over the face, with the bloody corner of the skin. The Priests
office also was to burn incense before their idols every morning, noontide,
evening, and at midnight, for then with Trumpets and Cornets they sounded a
long time, which done, they burned the Incense in Censers with much reverence,
and then they beat themselves and draw blood with sharp bodkins. They did
preach also on some festival days to the people. The revenues of the Priests
were great; the Temples in state, magnificence, and wealth, exceeded ou^s. The
Priests were all anointed, and wore their hair long, for they never cut it.
They did sometimes anoint themselves with an Unguent made of venomous beasts,
which made them without fear, and armed them with cruelty. They painted their
skins black. They washed the new born Children, and let them blood in their
ears; they performed marriages by asking the parties mutual consent, and tying
together a corner of the woman's veil, with a corner of the man's gown, and so
brought them to the Bridegrooms house, causing the Bride to go seven times
about the hearth. They buried the dead either in their Gardens, or on
Mountains; sometimes they burned the body; and if he was a great man; they
killed his Chaplain, and his Officers to attend him, burying also wealth with
him, that he might not want in the other world. The Priest used to attire
himself in these great Funerals, like a Devil with many mouths, and glass
eyes, and with his staff stirred and mingled the ashes. When the King died, the
Priests were to sing his Elogies, and to sacrifice two hundred persons to serve
him. Adultery was punished with death, and so was dishonesty in their Nuns and
Monks, of which there were two great Cloisters at Mexico. But who will see
these particulars handled at large, let them read Joseph Acosta, and Lopez de
Gomara.

Q. Had the Americans any knowledge of Christian Religion*

A. Concerning Christ they knew nothing; Americans acknowledge a Supreme God, a
Trinity, the immortality of souls, a life after this, and have some tradition
of Noah's flood.
some small knowledge they had of a supreme God, whom they called Mirococha, and
of the creation; of the immortality of souls, of a life after this, wherein are
punishments and rewards; and some of them as Lerius witnesses, believe the
resurrection of the flesh, and if we will believe Acosta, they have some
knowledge of the Trinity, which they worship under the picture of the Sun with
three heads; they have some tradition likewise of Noah's flood, and that all
mankind was drowned, except six persons, who saved themselves in a cave; some
in Brasil believe all were drowned except their progen^tors, who were preserved
to propagate mankind. The Indians also report that the Sun hid himself in a
certain Lake within an Island, during the time of the Deluge, and so was
preserved; this is not unlike the Poetical fiction of Diana and Apollo, how
they were begot in the Isle Ortygia, called afterward from their first
appearance Delos; by this intimating that after the flood, by reason of thick
foggs and mists arising out of the moist earth, the Sun and Moon were not seen
in many days; but these vapors being spent, and the earth dry, the Moon was
first seen, and then in some few hours afterward, the Sun. The tradition which
they have of the flood, cannot be that of Ogyges King of Attica, which happened
about six hundred years after Noah's flood, and which drowned only the country
about Athens and Achaia in Peloponesus; nor was it that of Deucalion, which
happened in the 82. year of his age, about two hundred and fifty years after
the former, and seven hundred eighty two years after Noah's flood; for this
drowned only Thessaly, and some part of Italy, of which the Americans could
have no knowledge; seeing many places nearer never heard of these floods, it is
most likely then, that their tradition was grounded on Noah's flood; for as
Noah's posterity peopled all the world, so they dispersed the memory of this
flood, wherever they planted; for we find this deluge, nor only mentioned by
Moses, but also by Berosus, Alexander Polyhistor, Abydenus the Historian, as he
is cited by Eusebius, Plato in Timaeo; Plutarch writing of Deucalions flood,
speaks of the Dove sent out of the Ark, which relates to Noah's flood; and
Ovid describing the same flood, writes according to the Mosaical description of
the first and universal deluge; whereas that of Deucalion was but of a
particular country; So Lucian de Dea Syria, writes of Deucalions flood, as if
he had read the sixth and seventh chapters of Genesis, of Noah's flood; for he
shows how all flesh had corrupted their ways upon the earth, how all their
works were (...), works of injustice and violence; how the rain fell, the
fountains of the great deep were opened, the waters so prevailed, that all
flesh died, (...). He shows also how he was preserved with his wife and
children in a great Ark; and how of all the beasts that live on the earth, two
and two entered into the Ark, etc. and lastly, how he built an Altar after his
deliverance. This description is directly of Noah's flood, not of Deucalions;
besides Mela, Solinus, and Pliny write that Ioppe the maritime town of Syria
was of great antiquity, as being built before the flood; which cannot be meant
of Ogyges or Deucalions flood, which were only in some places of Greece, and
went not so far as Syria; neither was it any great antiquity, for Ioppe to be
built before these floods; for many Cities besides this were built before;
therefore doubtless is meant Noah's floood. Lastly, Josephus says that Omnes
barbaricae historiae Scriptores, all the Barbarian historians have mentioned
this flood.

Q. What festival days were observed in New Spain?

A. Every twentieth day which was the last day of their month, New Spain, its
festival days.
was holy, and then were men Sacrificed. At the first appearance of green corn,
children were sacrificed, so when the corn was a foot above the ground, and
again when it was two foot high, holy days were kept, and children butchered.
In some of their feasts they sacrificed a woman, and with her skin covered a
man, who danced about the streers two days together. In one of their feasts
which the Mexicans kept in their (...) upon the Lake, a boy and a girl were
drowned to keep company with the gods of the Lake. In May they kept the feast
of Vitziliputzli, in which his Image made of paste, richly adorned, was carried
by the maidens attired in white, on their shoulders to the court, and thence by
the young men to the stairs of the Temple, and thence to the top with Music,
much adoration, vain ceremonies, and wicked sacrificing of men were used that
day. In May also was kept the Feast of Penance and Pardon, in which a captive
was sacrificed. After much profane adoration, the people took up earth and eat
it, desiring pardon for their sins, and bringing rich presents to their Idol,
and whipping themselves on the shoulders. Much meat is presented that day to
the Idols, and then to the Priests, who five days before had eat but one meal a
day. The Merchants had their peculiar god, and festival day, in which they
sacrificed a man, after they had given him for nine days divine honors. His
heart they offered about midnight to the Moon, perhaps because she is mistress
of the waters, on which Merchants use to traffic; or because they are more
beholding to her light in the night then others are. Concerning these
festivals, their Schools and Seminaries, their belief of the Souls immortality,
of their rewards and punishments, of their nine several places appointed for
them, See Acosta, Gomara, and P. Martyr in his Decads.

Q. What was the Religion of Jucatan and the parts adjoining?

A. In Iucatan they were Circumcised, Jucatan, its religion, and parts
adjoining.
and yet gross Idolaters, but curious workmen in carving and adorning their
Images. They had in their houses Images made like Bears, which they worshipped
as their household gods, with singing, and Incense. In hollow Images, they
caused boys to answer the peoples petitions, as if God had spoke to them. When
they wanted rain, or were in any danger, they had their Processions, and
Pilgrimages to these Idols. In Nicuragua, they worshipped the Sun, and diverse
Idols. All their Priests except Confessors, married. The ordering of the
Sacrifices and their numbers, depended merely on the Priests, who used to go
about the captives three times singing mornfully, and then with their flint
knives suddenly open their Breasts. They divide the body thus; the Prelate has
his Heart, the King his hands and feet, the taker his Buttocks, and the people
the rest. The heads are set on trees, under which they Sacrifice men and
children. They have their Idolatrous Processions, in which for the honor of
their Idol, they wound themselves, and for the desire of future happiness,
they offer themselves cheerfully for Sacrifices. Whilst the Priest annoints the
cheeks and the mouth of the Idol with blood, the others sing, and the people
pray. The Priest makes marriges, by joining the little fingers of the
Bridegroom and Bride near a fire; but the Lords are permitted for honors
^ake, first to corrupt the Br^de. The Adulterer is beaten, and the Adulteress
is divorced. He that forces a Virgin is a slave, except he pay her Dowry. But
if a slave force his Masters daughter, they are both buried alive. See Benzo,
P. Martyr, and Gomara.

Q. What was the Religion of the Southern Americans?

A. They generally worship the Sun and Moon, Southern America, the Religion
thereof.
with diverse Idols, and the devil in diverse shapes; they believe the Souls
immortality. Their Priests are their Physicians, and therefore in great esteem,
and exceeding rich, for they have all the goods of him whom they cure. When
they go to wars, they carry their gods with them, of whom they ask Counsel of
all affairs; and then they keep Lent for two months. They punish in some
places theft and murder with the loss of Ears and Nose; in other parts, with
death. These faults in the Nobility are punished with the loss of their hair
only. In some places they hold it a part of their devotion, to offer their
daughters to be defloured by their Priests. When it thunders and lightens, they
say the Sun is angry with them. When there is an Eclipse, they Fast, the
married Women scratch their Faces, and pluck their hairs; the Maidens draw
blood with sharp fish bones. When the Moon is Eclipsed, they say the Sun is
angry with her. When a Comet is seen, they beat drums and hollo, thinking by
this to drive it away. They use to consult with and invocate the Devil. The
Priests learn Physic and Magic when they are young, being two years shut up
in Woods; all that time they keep their Cells, see no women, nor eat flesh.
They are taught by their Masters in the night. The dead are buried either at
home, or being dried at the fire are hanged up. The bones at last are burned;
and the Skull presented to the Wife to be kept by her as a relic. In their
Lent fasts they abstain from Women and Salt. See P. Martyr, Gomara, Linschoten,
Cieza, etc.

Q. Of what Religion are the people of Paria, Guiana, and along the River
Debaiba, or St. John?

A Hereabout they be very zealous in worshipping of the Devil, Paria, Guiana,
and Debaiba, their Religions.
and Idols, to whom they sacrifice men, and then eat them. When their gods are
angry, they macerate themselves with fasting. Their Priests are stoned or
burned, if they marry against their vow of Chastity. They believe rewards and
punishments after this life. The spot in the Moon they hold to be a man
imprisoned there for Incest with his Sister. They feed yearly the departed
souls with Maiz and Wine. They held the souls of great men only, and such as
were buried with them, immortal. Their great men's Funeral Pomps are celebrated
yearly with much lamentation, drinking, and bestial ceremonies, both men and
women casting aside all modesty. He that will know more of this stuff, let him
read the forenamed Authors.

Q. What is the Religion of Brasil?

A. They acknowledge the immortality of the foul, Brasil, its Religion*
and believe that there are rewards and punishments after this life. For they
hope that if they kill and sacrifice many of their enemies, they shall be
carried beyond the Mountains into pleasant Gardens, there to dance and rejoice
with their forefathers. They stand in much fear of the Devil, who is still
vexing of ^^em, therefore they chiefly worship him; and when they go abroad,
they commonly carry fire with them, as their defense against the Devil, who
they think is afraid of fire. They have their solemn Festivals, which they
celebrate with dancing, howling, and tatling. The Husband has power to kill
the adulterous Wife. Their marriages are without any ceremonies. They bury
their dead upright in a pit with their goods. The Husband plays the Midwife to
the woman, washes, painteth, and names the child by the name of some wild
Beast; they have some knowledge of Noah's flood: of these passages see Masscus,
Lerius, Stadius, etc.

Q. What Religion did the people of Peru profess?

A. Their chief god was Wiracocha, Peru, its Religion.
by whom they understood the maker of all things; next to him they worshipped
the Sun, and the Thunder after him: The images of these three they never
touched with their bare hands; they worshipped also the Stars, Earth, Sea,
Rainbow, Rivers, Fountains, and Trees. They adored also wild Beasts, that they
might not hurt them, and in sign of their devotion, when they traveled they
left in the cross ways, and dangerous places, old shoes, feathers, and if they
had nothing else, stones. They worshipped the Sun by pulling off the hairs from
their Eyebrows; when they fear, they touch the earth, and look up to the Sun.
They worshipped also the dead bodies of their Emperors, and indeed every thing
they either affected or feared. They have some glimring knowledge of the
beginning of the world, of Noah's flood, and they believe the end of the world,
which still they fear when the Sun is Eclipsed, which they think to be the
Moons Husband; they held their Priests in such esteem, that no great matter was
undertaken by Prince or people without their advice. None had access to the
Idols but they, and then only when they are clothed in white, and prostrate on
the ground. In sacrificing they abstained from women, and some out of zeal
would put out their own eyes. They used to consult with the Devil, to whom they
sacrificed men, and dedicated boys in their Temples for Sodomy. They had also
their Temples richly adorned with Gold and Silver, and their Monasteries for
Priests and Sorcerers. Their Nuns were so strictly kept, that it was death to
be deflowred; after fourteen years of age they were taken out of the Monastery,
either to serve the Idols, and such must be Virgins still, or else to serve as
Wives and Concubines to the Ingua or Emperor. They are very frequent and strict
in their confessions, and cheerfully undertake what penance is enjoined them.
But the Ingua confesses only to the Sun; after confession they all wash in
baths, leaving their sins in the water. They used to sacrifice Vegetables,
Animals, and men, chiefly Children, for the health or prosperity of their
Ingua, and for victory in War; in some places they eat their men-sacrifices, in
others they only dried and preserved them in Silver Coffins; they anoint with
blood the faces of their Idols and doors of their Temples or rather slaughter
houses. See Acosta, Cieza, Gomara etc.

Q. What festival days did the Peruvians observe?

A. They had Feasts and sacrifices every month of the year, Peruviant, their
Festival days.
in which were offered multitudes of sheep of different colors, which they
burned. The Ingua's Children were dedicated in these Feasts, their ears were
pierced, then they were wiped, and their faces anointed with blood, in sign
that they should be true Knights to their Ingua. In Cusco during this month
and feast, no stranger might remain; but at the end thereof, they were
admitted, and had a morsel of bread presented to each man, that they should by
eating thereof testify their fidelity to the Ingua. In the second month which
is our January (for in December, in which the Sun returns from Capricorn
was their first month) they flung the ashes of their sacrifices into the
river, following the same six leagues, and praying the River to carry that
present to Viracocha; in three following months they offered one hundred sheep.
In the sixth they offered one hundred sheep more, and made a feast for their
Maiz. In the seventh they sacrificed to the Sun. In the eighth and ninth
months, two hundred sheep were offered. In the tenth, one hundred sheep more,
and to the honor of the Moon burned torches, washed themselves, and then were
drunk four days together. In the eleventh month they offered one hundred
sheep, and upon a black sheep poured much Chica or Wine of Maiz, to procure
rain. In the twelfth month they sacrificed one hundred sheep and kept a feast.
They have also their fasts which continue in mourning and sad processions two
days, and the two days after are spent in feasting, dancing, and drinking. See
Ios. Acosta.

Q What was their belief of the departed souls?

A. That they wander up and down, Peruvians their Belief of the departed souls.
and suffer hunger, thirst, and cold; therefore they carry them meat, drink and
clothes. They used also to put gold, and silver in their mouths, hands, and
bosoms; much treasure has been dug out of graves. But they believed that
the souls of good men were at rest in glory. The bodies were honored after
death, sacrifices were offered to them, and clothes. The best beloved Wife was
slain and attendants of all sorts. To the Ingua's Ghost young children were
sacrificed, and if the Father was sick, many times the Son was slain, thinking
this murder would satisfy death for the Father. Of these and their other
impious Ceremonies, see Acosta* By these horrible murders committed among the
poor Americans, Americans, their superstitious fear and Tyranny thereof.
we may see what a cruel and barbarous tyrant superstitious fear is, and what
wretched slaves they are, who are captivated by this tyrant, far more savage
then Mezentius, Phalaris, Busyris, or any other tyrannical butcher that ever
was; for there is no tyrant so powerful, or barbarous, but may be avoided by
flying from him to remote places, but who can fly from that superstitious fear,
which a man does carry continually about him; Quid terras alio calentes Sole
mutamus? patria quis exulse quoque fugit? a man may fly from his country, says
Horace, but not from himself; this tyrant haunts the superstitious wretch
continually, as the evil Spirit did Saul. Again, no tyrant can tyrannize over
a man longer then he lives; death sets every slave at liberty; but this tyrant
leaves not his slave in death, but with the terrors of future torments in hell,
does vex his soul when it is departing hence; Curae non ipsa in morte
relinquunt; there is no slave so wretched and miserable, no pain so great, no
captivity so unpleasing, no chains so heavy, no prison so loathsome, which in
sleep are not forgotten; for then the slave is at liberty, the pain is eased,
the chains are light, and the darkest dungeon, is then a beautiful Palace;
but this Deisedemonia, as the Greeks call it, this superstitious fear will not
permit its captivated slave to rest or take any quiet, but affrights him in his
sleep with horrid dreams, and hideous phancies, so that sleep which should be
his comfort and ease, becomes his tormenter. Besides, Temples and Altars, which
use to be Sanctuaries for Delinquents, are no ease or sanctuary at all to the
superstitious sinner; any servant might be defended from his Master by laying
hold of the Altar; but no Altar, no Temple, no Sacrifice can privilege the
superstitious soul, who is still jealous and fearful of his cruel gods; and
what wonder is it, if we consider the nature of those insatiable devils, whom
they worship, who are never satisfied with the blood of beasts, men, women, and
children, but are still thirsting after more, with the horse-leech; if these be
the gods which the Gentiles serve, surely as Plutarch says, they had been in
no worse condition if the Typhones, and Giants had overthrown these gods; for
they could not have been mo^e cruel, nor have exacted more bloody victimes. And
doubtless as the same Plutarch says, these poor wretches do not love their
gods, but rather hate them, because they still fear some hurt and mischief
from them; therefore as some men flatter and give rich presents to tyrants, not
because they love them (for indeed they hate them) but that they may not
receive hurt by them; so deal superstitious men with their gods. And in truth
Plutarch is not altogether mistaken, when he makes Superstition worse then
Atheism; for the Atheists hold there is no god, but the Superstitious honor
such fordid, base, and cruel gods, that it were far better there were no gods:
then such; for it is less impiety to say there is no god, then to give his
sacred name and honor to such wicked, greedy, barbarous, and blood sucking
devils. I had rather (says he) men should say there is no Plutarch, then that
they should say Plutarch is an inconstant, fickle, choleric, a revengefull,
and cruel man. And so he concludes that superstition is the cause of Atheism
and impiety; because men looking upon the ridiculous gestures, impurity,
cruelty, injustice, madness, undecency, and all kind of villainy perpetrated in
their Temples concluded, it were better have no gods, then such abominable
Deities. But see Plutarch himself in his book of superstition.

Q. What was the Religion of Hispaniola?

A. They worshipped the Sun and Moon, Hispaniola, its Religion.
which they say at first shined out of a Cave; and their tradition is, that out
of two Caves came mankind; the biggest men out of the greatest Cave, and the
least men out of the lesser Cave. They worship also diverse Idols with ugly
shapes, by which the Devil uses to speak to them; these they call Zaemes, to
which they kept diverse festivals. In these they had their publiqu* dances, with
the music of shells tied about their arms, thighs, and legs. The King sits
drumming when the people present themselves, having their skins painted with
diverse colors of herbs. When they sacrifice, they use with a sacred hook
thrust down their throat, to turn up their stomach. Then they sit down in a
ring, crosse-legged, and wri-necked about the Idol, praying their sacrifice
might be accepted. In some places the women dance about their Idols, and sing
the praises of their ancient Kings; then both Sexes on their knees offer cakes,
which the Priests cut and give to every one a piece, this each man keeps as a
holy relic all the year against dangers. If any fall sick, the Priests impute
this to their neglect in the Idols service, therefore exhort them to build a
Chapp^, or dedicate a Grove to their god. They think the Ghosts of the dead
walk, who assault such as are fearful, and vanish from them who are not afraid.
Their several Rites are like those of the other Pagan Countries. See P. Martyr.

Out of what I have written concerning the Idolatry of Asia, Idolatry further
condemned.
Africa, and America, we may conclude with Tertullian lib. de Idolat. that
every sin by what name soever it be called, or of whatsoever quality it is, may
be comprehended in the sin of Idolatry, Idololatriae crimine expungitur, to use
his own phraise, that is, every sin is made up and attains to its perfection
and consumination in idolatry; so that as he shows in that book* there is no
such murderer as the Idolater, who not only destroys the bodies of men and
beasts to please his Idol, but likewise murthereth his own soul: there is no
such Adulterer as he, who not only goes a whoring after false gods, but also
adulterates the truth; for every false god is adultery; there is no such thief
as he, for not only much robbery and oppression is committed to maintain false
worship and idolatry, as Arnobius instanceth in the Romans, who to maintain the
worship of their gods, did rob all other gods and nations, and with their
triumphant gold (Persius calls it aurum ovatum) adorn their images; but besides
this theft, the Idolater robs God of his right and honor, giving it to such as
are not gods. I will not speak of the uncleanness, drunkenness, wantonness,
and other sins which accompany this master sin, which Tertullian calls
Principale crimen generis humani, summus saeculi reatus, etc. devor^t^rium
salutis; the main wickedness of mankind, the chief guilt of the world, the
devourer or destroyer of man's happiness and salvation; therefore he will not
have any Christian to paint, or make graven images to be worshipped, affirming
that it is flatly against the law of God, and likewise against their vow in
baptism to forsake the Devil and his Angels; how do they forsake him, if they
make him? if they make it their trade to live by him, how have they renounced
him? can they deny with their tongue, what they confess with their hand?
destroy that with their words, which they build up with their deeds; confess
one God, and make many; preach the true God, and yet make false gods? If any
say that he worships none, though he makes them, Tertullian will answer him,
that he who makes false gods, does really worship them, not with incense and
sacrifice, but with his wit, sweat, industry, and skill, which he impends on
the making of them; he is more then their Priest; for without him they could
have no Priest. How can a Christian put forth that hand to touch the body of
our Lord, by which he has made a body for the Devil? And as it is Idolatry
says he, to carve, or paint Idols, so it is, any ways to adorn them, to build
houses or temples for them, so that all such Artificers are guilty of idolatry;
so are judicial Astrologers, who call the stars by the names of Idols, and take
upon them to foretell future contingencies by them; so are Schoolmasters, who
teach the Genealogies and Fables of these false gods; this severity indeed was
needful in the beginning of the Gospel, when Gentilisme was to be suppressed,
that way might be made for Christianity; but now Pagan idolatry being quite
extinguished among us, there is no danger in reading, or teaching of Heathen
Authors. He condemns also Merchants that bring home and sell incense or any
thing else whereby idols are worshipped. So he will not have Christians to be
present at the solemnities, shows, or festivals of idols, nor to give any
countenance to them, or to wink and connive at them, or to call them gods, or
to swear by them, for that is to take the name of the true God in vain; nay, he
will not permit Christians to light candles, or set up bays in their doors,
which upon solemn days was an honor due to the Emperor, because this ceremony
had some resemblance with Gentile idolatry.

The Contents of the fourth Section.
The Religion of the ancient Europaeans. 2. The Roman chief festivals. 3. Their
gods. 4. Their Priests. 5. Their Sacrifices^6. Their Marriage Rites. 7. Their
Funeral Ceremonies. 8. The old Grecian Religion. 9. Their chief gods. 10. Of
Minerva, Diana, Venus. 11. How Juno, Ceres, and Vulcan were worshipped. 12, The
Sun worshipped under the names of Apollo, Phoebus, Sol, Jupiter, Liber,
Hercules, Mars, Mercurius, Pan, etc. 13. The Moon worshipped under diverse names
and shapes. 14. The Earth and Fire, how worshipped and named. 15. The Deity of
the Sea, how worshipped. 16. Death, how named and worshipped. 17. The Grecian
Sacrifices and Ceremonies. 18. Their Priests and Temples of old:

SECT. IV.
Quest. WHat was the Religion of the ancient Europaeans? Europeans, Greeks,
and Romans their Religions.


Answ. The same Paganism was professed among them, that was in the other parts
of the world, and which is yet professed in Lapland, Finland, and some parts of
Norway, Lituania, and Samag^tia, whose religion is Idolatrous, whose knowledge
is Magic, and whose actions are barbarous. The chief gods that were worshipped
in Europe were the Sun, Moon, Stars, Elements, Rivers, Fountains, Trees; and
indeed so many great and small, that according to Varros computation, they
exceeded 30000. in number. If we speak of the Religions professed among the
Greeks and Romans, we shall speak in a manner of all; because they had almost
all Europe under their Dominion, and before their conquests the same idols were
worshipped by all, but under different names. Romans, their old Religion.
Numa taught the Romans to worship their gods by offering Corn and Cakes
besprinkled with salt, and to erect Temples, but no Images, thinking it both
absurd and impossible to represent that incomprehensible power by outward
shapes and forms. But many years after Tarquinius Pris^us taugh^ them according
to the Grecian manner, to set up images to their Gods. Then were the Vestal
Nuns chosen, who were to continue so thirty years; the first ten they were
learners, the second ten years practitioners in their office, but the third ten
years teachers of the novices. If they committed whoredom, they were burned or
buried alive; if the sacred fire went out by their neglect (which was held
ominous) they were scourged. Then were the Priests of Mars called Salii;
instituted at first but twelve, afterward twenty four. These were chosen out
of the Patricii, and they were in March to dance solemnly with their Targets
called Ancilia, one of which fell down from heaven. These festival dances were
dedicated to Mars. They had their Augures or Diviners. They had their
Triumviri, called Ep^lones, who had the charge of the holy feasts; and other
Triumviri, who had the charge of the Si^yls books. Arvales had the care of the
fields. Feciales of the wars. All these were Orders of Priesthood, to which
may be added Flamines, of which there were as many as there were of their
greater gods. Jupiters Priests were called Diales, the Priests of Mars,
Martiales, of Romulus, Qui^inales, etc. He that had the charge of these
Priests, of the Sacrifices, and of Festivals, was called Rex Sacrificulus, or
the King of Priests, because anciently Kings did exercise the Priests office.
But above them all was the Pontifical College, which at first consisted only
of eight* but Sylla enlarged them to fifteen; these were to assist the chief
Pontifie or Pope, in whom alone was the supreme power of all Religion, of
Sacrifices, Holy days, Priests, Yestals, Vows, Funerals, Idols, Oaths,
Ceremonies, and whatsoever concerned Religion; besides the care of the wooden
bridge called Pons sublicius. See Alexan^. ab Alexandro, Plutarch, Pli^*
Cicero, Gel^^* Fenestella, L^tus.
He had more privileges and honors then the Kings themselves; for he might
ascend the Capitol in his Litter, which was not lawful for others. And
whatsoever criminal fled to him, he was that day free from punishment. Neither
was he bound to give an account of any thing he did.

Q. What were the Roman chief Festivals?

A. Saturnalia, to the honor of Saturn, about the Suns going into Capricorn;
Their chief Festivals.
then the servants were better then their Masters; this feast they had from the
Greeks. Feriae Latinae, to Jupiter; this feast was kept upon the hill Albanus,
midway between Alba and Rome, by the Romans and Latins. Quinquatria was a
feast of five days, to the honor of Minerva, it was kept after the Ides of
March; the first day was for sacrifice, the other three for sword-players, and
the last for lustration. Natalitia, to the Genius, in which feast it was held
abominable to shed the blood of some beasts, and ominous, seeing those birth
feasts were wholly dedicated to mirth and joy. Vertum^alia, were feasts to
Vertumu^^ the god of Merchandising; it was kept in the month of October.
Lupercalia in February, to the honor of Pan Lycaeus, the god of shepherds, who
keeps the sheep from the wolves; This feast Evander brought with him out of
Arcadia into Italy; in it the young men used to run up and down the streets
naked, with leather thongs in their hands, striking gently all such as they
me^; young Ladies used purposely to offer their naked hands to be struck by
them, hoping hereby to become fruitful. Agonalia, were feasts kept in January,
either to the honor of Ianus, or else of Agon, the god of actions and
enterprises. Carmentali^ in January also, to the honor of Carmenta, Evanders
mother, who was a Prophetess. Feralia, so called, a ferendis epulis, from
carrying meat to the graves of their friends; this feast was kept in February
to the Manes or infernal Ghosts. Terminalia in February also, to Terminus the
god of marches and bounds; this feast was observed to keep amity between
neighbors, that they might not differ about the bounds of their lands.
Saliaria in March, to the honor of Mars, whose Priests called Salii, went
about dancing with the Ancilia or Targets in their hands. Liberalia, which the
Greeks call Dronysia, were kept in March, to the honor of Bacchus, or Liber,
whose Priests that day did sacrifice with Ivy Garlands on their heads.
Cerealia, in April, in memory of Proserpina found again by Ceres. The
ceremonies of this day were performed by the Roman Matrons, but originally this
was a Greek feast. Palilia in April, to Pales the goddess of shepherds.
Vinalia in April too: this feast was also called Veneralia, because kept to
Venus, in whose Temple much Wine was poured out, the Gardens dedicated, and
Sacrifices offered to her. Robigalia to Robigo the god of smut; this feast was
kept in April, that the Corn might not be smutty. Compitalia in May: these
feasts were kept in compitis, ^^eets and high ways, to the Lares, and their
mother Mania, to whom Children were wont to be sacrificed, till I^nius Brutus
instead of these, commanded the heads of Poppies and Onyons to be offered.
Lemuria in May, so called from the Lemures or night Ghosts; which they pacified
with this feast, in which they used to fling Beans, thinking thereby they
drove these Ghosts, out of their houses. Matralia in May, were feasts to
Matuta, which the Greeks call Leucothea; no serving maids were admitted into
this feast, except one, whom each Matron was to smite on the cheek, because
Matuta was jealous that her husband loved her maid better then her self,
whereupon she grew mad and drowned her self, with her son Melicerte, and so
was made a goddess; she was also called Ino. Neptunalia i^ June, were
celebrated to the honor of Neptune. Portumnalia to Portumnus the God of
harbors, in August: this feast was kept in the harbor of the River Tibris*
Consualia, in August, to the honor of Consus the god of Counsel; in this feast
the Asses and Horses were crowned and kept from work. In the same month were
kept Vulcanalia to Vulcan. Meditrinalia in October, to Meditrina the goddess
of Physic, for in this month they used to taste of old and new wine for a
Medicine. Augustalia the same month, in memory of Augustus his return to Rome
from his victories and conquests. Fontinilia, in October, in which feast all
fountains and wells were crowned with Garlands, Mercurialia to Mercury, in
November, and Brumalia the same month to Bromus or Brumus, that is Bacchus. In
December were kept not only Saturnalia, Feasts to Saturn, See Plutarch, Alex.
ab Alexandro, Joseph Scaliger, Rosinus, and others.
but also Opali^, to his Wife Ops. And Angeronalia to Angerona the goddess of
anguish and grief. And then also was the Feast called Laurentialia, to Acca
Laurentia. Besides these and many other set Feasts, they had others, called
Conceptivae, imperativae, and Nundinae; of all which,

Q. What Gods did the Romans worship?

A. Their chief deities were twenty, Their chiefgods.
namely: Jupiter the God of thunder, June of riches, Venus of beauty, Minerva
of wisdom, Vesta of the Earth, Ceres of Corn, Diana of hunting, Mars of wars,
Mercury of Eloquence, Vulcan, of fire, Apollo of Physic, Neptune of the Sea,
Ianus of Husbandry, Saturn of time, Genius of Nativities, Orcus of Hell,
Bacchus of Wine, Tellus of Seeds, Sol the Sun, and Luna the Moon. But indeed
under all these names they understood the Sun, to whom for his diverse effects,
and operations, they gave diverse names, as Macrobius shows. Besides these
they worshipped many other Deities of less note. As, Bellon^ the goddess of
war, Victoria of Victory, Nemes^s of revenge, Cupido of love, Gratiae, or
Charites of thanks, Penates man's tutelar Gods, Lares the household Gods, Parcae
the goddesses of destiny, Furiae, or Eumenides, the goddesses of punishments;
Fortuna, the goddess of Providence. All these were called Dii majorum Gentium:
there were others whom they named Indigite^, these were men who for their
merits were Canonized and made Gods. Such were Hercules, Faunus, Evander,
Carmenta, Castor, and Pollux, Aesculapius, Acca Laurentia, Quirinus, etc. And
not only virtuous men, but the Virtues themselves were deified; these had
their Temples, Sacrifices, and Festivals. Such were the Mind, Virtue, Honor,
Piety, Hope, Chastity, Peace, Concord, Quietness, Liberty, Safety, and
Felicity; Besides these, they had inferior Gods, whose merits deserve not
Heaven, nor scarce veneration; these they called Semones, as it were
semi-homines, half men; such were ^riapus, Vertumnus, Hippona, Naenia; and all
these petty Gods which waited upon every servile office and action of man; such
were Nascio the goddess of birth, Cunina of Cradles, Rumina of Sucking, Potina
of drinking, Educa or Edusa of eating, Carnea of flesh, Iuventus of youth,
Volupia of pleasure, Lubentia of lust, or desire; and many more of this sort.
They had also their Gods of marriages, as Iugatinus, the God of joining;
Domiducus, who had the Bride home; and many more of this kind. Childbearing
women had their several goddesses, as Partunda, Egeria, and many more. Men's
actions also had their deities; such were Horta the goddess of exhorting,
Volumna of willing, Laverna of stealing, Naenia of funerals, Libitina of
graves, or Coffins; the Rusticks had their peculiar Gods, as Robigus the God of
smut; Sterculius of dung; Bubona, of Oxen: Hippona, of Horses; Mellona, of
Honey; Pomona, of fruit^ Pales, of fodder; Flora, of Flowers; Terminus, of
bounds; Pan, of shepherds; Silvanus of fields and woods; Priapus of seeds and
gardens, besides many more: and so ridiculous they were in multiplying deities,
that sinks and privies had their Cloacina, Fevers their Febris, fear and
palenesse had their Gods to wit, Pavor, and Pallor; they worshipped also
foreign Gods, as Isis, Serapis, Osiris, the deities of Egypt; Sanctus, or Dius
Fidius, the Sabins God. And many more which they borrowed of those Nations they
subdued. But one God acknow^edged by the wiser sort of Gentiles.
But we must observe, that although the ignorant multitude among the Gentiles
did worship many Gods, yet the wiser sort, acknowledged but one true God; thus
Mercurius Trismegistus the ancientest of the Philosophers confesses there is
but one Unity the root of all things; one goodness of infinite power, the
Author of life and motion in the world. So Pythagoras who first assumed the
name of Philosopher says: that God is one, and all in all, the light of all
powers, the beginning of all things, the torch of heaven, Father mind, life,
and motion of the Universe. Empedocles who succeeded Pythagoras shows that
from this one entity proceed (...), all things that have been, are and shall
be. This same is acknowleged by Parmenides, Thales, Anaxagoras, Timaeus, and
other Philosophers of that age. Socrates confirmed this truth by his death;
Plato his Scholar calls God (...), that entity which has being of himself
(...), begot of himself, the beginning, middle, and end of all things; etc.
Iamblicus calls God (...), sufficient in himself, (...), Father to himself,
(...), goodness it self, the fountain and root of all things, intelligent and
intelligible, etc. Proelus writes that he is King of all things, the only God
who produces all things of himself, the End of Ends, and first cause of all
operations, the Author of all goodness and beauty, by whose light all things
shine, etc. Simplicius says, that from this divine beauty proceed all
beauties, and all truths from this divine truth, the beginning of all
beginnings, the sowrce and original of all goodness, the cause of causes, God
of Gods, etc. Plotinus to the same purpose makes God the original of all things
and who only is sufficient in himself, giving being to all, etc. The same
doctrine is taught by his Scholar ^orphyrie, and likewise by all the other
Plato^^sts; this was also the general Tenet of the Stoics, as may be seen in
Epictetus, who shows that above all things we must learn to know there is but
one God, the governor of all things, etc. who is not ignorant of our works,
words, and thoughts, etc. Cicero tells us that nothing is more excellent then
God, by whom the world is governed, who is subject and obedient to none. So
Seneca, we must find out something more ancient then the world, whence the
Stars had their original, etc. He calls God the Soul and Spirit; the preserver
and keeper of this Universe, the Lord and Architect of this great work, etc.
The same is acknowledged by Chrysippus as he is cited by Plutarch; there cannot
(says he) be found out any other beginning or original of justice, but from
Jupiter, who is the common nature, fate, and providence of all things. The
Peripateticks maintained the same doctrine, as may be seen in Aristotle's
Physics, Metaphysics, and De mundo; he acknowledges a first, infinite, and
eternal Mover, who is only wise, and the cause of causes. He is the Father of
gods and men, the preserver of the world, the mover of Heavens, Sun, Moon, etc.
His Scholar Theophras^us to the same purpose confesses that from this one
principle, all things have their existence and consistence; that God made all
things of nothing; Alexander Aphrodisaeus, and the rest affirm the same truth;
and not only the Philosophers, but likewise the Poets, assented to this
doctrine. Orpheus sings thus: (...) there is none other but this great King,
whose seat is in Heaven, and is compassed with clouds, who sees all things,
and is seen of none etc. Of these, see Augustine in the City of God,
Lactantius, Cicero, Plutarch, Rosinus, and others.
To the same purpose Phocyllides (...), There is one wise God, powerful and
blessed. But of this subject, I will speak more hereafter, concerning the Sun;
I could allege, Homer, Hesiod, Sophocles, Virgil, Ovid, and other Poets to
this purpose; but this work is already performed by Justin Martyr, Eusebius,
Clemens, Lactantius, Plessis and others; who likewise have inserted many verses
out of the Sibylls.

Q. What Priests had the Romans?

A. Their Priests.
Of these we have said somewhat already, but we will say something more. Their
antientest Priests were Luperci, the Priests of Pan Lycaeus, Potitii, and
Pinarii of Hercules. Of divination by chirping of Birds, Augures; of divining
by Poultry, Pullarii. They that had the care of Altars, and looked into the
intrals of the Sacrifice, were called Aruspices, and Extispices. Curiones were
the Priests that had care of each Curla or Ward in the City: for Romulus
divided Rome into 33 Wards, and assigned to each of them a Priest or Curio.
Over these was Curio maximus, that is an Archbishop. The Priests which Romulus
ordained to the memory of Titus Tatius, King of the Sabins, were called Sodales
Tatit. The Priests that went always covered with threaden caps* or hoods, were
called Flamines quasi Filamines, whereof there were diverse sorts, as we have
already showed. Of the Vestal Priestesses, and the Salii, as also of the
Feciales, Rex Sacrificulus, and Pontifex maximus we have said. The Priests that
had the charge of the Sibylls books were at first but two, called Duumviri,
then they were increased to ten, Decemviri, at last to fifteen, called
Quindecemviri. Fauna or Fatua who for her loyalty to her husband, was called
Bona Dea, had her peculiar Priestesses. The Priests of Sybele mother of the
Gods, were called G^lli, whose chief, or Archbishop was called Archi-gallus;
there were also other Priests called Triumviri, and Septemviri epulonum, who
had charge of the publiqu^ Feasts and games. Besides these, every Idol had his
Priest; and these had their under Officers or servants, called Camilli. The
servants of Flamen Dialis were called Flaminei. They had their Churchwardens
called Aeditui, their Trumpeters and Sacbutters, called Tubicines, and
Tibicines; Popae were those that bound the Sacrifices: Victimarii that killed
them. Their Cryers that went before the Priest to enjoin the people to forbear
working during the time of Sacrificing, Of these see^ the aforenamed Authors.
were called Preciae. The women that were hired to sing the praises of the
dead, were named Praeficae. Their Grave diggers Vespilones.

Q. What sort of Sacrifices did the ancient Romans use?

A. Romans, their Sacrifices.
They used to offer a day before the solemn Sacrifice, a preparative Sacrifice
called Hostia Praecedan^a. Their Succedaneae were Sacrifices which succeeded
when the former were not satisfactory. Wethers that were led to be Sacrificed
with a Lamb on each side of them, were called Ambigui^ Bidentes were sheep
sacrificed, having two horns, and two eminent teeth. Ambervales were sacrifices
carried in their Processions about the fields. Amburbales were Processions and
sacrifices about the City. Heysers sacrificed which had never been tamed, or
put under the yoke, were called Injuges. The Priest having brought the
sacrifice to the Altar, used to pray, laying his hand on the Altar; Music in
the mean time sounding. Then he lays on the head of the beast, Corn, or a
Cake, with Salt and Frankincense; this was called Immolatio from mol^ the Cake.
Then followed Libatio which was the tasting of the Wine, and sprinkling thereof
upon the beasts head; this done, the hairs between the horns of the beast being
plucked out, were flung into the fire; this they called Libamina Prim^. Then the
beast was killed, the blood received in vessels, and the intrails searched, at
last the beast is cut in pieces, one piece was wrapped in meal, and then
burned on the Altar: this was called Litare. After this they went to feasting,
singing, and dancing; now every particular God had his sacrifice; white beasts
were sacrificed to their supernal Gods, black to the infernal. The Bull was the
proper sacrifice of Jupiter, Neptune, Apollo, Mars, Luna, and the Heroes. The
Ram was sacrificed to Mars and the Heroes. Wine was offered to Ceres and Liber.
The Goat to Aesculapius and Liber. Milk and honey to Ceres. A Horse to Sol and
Mars. A Lamb to Juno and Faunus. A Dove to Venus. A Do to Pan and Minerva. A
Hind to Diana. A Hog to Sylvanus. A Cock to the Lares. A Sow to Cybele, and a
Sow to Ceres. A Hen to Aesculapius, and a Child to Saturn, etc. But this last
was abolished by the Romans. Of these particulars, see Servius on Virgil,
Rosinus, Alex^^ ab Alex. and the Latin Poets.
To each god also they assigned his particular Bird. The Eagle to Jupiter. The
Cock to the Sun. The Magpie to Mars. The Raven to Apollo. etc. They had also
their peculiar Trees. Jupiter the Oak. Pallas the Olive. Venus the Myrtle.
Pluto the Cypress. Bacchus the Vine. Hercules the Poplar. Apollo the Laurel,
etc.

Q. what Religious Rites did the Romans use in their Marriages?

A. Their marriage Rites.
In their marriages they used prayers, in which they called upon the chief
Wedding gods, to wit, Jupiter, Juno, Venus, Diana, and Pytho, or Suadela.
Before they married, they consulted with their Auspices; who encouraged, or
discouraged, them, according to the Birds they saw; the best Auspicium was
either two Crows, or two Turtles; these signified long and true love; but to
see one of these alone was ominous. After this sight, they went to their
prayers, and in the Temple before the Altar, were married, first sacrificing a
Hog to Juno, Cui Vincla jugalia curae, for she had the chief care of marriages:
the gall of the sacrifices the Priests flung away, to show there should be no
gall in the married life. They must not marry upon unluckie days; such were
the days after the Calends, Nones and Ides, these were called dies atri, or
black days; such a day was that which was kept in memory of Remus, killed by
his brother, called Lemuria or Lemulia: Neither must they marry on Funeral
days, nor on Festivals, nor when there was any Earthquake, or Thunder, or
Stormy weather, no such commotions must be in marriages. The Bride was
besprinkled, with water, to signify her purity, and in the Entry or Porch, she
must touch the fire and water, placed to show she must pass through all
difficulties with her Husband. See Sc^liger de re Poetica, Alex. ab Alex.
Rosinus, Servius, Del-Rio. in Senecam, etc.
In the wedding Chamber were placed certain Dieties, or Idols rather, to show
what was to be done in that place; these were Virginensis, Subjugus, Prem^,
Pertunda, Manturna, Venus, and Priapus. Their other Rites which were rather
Politic then religious, I touch not, as not being to my purpose.

Q. What were their Religious Rites in Funerals?

A. Their Funeral Rites.
The Corpse was wont to be washed, anointed, crowned by the Priest, and placed
in the porch of his house, with a Cypress tree before it; every thing that was
to be employed in the Funeral was to be bought in the Temple of Venus
Libitina, to show that the same diety which brought us into the world, carries
us out of it. The eyes of the dead bodies were closed upon the going out of the
breath; but opened again in the Funeral pile, that by looking toward Heaven,
they might signify the soul was gone thither; which also they express by the
flying of the Eagle out of the same pile, where the Emperors body was burned.
The place for the burial was appointed by the Pontifices, and Augures. Before
the pile were wont to be sacrificed Captives to pacify the infernal Ghosts:
but this being held too cruel, Gladiators were appointed to fight; and for want
of these, Of these and other customs see Virgil. and Servius on him;
Kirchmannus, also Rosinus, Rhodiginus, Alex. ab Alex. Gyraldus, and others.
Women were hired to tear their Cheeks; but this custom was forbid by the Law
of the twelve Tables. The Priest after the fire was burned, gathered the bones
and ashes, washed them with wine, put them in an Urn, and besprinkled the
people three times with holy Water. For the number of three was sacred. So was
7. and 9. Therefore upon those days, they used to keep Festivals in memory of
the dead. Altars adorned with Cypress boughs, and blew Laces were wont to be
erected to the Ghosts; and on them Frankincense, Wine, Oil, Milk, and Blood.

Q. Why was the burying of the dead held an act of Religion?

A. Because it was held an act of justice and mercy both, Burial of the dead,
an act of justice and mercy.
to bury the dead; of justice, that earth should be restored to earth, and dust
to dust; for what could be more just, then to restore to mother earth her
children, that as she furnished them at first with a material being, with food,
raiment, sustentation, and all things needful, so she might at last receive
them again into her lap, and afford then lodging till the Resurrection, whereof
some of the wiser Gentiles were not ignorant: it was also an act of mercy to
hide the dead bodies in the earth, that those organs of such a divine soul,
might not be torn by wild Beasts, and Birds, and buried in their mawes. That
disconsolate mother of Euryalus in the Poet, is not so much grieved for the
murdering of her Son, as for that he should be left a prey to the Birds and
Beasts.

Heu terra ignota, Aen. l. 9.
cunibus data praeda Latinis
Alitibusque jaces.
It was held among the Egyptians one of the greatest punishments that could be
inflicted, to want the honor of burial; and with this punishment Iehoiakim the
Son of Josiah, is threatened Ierem. 22. 19. That he should be buried with the
burial of an Ass, and cast forth beyond the gates of Jerusalem. And the
Milesian Virgins were terrified from hanging themselves, by the Law of their
Senate, that such self-murtherers should have their bodies dragged naked through
the streets in the same rope wherewith they hanged themselves. Mezentius in the
Poet does not desire Aenaeus to spare his life, but earnestly entreats him to
afford him burial.

Nullum in caede nefas, Aen. lib. 10.
nec sic in praelia veni;
Vnum hec per (siqua est victis venia hostibus) ore.
Corpus humo patiare tegi etc.
So Turnus entreats for the same favor from Aenaeas, si corpus poliari luinine
mavis, Read meis. Aen. 12. The right of Sepulture has been held so sacred
among all civil nations of the Gentiles, that the violation thereof has by
their Laws been counted Sacrilege. Therefore they have ascribed to their gods
the patronage of funerals and Sepultures; for this cause they called the Law of
interring, the Law of their gods (...) Isocrates in Panatheniaco shows that
the right of Sepulture is not so much humane as divine. (...). The burying of
the dead is commended by the Pagan writers as a work of humanity, mercy,
clemency, piety, justice, and religion; therefore the Latin pharse yet does
intimate, how just a thing it is to bury the dead; when they call Funerals
Deities, justa exequiarum. or justa funebria. We read in Homer Iliad. 24. how
angry Jupiter and Apollo were with Achilles, for abusing and neglecting to bury
the body of Hector; showing that Achilles had lost all mercy and modesty (...),
etc. And to show how religious an act it is to bury the dead, the Gentiles
assign the care of Funerals and Sepulchers, to certain gods which they called
Manes, whose chief was Pluto, called therefore Summanus; hence all Tombs and
Monuments were dedicated Diis manibus; and therefore they who offered any
violence to Tombs, were said to violate the Manes; Deorum Manium jura sancta
sunto. Of this you may see more in our Mystagogus Poeticus. It was counted an
execrable thing, if any should light upon a dead body unburied, and not cast
earth upon it; therefore the high Priest among the Jews, albeit he was not to
be present at any funeral, yet if by chance he found a dead corpse, he was to
bury it himself. And so careful were the Jews in this duty, that the bodies
of Malefactors were to be buried after Sun set. Horac^ brings in the dead corpse
promising a reward from Jupiter to him that should cast some earth upon it.
Multaque ^nerces unde potest tibi defluat; aequo? Ab Jove Neptunoque; but if he
refuse to do this work of humanity, piacula nulla resolvent, no sacrifice
should be able to expiate his crime. And to make men the more careful of this
last duty to the defunct, the Poets feigned that the souls of those dead
bodies which lay unburied, did wander up and down a 100. years without any
rest, neither were they admi^ted into (...), as Homer speaks, that is, the
gates of Pluto, nor were they received by Charon over the River Styx, as Virgil
sings, till the bodies be interred.

Nec ripas datur horrendas, nec rauca fluenta
Transportare prius quam sedibus ossa quierunt.
Hence it is that Patroclus in Homer, does so earnestly solicit Achilles to
bury him. The like earnest suit does Palinurus in Virgil put up to Aenaeas, for
the same favor; and because want of burial was counted one of the greatest
disgraces and punishments that could be inflicted on the dead, therefore self
murderers were debarred from the honor of interment, which as the Poet says,
Est solus honos Acheronte subimo.

Q. Of what religion were the Grecians?

A. Greeks and Gentiles their Religion and gods.
They and the Romans differed little in their Superstitions. The Romans
worshipped twenty principal gods, the Grecians but twelve of them; to wit,
Jupiter, Saturn, Bacchus, Apollo, Mars, Minerva, Diana, Venus and Juno, Ceres,
Mercurius, Vulcan; their Altar was called, (...), the Altar of the twelve gods;
but indeed Neptune, Hercules, Proserpina, and others were in no less esteem
among them. By these gods they were wont to swear; and as the Romans, so did
they make Deities of the creatures, of passions, of accidents, and of their own
ignorance, in erecting an Altar to the unknown God (...). Act. 17. Their chief
god was Jupiter, whom they call the Father and King of gods; so Homer often.
Him they acknowledged their Deliverer, their Counselor, their Lawgiver, and
Defender of their Towns: hence these Epithets of (...), that is, a Counselor,
often in Homer; (...) the chief Commander, or Ruler of the World; so Virgil;
Qui res hominumque deumque
Aeternis regit imperiis.
But yet Homer is permitted to abuse this supreme God with the titles of an
Adulterer, and of an impotent god, who was subject to the Fates, and bound by
the other gods till Thetis loosed him; He makes him also false in his promises
to Agamemnon, a laughing stock to Juno and Minerva, a slave to Love: subject to
sleep, a makebate among the other gods. So that albeit both the Greeks and
Romans worshipped the same Jupiter: yet the Romans being a wiser people, spoke
always reverently of him, as may be seen in the Prince of Poets, Virgil
triumphant, who in this respect, as in many other cases, is to be preferred
before Homer, as I have showed elsewere. Their next god was Apollo, or the Sun,
whom they made the chief god of Shepherds: as they armed Jupiter with thunder,
so they did Apollo with his silver bow: therefore called (...), by Homer. They
made him the Author of Divination: Hence his Oracles were famous everywhere.
They that died suddenly, were said to be killed by him: they made him also the
god of Music and Physic. He was called Alexicacus, and Apotropaius, that is,
a Deliverer from, or a turner away of evil. The mysteries of these things we
have unfolded elsewhere, in Mystagogo Poetico. He had a rich Temple at Delphos,
beautified with much gold, therefore called by Pindarus (...), and he from his
golden bow, (...). He invented the Cythron, and Mercury the Harp: they were
therefore worshipped both upon one Altar. Apollo from his sight and knowledge
of all things, was called (...). Mercury was worshipped as the god of music
also, and of merchandising. He had the charge of Wrestlers: therefore was
called (...): and because with his rod he used to conduct the souls to and from
Hell, he was named (...). He was also the Messenger and Herald of the gods:
and because he had the charge of doors, to keep them from thieves, he was
called (...): and from the invention of four useful Arts, to wit, Letters,
Music, Wrestling, and Geometry, he was called (...), four square, and so was
his statue. Homer calls him (...), the angel of the gods. And the Greek
Epigrammatist names him (...), the servant of the gods: and (...), the Bishop
of Wrestlers. See the Greek Poets and their Interpreters.
But this god was a notable thief, for he stole from Jupiter his Scepter: from
Neptune his Trident: from Mars his Sword: from Venus her Girdle: from Vulcan
his Tongs.

Q. What were their other chief gods whom they worshipped?

A. Saturn, a cruel god, who both devoured his own children, and could not be
pacified but by the sacrificing of Infants. In honor of him, they kept the
feast called (...), Saturnals; and afterward the Romans, they worshipped him
bare-headed; but the other gods with their head covered. He was bound by
Jupiter for his injustice, and thrust down to hell; and yet they hold his
government most happy, and under him the golden Age. He found out the use of
the Sith or Pruning-hook, with which he is painted; and taught the Italians
husbandry, for which he was highly honored by them. From him, not only the
Capitol was called Saturnius, but also the whole Country of Italy, Saturnie
Tellus. Bacchus or Liber, by the Greeks called Lyaeus, Dionysius, Bromius, was
a great god amongst them, and worshipped with Ceres. upon the same Altar;
therefore Pindarus calls him (...), the assessor of Ceres. He was called (...),
from his Night-sacrifices; (...), from his beauty; and (...), from his
different shapes; for sometimes he was a goat, sometimes a man, and sometimes a
bull, to show the different disposition of drunkards. They called him (...),
because twice born; first of Semele, then of Jupiter. (...), crowned with Ivy,
and a multitude more of such Epithers they gave him, as may be seen in the
Greek Epigrammatist. His feasts or Bacchanals, were so full of disorder, riot,
immodesty, and madness, that the Senate ordered this Greek Feast should not be
used in Rome or Italy. Mars for his hard armor and hard heart, and brazen
face, was called by the Greeks, (...); and by Pindarus, (...), carried in a
brazen Chariot. Homer calls him (...), the swiftest of all the gods Yet was
overreached by Vulcan the slowest, to let us see that strength is overcome
many times by policy; he was married to Venus; for soldiery, and venery are
seldom separate. He is by Homer joined with Minerva; Arts and Arms do meet
together; he was a great god among the Grecians, but greater among the Romans,
to whom they dedicated Priests, Feasts, and diverse Temples, not only for being
their tutelar god, but also because he was Romulus his Father; this mad god,
for so he is called by Homer, (...), was wounded by Diomedes; and he is termed
their (...) constant, Of these see the Greek and Latin Poets.
mutable, false, and treacherous. A brave god! miserable is that Country where
this god domineers, whose greatest enemies are Jupiter and Minerva; that is,
peaceable Princes, and wise Councillors.

Q. What were Minerva, Diana, and Venus?

A. These were also Grecian deities. Minerva was the Athenian chief goddess,
from whom they were named Athenians. Her Festivals were called Panathenaea, and
her chief Temple Parthenium; for she from her perpetual coelibate was styled
(...). She has the next place in heaven among the gods to Jupiter, and wears
his arms and target called Aegis, to show that Kings should never be without
wise and learned men, next to them. When she came out of Jupiters brain, she
made a noise brandishing with her Spear, at which mortals were affrighted;
therefore she is called (...), and Pallas, the wisdom of a Governor being
expressed either by his words or actions, keeps the people in awe: she had her
Palladium at Athens, as well as at Troy, and at Rome had diverse Temples called
Minervia. Greeks, their gods, how worshipped and painted.
Diana the sister of Apollo was worshipped by the Greeks in the habit of a
woman armed with a Bow and arrows. So she was afterward by the Romans, to whom
they erected diverse Temples, the chiefest whereof was upon hill Aventine. She
is called by Pindarus (...) a horse-driver; for by her they understood the
Moon, to which they assigned horses, to signify her motion, and anciently a
golden Chariot drawn by white hindes; from her delight she took in arrows, she
is called by the same Poet (...), by which are meant her beams; she was painted
also with a Torch in her hand, as Hecate is always, to show that she and Hecate
was all one, and by this Torch was meant her light; she was also the same with
Proserpine, and is called Triformis from the Moons three different shapes: but
she was a cruel goddess, who would not be satisfied without humane sacrifices;
in Arcadia she was worshipped in the form of a Virgin, covered with a Hindes
skin, having a Torch in one hand, two Serpents in the other, and on her
shoulders her Bow and quiver. Of these mysteries I have written sufficiently in
Mist. Poet. Venus was worshipped in armor by the Lacedaemonians, because she
overcame Mars, her worship cousisted in Flowers and Frankincense. She was
sometimes placed upon the same Altar with Mercury; to show how well Beauty and
Eloquence agree, She was had in honor more in Rome then in Greece, because
from her, as being the mother of Aenaeas, the Romans deduced their Original;
therefore she was honored with many Temples at Rome; she was the chief deity
that was worshipped by the women: Harlots honored her for gain; honest Virgins
for Beauty; Matrons for concord with their husbands; Widows for new Husbands;
and all for Fecundity: she being held the author of all these. She was painted
in a Chariot drawn sometimes with Doves, See Pausanias, Capella, Boccatins, etc.
sometimes with white Swans; she was crowned with Myrtle and Roses; she was
begot of the Sea froth: All which express to us the qualities of love.

Q. How were Juno, Ceres, and Vulcan worshipped by the Greeks?

A. At Corinth Juno was worshipped in the habit of a Queen, with a Crown on her
head, on which were carved the Graces and the hours, sitting in a throne of
gold, and white Ivory; having in one hand a Pomgranate, and in the other a
Scepter with an Owl on the top thereof. By Juno they mean the Moon; therefore
her Statue and Throne were of white materials. Hence Homer calls her (...)
having white arms. The Moon is Queen of the night, therefore she has her
Crown, Throne, and Scepter; the Owl being a night bird, was fitly dedicated to
her that was Lady of the night. She was the goddess of riches and Fecundity,
and the same with Lucina: therefore she has the Pomegranate, a Symbol of
plenty; as she is the Moon, the hours attend her; as the giver of riches, the
Graces; for bounty and good turns require thanks. In some Grecian Temples her
Image is drawn by Peacocks, to show that pride and wealth go together, and that
rich people delight in gaudy and glorious apparel: At Argos she was worshipped
with Vine branches about her, treading on a Lions skin, in contempt of Bacchus,
and Hercules, Jupiters two bastards; the one glorying for finding the use of
Wine, the other for killing the Lion. Juno was called (...) perfection, because
she had the charge of marriage, in which man's perfection consists, and (...)
as being Jupiters wife and sister; her sacrifices in Greece were Hecatombaea ^
100 beasts: at Rome, she was honored with diverse names, Temples, and
Sacrifices; the Calends of every month were dedicated to her, and her
solemnities were kept in February. Ceres was worshipped in a Chariot drawn by
two Dragons, with Poppy heads in one hand, and a burning Torch in the other,
with a sheaf of Corn on her head. What all these meant, we have showed
elsewhere. The secret or mystical sacrifices of Ceres Eleusina, were not to be
divulged; for no prosane person was to be admitted to them; for the Priest
going before uttered these words, (...). The Roman Priests proclaiming the same
in their tongue, Procul, procul este profani. The Arcadians did so honor Ceres
and Proserpina, that in their Temples they kept fires perpetually burning. In
her sacrifices Hogs were offered, but no Wine; The Priests of Ceres were called
(...) that is, Bees, to show both their diligence, purity and chastity; she was
worshipped also at Rome, where she had her Priests and Temples, and great
solemnities in April, called Ludi Cereales. In Vulcanes Sacrifices a Torch was
lighted and delivered from one to another, to signify that the Torch of our
life is imparted from the father to the son by generation. He was worshipped in
the form of a lame man, with a blew cap, See Cartarius, Martianus Capella,
Scaliger, Spondanus, etc.
to show us the nature of the fire, whereof he was god. At Rome he was also
worshipped, but his Temple was built by Romulus without the City, because Mars
his corrival had his Temple within the City, of which he was the tutelar god.

Q. Did the Greeks and Romans worship these gods only?

A. Yes, innumerable more; or rather the same deities above named, under other
names; for Apollo, Phoebus, Sol, Aesculapius, Jupiter, Liber, Hercules, Mars,
Mercurius, Pan, etc. are different names of one and the same Sun, which was the
chief god worshipped among the Geniles. Luna, Hecate, Diana, Juno, Lutina,
Venus, Ceres, etc. do signify the Moon, Vesta, Ops, Cybele, Rhea, Ceres,
Berecynthia, Magna Matter, Tellus, Pales, Flora, Fauna, Bona Dea, Proserpina,
etc. do signify the Earth, and the benefits we receive thence. Neptune,
Nereus, Glaucus, Proteus, Triton, Consus. Oceanus, etc. signify the Sea.
Pluto, Plutus, Proserpina, Charon, Cerberus, etc. are but different names of
one and the same infernal deities. And as the same god had different names, so
he had different sorts of worship; for the Sun under the name of Apollo, was
worshipped in the form of a beardlesse youth, with yellow hair, carrying in one
hand a Cythron, in the other, arrows, and his bow. As Sol, He was honored in a
flaming ship full of rich wates, carried about the world, by which light is
imparted to all. As Phoebus, he was adored in a golden Chariot drawn by four
horses swift and fiery, in one hand he holds a glitering target, in the other
a burning Torch, on his head a golden Crown beset with twelve precious stones.
As Aesculopius, he is set forth sitting in a Chair, in the habit of a grave man
with a long beard, crowned with Bays, holding in one hand a knobbed staff,
and with the other learning on a Serpents head. Sometimes he is described with
two Cocks in his hand, and certain frutis and herbs in his lap, by which the
properties of Physicians are represented; but the Sun is the great Physician.
As Jupiter, he was worshipped sitting in a throne with a Scepter in one hand,
and an Eagle in the other, by which was expressed his power and dominion. As
Bacchus of Liber, he was set out like a naked youth, with horns in his head, a
Crown of Ivy, and sometimes of fig leaves, with the Thyrsus or Vine Spear in
his hand, sitting in a Chariot drawn by Tigers, and Panthers. Which may
signify both the power, influence and raging heat of the Sun. As Hercules,
they honored him clothed with a Lions skin. Crowned with poplar leaves, and
the club in his hand knocking down the Hydra. We have showed the meaning of
these in Mystagog. Poetic. and that the Suns courses through the twelve Signs
were adumbrated by Hercules his twelve labors. As Mars, he was adored with a
Helmet on his head, a spear in one hand, and a Bow in the other. As Mercury, he
was worshipped like a young man on a square stone, having wings on his head,
and on his feet, with a sword in his hand killing many eyed Argus: by which was
meant the Suns perpetual vigor, in that he was resembled by a youth, the wings
showed his swiftness, the square stone the four seasons of the year, or four
Climats of the world, His killing of Argus showed the confounding of the Star
light by the suns presence. As Pan he was expressed and adored under the form
of a Satyr, with a red face, long beard, horns on his head, a spotted skin
about him, having in one hand a Pipe, But see the Mytbologists, and what we
have written in Mystag. Poetice.
in the other a Shepherds staff; his beard and horns signified his beams;
his speckled skin, the Heaven speckled with Stars; the pipe, the harmony of his
motion; and the staff, his power. Much more might be said of this subject.

Q. Under what names and shapes did they worship the Moon?

A. Moon, how worshipped.
As Hecate she was worshipped under the shape of a monster with three heads, by
which they signified the Moons threesold form she assumes, according to her
access and recesse to and from the Sun. As Luna at her first appearance, she
was honored with white and golden garments, and a burning torch, to show the
increasing of her light: when she was halse full, with a basket of fruit, to
show how the fruits fill and grow with her: but when she was at full, with a
dark colored garment, to signify the decreasing of her light. As Diana, she
was worshipped in the habit of a woman, with a torch flaming in one hand, two
snakes in the other, a bow and arrows on her shoulder, sitting in a Chariot
drawn with white Deer, all which signified partly her light, and partly her
motion. Her light is a help to hunters, therefore she was worshipped in the
habit of a hunter. As Juno she was honored in the ornaments of a Queen,
sitting in a chariot of brass, silver and gold, which signified both her
light, beauty, and dominion over the night. As Lucina, she was crowned with the
herb Dictamnus, or Dittany, which is good for women in labor: and a burning
torch in her hand, to show the hot fits, and sharp pains of Childbearing
women, upon which the Moon has great power. As Venus, she was resembled by a
beautiful woman naked, crowned with roses, and rising out of the Sea, by which
they signified the light and beauty of the Moon when she arises. As Ceres, she
was represented by a Matron with a sheaff of corn on her head, and a lamp in
her hand, to show, that from her proceeds both light and plenty.

Q. What names and worship did they give to the Earth and Fire?

A. They were called Vesta, Earth, and fire, how worshipped.
and under that name worshipped in the habit of a virgin, sitting on the
ground, and crowned with white Garlands, whose Temple was built round, and in
it a perpetual fire kept by the Nuns of Vesta. These two Elements were joined
together, because fire is begot, both in, and of the Earth. The Virgins habit
signified the purity of the Fire; her sitting, the immobility of the Earth; the
white Garlands, the purity of the air, or Firmament, compassing the Earth and
Fire; the roundnesse, of the Temple showed the rotundity of the Earth. The
earth also was called Rhea, Ceres, Berecynthia, Magna Matter, Cybele, Ops, etc.
She is called Vesta a Vestiend^, because she is clothed with herbs, grass and
trees; Rhea, from (...), to flow, because waters are still flowing in and upon
her. Ceres or Geres, from corn bearing, and supporting all things. Berecynthia,
from the Hill Berecynthus in Phrygia, where she was worshipped. The great
mother, because she generally nourishes and maintains all earthly creatures.
Cybele, from (...) a Cube, to show the stability of the earth. Ops from the
help we have by her: Proserpir^ a serpendo, from the creeping things within
her, and from the herbs which creep out of her. Tellus from Terra, the Earth
which was worshipped in the habit of an old woman with towers on her head,
having in one hand a Scepter, in the other a key; clothed in a garment
embroidered with herbs, flowers and trees, and sitting in a Chariot drawn with
Lions, to show that the earth supporteth all Towers and Castles; produces all
herbs and trees; is the predominant Element in compounded bodies, signified by
the Crown, Key, and Scepter: the motion of her Chariot on four wheels,
signifies the motion, not of the earth, but of her inhabitants in the four
seasons of the year; the Lions, and all earthly creatures, though never so
strong and fierce, are subject to the Laws of terrestrial nature. Of the manner
how Ceres was painted and worshipped, we have said already. By Proserpina, they
meant the Earth as she is fruitful, and cherishes the seeds cast into her. For
this cause she is called Bona Dea, from the many good things she affords us;
and Fauna, a Favendo, from favoring and cherishing us. Pomona, from the
fruits; and Flora, from the Flowers she produces: and Pales, as she furnishes
fodder to the cattle; therefore she was held the goddess of Shepherds, and her
Feasts Palilia, See the Mythologists.
were kept without shedding of blood; then were the Cattle purified with
Sulphur, Rosemary, Sabin, and Bays, and made to pass through flames of
stubble and hay.

Q. What worship had the Deity of the Sea?

A. He was called Neptune, Sea, how worshipped.
and worshipped in the form of an ancient man, with a Crown on his head,
holding his Trident in one hand, and embraced his Wife Amphithrite with the
other. Between his legs was a Dolphin. His Chariot drawn with Horses. The Sea's
swift motion was represented by the Dolphin and Horses; and its Dominion over
all other waters, by the Crown and Scepter. He was called Consus, from counsel;
to show that Princes Counsels should be hid, as the cause of the ebbing and
flowing of the Sea is. He was called Neptunus a Nubendo, from covering the
Earth. Nereus, and his Wife Thetis, were Sea deities, and indeed the same with
Neptune; so was Oceanus, whose Chariot was drawn by four Whales: Proteus is
also the same, though those are held by most to be different gods, yet in
effect all is but one and the same deity; so were the Tritons, and Nereides,
though these, with the Sirenes, are thought by some to be monstrous Fishes. The
Tritons were counted Neptunes Trumpeters, to show the noise and roaring of the
Sea. Old Glaucus is also the same Sea-god with the rest; Of all these we have
spoken fully in Mystagogo poetico.
who is described and worshipped in the form of an old man, with long hair and
beard dropping with water, his breast beset with Sea-oars, and below the Navel
like a Fish.

Q. What worship and names did they give to Death?

A. Death was held a Deity, Death, how worshipped.
and worshipped under the name of Pluto, or Plutus, sitting in a dark Throne,
with a black Ebony Crown on his head, a rod in one hand, to drive together the
dead bodies, and a key in the other, to lock them in. At his feet was placed
the three-headed-dog Cerberus, all which was to show the condition of the dead.
The Cypress-tree stood always by him; he was called from gathering, or driving
people together. Death is the great King of darkness, who drives all men, rich
and poor, wise and fools, Kings and beggars into one place; omnes eodem
cogimur; Death is called Cerberus, that is a devourer of flesh: For it consumes
all flesh. This is the black dog as Seneca calls him, which is still barking
at, and biting of mortals; he is called Bellua centiceps by Horace,
the-hundreth headed beast, for death has a hundred ways to seize upon us: The
same death is expressed by Charon to some, by Acheron to others; for to good
men who depart hence with a clear conscience, Of these things see more in
Mystag. Poetic.
death is comfortable; but to the wicked, whom the furies of an evil conscience
do torment, death is terrible and comfortless, expressed by the word Acheron,

Q. What was the manner of sacrificing in Greece?

A. None came near the altar till they were first purified, Greeks, their
Sacrificing.
neither must the sacrifice be laid on the altar, till it was also Instrated or
purified with Meal and holy water, called (...). The standers by were
besprinkled with this water, after a firebrand taken from the altar had been
quenched in it, and then some holy flower or meal was cast on them. This done,
the Priest prayed, then the Victim was brought to the altar, with the head
upward, if it was dedicated to the superior gods; but if to the inferior,
with its head downward. The Fat, Heart, Spleen and Liver, were offered to the
gods; the rest of the beast was eat up by the Priests and people, spending the
rest of the day in gormandising and drunkenness. When the Greeks sacrificed to
Vesta, and the Romans to the Lares, they left nothing of the sacrifice, hence
Lari sacrificare and (...) was to eat up all. The poorer sort offered (...),
that is, Meat or Cakes, the same with the Roman mol^, which by the richer sort
was mingled with Wine and Oil. These frugal sacrifices are called by Pindarus
(...) Supplicating sacrifices, intimating that there is more devotion in these
mean sacrifices, then many times in those that are more costly; for it is not
the sacrifice, but the heart of the sacrificer God requires They used to try if
their victim would prove acceptable to their Gods, by putting the Cake on the
head between the horns, which were in solemn feasts gilded; if the beast stood
quiet, it was fit to be sacrificed; if otherwise, it was rejected. In all
sacrifices Vesta was first invocated (...), to show both the antiquity and
necessity of fire in sacrificing. Their custom also was to sacrifice in the
morning to the Gods, in the evening to the Heroes or Demigods. The Greeks did
not as the Romans, grind the corn which they laid on the head of the Victim,
but laid it on whole (...), says Suides, to show the manner of the ancient
feeding, before the grinding of corn was invented. This whole corn was called
(...). They were wont also after their sacrifice and feast, to burn the tongue
of the beast and besprinkle it with Wine, as Homer shows, (...). This was to
show that after drinking and feasting, the tongue should be silent: and nothing
divulged what was then spoken. This was also done in honor of Mercury the god
of Eloquence and of sleep; for about sleeping time the tongue was sacrificed.
The Grecian Priests used to dance or run about their Altars, beginning first at
the left hand, to show the motion of the Zodiac, which is from the West called
by Astronomers the left part of the world: then they danced beginning at the
right hand, to show the motion of the first sphere, which is from East to West.
Their bloody sacrifices were called impure; but Frankincense, Mirth, and such
like were named by them, (...)Pure offerings. The flesh of the Victims were
called Theothyta, but by the Christian Doctors Idolothyra. They that gathered
the consecrated Corn were named Parasiti^. They that met to sacrifice were
called O^geones from (...) to sacrifice. Phylothytae were those who
superstitiously upon all occasions were given to sacrifice. Sacred feasts were
called (...) from (...) and (...), because much wine was drunk to the honor of
the gods; See Suidas, Eustathius, Rhodiginus, Athenaeus, etc.
and therefore (...) is to be drunk, because they used to be drunk (...) after
they had sacrificed. The burning of Incense or such like before the sacrifice
were called Prothyo^^ats.

Q. What Priests and Temples had the ancient Greeks?

A. As they had multiplicity of gods, Their Priests and Temples.
so they had of Priests anciently. The Priests of Jupiter and Apollo were young
boys, beautiful and well born. The Priests of Cybele were gelded; Ceres, Bona
Dea, and Bacchus had their women Priests. Bellona's Priests used to sacrifice
with their own blood. The Athenian Priests called Hierophantae used to eat
Hemlock or Cicuta, to make them impotent toward women. No man was made a
Priest who had any blemish in his body. Their garments and shoes were white, if
they were the Priests of Ceres. Purity was the chief thing they observed
outwardly. They that sacrificed to the infernal gods, wore black garments, but
Purple if they were the Priests of the Celestial deities. They used also to
wear Crowns or Myters, with Ribbans or Laces. Their office was not only to pray
and sacrifice, but also to purify with brimstone, and salt water. Their chief
Priests called Hierophantae, were the same in authority with the Pontifices at
Rome. The Athenian noble Virgins called (...), from bearing on their shoulders
the (...), which was a basket or chest of gold, in which the first fruits and
other consecrated things were carried in their Panathenaian pomps to the honor
of Minerva; I say these Virgins did much resemble the Vestal Nuns at Rome; the
(...) or (...) was as a Bishop or overseer of their sacred mysteries. (...) was
he that attended the sacred fire on the altar, they had their (...) Cryces, or
Preachers, and (...), Churchwardens, and other officers. Now for their
Temples. At Athens the Temple of Minerva was built in the highest part of the
City; so was Jupiters Temple at Rome built in the Capitol. The Temple of Mercy
called Asylum, which was a Sanctuary for Delinquents, was erected at Athens by
the sons of Hercules. Theseus had erected one before called Theseum, in
imitation of which Romulus at Rome built such another. At first the Gentle gods
had no Temples at all, but were worshipped either on Hills or in Groves. Cerops
was the first (as some think) who built a Temple in Athens, and Ianus in Italy.
Before that time they had no other Temples but the Sepulchers and Monuments of
the dead. The Temples of the celestial Gods were built upon the ground, of the
infernal under. In the Country of Sparta, Jupiter had a Temple called (...)
from the darkness thereof; being obscured with Groves. There was also (...)
the Chapel of the Earth, and (...) the Chapel of the Destinies, the place
where they had their Assemblies and Sermons called (...). Their Temples were
called (...) from the black smoke of their sacrifices and incense; (...), or
according to the Atticks (...) was the general name for Temples, because the
Gods dwelt In them; and because they were consecrated and holy, they were named
(...) was that part of the Temple where the Idol stood, the same with the
Latin Delulirum; (...) from (...), to cut or separate, did signify the Temple
as it was set apart and separated from other buildings. Such honor they gave
to their Temples, that they durst not tread on the threshold thereof, but leapt
over it; nor must they pass by any Temple without reverence to it: But of
the^^ passages (...) the (...) on Aristoph^^ Suidas, (...) Virgil, Cerda on
Tertullian, Rhodiginus. Turne^us, and others.
there they kept their treasures for the more security; sacrilege being held
then an execrable crime, and so it was held an impiety to walk in the Temple of
Apollo Pythius, and punishable with death by the Law of Pisistratus. Hence the
Proverb, when any danger was expressed, or impiety, (...), it had been better
you had walked in the Pythium; the word also (...) signifies easing of the
body, which that none might do, the Images of Serpents were set over the gates
of consecrated places; Pinge duos angues, sacer est loc^^, extra me ite. Their
martimonial and funeral Rites were the same with the Romans.

The Contents of the fifth Section.
The Religion of the old Germans, Gauls, and Britains. 2. Of the Saxons,
Danes, Swedes, Moscovites, Russians, Pomeranians, and their neighbors. 3. Of
the Scythians, Getes, Thracians, Cymbrians, Goths, Lusitanians, etc. 4. Of the
Lithuanians, Polonians, Hungarians, Samogetians, and their neighbors. 5. Of
diverse Gentile gods besides the above named. 6. The ranks and arms of their
gods. 7. With what creatures their Chariots were drawn. 8. Of peculiar gods
worshipped in peculiar places. 9. The Greek chief Festivals.

SECT. V.
Quest. OF what Religion were the Germans, Gauls and Britains?

Answ. The Germans at first had neither Images nor Temples, Germans, Gauls, and
Britains, their Religions.
but abroad worshipped the Sun, Moon, and Stars. Mother Earth was in chief
esteem among them; to her they dedicated a Chariot in a Grove which was lawful
only for the Priest to touch. He was never to leave the Chariot, which was
alwyes covered with cloth, and was drawn by two Oxen in Procession; then holy
days were appointed; at the end of her journey, she with the Chariot and
clothes were washed in a certain Lake; but the Ministers who performed this
work, were never seen any more, but were swallowed by the Lake, and the
goddess restored again by her Priest to her Grove. The ancient Gauls
worshipped Mercury in the first place, as being the god of Highways, Journys,
Gain, and Merchandising: after him they worshipped Apollo, Jupiter, Mars, and
Minerva. They and the Germans were wont to sacrifice men sometimes; so did the
ancient Britains, which with the Gauls had the same Religion and Priests
called Druidae from the Oaks under which they used to teach and sacrifice; for
they expounded all religious mysteries, taught the youth, decided controversies
and suits in Law, ordained rewards and punishments; and such as obeyed not
their decrees they excommunicated, debarring them from all divine exercises,
and all commerce with men. These Druidae had one chief over them, whose
successor was always elected. They were free from paying taxes, from serving
in the war, and had many other privileges. They committed not the mysteries of
their Religion to writing, but to the memory of their Disciples, who spent many
years in learning by heart their precepts in verse. They believed the
immortality of souls, they read Philosophy to their Scholars. It is thought by
some that Diana's Temple stood where St Paul's Church in London stands now. And
Minerva had her Temple at Bath, and Apollo in Scotland near Dalkeith. See
Tacitus, Cesars Commentaries, Camden, and others:
The Saxons worshipped the seven Planets, among which Thor the same with
Jupiter, was chief; from him Thursday was denominated. Next was Wodan or Mars;
Wednesday is so called from him. Fred or Frico was Venus, to whom Friday was
dedicated, as Tuesday to Tuisco the founder of the German Nation.

Q. Under what shapes and forms did the old Saxons worship their gods.

A. They worshipped the Sun under the shape of half a naked man set upon a
pillar, Old Saxons worshipped their gods under diverse shapes and forms.
whose head and face was all beset with fiery rays, holding on his breast a
flaming wheel, by which they signified the Suns heat, light, and motion. They
worshipped the Moon under the form of a Woman with a short coat and a hood with
long ears, with the picture of the Moon before her breast; they gave her also
piked shoes. Verstegan cannot find the reason of this habit; but perhaps the
reason may be this, if I may have leave to conjecture; they gave her a short
coat, to show the swiftness of her motion^ for a long coat signifies a slow
motion; therefore they painted Saturn whose motion is the slowest of all the
Planets, with a long coat. The hood or chapron with long ears, was to
represent her horns, or else to show that sounds are heard a far off in the
night, which is the time of her dominion. Her piked shoes also may resemble her
horns. Tuisco their third Idol is set out in the skin of some wild beast, with
a Scepter in his hand; this is thought to be the first and most ancient of that
nation, from whom the Germans call themselves Tuytshen, or as the Flemings
pronunce it Duytshen, as Verstegan observes; but I think that under this name
they worshipped Mars; for as Tacitus writes, Mars was one of the German gods.
His hairie garments does show the feirce and truculent disposition of that
warlike god; besides that, hairie Sylvanus is thought to be the same that Mars.
His Scepter may signify the power and command which Soldiers have in the
world. But it is more likely by this Idol they meant Mercury; for next to the
Sun and Moon, he was as Tacitus says, the Germans chief god. His Scepter and
hairie garment may signify the power and command that eloquence and music
have over the most brutish natures; and of these two faculties Mercury was the
inventer. And we must know that, as the Romans next to the Sun and Moon
honored Mars the Patron of their city, for which cause they dedicated to him
the third day of the week; so the Germans for the same cause dedicated to
Mercury their chief founder and patron the same day, which from his name Tuisco
is called Tuesday yet retained among us. Their fourth Idol was Woden, from whom
Wednesday is so called. He was the Germans Mars, and is called Woden, from
being wood or mad; intimating hereby the firercenesse of Soldiers, and fury
of War. He is painted with a Crown on his head, a sword in his hand, and in
complete armor. Their fifth Idol is Thor, which was their Jupiter, for they made
him the god of the air, and commander of winds rain, and thunder; they painted
him sitting in a chair, of state, with a Scepter in his right hand, a golden
Crown on his head, encompassed with twelve stars, by which they meant he was
King of the upper regions and commander of the stars: from him Thursday is
named, as among the Romans, Dies Iovis from Jupiter. Their sixth Idol was Friga;
from her our Friday is denominated, and was the same that Venus among the
Romans; she is painted in the habit of a man in arms, with a sword in one
hand, and a bow in the other; so among the Romans she was Venus armnata, and
Barbata; armed and bearded; she is called by the Greeks (...) in the masculin;
and by Aristophanes (...), so by Virgil, Deus; descendo ac ducente Deo flammam
inter et hosts. Their seventh Idol was Seater, whence comes the ^ame Saturday,
dedicated to him; Verstegan will not have this Seater to be the same that
Saturn, because he was other-ways called Crodo; but this is no reason; for
most of the gods had different names; the Sun is called Apollo, and Phoebus;
the Moon, Diana, Lucina, Proserpina. The goddess of wisdom is called Pallas
and Minerva, etc. Doubtless then this Idol was Saturn as his picture shows;
for he is set out like an old man; and so he was painted among the Romans; the
wheel in his left hand signifies the revolution of time, the pail of water in
his right hand, wherein were ^lowrs and fruits, and the perch under his feet,
do show the dominion Time has over Sea and Land, and all things there in
contain^d; for all sublunarie things are subject to time and change. His long
coat, as I showed before, did signify the slownesse of Saturns motion, which
is not finished but in 30 years. Other Idols they worshipped, but of less
note, of which see Verstegan.

Q What was the Religion of the Danes, Swedes, Moscovites, Russians,
Pomeranians, and their neighbors?

A. The Danes and Swedes worshipped the same gods that the Saxons did. Danes,
Swedes, Moscovites and their neighbors their Religions.
They call upon Thor or Jupiter, when the Pestilence is among them, because he
^uleth in the air: In the time of war they call upon Wod^n or Mars. In their
marriages they invocate Frico or Venus. They had also their Heroes or
demigods; they used to kill nine males of each kind of sensitive creatures,
and to pacify their gods with the blood thereof, then to hang up their bodies
in the Grove next the Temple called Vbsola. In some parts of Saxony they
worshipped Saturn under the name of Crodo, like an old man standing on a fish,
holding in his hands a wheel and a pitcher. Venus they worshipped in the form
of a naked woman standing in a Chariot drawn with two Swans and two Doves. On
her head she wore a Garland of Myrtle; in her right hand she had the Globe of
the world, in the other three Oranges. Out of her breast proceeded a burning
Tap^r. The three Graces naked with fruit in their hands waited on her. In
Westphalia they worshipped an Idol all in armor, holding a banner in his right
hand with a Rose, and in the left a pair of Scales. On his Breast was carved a
Bear, on his Helmet a Lion. It seems by the Idol they understood Mars. The
Rugians near the Baltic sea, worshipped Mars in the form of a Monster with
seven faces, and seven swords hanging by his side in their Scabberds; he held
the eighth sword naked in his hand. The same Rugians, as also the Bohemians,
worshipped an Idol with four heads, two of them looking forward, and two
backward; in his right hand it held a horn which the Priest every year
sprinkled with Wine, in the left hand a Bow; this also seems to be Mars. The
Sclavi adored an Idol standing on a Pillar, with a Plough-share in one hand, a
Lance and Banner in the other; his head was beset with Garlands, his legs were
Booted, and at one of his heels a bell did hang. Some of them did worship an
Idol on whose breast was a Target, in which was engraven an Ox head. It had a
Pole-Axe in its hand, and a little Bird sitting on its head. All these may seem
to represent Mars. The Moscovites and Russians adored an Idol called Perun, in
the shape of a man holding a burning stone in his hand, resembling Thunder; a
fire of Oken wood was continually maintained burning, to the honor of this
Idol; it was death for the Ministeres, if they suffered this fire to go out. It
seems this was Jupiters Image. The Stetinians in Pomerania worshipped a
three-headed Idol, and used to ask Oracles or advice of a black horse: the
charge of which was committed to one of the Priests. In the countries about
Moscovia, they worship an idol called Zolota Baba, See Saxo Grammaticus,
Cranzius on Vandalia, Olaus, Guaguin, and other Historians.
the golden Hag. It is a Statue like an old woman holding an infant in her
bosom, and near to her stands another infant. To this Idol they offer the
richest Sabel skins they have. They sacrifice Stags to her, with the blood
whereof they anoint her face, eyes, and her other parts. The beasts entrails
are devoured raw by the Prlests. With this idol they use to consult in their
doubts and dangers.

Q. What Religion did the Scythians, Getes, Thracians. Cymbrians, Goths,
Lucitanians, and other Europeans profess?

A. The same Gentilisme with the rest, adoring Idols of stocks and stones in
stead of the true God, Scythians, Getes, Thracians, Cymbrians, Goths, etc:
their Religions.
or rather they worshipped the Devil, as appears by their inhumane humane
sacrifices. The Scythians used to sacrifice every hundredth captive to Mars: So
did the Thracians, thinking there was no other means to pacify that angry and
butcherly god, but by murdering of men. Of the same opinion were the old
Germans, who sacrificed men to Mercury. The Cymbrians or Cymmerians by their
women Priests used to murder and sacrifice men. These she-devils girt with
brass girdles, and in a white surplice, used to cut the throats of the
captives, to rip up their bowels, and by inspection to foretell the event of the
war, and withal to make drums of their skins. The Goths did not think they
pleased the Devil sufficiently, except first they had tormented the poor
captive by hanging him upon a tree, and then by tearing him in pieces among
brambles and thorns. These Goths or Getes believed that the dead went into a
pleasant place where their God Tamolxius ruled; to him they used still to send
a Messenger chosen out among themselves by lot, who in a boat of five Oars went
to supplicate for such things as they wanted. Their manner of sending him was
thus; They took him hand and foot, and flung him upon the points of sharp
pikes* if he fell down dead, they concluded that the god was well pleased with
that messenger; if otherwise, they rejected him as an unworthy messenger;
therefore they chose another to whom they gave instructions before he died,
what he should say to their god; and so having slain him upon their pikes,
committed the dead body in the boat to the mercy of the sea. The Lithuanians
used to burn their chief captives to their gods. The Lusitanians ripped open
the bowels of their captives in their divinations, and presented their right
hands, being cut off, to their gods. The Sclavi worshipped an idol called
Suantovitus, whose Priest the day before he sacrifices, makes clean the
Chapel, which none must enter but he alone, and whilst he is in it, he must
not draw his breath, but hold his head out of the window, least with his mortal
breath he should pollute the Idol. The next day the people watching without the
Chapel door, view the Idols cup; if they find any of the liquor which was put
there wasted, they conclude the next years scarcity, but other wise they hope
for plenty; and so they fill the cup again, and pray to the Idol for victory
and plenty; then pouring out old wine at the idols feet, and offering to him a
great cake, they spend the rest of the day in gormandising. It is held a sin
and a dishonor to the idol not to be drunk then. Every one pays a piece of
money to the idols maintenance; to which also is paid the third part of all
b^oties taken in the war. To this purpose the idol maintained three hundred
horse, whom the Priest paid, being the Idols treasurer. See Olaus Magnus,
Saxo, Guaguinus, Io^annes Mag^^s, Aventinus, etc.
In Lituania, Russia, and the adjacent places, the Rusticks offer a yearly
sacrifice of Calves, Hogs, Sowes, Cocks and Hens* about the end of October,
when their fruits are all gathered in, to their idol Ziemiennick; they beat all
these creatures to death, then offer them with prayers and thanksgiving; which
done, they fall to eating and drinking, flinging first pieces of flesh into
every corner of the house.

Q. What did the Lithuanians, Polonians, Hungarians, Samogetians, and their
neighbors profess?

A. Their chief god was the Sun. Lithuanians, Polonians, Hungarians, etc. Their
Religions.
They worshipped also the Fire, which they continually maintained by Priests
chosen for that purpose. They ascribed also Divinity and worship to trees, and
the taller the tree was, the more adoration it had When Christianity began to
be preached among the Lithuanians, and were exhorted to cut their trees, none
would venture to touch these gods, till the preache^s encouraged them by their
example; but when they saw the trees cut down, they began to lament the loss
of their gods, and complained to their Prince of the wrong done to them by the
Christians, whereupon the Preachers were commanded presently to abandon the
country, and so these dogs returned to their vomit. They adored also Serpents,
which they entertained in their houses, and used by their Priests to ask
Oracles or advice of the fire, concerning their friends, when they fell sick,
if they should recover health again. The same Idolatry was used by the
Polonians or Sarmatians. The Hungarians or Pannonians did not only worship the
Sun, Moon and Stars, but also every thing they first met with in the morning.
Most part of Livonia is yet idolatrous, worshipping the Planets and observe the
heathenish customs in their burials and marriages. In Samogethia a country
bordering on Prussia, Livonia, and Lithuania, they worshipped for their chief
god the Fire, which their Priests continually maintained within a Tower on the
top of an high hill, till Vladislaus King of Poland beat down the Tower, and
put out the fire, and withal caused their Groves to be cut down, which they
held sacred, with the Birds, beasts, and every thing in them. They burn the
bodies of their chief friends, with their horses, furniture, and best clothes,
and withal set down victuals by their Graves, believing that the departed
souls would in the night time eat and drink there. The like superstition is
used by the Livonians. So the Lapponians are at this day for the most part
idolatrous; they hold that no marriage which is not consecrated by fire and a
flint, See Olaus, Munster in his Geography, and others.
is lawful; therefore by striking of the flint with iron, they show that as the
hid sparks of fire fly out by that union, so children are propagated by the
conjunction of male and female. Many parts also of Moscovia at this day
continue in their Gentilisme.

Q. What other gods did the Gentiles worship beside those above named?

A. It were tedious to mention all; Gods of the Gentiles.
I will only name some of them. Aeolus was god of the Winds, Portunus god of
Harbors, Agonius god of Action, Angerona goddess of Squinzees, Laverna or
Furina goddess of Thieves, Aucula goddess of maid servants. Carna goddess of
hinges, Aristae^s god of honey, Diverra goddess of sweeping, Feronia goddess
of Woods, Dice goddess of Law-suites, Fidius of Faith, Aruncus of diverting
hurt from Corn, Hebe of youth, Meditrina of Medicines, Men^ of women's monthly
flowers, Myodes or Miagrus, the same with Beelzebub the god of Flies, Limentinus
of thresholds, Peitho goddess of Eloquence, Aius of speech, Pecunia of money,
Thalassius of marriage, Vacuna goddess of leisure or idleness, Of these see
Austin, Lactantius, Tertullian, Plutarch, Arnobius, Eusebius, etc.
Vitula goddess of youthful wantonness, Sentinus of sense, Tutanus of
defense, Vallonia of Valleys, Vitunus of life, Collina of hills, Iugatinus of
the tops of mountains. We cannot meet with any creature, action, passion, or
accident of man's life, which had not its peculiar deity.

Q. How did they rank and arm their gods?

A. Some of them they called Supernal, How Ranked and Armed.
as Saturn, Jupiter, Apollo, Mercurius, Mars, Vulcan, Bacchus, Hercules,
Cybele, Venus, Minerva, Juno, Ceres, Diana, Themis. Some they named infernal,
as Pluto, Charon, Cerberus, Rhadamanthus, Minos, Aeicus, Proserpina, Alecto,
Tisiphone, Megaera, Chimera, Clotho, Lachesis, Atropos. Some were deities of
the Sea, as Oceanus, Neptune, Triton, Glaucus, Palemon, Proteus, Nereus,
Castor, Pollux, Phorbus, Melicerta, Amphitrite, Thetis, Doris, Galataea, and
the other Sea-Nymphs, called Nereides. The Country gods, and of the Woods, were
Pan, Sylvanus, Faunus, Pales, the Satyrs, etc. There were three deities called
Graces, or Charites, to wit, Aegle, Thalia, Exphrosyne. Three Fatal Sisters,
called Parcae; to wit, Cl^tho, Lachests, Atropos; Three Furies, called
Eu^^enides, to wit, Alecto, Megaera, Tisiphone. The chiefest of their gods they
did thus arm; namely, Saturn with the Sith. Jupiter with Thunder. Mars with
the Sword. Apollo and Diana with Bows an arrows. Mercury with his Caduceu^, or
Rod. Neptune with the Trident, or three-forked Scepter. Of these see the Poets
and their Commentators.
Bacchus with the Thyrsus, or Spear woven about with Vine-leaves. Hercules with
his Clave, or Club. Minerva with her Lance and Aegis, or Target, having on it
Medusa's head. Vulcan with his Tongs, etc.

Q* With what creatures weretheir Chariots drawn?

A. Jupiter, Sol, Their Chariots how drawn.
Mars, and Neptune, had their Chariots drawn by Horses. Saturn by Dragons.
Thetis, Triton, Leucothoe, by Dolphins. Bacchus by Lynces and Tigers. Diana by
Stags. Luna, or the Moon, by Oxen. Oceanus by Whales. Venus by Swans, Doves,
and Sparrows. Cybele by Lions. Juno by Peacocks. Ceres by Serpents. Pluto by
four black Horses. Mercury, in stead of a Chariot, had wings on his head and
heels. The mystical meanings of these things we have opened. In Mist. Poet.


Q. In what peculiar places were some gods peculiarly worshipped?

A. Though Apollo was worshipped in many places: In what peculiar places
worshipped.
as in the wood Grynaeum in Ionia; on Phaselis, a hill in Lycia* in Tenedos, an
Isle of the Aegean Sea; in Delos and Claros, two of the Cyclad Islands; on hill
Cynthus; in Cyr^ha, a Town of Phocis: at Rhodes, on hill Soracte; on Parnassus,
and other places; yet he was chiefly worshipped at Delphi, a Town of Phocis. So
Venus was honored in Cyprus, and in Paphos, a Town of the same Isle; and in
the Isle Amathus in the Aegean Sea, on hill Eryx; and in Sicilie, and
elsewhere; yet her chief worship was at Paphos. So Juno was worshipped at
Samos, an I^le of the Icarian Sea; at Argos and Mycenae, Towns of A^haia, and
in other places; yet she was principally honored at Carthage in Africa.
Minerva was worshipped in Aracynthus, a hill of Ae^olia; in Pyreus, a hill of
Attica, and elsewhere; yet She was chiefly honored at Athens. Bacchus was
worshipped at Nysa, a Town of Arabia; at Naxos, one of the Cyclades, but
chiefly at Thebis in Boeotia. Diana was worshipped at Delos, on hill Cynthus;
at Ephesus, and elsewhere. Hercules was honored at Gades; at Tybur, a Town
near Rome; at Tyrintha, near Argi* at Thebis in Boeotia, etc. Jupiters worship
was maintained at Rome, in Lybia, on hill Ida in Crete; and elsewhere. Mars was
adoted at Thermodon in Scythia, on Rho^^pe, a hill in Thracia; among the Getes*
and other Nations. Vulcan was chiefly honored at Lemnos, Quitinus at Rome,
Faunus in Latium, Isis in Egypt, Aesculapius in Epidaurus, a Town in
Peloponnesus, Cybele in Phrygia, chiefly on the hills Ida, Berecynthus, and
Dindymus. Fortune was honored in A^tium and Prae^este, Towns of Italy, etc.
Who would know more of these, let them consult wi^ the Poets.

Q. What were the Greek chief festivals?

A. The Greek were these. Anacalypteria, kept by the Rusticks to Ceres and
Bacchus, Greeks; their chief Festivals.
upon the taking in of their fruits; but I find that the feast of Pr^serp^na's
wedding with Pluto, called Theogamia, was called Anacalypteria, and so was the
third day of each marriage from (...), to disclose or discover, because then
the Bride, who before had been shut up in her fathers house, came abroad to her
Husbands house; and so the Presents that were given her by her husband that
day, were called Anacalypteria. 2. Anthesteria were Feasts kept to Bacchus, so
called from Anthesterion, the month of February, in which they were kept. But
some will have this to be the month of November; others of August, which is
most likely, because then grapes are ripe, and the Athenian children were
crowned with Garlands of flowers. This feast also was called Dionysia. 3.
Aletis was a feast at Athens, kept to Icarus and Erigone. 4. Anthesphoria, kept
to the honor of Proserpina, who was carried away by Pluto as she was gathering
of flowers; (...) is a flower: It was called also Theogamia, a divine marriage.
5. (...), was an Athenian feast kept four days; Erasmus mentions only three. 6.
Ascolia, were Attick feasts kept to Bacchus, from (...) a bladder; because in
the middle of the Theater they used then to dance upon bladders that were blown
and oyled, only with one foot, that by falling they might excite laughter;
this dancing was called Ascoliasmus, of which Virgil speaks: Mollibus in pratis
unctos saliere per utres. 7. (...), were Athenian feasts in the month of
September called by them Boedromion: this feast was kept with voci^eration and
running. 8. (...), were love feasts, in which kinsfolks entertained each other
with good cheer and gifts. 9. (...) were feasts at Athens, wherein all kinds of
seeds were boiled to Bacchus and Mercury, in a pot called (...); this feast was
kept about the midst of November. 10. (...), was the scourging feast among the
Lacedaemonians, in which the prime youth were whipped in the presence of their
friends at the altar of Diana. 11. (...), the feasts of Jupiter; they were
called also (...): Here they were not very jovial, but sad, and (...), of sower
countenance. 12. (...), from (...) and (...), were feasts kept to Diana in
February, called E^aphetolion, wherein Stags were sacrificed to Diana. 13.
Ephestia at Thebes, were feasts kept to the honor of Tyresias the Prophet who
had been both man and woman; therefore that day they clothed him first in man's
apparel, and then in a woman's habit. 14. (...), from (...) marriage: this was
Iunos feast, kept in January, called Gamelion; and she having the charge of
marriages, was called Gamelia. 15. Hecat^mbe to Juno, in which 100 sacrifices
were offered, and diverse shows of sports exhibited to the people: He that
overcame was rewarded with (...), a brazen Target, and a Myrtle garland. This
feast was called also (...) from Iuno^ name; and the month of July, in which
this feast was kept, is named (...). 16. (...) Athenian ^easts, in which
certain holy Relics were carried about in a chest called (...), by the
Priests called Helenophori. 17. (...) were Lacedemonian feasts, kept to the
honor of Apollo, and his Boy ^yacinthus, whom he lost; therefore Lycander
calls him (...) much lamented. 18. Hypocaustria, were feasts to Minerva, for
avoiding the dangers that come by firing, from (...), to kindle or burn. 19.
(...), was a feast at Argos, so called from (...) a Sow, because by them then
this beast was sacrificed to Venus. 20. (...), so called from (...) a Torch, or
Lamp: This feast was kept to Bacchus, into whose Temple in the night they used
to carry burning Torches, and to place goblets full of Wine in all parts of the
City. 21 (...) were the feasts of Cybele, called Magna Matter, in which were
exhibited diverse spectacles to the people in the month of April. 22. (...),
was Apollo's festival, who was called Metageitnius; and the month in which it
was kept was named (...), which some say is May, others July. 23. (...), was a
feast among the Aegeans, in which it seems they eat all of one dish, or else
but once a day, or else each man apart. These are called (...). 24. (...), the
feast of Minerva, kept in the harbor of Athens, called Munichium. The month
of March was also called (...). 25. (...) were sober sacrifices, without wine;
therefore called (...); at Athens these sacrifices were performed to Venus
Urania; likewise to Mnemosyne, Aurora, Sol, Luna, the Muses and the Nymphs, and
even to Bacchus himself. Sometimes they offered in stead of Wine (...), water
mingled with honey. 26. (...) were the night sacrifices of Bacchus, whence he
was called (...). 27. (...), were Athenian feasts, so called from the great cup
of the same name, which being filled with wine, beardlesse youths (...), says
Athenaeus, being to cut their long hair offered to Hercules. 28. Ornea, the
festivals of Priapus, who was called (...), from Ornis, a Town of Peloponnesus.
29. (...), an Athenian feast, in which the noble youth carried (...), Vine
branches into Minerva's Temple. This feast was instituted when The seus
returned mourning from Crete, upon the report of his fathers death Aegeus. 30.
(...), the chief Athenian feast to the honor of Minerva; it was celebrated
every fifth year. In this were diverse shows; the youth then used to dance in
armor, called (...), from Pyr^hus the inventer. The Image of Pallas was then
carried in a Ship called Panathenaica, in which the sail called Peplus was
spread; and on this was woven the Giant Enceladus, slain by Pallas. In this
feast they used to run with lamps or torches; and so they did in the Feasts
called Ephestia and Promethea. He that overcame, had for his reward (...)* the
Olive fruit, that is, a pot of Oil, whereof Pallas was the Inventer, and none
but he could by the law carry any Oil out of the A^tick Country. 31. (...),
were feasts dedicate to Apollo in the month (...), which some take for
October, others for July. This feast was so called from (...), from beans, or
other kind of legumina consecrated to Apollo. 32. (...), an Athenian feast to
Minerva; the month in which it was kept was called (...), from bearing about
in procession (...) or (...), a Fan to make a shadow from the Suns heat. The
Fan was carried by Minerva's Priest, accompanied with the Gentry of Athens out
of the Tower; from this they called Minerva, S^irada. The month of this feast
was thought to be March. 33. (...); this feast was dedicated to Apollo and
Diana at Athens in the month of April, which was called (...). In it the first
fruits of the earth were offered to these gods, and boiled in the pot called
(...). 34. (...), were feasts to Bacchus the god of Wine, who was therefore
(...), and his Temple (...) commonly called; this was an Athenian feast. 35.
(...) were feasts dedicated to all the gods together. This feast by the Latins
is called dies pandicula^is, and communicarius. Theoxenia also were games
exhibited to Apollo, who was called Theoxenius, and this (...), common feast
was at Delphi, consecrated peculiarly to Apollo. This feast was so called
(...), because all the gods were entertained at a feast. Castor and Pollux were
the authors of this feast; for when Hercules was deified, he committed to these
Di^scuri the care of the Olympic games; but they devised this new feast of
Theoxenia. It was chiefly observed by the Athenians in honor of foreign gods;
Of these see Suidas, Athenaeus, Rhodiginus, Gyraldus, Hesychius, ^ertullian,
Austin, Plutarch, Iu^* Pollux, the Scholiast of Aristophanes, Meursius, and
others:
for among them (...), says Hesychius, the foreign gods were worshipped. This
feast is called by Pindarus (...), hospitable tables, and the sacrifice (...).
36. (...) was the feast of Bacchus, in whose Temple three empty vessels in the
night time were filled with wine, but none knew how, for the doors were fast
locked, and guarded. Thuia also was the first Priestesse of Bacchus, from which
the rest are called Thyadae. 37. (...) were the feasts of Bacchus every third
year, in Latin Trienalia and Triennia; of which Ovid, Celebrant repetita
Triennia Bacchae. Some other festivals the Greeks observed; but of less note.

The Contents of the Sixth Section.
Of the two prevalent Religions now in Europe. 2. Of Mahomets Law to his
Disciples. 3. Of the Mahumetants opinions at this day. 4: Mahomet, not the
Antichrist. 5. Of their Sects, and how the Turks and Persians differ, 6. Of the
Mahumetan Religious Orders. 7. Of their other Hypocritical Orders. 8. Of their
secular Priests. 9. Of the Mahumetan devotion, and parts thereof. 10. Of their
Ceremonies in their Pilgrimage to Mecca. 11. The Rites of their Circumcision.
12. Their Rites about the sick and dead. 13. The extent of Mahumetanism, and
the causes thereof. 14. Mahumetanism, of what continuance.

SECT. VI.
Quest. WHat are the two prevalent Religions this day in Europe?

A. Mahumetanism, Mahumetans, their Religion.
and Christianity. The former was broached by Mahumet the Arabian, being
assisted by Sergius a Nestoria^ Monk, with some other Heretics and Jews, about
600. years after Christ; for Mahomet was born under Mauritius the Emperor, anno
Christi 591. and under Heraclius, anno 623. he was chosen General of the
Saracen and Arabian Forces, and then became their Prophet, to whom he exhibited
his impious doctrine and law, which he pretended was delivered to him by the
Angel Gabriel. But his Book, called the Alcoran, was much altered after his
death, and diverse different copies thereof spread abroad, many of which were
burned, and one retained, which is now extant. This is divided into 124.
Chapters, which are fraughted with Fables, Lies, Blasphemies, and a mere
hodg-podge of fooleries and impieties, without either Language or Order, as I
have showed in the Caveat I gave to the Readers of the Alcoran; yet to him that
reads this Book a thousand times, is promised a woman in his paradise, whose
eyebrows shall be as wide as the Rainbow. Such honor do they give to their
ridiculous Book called Musaph, that none must touch it till he be washed from
top to toe; neither must he handle it with his bare hands, but must wrap them
in clean linen. When in their Temples it is publicly read, See Lanicerus, and
others.
the Reader may not hold it lower than his girdle; and when he has ended his
reading, he kisseth the book, and lays it to his eyes.

Q. What Law did Mahomet give to his Disciples?

A. His Law he divides into eight Commandments* Their Law.
The first is to acknowledge only one God, and only one Prophet, to wit
Mahomet. 2. The Second is concerning the duty of children to their Parents. 3.
Of the love of neighbors to each other. 4. Of their times of prayer in their
Temples. 5. Of their yearly Lent, which is carefully to be observed of all for
one month or thirty days. 6. Of their charity amd alms-deeds to the poor and
indigent. 7. Of their Matrimony, which every man is bound to embrace at 25.
years of age. 8. Against murder. To the observer of these commands he Promises
Paradise; in which shall be silken Carpets, pleasant Rivers, fruitful trees,
beautiful women, music, good cheer, and choice wines, stores of gold and
silver plate with precious stones, and such other conceits. But to those that
shall not obey this Law, hell is prepared, with seven gates, in which they
shall eat and drink fire, shall be bound in chains, and tormented with scalding
waters. He proves the Resurrection by the story of the seven sleepers, which
slept 360. years in a Cave. He prescribes also diverse moral and judicial
Precepts, as abstinence from swines flesh, blood, and such as die alone: also
from adultery and falls witness. He speaks of their Fridays devotion; of good
works; of their Pilgrimage to Meccha; of courtesy to each other; of avoiding
covetousness, usury, oppression, lying, casual murder, disputing about his
Alcoran, or doubting thereof. Also of prayer, alms, washing, fasting, and
Pilgrimage. He urges also repentance, forbideth swearing, commends friendship,
will not have men forced to Religion; will not have mercy or pardon to be
showed to enemies. He urges valor in Battle, promising rewards to the
courageous, and showing that none can die till his time come, and then is no
avoiding thereof.

Q. What other opinions do the Mahumetans hold at this day.

A. They hold a fatal necessity, and judge of things according to the success.
Their opinions.
They hold it unlawful to drink Wine, to play at Chess, Tables, Cards, or such
like recreations. Their opinion is, that to have Images in Churches is
Idolatry; They believe that all who die in their wars go immediately to
Paradise, which makes them fight with such cheerfulness; They think that every
man who lives a good life, shall be saved, what Religion soever he professes;
therefore they say that Moses, Christ, and Mahomet, shall in the resurrection
appear with three banners, to which, all of these three professions shall make
their repair. They hold that every one has two Angels attending on him; the
one at his right hand, the other at his left. They esteem good works
meritorious of Heaven. They say that the Angel Israphil shall in the last day
sound his trumpet, at the sound of which, all living creaturs (Angels not
excepted) shall suddenly die, and the Earth shall fall into dust and sand; but
when the said Angel sounds his trumpet the second time, the souls of all that
were dead shall revive again: then shall the Angel Michael weigh all men's souls
in a pair of scales. They say there is a terrible Dragon in the mouth of hell;
and that there is an iron bridge, over which the wicked are conveyed, some into
everlasting fire, and some into the fire of Purgatory. They hold that the Sun
at his rising, and the Moon at her first appearing should be reverenced. They
esteem Polygamy no sin. They hold it unlawful for any man to go into their
Temples not washed from head to foot; and if after washing, he piss, go to
stool, or break wind upward or downward, he must wash again, or else he offends
God. They say that the heaven is made of smoke; that there are many seas above
it; that the Moons light was impaired by a touch of the Angel Gabriels wing, as
he was flying along; that the devils shall be ^aved by the Alcoran. Many other
favourless and senseless opinions they have, as may be seen in the Book called
Sca^la, being an Exposition of the Alcoran Dialogue wise.

Q. Was Mahomet that Great Antichrist spoken of by Saint Paul, 2 Thessalonians. 2. and
by Saint John in the Apocalypse?

A. No: Mahomet, not that great Antichrist spoken of by Saint Paul, and Saint
John.
For Mahomet was an Arabian, descended from Ismael and Hagar: but Antichrist
(if we will believe the ancient Doctors of the Church) shall be a Jew, of the
tribe of Dan. 2. Antichrist shall come in the end of the world, and as the
Church anciently believed, immediately before Christ's second coming; but
Mahomet is come and gone, above a thousand years ago. 3. The ancient Fathers
believed that the two Witnesses which shall oppose Antichrist, and shall be
slain by him, are Henoch and Elias; but these are not yet come. 4. The
tradition of the Primitive Church was, that Antichrist shall reign but three
years and a half, supposing that this period of time is meant by time and
times, and half a time: but Mahomet we know reigned many more years. 5.
Antichrist will wholly oppose himself against Christ, vilify him, set himself
up in his stead: and to extol himself above all that is called God: but
Mahomet does speak honorably of Christ, in calling him the Word of God, the
Spirit of God, the Servant of God, the Savior of those that trust in him, the
Son of a Virgin, begot without the help of man, etc. as may be seen in his
Alcoran. 6. Our writers, as Forbes, Cartwright, etc. hold that Antichrist is
described Revel. 9. under the name of that Star which fell from Heaven, having
the key of the bottomless pit, and under the name of Abadd^n and Apollyon; but
that Mahomet with his followers are set out in that same chapter under the four
Angels bound in the great River Euphrates. 7. The Apostle 2 Thessalonians. 2. says,
that Antichrist shall ^it in the Temple of God as God, and shall exalt himself
above all that is called God. But this cannot be meant of Mahomet, for he never
sat in the Temple of God, whether by this word we understand the Temple of
Jerusalem, or the Church of Christ; for he and his Disciples separated
themselves from the Church of Christ, and will have no communion with
Christians. 8. Antichrist is to come with signs and lying wonders, and by these
to raise his Kingdom. But Mahomet came with the sword, and by it subdued the
neighboring Nations, so that neither he nor his followers did or do pretend
to any wonders. 9. Our writers say that Antichrist is not to be taken for a
particular person, but for a whole company or society of people under one head;
but Mahomet was a particular person. 10. Antichrist is to be destroyed by the
breath of the Lords mouth; but Mahomet died a natural death. By all these
reasons then it appears, that Mahomet cannot be that Great Antichrist who is to
come in the end of the world. Yet I deny not but he was an Antichrist in
broaching a doctrine repugnant to Christ's Divinity. Such an Antichrist was
Arius; likewise in persecuting Christ in his members, he may be called
Antichrist; and so might Nero, Domitian, Dioclesian, and other persecutors.
Besides, the number of the beast 666. is found in Mahomets name, and so it is
found in diverse other names. If we consider the miseries, desolation and blood
that have followed upon the spreading of Mahumetanisme in the world, we may
with Pererius on Revel. 6 conclude that Mahomet is signified by death, which
rides on the pale horse, followed by Hell or the Grave; to whom was given
power over the fourth part of the earth, to kill with the sword, with famine,
etc. for he was the death both of soul and body to many millions of people;
upon whose wars followed destruction, famine, pestilence and many other
miseries, in that part of the world, where he and his successors have spread
their doctrine and conquests.

Q. Are all the Mahumetans of one profession?

A. No: Their Sects.
for there be diverse Sects amongst them; but the two main Sects are, that of
the Arabians, followed by the Turks; and of Hali by the Persians. To this Hali
Mahomet bequeathed both his Daughter and his Alcoran, which the Persians
believe is the true Copy, and that of the Turks to be false. This Hali
succeeded Mahomet, both in his Doctrine and Empire; whose interpretation of the
Law they embrace for the truest. As the Saracen Caliphs of old, exercised both
the Kingly and Priestly Office; so both are claimed by the modern Persian; for
both were performed by Mahomet and Hali. But to avoid trouble, the Persian
Sophi contents himself with the Secular Government, leaving the Spiritual to
the Mustaed Dini, who is as the Musti in Turkey. These two Sects differ in many
points: for the Arabians make God the author both of good and evil; but the
Persians of good only; the Persians acknowledge nothing eternal but God; the
Turks say that the Law is also eternal; the Persians say that the blessed souls
cannot see God in his Essence, but in his Effects or Attributes: The Turks
teach that he shall be visible in his Essence. The Persians will have Mahomets
soul to be carried by the Angel Gabriel into Gods presence when he received his
Alcoran. The Turks will have his body carried thither also. The Persians pray
but three times a day, the Arabians five times; other differences they have;
but these are the chief Doctrinal differences: the maine is about the true
Alcoran, See Borrius, Lanicerus, Knolles, Camerarius, Iovius, etc.
the true interpretation thereof, and the true successor of Mahomet; for they
hold Eubocar, Ofmen, and Homar, whom the Turks worship, to have been usurpers,
and Hali the only true successor of Mahomet, whose Sepulcher they visit with
as great devotion as the Turks do the other three.

Q. What religious Orders have the Mahumetans?

A. Most of their religious Orders are wicked and irreligious. Mahumetans,
their religious orders.
For those whom they call Imailer and religious brothers of love, are worse
then beasts in their lusts, sparing neither women nor boys; their habit is a
long coat of a violet color, without scam, girt about with a golden girdle, at
which hand silver Cimbals, which make a jangling sound; they walk with a book
in their hand, containing love Songs and Sonnets, in the Persian tongue; these
go about singing, and receive money for their Songs, and are always
bare-headed, wearing long-hair, which they curle. The Order of Calender
professes perpetual Virginity, and have their own peculiar Temples, or
Ghappels. They wear a short coat made of Wool and Horse hair, without sleeves,
They cut their hair short, and wear on their heads Felt-hats, from which hangs
cuffs of horse hair, about a hand-breadth. They wear iron rings in their ears,
and about their necks and arms; they wear also in their Yard an iron or silver
ring of 3. lib. weight, whereby they are forced to live chastely; they go about
reading certain Rimes or Ballades. The Order of Dervises go about begging
alms in the name of Haly, son in Law to their god Mahomet. They wear two
sheepskins dried in the Sun, the one whereof they hang on their back, the other
on their breast; the rest of their body is naked. They shave their whole body,
go bare-headed, and burn their temples with a hot Iron. In their ears they
wear rings, in which are precious stones. They bear in their hand a knotty
club. They are desperate Assassinates, will rob and murder when they find
occasion; they eat of a certain herb called Asserad or Matslach which makes
them mad; then they cut and slash their flesh; the madder they are, the more
they are reverenced. In Natolia near the Sepulcher of a certain Saint of theirs
is a Covent of these Monks, being about five hundred, where once a year there
is kept a general meeting of this Order, about eight thousand, over whom their
superior called Assambaba is President. On the Friday after their devotions
they make themselves drunk with Asserad in stead of Wine; then they fall to
dancing in a round, about a fire, singing Ballades, which done, with a sharp
knife they cut flowers and Figures on their skins, for the love of those women
they most affect. This Feast holds seven days, which ended, with banners
displayed, and drums beating, they depart all to their several Covents,
begging alms all the way as they march. Their fourth Order called Torlachs,
are clothed like the Dervises, but that they wear also a Bears skin instead of
a Cloak, but they go bare headed and shaven; they anoint their heads with Oil
against cold; and burn their temples against defluxions. Their life is beastly
and beggarly, living in ignorance and idleness; they are begging in every
corner, and are dangerous to meet with in Desert places, for they will rob and
plunder; they profess Palmestry like our Gypsies, who use to pick silly women's
pockets as they are looking in their hands. They carry about with them an old
man, whom they worship as a Prophet; when they mean to have money from any rich
man, they repair to his house, and the old man there prophesies sudden
destruction against that house; See Menavino, Nicholaus Nicholai,
Septemcastrensis, etc.
which to prevent, the Master of the house desires the old man's prayers, and so
dismisseth him and his train with money, which they spend wickedly; for they are
given to Sodomy and all uncleanness.

Q. Are there no other hypocritical Orders amongst them?

A. Yes, many more. Some whereof go naked, except their privities, seeming no
ways moved either with Summers heat, or winters cold; they can endure cutting
and slashing of their flesh, as it were insensibly, to have their patience the
more admired. Some will be honored for their abstinence in eating and drinking
sparingly and seldom. Some profess poverty, and will enjoy no earthly things.
Others again profess perpetual silence, and will not speak, though urged with
injuries and tortures. Some avoid all conversation with men. Others brag of
Revelations, Visions, and Enthusiasms. Some wear Feathers on their heads, to
show they are given to contemplation. Some bave Rings in their ears, to note
theri subjection and obedience in harkning to spiritual Revelations. Some hare
chains about their necks and arms, to show they are bound up from the world;
some by their mean clothes brag of their poverty. Some to show their love to
hospitality, carry pitchers of clean water, which they profer to all that will
drink, without taking any reward: Some dwell at the graves of the dead, and
live on what the people offers them. Some of them have secret commerce with
women, and then give out that they conceive and bare children without the help
of man, purposely to extenuate the miraculous birth of Christ. Some are
Antinomians, affirming that there is no use of the Law, but that men are saved
by Grace. Some are for traditions and merits, by which salvation is obtained,
and not by Grace. These addict themselves wholly to Meditation, Prayer,
Fasting, and other spiritual exercises; there be some who are accounted
Heretics, for they hold that every man may be saved in his own Religion, and
that Christ's Law is as good as Mahomets; therefore they make no scruple to
enter into Christian Churches, to sign themselves with the Cross, and
besprinkle themselves with Holy water. These Votaries have their Saints, to
whom they have recourse in their wants, and to whom they assign particular
Offices: some have the charge of travelers, some of children, See Georgiovitz,
Septemcastrensis, Busbequius, and others.
some of child bearing-women, some of secrets, and such like. They have also
their Martyrs, Relics, and lying miracles.

Q. What secular Priests have they?

A. They have eight Orders or degrees; 1. The Mophti or their Pope, Their
secular Priests.
on whose judgment all depend, even the Great Turk himself, both in spiritual
and secular affairs. 2. The Caldelescher, who under the Mophti is judge of all
causes, both Civil and Ecclesiastical. 3. The Cadi whose Office is to teach
the people. 4. Modecis, who have the charge of Hospitals. 5. Antiphi, who
publicly read the heads of the Mahumetan superstition, holding in one hand a
naked sword, in the other a Semiter. 6. Imam, who in their Temples have charge
of the Ceremonies. 7. Meizin, who on their Towers sing and call the people to
prayer. 8. Sophi, who are their singing men in their Temples. The higher Orders
are chosen by the grand Seigniour. The inferior by the people, who have a
small pension from the Turk, which being insufficient to maintain them, they
are forced to work and use trades. There is required no more learning in them,
but to read the Alcoran in Arabian, for they will not have it translated. To
strike any of these is the loss of a hand in a Turk, but of life in a
Christian. See Cuspinian, Knolles, etc.
In such esteem they have their beggarly Priests,

Q. Wherein does the Mahumerans devotion consist chiefly?

A. in In their multitudes of Mosches, Their devotion
or Temples, the chicfe of which is Saint Sophi in Constantinople, built or
rather repaired by Justinian. 2. In their Hospitals, both for poor and
strangers. 3. In their Monasteries and Schools. 4. In their washings, whereof
they have three sorts. One of all the body. Another of the private parts only.
The third of the hands, feet, face, and organs of the five Senses. 5. In giving
of alms either in money or in meat; for their manner is to sacrifice beasts,
but not as the Jews upon Altars; these beasts they cut in pieces and distribute
among the poor. Their other Sacrifices, which either they offer, or promise to
offer when they are in danger, are so divided, that the Priests have one share,
the poor another, the third they eat themselves. 6. In making of Vows, which
are altogether conditional; for they pay them if they obtain what they desire,
otherwise not. 7. In adorning their Temples with multituds of Lamps burning
with Oil, and with Tapestry spread on Mats, upon which they prostrate
themselves in prayer. On the walls are written in golden letters, There is but
one God, and one Prophet Mahomet. 8. In praying five times a day, and on Friday
which is their Sabbath (because Mahomets birthday,) six times, bowing
themselves to the ground, twice as often as they pray. Whosoever absents
himself, chiefly on Friday, and in their Lent, is punished with disgrace, and a
pecuniary Mulct. 9. In diverse ridiculous ceremonies acted by their Priests, as
pulling off the shoes, which all people are tied to do when they enter into
their Temples; in stretching out the hands and joining them together, in
kissing the ground, in lifting up the head, in stopping of the ears with their
fingers, in praying with their faces to the South, because Mecca is there, in
wiping their eyes with their hands, in observing a Lenten Fast for one month
in a year, changing the month every year, so that they fast one whole year in
twelve; and then they abstain from all meat and drink, till the stars appear.
In plucking off their hairs at the end of their Fast, and in painting of their
nayls with a red color. See Georgiovitz, Knolles, Purcha^ etc.
10. In Pilgrimages to Mecca, in circumcision of their children, in feasting at
the Graves of the dead, and in other such vain ceremonies.

Q. What Ceremonies observe they in their Pilgrimage to Mecca?

A. This journey is undertaken and performed every year, Their Pilgrimage to
Mecca.
and it is held so necessary, that he who does not once in his life go this
Pilgrimage, shall be assuredly damned; whereas Paradise and remission of sins
is procured to them that go it. The way is long and tedious to those of Greece,
being six months journey, and dangerous by reason of Arabian thieves,
mountains of sand, with which diverse are overwhelmed; and want of water in
those sandy and barren deserts. Their chief care is to be reconciled to each
other where there is any difference, before they go; for if they leave not
behind them all grudges and quarrels, their Pilgrimage will do them no good;
they begin their journey from Cairo, about three weeks after their Easter,
called Bairam, being guarded with 200 Spachi on Dromedaries, and 200 Ianizaries
on Camels with eight pieces of Ordnance, a rich vesture for the Prophet, and a
green Velvet covering wrought with gold to cover his Tomb, which the Bassa
delivers to the Captain of the Pilgrims. The Camels that carry these Vestures
are covered with cloth of gold, and many small bells; the night before their
departure is kept with great Feasting and triumphs. No man may hinder his wife
from this Pilgrimage, and every servant is made free that goes it. The Camel
that carries the box with the Alcoran is covered with cloth of gold and silk,
the box with silk only during the journey, but with gold and Jewels at their
entering into Mecca. Musicians also and singers encompasse the Camel, and much
vain Pomp is used in this Pilgrimage They use diverse washings by the way when
they meet with water. When they come to Mecca, the house of Abraham, which they
fable was miraculously built, receives a new covering and a new Gate; the old
vesture is sold to Pilgrims, which has a virtue in it to pardon sins; after
many idle Ceremonies performed, they go round about Abraham's house seven times;
then they kiss a black stone, which they believe fell down thither from
Heaven; at first it was white, but by the often kissing of sinners it is become
black; then they wash themselves in the Pond Zunzun, without the Gate five
paces; this pond the Angel showed to Hagar when she wanted water for Ismael. Of
this also they drink, and pray for pardon of their sins. After five days abode
at Mecca, they go to the Hill of pard^ns, 15 miles distant, and there they
leave all their sins behind them after they have heard a Sermon and prayed, and
offered Sacrifices. Upon their return they must not look back to the Hill, lest
their sins follow them. From hence they repair to Medina, where Mahomets
Sepulcher is thought to be; but by the way they run up a certain hill, which
they call the mount of health; they run, that they may sweat out all their
sins. Thence they come pure to the Seducers tomb which notwithstanding they
may not see, being hanged about with a Silk Curtain, which by the Eunuchs,
being 50. in number to attend on the tomb, and to light the Lamps, is taken
down when the Pilgrims Captain presents the new one; without, each man gives
to the Eunuchs handkerchiefs, or such like, to touch the tomb therewith; this
they keep as a special Relic. When they return to Egypt, the Captain
presents the Alcoran to the Bassa to kiss, and then it is laid up again; the
Captain is Feasted, and presented with a Garment of cloth of Gold. They used to
cut in pieces the Camel with his Furniture which carried the Alcoran, See
Vertoman, Lanicerus, and others.
and reserve these pieces for holy Relics. The Alcoran also is elevated, that
all might see and adore it, which done, every one with joy returns to his one
home.

Q. What Ceremonies use they about their Circumcision? Their Circumcision.


A. They are Circumcised about eight years of age; the Child is carried on
hors-back, with a Tullipant on his head to the Temple, with a torch before him,
on a spear decked with flowers, which is left with the Priest as his Fee, who
first nippeth the end of the skin of the child's yard with pincers, to mortify
it, then with his sizzers he nimbly cuts it off; presently a powder is laid on
to ease the pain, and afterward salt. The child's hands being loosed, looks,
as he is taught by the Priest, toward heaven, and lifting up the first finger
of his right hand, says these words: God is one God, and Mahomet in his
Prophet. Then he is carried home in state after some prayers and offerings at
the Church. Sometimes the child is circumcised at home; and receives his name,
not then, but when he is born. They feast then commonly three days, which
ended, the child is carried with Pomp to the Bath, and from thence home, See
Georgiovitz and others.
where he is presented with diverse gifts from his Parents Friends. Women are
not circumcised, but are tied to make profession of their Mahumetan faith.

Q. What Rites do they observe about the sick and dead?

A. Their Priests and chief friends visit them, exhort them to repentance,
Their Rites about the sick and dead.
and read Psalms to them. When any dies, the Priest compasses the Corpse with
a string of beads, made of Lignum Aloes, praying God to have mercy on him; then
the Priests carry it into the Garden, wash it, and cover it with its own
garments, with flowers also and persumes, and his Turband is set on his head.
Women perform this office to the body of a woman. This done, the body is
carried to the Temple with the head forwards, and set down at the Church-door,
whilst the Priests are performing their service; then it is carried to the
burial-place without the City: the Priests pray for his soul, are paid for
their pains, and feasted at home. Some part of their good cheer is set on the
grave, for the soul to feed on, or for alms to the poor. They believe there are
two Angels, who with angry looks, and flaming firebrands, examine the dead
party of his former life, whom they whip with fiery torches if he be wicked; if
good, they comfort him, and defend his body in the grave till the day of
judgment; but the bodies of the wicked are knocked down nine fathoms under
ground, and tormented by their angry Angels, the one knocking him with an
hammer, the other tearing him with an hook, till the last day; against this
torment the Turks use to pray at the graves of the dead. The women there do not
accompany the dead to the grave, but stay at home weeping, and preparing good
cheer for the Priests and others of the departed man's friends. They believe
that when the Corpse has been in the grave on quarter of an hour, that a new
spirit is put into it, is set upon its knees, and is examined by the foresaid
Angels of his faith and works. They believe also that it is a work of charity,
and conducible to the soul of the defunct, See Menavino, Bellonius, etc.
if the birds, beasts, or ants be fed with the meat which they set on the
graves of the dead.

Q. How far has this Mahumetan Superstition got footing in the world?

A. Though it be not so far extended as Gentilisme, Their Superstition how far
spread.
yet it has overreached Christianity; not in Europe, where Christianity
prevails, but in Africa where it has thrust out the ancient Christian
Churches, and erected the Half Moon in flead of the Cross, except it be among
the Abyssins, and some small places held by the Spaniard or Portugal: But in
Asia it has got deeper footing, having overrun Arabia, Turkey, Persia, some
part of Mogols country, and Tartaria, only here and there some small
Congregations of Christians are to be found. In America indeed it is not as yet
known. Now the reasons why this Superstition is so far spread, are these. 1.
The continual jars, frivolous debates, and needless digladiations about
questions of Religion among Christians, which has made the world doubt of the
truth thereof, and takes away the end and scope of Religion, which is to unite
men's affections; but the remedy is become the disease, and that which should
cure us, wounds us. 2. The wicked and scandalous lives both of Christian
Laity and Clergy: for the Mahumetans generally are more devour in their
religious duties, and more just in their dealings. 3. The Mahumetan Conquests
have in those parts propagated their Superstition. 4. Their religion is more
pleasing to the sense then Christianity; for men are more affected with
sensitive pleasures, which Mahomet proffers in his Paradise, then with
spiritual, which are less known, and therefore less desired. 5. The
greatness of the Turkish tyranny over Christians; the rewards and honors they
give to those that will turn Muselmen, or Mahumetans, are great inducements for
weak spirits to embrace that religion; for a Christian Runegado that will
receive circumcision among them, is carried about the streets with great joy
and solemnity, is presented with many gifts, and made free from all taxes; for
which very cause, many, both Greeks and Albanians, have received circumcision.
6. The liberty which is permitted to multiply wives, must needs be pleasing to
carnal-minded men. 7. They permit no man to dispute of their Alcoran; to call
any point of their religion in question; to sell the Alcoran to strangers, or
to translate it into other languages: It is death to offend in any of these,
which is the cause of much quietness and concord among them. 8. They inhibit
the profession of Philosophy among them, and so they keep the people in
darkness and ignorance, not suffering the light to appear and to detect their
errors. 9. They teach, that all who live a good life shall be saved, whatsoever
his religion be; this makes many weak Christians revolt from their holy faith
without scruple or check of conscience; for what care they, whether they serve
Christ or Mahomet, so they be saved? 10. They hold, that after a certain time
of torments in Hell, the wicked shall be released from thence; this doctrine is
more pleasing to wicked men then Christianity, which admits of no redemption
from Hell, nor any mitigation of eternal torments. 11. Men are much taken with
moral outsides, whereby the Turks exceed Christians; for they are more modest
in their conversation generally then we; men and women converse not together
promiscuously, as among us; they are less sumptuous in their buildings; less
excessive and fantastical in their clothes; more sparing in their diet, and
altogether abstemious; more devout and reverend in their Churches, so that they
will not suffer a piece of paper to be trod upon, or lie on the ground, but
will take it up, kiss it, and lay it in some place out of danger; and this is,
because the name of God and Mahomets Law is written upon paper; they are also
more sober in their speeches and gesture, and more obedient to their Superiors
then we are. 12. There is nothing more pleasing to our nature then private
revenge, which by Christ's Law is prohibited, but by the Mahumetan Law is
allowed; for they are to hate, and to kill their enemy, if they can. 13,
Arianism had infected most of the Eastern Churches; therefore it was no wonder
if they received Mahomets Doctrine, which was grounded upon Arius his Heresy.
14. They suffer no man to blaspheme Christ, but honor him, and speak
reverently of him; so they do of Moses and Abraham, which makes that neither
Jews nor Christians are in those parts much averse from, or violent against
their Religion. 15. They have been always very zealous and diligent in gaining
Proselytes, and yet force no man. For these, and such like reasons, let us not
wonder at the great increase of Mahumetanisme in the world.

Q. Of what continuance is Mahumetanisme?

A. Mahomet was born in the year of Christ, 592. in the time of S. Gregory the
Pope, and Mauritius the Emperor: Mahumetanism, of what continuance.
according to Genebrard he lived 63. years, of which he spent 23. years in
spreading of his doctrine, then died in the year of our Lord 655. Constance
being Emperor, and Eugenius the first Pope; So that Mahumetanisme has lasted
already above 1000. years, to the great oppression and vexation of the Church
of Christ, and to the eternal dishonor of Christian Princes, who if they had
spent but the tenth part of that blood against the Turks, which they have
shamefully and sinfully shed in their own private quarrels, there had not been
at this day any remainder of that damnable Sect, which has longer continued a
scourge to the Church of Christ, then ever any enemy did against Gods people of
old. For the Egyptians oppressed the Israelites scarce 200. years; the
Canaanites 20. years; the Moabites 18. years; the Philistines 40. years; the
Assy^ians and Chaldeans from the first to the last, did not ^ex and oppress
Gods people above 300. years; afterward they were oppressed by Antiochus
Epiphanes 40 years; the Christian Church from Nero till Constantine was
afflicted about 260. years; and afterward by the Goths and Lombards nere 300.
years. But this oppression of the Church by Mahomet has, as I said, lasted
above a thousand years. The reasons are diverse as I have showed in the former
question, to which may be added these. 1. By this long persecution and tyranny
of the Turks, God will try and exercise the faith, patience, constancy, and
other virtues of his people, which would corrupt and purrifie like standing
water, or Moab ^^tled upon the Lees, not being poured from vessel to vessel.
How can the courage of a Soldier be known but in a skirmish? or the skill of a
Mariner, but in a storm; Marcet sine adversario virtus; that tree, says
Seneca, is most strongly rooted in the ground, which is most shaken with the
wind. Nulla est a^or fortis and solida, nisi in quam venti saepius incursant,
ipsa enim ^exatiane constringitur, and adices certius figit. 2. God is pleased
to continue this tyranny and power of the Mahumetans, to the end that Christian
Princes may love each other, and stick close together against the common enemy;
that their military discipline might be exercised abroad, and not at home: For
this cause the wisest of the Romans were against the utter destruction of
Carthage; fearing least the Romans wanting an enemy abroad, should exercise
their swords against themselves; which fell out accordingly. For the same cause
God would not utterly destroy the Philistines, Ammonites, Moabites, and other
neighboring enemies of the Jews. But such is the madness of Christians, that
though we have so potent an enemy close at our doors, ready to devour us, yet
we are content to sheath that sword into our own bowels, which we should
employ against the common foe. 3. God will have this sword of Mahumetanisme to
hang over our heads, and this scourge to be still in our eyes, that thereby we
may be kept the more in awe and obedience; that if at any time we start aside
like a broken bow, we may return again in time, considering God has this
whip ready and at hand to correct us. Thus God lest the Canaanites among the
Jews, to be pricks in their eyes, and goads in their sides. I will not (says
the Lord) drive out any from before them of the Nations which Joshua left when
he died; that through them I might prove Israel, whether they will keep the way
of the Lord to walk tberein, etc. therefore the Lord left these nations without
driving them out hastily. See Judge. 2. 21, 22. and 3. 1, 2, 3, etc. 4. God is
content to continue this Mahumetan Sect so long, because justice is exercised
among them, without which a State or Kingdom can no more stand then a tree
without a root, or an house without a foundation; they are also zealous and
devout in their way; and great enemies to Idolatry, so that they will permit no
images to be painted or carved among them, knowing that God is not offended so
much against any sin as against idolatry, which is spiritual adultery, most
destructive of that matrimonial conjuction between God and us. 5. The Lord by
the long continuance of Mahumetanism, will punish the perfidiousnesse and
wickedness of the Greek Emperors, as likewise the multitude of heresies and
schisms hatched in that Church. 6. This Sect of Mahumeranism is so made up of
Christianism, Judaism and Gentilism, that it abates the edge of any of these
nations, from any eager desire of its extirpation.

The Contents of the Seventh Section.
The Christian Religion propagated. 2. The decay thereof in the East by
Mahumetanism. 3. Persecution and Heresy the two great Enemies thereof. 4.
Simon Magus the first heretic, with his Disciples. 5. Menander, Saturninus,
and Basilides, Heretics. 6. The Nicholaitans and Gnostics. 7. The
Carpocratians. 8. Cerinthus, Ebion, and the Nazarites. 9. The Valentinians,
Secundians, and Prolemians, 10. The Marcites, Colarbassi* and Heracleonites.
11. The Ophites, Cainites, and Sethites. 12. The Archonticks and Ascothyprae.
13. Cerdon and Marcion. 14. Apelles, Severus, and Tacianus. 15. The
Cataphrygians. 16. Pepuzians, Quintilians, and Artotyrites. 17. The
Quartidecimani and Alogiani. 18. The Adamians, Elcesians, and Theodocians. 19.
The Melchisedicians, Bardesanists, and Noetians, 20. The Valesians, Catheri,
Angelici, and Apostolici. 21. The Sabellians, Originians, and Originists. 22.
The Samosatenians and Photinians. 23. The Manichaean Religion. 24, The
Hierachites, Melitians, and Arians: 25. The Audians, Semi-arians, and
Macedonians. 26. The Aerians, Aetians, and Apollinarists. 27. The
Antidicomarianits, Messalians and Metangismonites. 28. The Hermians,
Proclianites, and Patricians. 29. The Ascites, Pattalorinchites, Aquarii, and
Coluthiani. 30. The Floriani, Aeternales, and Nudipidales. 31. The Donatists,
Priscillianists, Rhetorians, and Feri. 32. The Theopaschites, Tritheits, Aquei,
Melitonii, Ophei, Tertullii, Liberatores, and Nativitarii. 33. The Luciferians,
Jovinianists, and Arabicks. 34. The Collyridians, Paterniani, Tertullianists,
and Abelonites. 35. The Pelagians, Predestinati, and Timotheans. 36. The
Nestorians, Eutychians, and their Spawn.

SECT. VII.
Quest. WHat is the other great Religion professed in Europe?

A. Christianity; which is the Doctrine of Salvation, Christianity, its
beginning.
delivered to man by Christ Jesus the Son of God, who assuming our nature of a
pure Virgin, taught the Jews the true way to happiness, confirming his
doctrine by signs and miracles; at length sealed it with his blood; and so
having suffered death for our sins, and rose again for our justification, he
ascended to his Father, leaving twelve Apostles behind him to propagate this
doctrine through the world, which they did accordingly, confirming their words
with miracles, and their own blood; and so this light of the Gospel scattered
all the fogs and mists of Gentile superstition; at the sight of this Ark of the
new Covenant, the Dagon of idolatry fell to the ground: when this Lion of the
Tribe of Judah did roar, all the beasts of the forest, that is, the Pagan
Idols or Devils rather hid themselves in their dens. Apollo complained that his
Oracles failed him, and that the Hebrew child had stopped his mouth. When it
was proclaimed at Palotes by Thanas the Egyptian ship-master, that the great
god Pan was dead, all the evil spirits were heard to howl and bewail the
overthrow of their Kingdom, Porphirie complained that the preaching of Christ
had weakened the power of their gods, and hindered the gain of their Priests.
The bones of Babylas so hindered Apollo that he could deliver no Oracle while
they were there. The Delphick Temple fell down with earthquake and thunder,
when Julian sent to consult with the Oracle. Such was the irresistible power of
the two-edged sword which came out of Christ's mouth, that nothing was able to
withstand it. The little stone cut out of the mountain without hands smot the
great Image of Nebuchadnezzar, and brake it in pieces; to the Doctrine of
twelve poor weak fishermen, did the great Potentates of the world submit their
Scepters. Thus the stone which the builders refused, became the head of the
Corner; it was the Lords doing, and its marveilous in our eyes. The terrible
beast which with his iron teeth destroyed all the other beasts, is destroyed by
the weakness of preaching, against which the more the Roman Empire strugled,
the more it was foiled, and found by experience that the blood of Martyrs was
the seed of the Church, which conquered the great conquerours, not with acting,
but with suffering, not by the sword, but by the word, and more by their death
then by their life: like so many Sampsons triumphing over these Philistines in
their death and torments.

Q. 2. Seeing the power of Religion was so irresistible in the beginning, that
it carried all like a torrent before it, how came it to grow so weak within
600 years, that it yielded to Mahumetanism?

A. When God saw that the ungrateful professors of Christianity began to loath
that heavenly Manna, Yields to Mahumetanism.
and to covet for Quales of new Doctrine, he gave them leave to eat and poison
themselves therewith. He was not bound to cast pearls before swine, and to give
that which was holy to dogs. In his just judgments he removed the Candlestick
from those who rejected the light, and delighted themselves in darkness; it
was fit the Kingdom of God should be taken from them, and given to a people
that should bring forth the fru^ts thereof. They deserved to be plagued with a
famine who grew wanton and spurned against their spiritual food. Besides, when
the devil perceived he could do no good by open hostility and persecution, but
the more burden he laid upon the Palm, the more it flourished, and the oftener
he flung the Giant of Religion to the ground, the stronger it grew with
Antaeus; he resovled at last to join the Foxes tail to the Lio^s skin, and to
try whether the heat of the Sun would not make the traveller sooner forsake his
cloak, th^n the impetuosity of the wind. He choaks all zea^e and sincerity
with the baits of wealth and honor; he poisons them with ambition, pride,
covetousness, and envy; the evil man sowed the ^ases of dissension and
heretical Doctrines in the Lords fields; the spiritual husbandmen grew
careless and idle, the Shepherds neglect their flocks, the dogs grow dumb, and
so the Lords sheep are suffered to stray, and become a prey to the Wolves. The
watchmen being inebriated with honor, wealth, ease, and security, fall asleep
on the walls, and let the enemy feise upon the Lords City. It was not then the
weakness of Christian Religion that was the cause of Mahomets prevailing; for
the heat of the Sun is not weak, though it cannot soften the clay; not is the
good seed that is cast into barren ground, to be blamed, if it does not
fructify; neither is the preaching of the Gospel impotent and weak, because it
does not always edify. All the water in the Sea cannot mollify a Rock, nor
all the rain in the clouds secundate a stony barren ground. The subject must be
capable, or else the Agent cannot operate. Mahumetanism then prevailing upon
Christianity, proceeded from the voluntary perverseness of men's hearts, from
the malice and craft of the devil, and from the just judgments of the Almighty.

Q. 3. What were the Engines that Satan used to overthrow Religion in the
beginning?

A. Open persecution and heresy; Religion, by what Engines battered.
with the one he destroyed the bodies, with the other he poisoned the souls of
Christians. Persecution with Saul killed its thousands, but Heresy with David,
ten thousand. Persecution was the Arrow that did fly by day; but Heresy the
Pestilence that raged in the darkness. Persecution was the Pruning knife that
lopped the branches of Religion, but Heresy the Axe laid to the root of the
tree. Persecution was the Dragon that drove the woman into the wilderness, but
Heresy the beast that spoke blasphemies. Open Persecution began in Nero a
Tyrant, but Heresy in Simon a Witch. Open Persecution began about 66 years
after Christ's Ascension, but heresy immediately after Christ's departure, about
the sixth year, in the beginning of Caligula's reign. Persecution is the wild
Boar of the Forest, but Heresy the little Fox that eats up the Grapes of
the Lords Vineyard.

Q. 4. Who was the first Heretic that opposed the Orthodox Religion, and what
were his opinions?

A. Simon called Magus, because he was a Witch; a Samaritan by birth, Heretics
and Heresies, namely Simon Magus.
and a Christian by profession; he would have bought the gifts of the Holy
Ghost for money, Act. 8. 13. He denied the Trinity, and affirmed himself to be
the true God. He taught that the world was made by the Angels, not by God. And
that Christ came not into the world, nor did he truly suffer. He denied also
the Resurrection of the flesh, and permitted promiscuous marriages. He likewise
affirmed that the true God was never known to the Patriarchs and Prophets. This
point was afterward maintained by Menander, Menander, Saturninus, Basilides.
Cerinthus, Nicholas, Saturninus, and Basilides succeeding Heretics. Upon this
Doctrine also the Tertullianists, and Anthropomorphits grounded their Heresy,
in ascribing a humane body to God. His denying of the Trinity, begot afterward
the Sabellians, Samosatenians, Montanists, Praxians, Photinians, and
Priscillianists. His Heresy of the Creation of the world by Angels, begot the
Marcionites, Manichees, and the Angelick heretics, who worshipped Angels. In
saying that Christ came not, nor suffered, he gave occasion to the Heresies of
Valentinians, Cerdonians, Marcionites, Aphthardocites, Docits, Samosatenians,
and Mahumetans. Upon his denial of the Resurrection, Basilides, Valentinus,
Carpocrates, Apelles, and the Hierarchits, grounded their Heresies. Besides,
Epicurism, Libertinism, and Atheism got vigor hereby. By permitting
licentiousness and promiscuous copulation, he gave occasion to the
Basilidians, Gnostics, Manichees, Acatians, Eunomians, and Mahumetans to live
like beasts, See Austin, Irenaeus, and Epiphanius, upon this subject, in their
Books they wrote against Heresies.
and to slight Marriage. Besides these impious opinions, he held Magic and
Idolatry lawful. He gave to the Angels barbarous names. He slighted the Law of
Moses, as being not from God; and blasphemously denied the Holy Ghost to be a
substance, but a bare virtue or operation, and caused his Disciples to worship
his whore Helena, or Selene, for a goddess.

Q. 5. Why did Simon Magus and his scholars, with many other heretics since
him, besides Jews and Mahumetans deny the Trinity.

A. Partly the malice of Satan who hates and persecutes the truth, partly the
pride of Heretics who would seem wiser then the Church, Trinity denied by
Simon Magus and his Scholars, with others besides Jews and Mahumetans, and why.
partly their ignorance, because by natural reason they cannot comprehend this
ineffable mystery, and partly malice against Christ, whose Divinity is denied
by Jews and Mahumetans; bred this Heresy: notwithstanding the truth is
plainly set down both in the old and new Testament, asserted by all the Greek
and Latin Fathers, confirmed by all General councills, and proved by all
Orthodox Divines that it is no more repugnant to natural reason for the
Father, Son and Holy Ghost to be one God, then for the soul, mind, and body
to be one man; but because this Doctrine is sufficiently proved by all Divines
both ancient and modern, and all objections to the contrary answered and
refuted, I will forbear to set down what is so plain and obvious, already
handled by so many Pens, and will only show that the Doctrine of the Trinity
was not unknown even by the light of nature to the Gentile Philosophers, Poets
and Sibylls. Zoroastres speaks of the Father, who having perfected all things
has delivered them to the second Mind, which Mind (says he) has received
from the Father knowledge and power. Here is a plain testimony of the first and
second person. Concerning the third, he says that the Divine love proceeded
from the Mind or Intellect, what else is this Divine love but the Holy Ghost?
The Chaldaean Magi, which were their Philosophers, acknowledged three
beginnings, to wit Ormases, Mitris, and Ariminis, that is God, the Mind, and
soul, Mercurius Trismegistus taught his Egyptians that God who is life and
light begot the Word, who is the other Intellect, and maker of all things, and
together with him another who is the fiery God, or Spirit; here the three
persons are distinctly named. He shows also that the subtle intellectual
Spirit by the power of God did move in the Chaos; this is consonant to the
words of Moses, the spirit of God moved on the waters. Orpheus sings the
praises of the Great God, and of his word which he first uttered. Pythagoras
and his Scholars were not ignorant of this Mystrey, when they placed all
perfection in the number of three, and made love the Original of all things.
Zeno the Stoic confesses that (...) the Word is God, and the Spirit of Jove.
Socrates acknowledges God to be the Mind or Intellect, that the Essence of
God is his Idea, which he begets by the knowledge of himself, and by which he
made the World. Numenius the Pythagorean, Plotinus, Iamblichus and others do
write very plainly of the three Hypostases or Persons in the Trinity, so that
no Christian can write more fully, as may be seen in their own words, as they
are alleged by Du-Plessis in his Book of the truth of Christian Religion; who
cites also certain Oracles of Serapis the Egyptian chief Idol or Devil; and
of Apollo out of Suidns, by which we may see how the evil Spirits are forced to
confess the Trinity. I could also allege the testimonies of the Sybills to
the same purpose; but because I study brevity, and these heathen testimonies
and Sibyllin verses, are cited by Clemens Alexandrinus, Origin against Celsus,
Cyril against Julian, Eusebius in his preparation, Saint Augustine in his
books of the City, etc. I forbear to insist any more on this subject. And as
the Gentiles gave testimony to this plurality of persons, so did the Jews
also, though now they reject this doctrine, thinking that we by worshipping the
Trinity, do worship three Gods; but their ancient Rabbis do prove the Trinity
out of the Old Testament, as Rabbi Simeon, the Son of Iohai brings a place
out of Rabbi Ibba upon Deuteronomy 6. Hearken O Israel, the Lord our God is one
God. In the Hebrew thus (...) Jehovah Elohenu Jehovah Echad. He shows that the
first Jehovah is God the Father; the second word Elohenu our God is God the
Son; for so he is called by the Propher, and Evangelist, Emanuel, God with us.
The third word Jehovah, is God the holy Ghost. And the fourth word Echad, that
is One, is to show the Unity of Essence in this plurality of persons. Many
other passages I could allege out of the writings of the ancient Rabbis to
confirm this truth; but this is already performed by Galatinus in his books de
arcanis catholicae veritatis.

Q. 6 Who were Simons principal Scholars, and what were their opinions?

A. 6. Menander a Samaritan also, and a Magician. He flourished at Rome, in the
time of Titus about 49. years afser Christ. He held the same impious opinions
that Simon did; but differed from him in saying that himself and not Simon, was
the Savior of the world; and that therefore all should be baptized in his
name, and not in the name of Simon or Christ, and that all such should in power
excel the Angels, and should live immortally here; so he denied the
Resurrection of the flesh. To him succeeded Saturninus and his fellow Scholar
Basilides, about the fifteenth year of Adrian the Emperor, and after Christ
the hundredth. Saturninus was of Antioch, and infected Syria with his poison, as
Basilides did Egypt. Saturninus held the same impieties with Simon and
Menander, but differed from them in saying that the world was made only by
seven Angels, and not by all, against the Will and Knowledge of God. He taught
also that some men were naturally good, and some naturally evil; and that
nothing must be eat that has life in it, which was the Doctrine afterward of
the Manichees. And impiously affirmed that some of the ancient Holy Prophets
spoke, and were sent by Satan. Basilides also was a Simonian Heretic, but
differed from him in holding there were so many Heavens as days in the year,
to wit 365. the chief god he called (...), in the letters of which name are
contained 365. He held also that this inferior world and man was created by
the 365th or last Heaven. He taught also that the superior god Abraxas begot
the Mind, this the Word: Of the Word came Providence, and of Providence
Wisdom: Of Wisdom the Angels were begot, the last of which was the God of the
Jews, whom he calls an ambitious and a turbulent God, who had attemped to
bring all Nations in subjection to his people. He said that Christ was sent by
Abraxas to oppose the turbulent God of the Jews, and does not call him Jesus
and Savior, but Goal a Redeemer. He held it unlawful to suffer Martyrdom for
Christ; He permitted Idolatry, See Irenaeus, Austin, Theodoret, Tertullian,
Epiphanius, etc.
and taught that no voluntary sin was pardonable, and that Faith was not the
gift of God, but of Nature, as also election. The other errors which this
Egyptian held (for he was of Alexandria) were the same that Simon maintained.

Q. 7. What was the Religion of the Nicholaitans and Gnostics?

A. The Nicholaitans, Nicholatians:
so called from Nicholas one of the seven Deacons, Act. 6. and whose works
Christ hated, Rev. 2. gave themselves to all uncleanness and sflshly lusts,
teaching that men ought to have their Wives in common. They made no scruple of
eating things offered to Idols. At their meetings or love Feasts, they used to
put out the lights, and commit promiscuous adulteries with each others wise.
They taught that the world was made by the copulation of light and darkness,
out of which Angels, Dae^ons, and Men were procreated. Man's seed and menstruous
blood were with them sacred, and used by the Gnostics in their divine service,
Gnostics.
whereby they brought an odium upon Christianity. They would not have God but
Angels creators of this inferior world, which Angels they called by diverse
barbarous names. Nicholas the father of this Sect, was by birth an Antiochian,
whose doctrine began to spread about the beginning of Domitians reign, after
Christ 52 years, before S. John's banishment into Pathmos. The professors of
this Sect did long retain the name of Nicolaitans, but were called Gnostics
from (...) Knowledge, which proud title they gave themselves, as if their
knowledge had been transcendent above other men. But their knowledge was so
whimsical, that neither they, or any else understood it; they babled much
concerning their Aeones, and of Ialdabaoth, who made the heavens, and all
things we see, of water. They ascribed diverse sons to their chief Aeon, to wit,
Ennoia, Barbeloth, and Prunicon, which they named Christ. They held that most
things were procreated of the Chaos, and the Abyss of water and darkness.
They taught also that in faithful men were two souls, one holy, of the divine
substance, the other adventitious by divine insufflation, common to man and
beasts. These are the souls that sin, and which pass from man to beast, after
the opinion of Pythagoras, they held also there were two Gods, a good and an
evil; as the Manichees afterward did. They made Jesus and Christ two distinct
persons, and that Christ descended into Jesus when he was thirty years old, and
then he wrought miracles. On this Doctrine the Eutychians and Nestorians
grounded their Heresies. They would have none to suffer Martyrdom for Christ,
who they said conversed on the earth after his Resurrection 18 months. See
Irenaeus, Tertullian, Austin, Theodoret, etc.
This Heresy was much spread in Asia and Egypt about 129 years after Christ,
and in Spain it flourished after Christ 386 years. Out of this Sink, the
Valentinians, Manichees, and Priscillianists sucked their poison.

Q. 8. Of what Religion were the Carpocratians?

A. Carpocrates by birth an Alexandrian in Egypt, Carpocrates.
who flourished about the year of Christ 109. in the time of Antoninus Pius,
and was contemporary with Saturnius; this Carpocrates, I say, ta^ght there were
two opposite Gods; that the Law and good works were needless to those that had
faith: that we could not avoid the rage of evil spirits, but by doing evil, for
that was the way to please them. Therefore they gave themselves over to Magic
and a Libidinous life. They taught also that Christ was a mere man, and that
their master Carpocrates was the better man; hence sprung up the Samosatenians
and Arrians. They said also that Christ was begot as other men, of Joseph and
Mary; and that only his soul ascended into Heaven. They held Pythagorean
transanimation, See the authors above named, Eusebius also, and Clemens
Alexandrinus.
but denied the Resurrection, and that this world was not made by God, but by
Satan. Because their disciples should not publish their abominable mysteries,
they put a mark by a bodkin on their right Ear. Carpocrates carried about with
him his Punk Marcellina.

Q. 9. What was the Religion of Cerinthus, Ebion, and the Nazarites?

A. Cerinthus being a Jew by birth, Cerinthus.
and circumcised, taught that all Christians ought to be circumcised: He lived
in the time of S. John the Apostle, who would not enter into the same Bath with
that pernicious Heretic. He spread his Heresy in Domitians time, about 62
years after Christ. He held the same impious Tenets that Carpocrates, and
taught that it was Jesus who died and rose again, but not Christ. He denied the
Article of life eternal, and taught that the Saints should enjoy in Jerusalem
carnal delights for 1000 years; the maintainers of this whimsie afterward were
the Origenists, Chiliasts, or Millenaries, and on this Mahomes founded his
Paradise. Ebion was a Samaritan by birth, but he would be esteemed a Jew. He
lived also in Domitians time. He denied Christ's divinity, and held the
necessity of the Ceremonial Law, with Cerinthus: And that the use of flesh was
unlawful, because all flesh was begot of impure generation: The Ebionites,
Ebionites.
of all the New Testament admitted only S. Matthews Gospel, because it was
written in Hebrew. The Ebionite Heresy did not continue long under the name of
Ebion, but under other names, to wit, Sampsei, and Elcesitae. Against these
Heretics S. John, who lived in their time, wrote his Gospel, to prove Christ's
Divinity; they rejected S. Paul's Epistles because they refell the Ceremonial
Law. Nazarites.
As for the Nazarites, or Nazarens, they were before Cerinthus and Ebion, about
the end of Nero, 37 years after Christ. They were the first that retained
circumcision with Baptism, and the ceremonial Law with the Gospel. They were
led much with private Revelations and Enthusiasms. They had more Gospels then
one; to wit, the Gospel of Eve, and that which they called the Gospel of
perfection. They were much addicted to fables. Noah's wife they called Ouria,
which signifies fire in Chaldee; she often times set the Ark on fire, See
Epiphanius, Eusebius, Austin, etc.
which therefore was so many times rebuilt. They make her also the first that
imparted to mankind the knowledge of Angels.

Q. 10 What was the Heretical Religion of the Valentinians, Secundians, and
Ptolemians?

A. The Valentinians, Valentinians:
who from their whimsical knowledge were called Gnostics, had for their
master, Valentinus an Egyptian, who lived in the time of Antoninus Pius
Emperor, about a 110 years after Christ. He taught that there were 30 Aeones,
Ages, or Worlds, who had their beginning from Profundity and Silence; that
being the Male, this the Female. Of the Marriage or Copulation of these two,
were begot Understanding and Truth, who brought forth eight Aeones. Of the
Understanding and Truth were begot the Word and Life, which produced 10.
Aeones. The Word and Life brought forth Man and the Church, and of these were
procreated 12. Aeones; these 8. 10. and 12. joined together, made up the 30.
the last of these 30. being abortive* produced the Heaven, Earth, and Sea. Out
of his imperfections were procreated diverse evils, as darkness out of his fear,
evil spirits out of his ignorance, out of his tears springs and rivers; and out
of his laughter light. They also taught that Christ's body was merely spiritual,
and passed through the Virgin, as through a conduit or pipe. Evil was natural
(they said) to the creature, and therefore they made God the author of evil,
which afterward was the doctrine of the Manichees. They held that only the
soul was redeemed, and that there should be no resurrection of the body. Faith
(they taught) was natural, and consequently salvation, which all did not attain
for want of good works; this was the Pelagian doctrine afterward. They made
three sorts of men; to wit, spiritual, who were saved by faith only: these
they called the sons of Seth; hence the Sethian Heretics. The second sort are
animal, or natural, who are saved by works, and are of Abel; hence the
Abelites. The third sort are carnal, who cannot be saved; these are of Cain;
hence the Cainite Heretics. They eat of things offered to idols; slighted good
works as needless, and rejected the old Prophets. Valentinus his chief
Scholar and Successor was Secundus, whose Disciples called Secundians,
Secundians.
changed the name, but retained the Doctrine of Valentinus, permitting all kind
of vicious life, in that they held knowledge without good works would bring men
to Heaven. Valentinus held that the Aeones were only the effects of the divine
mind; but Secundus said they were true Essences, subsisting by themselves.
Ptolomeans.
He added also light and darkness to the eight principal Aeones, and so made
up ten. To Secundus succeeded Ptolomaeus in Valentinus his School. See
Irenaeus, Epiphanius, Austin, with his Commentator Danaeus, etc.
He gave to Bathos, or Profundity, two Wives; to wit, (...), that is
Cogitation; and (...), that is, Will. By the former Wife, Bythus, he procreated
(...), the Mind; and by the other he begot (...), the Truth. Pt^lomaeus also
slighted the old Law.

Q. 11. Of what opinions were the Marcites, Colarba^^, and Heracleonites?

A. Marcus was a notable Magician, Marcites.
who lived under Antoninus Pius, about 115. years after Christ. His Scholars
called themselves Perfect, and bragged that they were more excellent then Peter
or Paul. They denied Christ humanity, and the resurrection of the flesh. They
held two contrary beginnings, or Gods; to wit. (...) that is, Silence; and
(...), that is, Speech. From these the Marcionites and Manichees borrowed their
two principles. They retained their Aeones of Valentinus, but reduced them to
four; to wit, Silence, Speech, and two unnamed, so in stead of the Christian
Trinity, they held a Quaternity. They taught that all men, and every member in
man's body, were subject to, and governed by certain letters and characters.
They baptized not in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; but in the
name of the Father unknown, of Truth the Mother of all, and of him who
descended upon Jesus. By Magical words they bragged that they could turn the
Sacramental Wine into blood, and bring down the grace of God from Heaven into
the chalice. The Colarbasians, Colarbasians.
so called from Colarbas, or Colarbasus the author of that Sect, ascribed the
life, actions, and event^ of man, and all humane affairs to the seven Planets,
as authors thereof. They held also but one Person in the Deity, called by
different names. They divide Jesus from Christ, as the Nestorians afterward;
and taught that Christ was as a flower compacted and made up of the 30. Aeones.
Heracleon, Heracleonites.
Father of the Heracleonites* lived about 110. years after Christ. These
divided the Aeones into good and bad, and held two beginnings, to wit,
Profundity and Silence. Profundity they held to be the most ancient of all; and
that of this with Silence, all the other Aeones were procreated. They said that
man consisted of a soul, body, and some third substance; they held it no sin to
deny Christ, in danger of life* with the mouth, if so be the heart believed in
him. They used in their praye^s Superstitious and Magical words, See
Tertullian, Itenaeus, Epiphanius, Austin, etc.
to drive away Devils. And they thought by anointing their dead with Water,
Oil, and Balsame, to free them from eternal death.

Q. 12. Of what Religion were the Ophites, Cainites, and Sethites?

A. These were called also Ophei and Ophiomorphi from (...) the Serpent which
they worshipped. Ophites.
This Sect began about the year of Christ 132. They taught that Christ was the
Serpent which deceived Eve; and that he in the form of a Serpent entered the
Virgins Womb. In the Eucharist they used to produce a Serpent by enchanting
words out of his hole, or rather box, in which they carried him about; neither
did they think that the Sacramental bread was consecrated till that Serpent had
first touched it, or tasted thereof; they denied also the Resurrection of the
flesh, and Christ's incarnation. Cainites.
The Caini were so called because they worshipped Cain as the author of much
goodness to mankind, so they worshipped Esau, Core, Dathan, Abiram and Judas,
who betrayed Christ, saying that he foreknew what happiness should come to
mankind by Christ's death, therefore he betrayed him. Some of this Sect were
called (...), that is, resisters of God, for they opposed him what they could
in his Laws, therefore rejected the Law of Moses as evil; and worshipped the
wicked Angels, whom they pleased by their evil actions, they taught also that
we were evil by nature, and that the creator of the world was an unknown God,
Sethites*
and envious to Cain, Esau, and Judas. The Sethites so called from Seth, Adams
Son whom they worshipped, lived most in Egypt. About the same time that the
Cainites flourished. They thought that Seth was born of a superior Virtue which
they called Mother. She of the chief God brought forth Seth the Father of all
the Elect: So they make Seth a part of the Divine substance who came in place
of Abel, who by the envy of some Angels stirring up Cain against him, was
slain. They prate also that by the cunning of some Angels some of Cains
posterity were preserved in the Ark, from the flood which was sent by this
great Mother to punish the Cainites for the murdering of Abel. Of this
posterity of Cain proceed all wicked men. They denied the Resurrection, and
held that the Angels had carnal commerce with women, and of this copulation two
men were produced, the one Earthly the other Heavenly being an Hermaphrodite,
who was created to Gods image, See the above named Auth^^s.
who as they blasphemously taught is an Hermaphrodite, and so Adam also. They
make Christ who was born of the Virgin, to be no other then Seth.

Q. 13. What Religion did the Archonticks profess and the Ascothyp^ae?

A. These were the last of the Valentinian Heretics; ca^^ed Archontici,
Archonticks.
from (...), or (...), that is; Principalities, these they worshipped as
inferior gods, Father of the Angels, and creators of the world; of Photenia the
Mother, were the Angels begot by these Archontes. One Peter an Anachorit, and a
Monk of Palestina was author of this Sect, in the time of Constantius the Son
of Constantine, about the year of Christ, 308. These spawned anothed Sect,
which they called Ascothyptas, Ascothypta^
because they brake in pieces all the Plate and Vessels used in the Sacrament;
for they rejected the Sacraments of the Church* They despised good works, and
gave themselves to all uncleanness, and slighted the Old Testament, denied the
Resurrection, and Sacraments, as is said, thinking it unlawful to represent
Spiritual and Heavenly things by corporal and earthly. They thought that the
Devil begot Cain and Abel of Eve; both these sons were Reprobates. And that a
man who has knowledge and says may be saved, let his life be never so
Vicious, and that the devil was the Son of the Jewish, See Austin, Theodoret,
Isidorus, etc.
but not of the Christian God. They also affixed to each Heaven or Sphere an
angel, as the Peripate^icks did an Intelligence.

Q. 14. What was the Religion of Cerdon and Marcion?

A. Cerdon lived about the time of Valentinus the Heretic, Cerdon.
under Antoninus Pius Emperor 110 years after Christ; he taught that there were
two contrary gods; the one a god of mercy and pity, the other of justice and
severity, whom he called evil, cruel, and the maker of the world. The former
God he called good, and the Father of Christ, and author of the Gospel; but
Moses Law they rejected and the old Testament, as proceeding from the other
god, to wit, of justice. The Cerdonians also denied the Resurrection of the
flesh and Humanity of Christ; Affirming that he was not born of a Virgin, nor
suffered but in show. Marcion, Marcion.
by birth a Paphlagonian near the Euxin Sea, was Cerdons Scholar, whose
opinions he preferred to the Orthodox Religion, out of spleen because his
Father Bishop Marcion excommunicated him for Whoredom, and because he could not
without true repentance be received again into the Church; therefore he
professed and maintained Cerdons Heresies at Rome, in the time of M. Antoninus
Philosophus, 133. years after Christ, but he refined some points, and added to
them some of his own phansies. With Cerdon he held two contrary gods, and
denied Christ's Incarnation of the Virgin, and therefore blotted his Genealogy
out of the Gospel, affirming his body to be from heaven, not from the Virgin.
He denied that this world, by reason of the Ataxie and Disorder in it, could be
the work of the good god. He rejected the Old Testament and the Law, as
repugnant to the Gospel; which is false, for their is no repugnancy. He denied
the Resurrection, and taught that Christ by descending into hell, delivered
from thence the souls of Cain, Esau, the Sodomites, and other reprobates,
translating them into heaven. He condemned the eating of flesh, and the married
life; and renewed baptism upon every grievous fall into sin. If any of the
Catechumeni died, some in their name were baptized by the Marcionites. See
Epiphanius, Eusebius, Austin, Theodoret, etc.
They also baptized and administered the Eucharist in presence of the
Catechumeni, against the custom of the Church. They permitted Women also to
baptize. They condemned all Wars as unlawful, and held transanimation with the
Pythagoreans.

Q. 15. What was the Religion of Apelles, Severus, and Tatianus?

A. Apelles whose scholars were called Apellitae, Apelles.
was Marcions Disciple, and a Syrian by birth. He flourished under Commodus the
Emp^ror, about 150. years after Christ. He taught that there was but one chief
God, to whom was subordinat a fiery God who appeared to Moses in the bush, who
made the world, and gave the Law to the Israelites, and was their God. He gave
to Christ a body compacted of the Stary, and Elementary substance, and appeared
in the shape only of man. This body when he ascended, he left behind him,
every part thereof* returning to their former principles; and that Christ's
spirit is only in heaven* He rejected the Law and Prophets, and denied the
Resurrection. Severus, author of the Severians, was contemporarie with Apelles
under Commodus, 156. years after Christ. He used the company of one Philumena a
Strumpet and Witch. He taught his disciples to abstain from Wine, as being
poison begot of Satan in the form of a Serpent, with the Earth. The world he
said was made by certain Powers of Angels, which he called by diverse barbarous
names, He hated Women and Marriage, denied the Resurrection, the Old Testament,
and Prophets, using in stead of them, certain Apocryphal Books. Tatianus,
Tatianus.
a bad Scholar of a good Master, Justin Martyr, was a Mesopotamian by birth,
and lived under M. Antoninus Philosophus, 143. years after Christ; his
disciples were called Tatiani from him, and Encratitae from (...) temperance or
continence, for they abstain from Wine, Flesh, and Marriage. They were called
also Hydro-Paristatae, users of Water, for in stead of Wine they made use of
Water in the Sacrament. They held that Adam was never restored to mercy after
his fall. And that all men the sons of Adam are damned without hope of
salvation except the Tatiani. They condemned the Law of Moses, See Irenaeus,
Tertullian, Eusebius, Austin, Theodoret, Epiphanius, etc.
the eating of flesh, and the use of wine, and held Procreation of Children to
be the work of Satan; yet they permitted, though unwilingly, Monogamy, or the
marrying once, but never again, they denied that God made male and female, and
that Christ was the seed of David.

Q. 16. Of what Religion were the Cataphrygians? Cataphrygians.


A. Montanus disciple to Tatianus who was his contemporary, was author of this
Sect, who for a while were from him called Montanists; but being ashamed of his
wicked life, and unhappy end, they were afterward from the Country where he was
born, and which was first infected with his heresy, called Cataphrygians,
(...): they were named also Tascodragitae, because they used in praying to
thrust their forefingers into their Nostrills, to show their devotion, and
anger for sin. Tascus in their Language, signifies a long slick, or slaff, and
Druggus their Nose, as if you would say Perticonasati, as the interpreter of
Epiphanius translates it. They loved to be called Spirituales, because they
bragged much of the gifts of the Spirit; others that were not of their opinion,
they called naturual men. This Heresy began about 145. years after Christ, and
lasted above 500. years. He had two Strumpets which followed him, to wit Prisca
and Maximilla, these forsook their Husbands, pretending zeal to follow
Montanus; whereas indeed they were notorious Whoors: they took upon them to
prophecy, and their dictates were held by Montanns as divine oracles, but at
last, he and they* for company hanged themselves. He blasphemously held himself
not only to be in a higher measure inspired by the Holy Ghost, then the
Apostles were, but also said that he was the very Spirit of God, which in some
small measure descended on the Apostles; he condemned second marriages, and yet
allowed Incest. See Epiphanius, Eusebius, Austin Theodoret, Isidor, etc.
He trusted altogether to Revelations and Enthusiasmes, and not to the
Scripture. In the Eucharist, these wretches mingled the Bread with Infants
Blood; they confounded the persons of the Trinity, affirming the Father
suffered;

Q. 17. What was the Religion of the Pepuzians, Quintilians, and Artotyrites?

A. These were disciples of the Cataphrygians: Pepuzians Pepuzians.
were so called from Pepuza a town between Galatia and Cappadocia, where
Montanus dwelt, and Quintillians Quintilians.
from Quintilla another whorish Prophetess, and companion to Prisca and
Maximilla. They held Peprza to be that new Jerusalem fore told by the Prophets,
and mentioned in the Epistle to the Hebrews, and in the Revelatien. In this
they said we should enjoy life eternal. They perferred Women before Men,
affirming that Christ assumed the form of a Women, not of a Man. And that he
was the author of their wicked Tenets. They commended Eve for eating the
forbidden fruit, saying that by so doing, she was the author of much happiness
to man. They admitted Woman to Ecclesiastical functions, making Bishops and
Priests of them* to preach, and administer the Sacraments. They mingled also
the Sacramental Bread with humane Blood. The Artotyritae Artotyrites.
were so called from offering Bread and Chief in the Sacrament in stead of
Wine, because our first Parents offered the fruits of the Earth, and of sheep,
and because God excepted Abels sacrifice which was the fruits of his sheep, of
which Cheese comes; therefore they held cheese more acceptable then wine. In
other points they were Pepuzians, and differed from them only in cheese
offering; See Epiphanius, Austin, Theodoret.
therefore they were called Artotyritae, from (...) bread, and (...) cheese.

Q. 18. What was the Religion of the Tessarescae Decatitae, or Quarradecimani
and of the Alogiani?

A. The former of these were so called from observing Easter on the fourteenth
day of the Moon in March, after the manner of the Jews, and they made Saint
John the author of that custom which was observed by the Oriental Churches,
Quartadecimani.
till Pope Victor excommunicated them, as Schismatics, in dissenting from the
custom of the Western Church. This controversy fell out about the 165* year
of Christ, Severus then being Emperor, and from the first Original thereof
continued 200. years. This Heresy was condemned by the council of Nice, and
ordered that Easter should be kept after the manner of the Western Church,
which derived their custom from Saint Peter. These Heretics also denied
repentance to those that fell after baptism; which was the Novatian Heresy.
Alogiani.
Alogiani so called from (...) the privative, and (...) the word, because they
denied Christ to be the word, and consequently they denied his divinity, as
Ebion and Cerinthus had done before, Samos^tenus, A^^ius, and the Mahumetans
afterward. These Alogiani rejected Saint John's Gospel and his Apocalypse, as
not written by him, but by Cerinthus, which is ridiculous; for Cerinthus denied
Christ's Divinity, which Saint John asserteth, in writing, that the Word was
God. These Heretics were named also Berilliani from Berillus a Bishop in
Arabia, who taught that Christ was a man, and then became the word of God. The
first broacher of this Heresy is thought to be Artemon a profane man, See
Epiphanius, Austin, Theadoret, Is^dor, etc.
who lived about the time of Severus Emperor 167. years after Christ, from him
they were called Artemonit^.

Q 19. What was the Religion of the Adamians, Elcesians, and Theodotians?

A. The Adamians Adamians.
or Adamites, so called either from one Adam their author, or from Adam the
first man, whose nakedness they imitate, sprung up shortly after the
Gnostics, and were called Prodiciani from one Prodicus, whom they followed. Of
this Sect there be many extant at this day. They held it unlawful for men or
women to wear clothes in their congregation and assemblies, seeing their
meetings were the only Paradise on earth, where they were to have life Eternal,
and not in Heaven^; as Adam then in his Paradise, so Christians in theirs
should be naken, and nor clothed with the badges of their sin and shame. They
rejected marriages as diabolical; therefore they used promiscuous copulation in
the dark; they rejected also all prayers to God as needless, seeing he knew
without us what we wanted. The Elcesei, so called from Elcesae, El^^sians.
an impostor; and Sampsei from a spotted kind of Serpent, which they
represented in their changable dispositions, were much addicted to judicial
Astrology and Soothsaying. They held two Priests, one below made of the Virgin,
a mere man, and one above; they confound Christ with the Holy Ghost, and
sometimes they call him Christ's Sister, but in a masculine name, to both which
persons they give longitude, latitude, and locality. To water they ascribe a
divinity, and so they did to two Whoores, Marthus and Marthana, the dust of
whose feet and spittle they worshipped as holy relics. They had a certain
Apocrypha book, the reading whereof procured remission of ^in; and they held it
no sin to deny Christ in time of persecution. This Heresy began to spread,
about 210. years after Christ under Gordian the Emperor. See Origin who writ
against it. Theodotians.
The Theodocians so called from one Theodo^us, or Theodotion, who lived under
Severus Emperor; 170. years after Christ. Of these Heretics see Tertullian,
Eusebius, Epiphanius, Austin, Theodoret, etc.
He was a Byzantian by birth, and a Tanner by profession, who taught that in
times of persecution we may deny Christ, and in so doing, we deny not God,
because Christ was merely man, and that he was begotten of the seed of man. He
also added to, and took from the writings of the Evangelists what he pleased.

Q 20. What was the Religion of the Melchisedecians, Bardesanists, and Noetians;

A. The former were called Melchisedecians for believing that Melchisedeck was
not a man, Melchisedecians,
but a Divine power superior to Christ, whom they held to be a mere man. One
Theodotus Scholar to the former Theodotus the Tanner, was author of this Sect,
who lived under Severus about 174. years after Christ. The Bardesanists were so
called from one Bardesanes a Syrian who lived under Verus the Emperor,
Bardesanists.
144. years after Christ. He taught that all things, even God himself, were
subject to Fate, or a Stoical necessity, so that he took away all liberty, both
from God and man, and that virtue and vice depended on the Stars. He renewed
also the whimsies of the Aeones, by which he overthrew Christ's divinity, and
denied the Resurrection of the flesh. The Noetians, Noetians.
so called from Noetus born in Smyrna, taught that there was but one Person in
the Trinity, which was both mortal and immortal, in heaven God, and impatible;
on earth Man, and patible. So they made a Trinity, not of Persons, but of Names
and Functions. Noetus also taught, that he was Moses, and that his brother was
Aaron. This Heretic was buried with the burial of an Ass, See the authors
already named.
and his city Smyrna was overthrown eight years after he broached his Heresy.
He lived about 140. years after Christ, under M. Antoninus, and L. Verus
Emperors.

Q. 21. Of what Religion were the Valesians, the Cathari, Angelici, and
Apostolici?

A. The Valesians so called from one Valens, an Arabian, Valesians.
who out of the doctrine of the Gnostics or Tatians condemned marriage and
procreation. Therefore his Scholars after the example of Origin, gelded
themselves, thinking none can enter into heaven but Eunuchs. Whereas the
Eunuchs Christ speaks of be such, as by continence subdue the lusts of the
flesh; This Heresy springing under Iulianus Philippus Emperor about the year
of Christ 216. Cathari.
The Cathari (...) so called by themselves, as if they were purer then other
men, derived most of their Tenets from Novat^s, hence they were named
Novatians. This Novatus lived under Decius the Emperor, after Christ 220.
years. He was an African born. This Heresy lasted till the time of Arcadius,
to wit, 148. years; they denied repentance to those who fell after Baptism,
they bragged much of their Sanctity and good works. They condemned second
Marriages as adulterous. They used rebaptization as the Donatists did
afterward. They rejected also Oil or Chrism in Baptism. Angelici.
The Angelici were so called from worshipping of Angels; it seems this Heresy
was begun in the Apostles time, who condemns it; but had its growth shortly
after the Melchisedecians, about the year of Christ 180. The Apostolici were so
called from imitating the holiness of the Apostles; Apostolici.
these were the spawn of the Encratites, about the year of Christ 145. They
rejected all married people as incapable of Heaven, and held that the Apostles
perpetually abstained from marriage. They had all things in common, holding
those unfit for Heaven who had any thing peculiar to themselves. They denied
repentance and reconciliation to those that fell after Baptism. In stead of the
Evangelists, they used Apocrypha books, as the Gospel, according to the
Egyptians; See the authors above named.
the act of Andrew and Thomas. These Heretics were called also Apotactitae by
the Latins, and by the Greeks (...) from renouncing of the world.

Q. 22. What was the Religion of the Sabellians, Originians, and Originists?

A. The Sabellians were indeed all one in opinion with the Noetians, Sabellians.
but this name grew more famous then the other; for Sabellius an African by
birth, was a better scholar then Noetus. Sabellianisme began to be known about
the year of Christ 224. under the persecution of Valerian. They held there was
but one person in the Trintry: whence it follows that the Father suffered;
therefore they were named Patripassiani. This one Person or (...), say they, is
called by diverse names as occasion serves. The Originians were so called from
one Origines a Monk, Originians.
who lived in Egypt and was disciple to Antony. These condemned marriage,
extolled concubinat, and yet were enemies to propagation, committing the sin of
Onan. They also reject such books of the old and new Testament, as seem to
favor marriage. The Origenists Origenists.
or Adamantians wree so called from that famous Origin, who for his constancy
in times of persecution, and for his inexhausted labors, was named Adamantius.
His errors began to spread about the year of Christ 247. under Aurelian the
Emperor, and continued above 334. years. They were condemned first in the
council of Alexandria 200. years after his death; and again in the fifth
general council of Constantinople under Justinian the first, they held (...),
or a Revolution of souls from their estate and condition after death, into the
bodies again, to converse in the world; and so by denying the perpetuity of our
future estate, either in heaven or hell, by consequence they denied the
Resurrection of the flesh. They held also that the punishments of the Devils
and Reprobates should last only a 1000. years, and then should be saved. They
taught that Christ and the holy Ghost do no more see the Father, then we see
the Angels; that the Son is coessential to the Father, but not coeternal;
because, say they, the Father created him, as he did also the holy Spirit. That
the souls were created long before this world, See Eusebius, Epiphanius,
Austin, Theodoret, etc.
and for sinning in Heaven were sent down into their bodies, as into prisons.
They did also overthrow the whole historical truth of Scriptures by their
allegories.

Q. 23. What was the Religion of the Samosatenians, and Photinians;

A. Paulus Samosatenus was so called from Samosata, Samosatenians.
where he was born, near Euphrates. His Scholars were called Paulinians and
Samosatenians, and afterward Photinians, Lucians, and Marcellians, from these
new teachers. Their belief was, that Christ was merely man, and had no being
till his incarnation. This Heresy was taught 60. years before Samosatenus, by
Artemon, and was propagated afterward by Photinus, Lucian, and Marcellus,
Arrius, and Mahomet. They held that the Godhead dwelt not in Christ bodily, but
as in the Prophets of old, by grace and efficacy, and that he was only the
external, not the internal word of God. Therefore they did not baptize in his
name; for which cause the Council of Nice rejected their baptism as none, and
ordered they should be rebapti^ zed, who were baptized by them. This heresy
under the name of Samosatenus brake out about 232. years after Christ; and has
continued in the Eastern parts ever since. The Photinians, Photinians.
so called from Photinus, born in the lesser Galatia, held the same heresy
with Samosatenus, and began to propagate it about the year of Christ 323. at
Syrmium, where he was Bishop, under Canstantius the Emperor; and before him,
Marcellus his master under Constantine the great, publicly taught it,
affirming also that the Trinity was the extention of the divinity, which is
dilated into three, and contracted again into one, See the forenamed Authors.
like wax being contracted, may be dilated by heat. This heresy was much
spread under Valens the Arrian Emperor 343. years after Christ.

Q. 24. What was the Manichean Religion?

A. Manes a Persian by birth, Manichees.
and a Servant by condition, was Father of the Manichean Sect; which was the
sink of almost all the former heresies, for from the Marcionites they derived
their opinion of two Principles, or gods, one good, the other bad. With the
Encratites they condemned the eating of flesh, eggs, and milk; they held also
with the Anthropomorphites, that God had members, and that he was substantially
in every thing, though never so base, as dung and dirt, but was separated from
them by Christ's coming, and by the Elect, Manichea^s eating of the fruits of
the Earth, whose intestins had in them a cleansing and separating virtue. They
condemned also the use of wine, as being the gall of the Princes of darkness.
With Marcion also they rejected the Old Testament, and currilated the New, by
excluding Christ's Genealogies; and said, that he who gave the Law, was not the
true God. They babled also, that there was a great combat between the Princes
of darkness, and of light; in which, they who held for God, were taken
captives, for whose redemption God labors still. With the Ophites they held
that Christ was the Serpent which deceived our first Parents; and with diverse
of the precedent Heretics, not only did they deny Christ's Divinity, but his
Humanity also; affirming that he fained himself to suffer, die, and rise again;
and that it was the Devil who truly was crucified. With Valentinus they taught
that Christ's body was fixed to the Stars, and that he redeemed only our souls,
not our bodies; With the former Heretics, they denied the Resurrection, and
with Pythagoras, held transanimation. With Montanus, Manes held that he was the
true Para^let, or comforter, which Christ promised to send. With the Gentiles
they worshipped the Sun, Moon, and some Idols. With Anaxago^As, they held the
Sun and Moon to be ships; and taught that one Schacla made Adam and Eve. They
make no scruple to swear by the creatures; they give to every man two contrary
souls, which still struggle in him. With the Poets they held that the heaven
was supported by the shoulders of one whom they called Laturanius. They make
the soul of man, and of a tree, the same in essence, as being both of them a
part of God; with the former heretics also they condemned marriage, and
permitted promiscuous copulation; and that not for procreation, but for
pleasure. They rejected baptism as needless, and condemned almsgiving, Of
these see Clem. Alexandrinus, Epiphanius, Theodoret, and Austin, who had been
himself a Manichee.
or works of charity: they make our will to sin, natural, and not acquired by
our fall; as for sin they make it a substance, communicated from parents to
Children; and not a quality, or affection. These wicked opinions raged in the
world 340. years after Manes was excoriated alive for poysonning the Persian
Kings Son; these Heretics were three Sects; to wit, Manichees, Catharists, or
Puritans; and Macarii, or blessed.

Q. 25. What was the Religion of the Hierarchites, Melitians, and Arrians?

A. The Hierachites, Hierachites.
so called from Hieracha, an Egyptian, and a Monk who lived shortly after
Origin, under Gallienus, 234. years after Christ, taught that married people
could not enjoy heaven; nor infants, because they cannot merit; they admitted
none into their Church, but those that lived single. They denied that Paradise
in which man was created, had any earthly or visible being. They held
Melchisedeck to be the Holy Ghost, and denied the Resurrection. Meletians.
The Meletians (so called from Meletius, a Theban Bishop in Egypt; who because
he was deposed for offering to Idols, in spleen he taught the Novatian Heresy,
in denying pardon of sins to those that fell though they repented) rejected all
from their communion, who in time of persecution fell from Christ, though they
afterward repented. They used Pharisaical washings, and diverse other Judaical
ceremonies, and in their humiliations to appease Gods anger with dancing,
singing, and gingling of small bells. This Heresy began under Constatine the
Emperor 286. years after Christ. Arrians.
The Arrians so called from Arrius a Lybian by birth, and a Presbyter of
Alexandria by Profesion, were called also Exoucontji, for saying that Christ
was (...), created of nothing. This heresy brake out under Constantine 290.
years after Christ, and overrun a great part of the Christian world. They held
Christ to be a creature, and that he had a man's body, but no humane soul, the
divinity supplying the room thereof. They held also the holy Ghost a creature,
See Epiphanius, Austin, Eusebius, Ruffinus, Socrates, and Theodoret, in their
Histories:
proceeding from a creature, to wit, Christ. The Arrians in their Doxolegier
gave glory not to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, but to the
Father by the Son in the Holy Ghost. They rebaptized the Orthodox Christian;
and baptized only the upper parts to the Novel, thinking the inferior parts
unworthy of baptism.

Q. 26. What was the Religion of the Audians, Semi-arrians, and Macedonians?

A. The Audiani so called from Audaeus a Syrian, who appeared under Valentinian
the Emperor 338. years after Christ, Audian^.
were named afterward Anthropormorphytae, for ascribing to God a humane body;
these as afterward the Denatists, forsook the Orthodox Church, because some
wicked men were in it. They held darkness; fire and water eternal, and the
Original of all things. They admitted to the Sacrament all sorts of Christians
even such as were profane and impenitent. The Semi-arrians were those who
neither would have Christ to be (...) of the same individual essence with the
Father, Semi-arrians.
as the Orthodox Church held; nor yet (...) of a like essence; but (...) of a
different Essence, but of a like Will: and so they taught, that Christ was not
God in Essence, but in Will only and Operation. This Heresy also held that the
Holy Ghost was Christ's creature. It began under Constantius the Emperor 330.
years after Christ. The chief author thereof was one-eyed Acatius, Bishop of
Cesaraea Palestina, successor to Eusebius; hence they were called Acatiani.
Macedonian^.
The Macedonians, so called from Macedonius, Bishop of Constantinople; held
that the holy Ghost was a creature, and the servant of God, but not God
himself; and withal that by the holy Spirit was meant only a power created by
God, and communicated to the creatures. This Heresy sprung up, or rather being
sprung up long before, See Socrates, Sozomen, Theodoret, Isidor, Austin,
Epiphanius, etc.
was stiffly maintained under Constantius, the Son of Constantine 312. years
after Christ; and was condemned in the second Ecumenical council at
Constantinople under Theodosius the great. These Heretics were called (...)
fighters against the spirit.

Q. 27. Of what Religion were the Aerians, Aetians, or Eunomians, and
Apollinarists?

A. The Aerians so called from Aerius the Presbyter, Aerians.
who lived under Valentinian the first 340. years after Christ; held that there
was no differance between a Bishop and a Presbyter, that Bishops could not
ordain, that the dead were not to be prayed for; that there should be no set or
anniversary fasts, and with the Encratites, or Apotactitae admitted none to
their communion, but such as were continent, and had renounced the world. They
were called Syllabici also, as standing captiously upon Words and Syllabies.
They are said also to condemn the use of flesh: the Aetians, Aetians
were called so from Aetius a Deacon whose successor was Eunomius about the
year of Christ 331. under the Emperor Constantius; he was Bishop of Cyzicum
whose disciples were called Eunomians, and Anomei for holding that Christ was
no way like the Father. They were called also Eudoxiani, Theophron^ani. When
they were banished, they lived in holes, and caves, and so were called
Troglodytae and Gothici, because this heresy prevailed much among the Goths,
by means of Vlphillas their Bishop. These heretics held that God could be
perfectly here comprehended by us, that the Son was neither in power, essence,
or will, like the Father, and that the Holy Ghost was created by the Son; that
Christ also assumed only man's body, but not his soul. They permitted all kind
of licentiousness, saying that faith without good works could save. Eunomians.
The Eunomians did rebaptise the Orthodox professors, and baptized in the name
of the Father uncreated, the Son created, and the Holy Ghost created by the
Son. The Apollinarists so called from Apollinaris Presbyter in Laodicea,
divided Christ's humanity in affirming that he assumed man's body and a sensitive
soul, Apollinarists.
but not the reasonable or intellective soul of man, because that was supplied
by the divinity; from this division they were named Dupla^es and Dim^iritae. In
stead of the Trinity they acknowledge only three distinct degrees of power in
God: the greatest is the Father, the lesser is the Son, and the laest of all
the Holy Ghost. They held that Christ's flesh was consubstantial with his
divinity, and that he took not his flesh from the Virgin, but brought it from
Heaven. They held that Christ had but one will, See the Authors above named.
that men's souls did propagate other souls, that after the Resurrection the
ceremonial Law should be kept as before. This heresy brake out 350. years
after Christ, under Valens the Emperor.

Q. 28. What did the Antidicomarianites, Messalians, and Metangismonites
profess?

A. The former of these were so called, Antidicomarianites.
because they were (...), adversaries to Mary's Virginity. Whence they were
named Antimaritae, and Helvidians, from Helvidius the author, who lived under
Theodosius the great, 355. years after Christ. These held that Mary did not
continue a Virgin after Christ was born, but that she was known by Joseph,
whereas she was indeed (...) a perpetual Virgin. Messalians.
The Messalians were so named from the Caldaicks word Tsalah which signifies
to pray, therefore in Greek they were called (...) from (...) prayer, because
they did pray continually; and Martyriani for worshipping as a Martyr one of
their Sect who was killed by a Soldier. They were called also Enthusiastae
from their pretended inspirations, and Euphemitae from (...) praises or elogies
which they sung to God, and Satanici from worshipping of Satan, whom they held
to be the governor of mankind. They held that nothing was required to
salvation, but prayer; therefore they rejected faith, preaching, and
sacraments; and taught that God was visible to our bodily eyes, and that Satan
was to be worshipped that he might do no hurt; they bragged that they could
visibly expel Satan, whom they could see come out of the mouth like smoke, and
in form of a Sow with her Pigs, into whose place the holy Ghost did visibly
succeed. They live idly, and hare working, so that they excommunicate any of
their Sect that labor; they condemn all alms giving, except to those of their
own Sect: They allow lying, perjury, and dis^embling in Religion. They slighted
the Sacraments, and held that baptism was of no use, but only for sins past.
This heresy prevailed under Valentinian and Valens Emperors, Me^angismonits
341. years after Christ. The Metangismonites were so called from (...), that
is, transvasation, or putting one vessel, See Philaster, Austin, Damascen,
Theodoret, etc.
or (...) in Greek, into another; for they held that the Son was in the Father,
as a lesser vessel in a bigger; and so they make the Divine Essence bigger and
lesser then it self, they held also that God was corporeal.

Q. 29. What was the Religion of the Hermians, Proclianites, and Patricians?

A. The Hermians or Hermogenians, Hermians.
so called from Hermius or Hermogenes an African under Severus the Emperor,
177. years after Christ, are by Saint Austin reckoned the same with the
Seleucians. These held that the elements or matter of the world was coeternal
with God. That the Angels were made of spirit and fire, and that they were the
creators of men's souls. That evil was partly from God, partly from the matter,
that Christ in his ascension left his body in the Sun; they denied that there
was ever any visible Paradise; that there shall be any Resurrection, and that
baptism by water was to be used. Proclianites.
The Proclianites were so called from one Proclus or Proculus, an obscure man,
who held the Hermogenian opinions, and withal taught that Christ was not yet
come into the flesh. Patricians.
The Patricians were so called from one Patricius whom Danaeus thinks lived
under Arcadius the Emperor, 387. years after Christ. These held that not God,
but Saran made man's flesh, and that therefore men may lawfully kill themselves
to be rid of the flesh; See Austin, Isidor, Gratian, and others.
they admit and reject what books of the Old Testament they please.

Q. 30. What did the Ascitae, Pattalorinchitae, Aquarii, and Coluthiani,
profess?

A. The Ascitae Ascitae.
so named from (...) a Bottle used to carry about Bottles filled with W^ne, and
stopped, bragging that they were the new Evangelical Bottles filled with new
Wine; and such they held necessary for all good Christians to carry about; in
this they placed the main of their Religion. These and diverse other heresies
like Jonas his gourd were quickly up and quickly down. The Pattalorinchitae
were so named from (...) a staff or stick, Pattalorinchitae
and (...) the Nose, for they used to thrust their fingers into their Nose and
Mouth, to hinder them from speaking; for they place^ all their Religion in
silence. Hence they were called Silentiarii. Aquarii.
The Aquarii were so called from (...) water, because in stead of pure Wine,
they offered Water in the Sacrament. These were the spawn of the Severians,
Coluthiani.
Encratites, and Helcesaites. The Coluthiani were so called from Coluthus,
Presbyter of Alexandria, and coetanial with Arrius, under Constantine, 290.
years after Christ. Their opinion was, that God could not be the author of
punishment, because it is evil; See Philaste^. Austin, Theodoret, Isider, etc.
whereas Amos the Prophet shows the contrary, that their is no evil in the
City, which the Lord has not done; Amos 3. 6. and in Isay, the Lord forms
the Light and Darkness, making peace, and creating evil, Is. 45. 7.

Q. 31. What were the Religious Tenets of the Floriani; Aeternales, and
Nudipedales?

A. The Floriani were so called from Florinus, or Florianus a Roman Presbyter,
Floriani.
who lived under Commodus the Emperor, 153. years after Christ. These heretics
were spawned by the Valentinians, whose Doctrines concerning the ^^ones, and
other of their Tenets they maintained, and withal, that God made evil and sin;
whereas Moses tells us that all things which he made were very good. They
retained also the Jewish manner of keeping Easter, and their other Ceremonies.
Aeternales Aeternales.
from the opinion of the worlds eternity; for they held there should be no
change after the Resurrection, but that the world should continue as it is now.
This heresy in Philaster and Austin has neither name, nor author. The
Nudipedales Nudipedales.
were those who placed all Religion in going bare foot; because Moses and
Ieshua are commanded to pull off their shoes, and Isay to walk barefoot;
whereas these were Extraordinary, and peculiar precepts, See Philaster, Austin,
etc.
and signs of particular things, not enjoined to be iitated.

Q. 32. What was the Religion of the Donatists, Priscillianists, the
Rhetorians, and the Feri?

A. Donatists.
The Donatists, so called from Donatus a Numidian, who because Cecilian was
preferred before him to the Bishopric of Carthage, accused him and all the
Bishops that ordained him to be Traditores, that is, such as had delivered the
Bibles to be burned by Idolaters under the persecution of Maximinus: though
this accusation was found false, yet Donatus persisted obstinate, and separated
himself, and congregation from all others, accounting that no Church where any
spot or infirmity was to be found; and that such a pure church was only to be
found among the Donatists, and yet they would have no man to be forced, or
urged to a godly life, but must be le^t to himself, which was to open a Gap to
all impurity, they did also flight the magistracy, and would not suffer them to
punish heretics. They held the efficacy of the Sacraments to depend upon the
dignity of the Minister, and not on the Spirit of God; they rebaptized also the
Orthodox Christians as if their baptis^n had been no baptism. They held it no
sin to kill themselves rather then to fall into the hands of the Magistrate;
and so they made no scruple to kill others that were not of their faith, when
they found any advantage. They used certarn magical purifications, and bragged
much of Enthusiasms and Revelations. They also with the Arrians made the Son
less then the Father, and the Holy Ghost then the Son. This herefie was
divided into diverse schisms, the chief whereof were the Circumcellions so
called from their Cells and Cottages in which they lived, to show their
austerity; these made no bones to murder all they met, that were not of their
Religion, so that they were more dangerous then Highway Robbers. The Donatists
were named also Parmenianists from Parmenianus one of Donatus his disciples. At
Rome, they were named Campates from the Camp, or Field, and Montenses from the
Hill where they used to hide themselves. The Priscillianists were so named from
Priscillianus Priscillianifts.
a Spaniard, who under Gratian the Emperor, spread his heresy first in Spain,
348. years after Christ. From thence like a canker it run through all the West:
his heresy was made up of former heresies; for with the Manicnes he held that
the world was made by an evil god. With the Sabellians he confounded the
persons of the Trinity; with the Origenists, he taught that men's souls were
made before their bodies in some receptacle of Heaven; and with the Manichees,
that they were parcels of the Divine Essence. With Astrologers they held that
all humane events depended on the Stars; and with the Stoics that we sin
necessarily, and coactively. With the Gnostics they condemned marriage; with
the Encratites, the eating of flesh; with the Audians they allowed lying, and
perjury in matters of Religion; and with the G^osticks they rejected the
ancient Prophets as fanatical and ignorant of the will of God. Rhetorians.
The Rhetorians so called from one Rhetorius, held the same Tenet, which the
Mahumetans do at this day, namely that every man shall be saved by the Religion
he professes, and that therefore no Religion should be forced, Feri.
but men should be left to their own choice, and will. The Feri or wild
Heretics were such as held it unlawful to eat or converse with men; See
Philaster, Austin, Isidor, etc.
therefore they held none should be saved, but such as lived alone: They taught
also that the holy Ghost was a creature.

Q. 33. What were the Theopaschitae, Trithei^ae, Aquei^ Mel^^onii, Ophei,
Tertullii, Liberatores, and Nativitarii?

A. The Theopaschites, Theopaschitae.
held that the divinity of Christ suffered as if there had been in him but one
nature, because one person. Tritheitae.
The Tritheits divided the Essence of God into three parts; the one they called
the Father, the other the Son, and the third the Holy Ghost; as though either
of the persons had not bin perfectly God. Aquei.
The Aquei held that the water was not created but coeternal with God; this
heresy was culled out of the Hermagenian and Audian Tenets. Melitonii:
The Melitonii so named from one Melito, taught that not the soul, but the body
of man was made after Gods Image, and so with the Anthropomorphites they made
God corporeal. The Ophei, Ophei.
so called from one Opheus, held there were innumerable worlds. Tertullii.
The Tertullii, from one Tertullus, taught that the souls of wicked men should
be converted into Devils, Li^eratores^
and Savage Beasts. Li^eratores, are those who taught that Christ by his
descending into Hell, did set at liberty all wicked that then be^eved in him.
Nativitarii.
Nativitarji, were such as taught that Christ's Divine Nativity had a beginning,
because it is written, Psalm. 2. [Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten
thee] so they acknowledged the Eternity of his Essence, Of which see Philaster,
Austin Isidor, etc.
but not of his Filiation. These were but branches of former Heresies, broached
by obscure or unknown authors, and of short continuance.

Q. 34. What were the Luciferians, Jovinianists, and Arbicks.?

A. Luciferians, Luciferians.
so called from Lucifer Bishop of Caralitanum in Sardinia, who lived under
Iul^an the Apostate, 333. years after Christ, taught with the Cerinthians, and
Marcionites, that this world was made by the Devil. That men's souls were
corporeal, and had their being by propagation or traduction. They denied to the
Clergy that fell, any place for repentance, or reconciliation; neither did they
restore Bishops or inferious Clerks to their Dignities, if they fell into
Heresy, though they afterward repented. This was the Doctrine of the old
Nova^ians, and Meletians; these Luciferians were named also Homonymians, for
using the word flesh ambiguously in their dispurations. The Iovinianists were
so called from Iovinian a Roman, Iovinianists.
who lived under Jovinian the Emperor, 335. years after Christ. These held
with the Stoics that all sins were equal; that after baptism we could not
sin: that fasting was needless. that Virginity was not better then the married
life, and that the blessed Virgin in bearing Christ lost her Virginity.
Arabieks.
The Arabicks, were so named from Arabia, the country where this heresy was
broached and maintained, under Philip the Emperor, 217. years after Christ;
they held that men's souls died with their bodies, and that both in the last
day should rise again: From this heresy they were called (...), See the above
named; authors, and (...) against (...).
that is, mortal souls; not much different from them are the Psychopanuychitae
of this age, who make the soul sleep in the Grave with the body till the
Resurrection.

Q. 35. What were the Collyridians, Paterniani, Tertullianists, and Abelonitae?

A. The Collyridians Collyridians.
were hatched also in Arabia, and so named from a kind of Cakes or Buns, which
the Greeks call (...); these Cakes they presented every year with great
ceremony to a certain Maid fit^ng in a chair of State, and covered with a vail,
^n honor of the Virgin Ma^y: these flourished under Theo^osius the great, 357.
years after Christ. Paterniani.
Paterniani. so called from one Paternus an obscure fellow, were named also
Venu^iani from Venus, which by their venereal actions they honored more then
God, These held that all the lower parts of man's body, from the Navel downward,
were made by the Devil; and therefore they gave themselves to all
lasciviousness and uncleanness, therefore they were called (...); deriders of
good manners and honesty. Tertullianists
The Tertullianists. were so called from that famous Lawyer and Divine
Ter^ullian, who lived under Severus the Emperor, about 170 years after Christ.
He being excommunicated by the Roman Clergy for a Montanist, fell unto these
heretical opinions; to wit, that God was corporeal, but without delineation of
members; that men's souls were not only corporeal, but also distinguished into
members, and had corporeal dimensions, and did increase and decrease with the
body; and that the soul had its Original by propagation or traduction. He held
also that the souls of wicked men after death were converted into Devils; that
the Virgin Mary, ^ after Christ's birth, did marry once, and with the
Catap^rygian, he bragged much of the Paraclet or Spirit, which they said was
poured on them in a greater measure, then on the Apostles. He condemned all use
of arms and wars among Christians; and with the M^ntanists, rejected second
marriages, as no better then adultery. The Abelonitae Abelonitae.
were so called from Abeo, Adams Son; these taught that Abel was married, but
had no carnal commerce with his Wife, because there is no mention made of his
Children, as there is of Cains and Seths. For this cause these Abclites did
marry Wives, but not use them as Wives for propagation, for ^^ar of Original
sin, whereof they would not be authors; therefore they condemned copulation, as
a work of the flesh, and altogether Satanical. But for the conservation of
their Sect, they used to adopt other men's Children. This heresy sprung up
under Arcadius the Emperout, 370. years after Christ, Of which see Austin.
in the Terriroties of Hippo, where Saint Austin was Bishop. This heresy
lasted not long.

Q. 36. What Tenets in Religion held the Pelagians, Praedestinati, and
Timotheans?

A. The Pelagians were so called from Pelagius a Britain by birth, Pelagians.
and a Monk at Rome, afterward a Presbyter, under Theod^sius the younger, 382.
years after Christ. They were named also Caelestiani from Caelestius one of
Pelagius his scholars. These taught that death was not the wages of sin, but
that Adam should have died, though he had not sinned. That Adams sin was
hurtful only to himself, and not to his posterity; that concupiscence was no
sin, that Infants did not draw original sin from their Parents, that infants
might be saved without baptism, that they should have life eternal, but out of
the Kingdom of God; that man after the fall had the free will to do good, and
ascribed no more to grace, but that by it we had our nature, and that by our
good works we obtain grace; they rejected the Doctrine of predestination,
Praedestinati.
perhaps because the Heretics called Praedestinati, made Predestination a
cloak for all wickedness, security and desperation; for they taught that the
Predestinate might sin securely, for he could not be damned; and that such as
were not predestinate, should never be saved, though their life were never so
holy. This heresy was not long before Pelagianisme, and is the same with that
of the Libertins. The Timotheans, Timotheans.
so called from Timotheus Aelurus; (that is, the Ca^, from his bad conditions)
sprung up under Zeno the Greek Emperor, 447. years after Christ. These taught
that the two natures of Christ were so mixed in the Virgins Womb, that they
ceased to be what they were before, and became a third substance made up of
both, as a mixed body is made up of the Elements, which lose their names and
forms in the mixtion. These Heretics afterward lost the name of Timotheans
from Timotheus their Author, Bishop of Alexandria, Of the Timotheans see Pet.
Lombard, Evagrius, and Nicephorus.
and were called Monothelites and Monophysites from ascribing only one will,
and one nature to Christ. Of the Pelagians see Austin, and the other Fathers
who have written against them.

Q. 37. What was the Religion of the Nestorians, Eutychians, and of those Sects
which sprung out of them?

A. The Nestorians were so called from Nestorius Nestorians.
Patriarch of Constantinople, who broached his Heresy under Theodosius the
younger, 400 years after Christ. He taught that in Christ were two distinct
persons, to wit, the Son of God, and the Son of Mary; that the Son of God in
Christ's baptism descended into the Son of Mary, and dwelt there, as a lodger
does in a house; therefore he would not call the Virgin Mary (...) the Mother
of God, but (...) the Mother of Christ. Besides he made the humanity of Christ
equal with his divinity, aad so confounded their properties and operations.
This Heresy was but the spawn of some former Heresies, chiefly of Manicheisine
and Arrianiame. It was condemned in the Council of Ep^esus under Theodosius the
younger, in which Cyrill Bishop of Alexandria was President^ and the author
Nestorius was deposed and banished, where his blasphemous tongue was eat out
with Worms, and his body with Core and his seditious accomplices swallowed up by
the Earth. The Eutychians so named from Eu^yches Archimandrite or Abbot of
Constantinopie, Eutychians, and their spawn*
who lived in the latter end of Theodosius the younger, held opinions quite
contrary to Nestorius, to wit, that Christ before the Union, had two distinct
natures, but after the Union only one, to wit, the Divinity which swallowed up
the Humanity, and so they confounded the property of the two natures, affirming
that the Divine nature suffered and died; and that God the Word, did not take
from the Virgin Humane nature. This heresy was first condemned in a Provincial
Synod at Constantinople; then it was set up again by Dioscurus Bishop of
Alexandria, in the theevish Council of Ephesus called (...), and at last
condemned by the general Council of Chalcedon under Marcian the Emperor. From
the Eutychians sprung up the Acephal^, or headless Heretics, so called
because they had neither Bishop, Priest, nor Sac^ament amongst them; these held
that in Christ were two natures, which notwithstanding they confounded, as they
did also the properties, saying that the humanity lost it self and properties,
being swallowed up by the divinity, as a drop of Vinegar is lost in the Sea.
Severus Bishop of Alexandria was author of this Sect, under Anastasius
Emperor, 462. years after Christ. They were called also Theodosians from
Theodosius their chief Patron, and Bishop of Alexandria. 2. The Monophysites
were all one with the Eutychians, differing only in name. 3. The Agnoetae, so
called from (...) ignorance, because they held that Christ's Divinity, which
with them only remained after the Union, was ignoranT of the day of judgment,
and where Lazarus after his death was laid. This heresy was revived by
Theodosius Bishop of Alexandria, under Mauritius the Emperor, 572. years
after Christ. 4. The Iacobites so called from Iacobus the Syrian, held the same
opinions that the Eutychians; and scoffed the Christians with the name of
Me^chites, because they followed the Emperor in their Faith. These under
Ph^cas the Emperor drew all Syria into their Heresy, 575. years after
Christ. 5. The Armenians so named from Armenia, insected with that Heresy,
held that Christ took not a humane body from the Virgin, but that it was
immortal from the first minute of its Conception; hence they were called (...)
and (...); they again in s^orn called the Orthodox Christians Manicheans and
Phantas^asts; these held a Quaternity of Persons, and that the Divinity
suffered; and kept their Easter after the Jewish manner. They sprung up under
Phocas the Emperor, 577. years after Christ. 6. The Monothelites in words
held there were two natures in Christ, but in effect denied them, by giving him
one Will only. All these branches of Eutychianisme were condemned by the fifth
General Council held at Constantinople under Justinian the first, who confirmed
the council of Chalcedon, to which these (...), or doubting Heretics (for so
they called themselves) would not subscribe. At last sprung up Mahumetanisme,
589. years after Christ. Of which we have spokeh already. Of all these see
Isidor, Theodoret, Evagrius, Nicephorus, S^erates, Sozomen, and others.

The Contents of the Eighth Section.
Of the opinions in Religion held the seventh Centur^. ^ The opinions of the
eighth Century. 3. The Tenets of the ninth and tenth Centuries. 4. The opinions
of the eleventh and twelfth Centuries. 5. Of the Albigenses (...) other Sects
in the twelfth Century. 6. The ^spans^ thirteenth Century. 7. The Sects of the
fourte^^th Century. 8. Of the Wicklevites. 9. The (...) of the fifteenth
Century. 10. The opinions of the (...) Century, to wit, of Luther and others.
11. of (...) sprung cut of Luther anisme. 12. Of Protestants. (...) Of the
other opinions held this Century. 14. The (...) beads of Calvin's Doctrine. 15.
Of other opinions ^eld this age. 16. of diverse other opinions in this age*
(...) and the causes of this variety, and confusion in the Church.

SECT. VIII.
Quest. WHereas we have had a view of the different Heresies in Christian
Religion, the first 600. years after Christ; now let us know what were the
chief opinions and authors thereof in the (...) Century? Heretics of the
seventh Century.


A. The Heicetae professed a Monastical life* but (...) taught that the service
of God consisted in holy ^ances and singing with the Nuns, after the example of
Moses and Miriam, Exodus 15. upon the overthrow of P^^roh in the Red Sea.
Gnosimachi were haters and (...) of all learning, or Book knowledge; teaching
that God required nothing from us, but a good life. Of these we have too many
in this age. But Christ tells us that Life (...) consists in knowledge: And God
complains by the Prop^et, that his people perish for want of knowledge: So
Christ shows that destruction fell on Jerusalem, because she knew not her
day; and the Lord complained that his (...) had less knowledge then the Ox or
the Ass. Therefore (...) given Lips to the Priest, to preserve knowledge, and
Christ by his knowledge has justified many, says the Prophet* The Armenii
taught that the holy Ghost proceeded only from the Father, and not from the
Son. Tha^ Christ rose from the dead on the Sabbath day; whereas the Scripture
tells us plainly, that he arose the third day. They observed also the Jewish
sacrifices. They (...) first ^o baptize the Cross, then to worship it. They
taught it was not man that sinned, but Satan by tempting ^im: and that man had
not propagated by carnal (...), if he had not sinned. They denied Original sin,
and held that all who died before Christ, were (...) for Adam's sin. They
ascribed no efficacy to the ^acraments, and yet held baptism absolutely
necessary. They placed the Children of unbaptized Infants, if they were of
faithful Parents, in earthly Paradise; if o^ unfaithful, in hell. They never
baptized without (...) the Eucharist. They held baptism without (...)
ineffectual, they used rebaptization. They permi^red the husband to dissolve
Matrimony when he pleased, and denied prayers for the dead, and the eternity of
hell fire. And that the souls were not in bliss till the Resurrection. And
taught that then there should be no wonen at all, but that they should be
converted into men. Chazinzarii were so called from Chaz^s, which in their
language signifies the cross; for ^^ey taught that the cross only was to be
wor^^^pped* therefore they were named Staurolatrae, or cr^ss-worshippers. They
prosessed also Nestorianism. The T^^etopsychitae held that the souls died with
the bodies. Theocatagnostae were such as reprehended some o^ Gods actions and
words. Ethnophrones were Paganising Christians, who with Christianity taught
Gentile supers^ition. The Lampeti^ns so called from Lampetius their author,
taught that there should be no distinction of Garments among religious men.
They condemned also all Vows. See Damascen, Nicephorus. Sanders, Baronius, etc.
The Maronits so named from one Maron, held with Eutyches, Dicscorus, and the
Aceph^^^ that Christ had but one nature and will; these were afterward
reconciled to the Church of Rome.

Q 2. What opinions were held in Religion within the eighth Century?

A. Agonyclitae held that it was superstition (...) prayer to bow the knees,
Heretics of the eighth Century.
or prostrate the body: therefore they used to pray standing. The Ic^nocla^^^,
or Iconoma^hi taught that it was Idolatry to have ^mages in Temples. The
Alde^ertins, so called from Alde^^rtus a French man their author, believed that
he had holy relics brought to him by an Angel, from the farthest part of the
world. They equalled him with the Apostles; and rejected Pilgrimages to Rome;
they h^ld that his hairs and nails were as well to be wo^shipped, as the
relics of Saint Peter; they believed that he knew their sins, and could
forgive them without confession* The Albanenses held that all Oaths were
unlawful, that there was no original sin, nor any efficacy in the Sacraments,
nor any use of extreme u^ction, nor of confession, nor of excommunication; that
the Sacraments lost their efficacy, if given by ^^cked Priests; that there was
no free will; some (...) that they held transanimation, See Sanderus, Ba^onius,
Gua^terus, etc.
and the eternity of the world, and that God did not forsee evil. That there
should be no Resurrection, nor general judgment, nor ^ell.

Q. 3. What were the opinions held in the ^inth and tenth Centuries?

A. Cladius Bishop of Taurinum, Heretics of the ninth and tenth Centuries.
condenmed Pilgmages, Images, Invocation of Saints, and taught that baptism
without the sign of the Cross, was no^ ^^^tism. One Gadescalcus whom some say
was a French man, held the heresy of the Praedestinati, and that God ^ould not
have all men to be saved; and consequently that Christ died not for all.
Photius a Grecian ^^nied the Procession of the holy Ghost from the Son, and
held that there was no reward for the good or b^d, till the general judgment;
that there was no purgato^y; he condemned second marriages, and prayers for the
dead; he held it no sin to hurt an enemy, even with lying and perjury.
Fornication with him was no sin, he dissolved marriages at pleasure. He
maintained usury, sacri^^dge, and rebaptization; and taught that Children were
not to be baptized till the eighth day. He gave the E^charist to Infants, the
cup to the Lai^y; denied extre^^ ^nction; and administered the Sacrament in
Leav^^ed Bread. Iohonnes Scotus a Benedictine Monk, and S^hloar of Becie (not
Duns Scotus subtilis) held that in the Eucharist was only the figure of
Christ's body. See the above named Authors.
Bertramus a Presbyter taught that the body of Christ which is in the
Eucharist, was not the same who was born of the Virgin. The same opinions were
mai^tained by some in the tenth ^enturie.

Q. 4. What were the^ opinions of the eleventh and twelfth Cent^ries?

A. ^erengarius Archdeacon of Anjou, Heretics of the eleventh and twelfth
Centuries.
taught that (...) body was not corporally, but figuratively in the Sacrament:
Horibert and Lisoius in France, taught Ma^icheism. The Simoniacks held it
lawful to buy and fell Church preferments. The Reordinantes, would admit no
Simoniack Priests till they were reordained. At Milla^ a new Sect of
Nicolaitans brake out, reaching the necessity of promiscuous Copulation.
Sabellianism (...) out also this age. In the twelfth Century, mar^^^us of Padua
taught that the Pope was not Christ's successor: that he was subject to the
Emperor: that there was no difference between Bishops and Priests, and taht
Churchmen should not enjoy temporal estates. The Bongomilii, whose author was
one Basti, a Physi^ian renewed the heresies of Arrius, the Anthropomorphites,
and the Manichees* They rejected the Books o^ Moses, made God with a humane
shape, taught that the world was made by evil Angels, and that Micha^l (...)
Archangel was incarnate. They condemned Image worship, and despised the
cross, because Christ died on it. They held the churches baptism to be the
baptism of John, but their own to be the true baptism of Christ: they slighted
the Church Liturgy, and taught there was no other Resurrection, but from sin by
repentance: they held also that men might dissemble in Religion. At Antwerp one
Taudenius or Tanchelinus, being a Layman, under took a Reformation^ teaching
that men were justified, and saved by faith only; that there was no difference
between Priests and Laymen; that the Eucharist was of no use; and that
promiscuous copulation was lawful. The Petrobruss^ans so called from Peter de
Bruis of Antwerp, held that baptism was needless to Infants; and likewise
churches were useless, that crosses should be broken, that Christ was not
really in the Eucharist, and that prayers for the dead were fruitless. One
Peter Aballard taught that God was of a compounded Essence, that he was not the
author of all goodness; that he was not only eternal; that the Angels helped
him to create the world; that power was the property of the Father, Wisdom of
the Son, Goodness of the holy Spir^^. He denied that Christ took our flesh to
save sinners, or that the fear of God was in him; he said that the holy Ghost
was the soul of the world, that man had no (...) will; that all things, even
God himself, were subject to necessity, that the Saints do not see, God, that
in the life to come there should be no fear of God, and that we are in
matters of faith to be directed by our reason. His chief disciple was Arnoldus
Brixienfis, who denied also temporalties to the Clergy. Gilbert Porr^^anus
Bishop of Poytires, taught that the Divine Essen^^ was not God, that the
Proprieties and Persons in the Trinity were not the same; that the Divinity was
not incarnate in the Son. He rejected also merits, and lessened the efficacy of
baptism. The Henricians so called from one Henry of Toulouse a Monk, and
somented by Henry the Emperor, taught the same Doctrines that Peter de Bruis
did, and withal that the church music was a mocking of God. The Patareni
taught ^lso the same things. The Apostolici so named from saying they were
Apostles immediately sent from God, despised marriage, all meats made of Milk;
the baptising of Infants, purgatory, prayers for the dead, invocation of
Saints, and all Oaths. They held themselves to be the only true Church. One
Eudon gave himself out to be the judge of the quick and dead. The Adamites
started up again in Bohemia. The Waldenses so called from Waldo of Lions, who
having distributed his wealth, professed poverty; he rejected images, prayers
to Saints, Holy days, Churches, Oil in Baptism, confirmation* the Ave Mary,
au^icular confession, indulgences, purgator: prayers for the dead, obedience to
Prelates, distinction of Bishop and Priest, Church Canons, merit, religious
orders, extreme unction, miracles, exorcisms, Church music, canonical hours,
and diverse other Tene^^ of the Church of Rome. They held that Laymen might
preach, and consecrate the Bread, and that all ground was alike holy. They
rejected all prayers except the Lords prayer, and held that the Eucharist
consecrated on the Friday had more efficacy then on any other day. That Priests
and Deacons falling into sin, lost their power in consecrating, and Magistrates
in governing if they fell. That the Clergy should possess no tempor^lties; See
Baronius; Genebrard, Sanderus, Gualterus, etc.
that the Church failed in Pope Sylvesters time. They rejected the Apostles
creed and all oaths; but ^ermitted promiscuous copulation; and taught (...) man
ought to suffer death, by the sentence of any Judge.

Q. 5 What were the Albigenses, and what other Sects were there in this twelfth
Century?

A. These not long after the Waldenses, Albigenses, and their opinions.
swarmed in the Province of Tolouse, and were overthrown by Simon Earl of
Montferrat; these taught that they were not bound to make prosession of their
faith; they denied p^rgatory, prayers for the dead, the real presence, private
confession, images, bells in Churches, and condemned the eating of flesh, eggs
and milk. The Romish writers affirm that they held two Gods; that our bodies
were made by Satan, that the Scriptures were erroneous, all oaths unlawful, and
Baptism needless. They rejected the old Testament and marriage, and prayers
in the Church; they held there were two Christ's, a good born in an unknown
Land, and a bad born in Bethlehem of Judea. That God had two Wives, of which he
begot Sons and Daughters, and more such stu^^, as may be seen in the above
named authors: The Cor^erij held the Petrobrussian Tenets, and withal that the
Virgin Mary was an Angel: that Christ's body was not glorified in Heaven, but
did putrify as other dead bodies, and so should remain after the day of
judgement^ They taught also that the souls should not be glorified till the
Resurrection. Ioachimus Abbas taught that in the Trinity, the Essence generated
the Essence, which opinion was condemned in the general Council of Lateran,
under Innocent the third: not long after started up Petrus Iohannis, who
maintained the error of Ioachimus, and withal taught that the reasonable soul
was not the form of man; See Baronius, Sanderus, Bellarmin, Viegas, and the
Authors above named.
that the Apostles preached the Gospel after the literal, not after the
spiritual sense; that grace was not conferred in baptism; that Christ's side
was pierced with a Lance whilst he was yet alive, which is directly against
the words of Saint John; therefore this opinion was condemned in the council of
Vienna; he held also Rome to be Babylon, and the Pope to be Antichrist.

Q. 6. What opinions in Religion were professed the ^^^teenth Century?

A. Almaricus a Doctor in Paris, Heretics of the thirteenth Century.
taught that if Ad^m had not sinned, there had been no procreation, nor
distinction of Sex. This was condemned in the council of Lateran, under
Innocent the third. He held that the Saints do no ways see God in himself,
but in his creatures. He denied the Resurrection, Paradise, and Hell, also the
real presence, invocation of Saints, Images, and Altars. He said that in the
Divine mind might be created Ideas. He transformed the mind of a ^ontemplative
man, into the Essence of God; and taught that charity made sin to be no sin*
David Dinantius taught that the first Matter was God, which was to make God a
part, and the meanest part of all his creatures. Gulielmus de sancto amore,
taught that no Monks ought to live by alms, but by their own labors, and that
voluntary poverty was unlawful; the same doctrine was taught by Desider^us
Longobardus affirming it a pernicious opinion that men should leave all for
Christ. Raymundus Lullius taught that in God were different Essences, that God
the Father was before the Son; that the holy Ghost was conceived of the Father
and the Son, (...) the Doctrine of the Church is that he proceeds from the
Father and the Son; not by way of Generation or Conception* but of Eternal and
Spiritual dilection, he also taught that it was injustice to punish any man for
opinions in Religion or Heresy. The Whippers taught that whipping of
themselves with rods full of knots and sharp pricks did more exp^^te and
abolish sin, then confession; that this their voluntary whipping was before
Martyrdom, which was inflicted by outward force: that now there was no use of
the Gospel, nor of the Baptism of Water, since the Baptism of Blood was
better; that holy water was ^^^ies^e; that no man could be saved who did (...)
himself. They also held perjury lawful. The (...) whose author was one
Hermannus Italus held community of Wives lawful; which Doctrine they put in
practice, at their meetings to pray; then putting out their l^ghts, ^hey used
promisc^ous copnlation: and the children born of such commixtion they put to
death. They taught that all things amongst Christians should be in common; that
Magistracy did not consist with Christianity, and that the Saints did not see
God till the day of judgment. Gerardus Sagarellus of Parma, whose Disciples
were named Pseud^-apostoli, that is, false Apostles, because they bragged that
they did imit^te the Apostles poverty, therefore they would not take or keep
money, or reserve any thing for the next day; he taught that to make vows, or
to swear at all, was unlawful; See the above named Authors.
that marriages might be dissolved by such as would embrace their Religion; and
that they were the only Christians; they were enemies to Tithes, and to
Churches, which for prayer they accounted no better then Hogs Styes.

Q. 7, What were the opinions in Religion the feurteenth Century?

A. The Beguardi who professed a Monastical life, Heretics of the fourteenth
Century.
taught that we might attain to as much perfection and beatitude in this life,
as in Heaven; that all intellectual natures were blessed in themselves, not in
God, that it was a sin to kiss a Woman, but not to lie with her; because
nature inclined to this* but not to that. That perfect and spiritual men were
freed from obedience to superiors, from fasting, praying, and good works, and
that such men could not sin, nor increase in grace, being perfect already. They
would have no reverence to be used in the Eucharist, nor at all to receive it,
for that did argue imperfection. The Beguinae professed the same Tenets, and
withal were against vows and voluntary poverty. The Beguini taught that wealth
consisted not with Evangelical perfection, and therefore blamed Pope John 22,
for permitting the Franciscans to have corn in their barns, and wine in their
cellars. They held that the state of Minorites was more perfect then that of
Bishops; that they were not bound to give an account of their faith when they
were demanded by the Inquisitors; and that the Pope had no power to dispense
with Vows. The Lolhards, so called from Walter Lolhard their author, held that
Lucifer was injuriously thrust out of Heaven; that Michael and the blessed
Angels should be punished eternally; that Lucifer should be saved; that the
blessed Virgin lost her Virginity after Christ's birth; and that God did neither
see, nor would punish sins committed under ground; therefore they gave
themselves to all uncleanness in their vaults and caves. Richardus Armacanus
taught that voluntary poverty was unlawful; and that priests could bless, and
confer orders as well as Bishops! One Ianovesi^s taught, that in the year ^^60.
on Whitsunday, Antichrist would come, who should pervert all Christians, and
should mark them in their Hands and Foreheads, and then should be damned
eternally: and that all Jews, Saracens, and Infidels, who were seduced by
Antichrist, should after his destruction be converted to Christ, but not the
Christians that fell off from Christ. The Turelupini taught that we should not
be ashamed of those members we have from nature; and so, See the above named
Authors.
like the Cynicks, they gave themselves openly to all uncleanness; they held
also, that we were not to pray with our voice, but with the heart only.

Q. 8. What were the Tenets of the Wicklevits who lived in this Centurie?

A. They were so called from John Wickliffe an Englishman, Wickliffes opinions.
and taught that the substance of bread and wine remained in the Sacrament;
that neither Priest nor Bishop, remaining in any mortal sin could consecrate,
or ordain; that the Mass had no ground in Scripture; that outward confession
was needless where there was true contrition; that a wicked Pope had no power
over the faithful; that Clergymen should have no possessions; that none should
be excommunicate by the Church, but he who is first excommunicate by God; that
the Prelate who excommunicates a Clerk appealing to the King, is a traitor^ and
so is he that being excommunicate, refuses to hear, or to preach; that Deacons
and Priests may preach without authority of the Bishop; that the King might
invade the Churches Revenues; that the people may punish their Kings; that the
Laity may detain or take away the Tyt^es; that special prayers for any man were
of no more force then general; that religious orders were unlawful, and that
such should labor with their hands; that it was a sin in Constantine, and
others, to enrich the Church; that the Church of Rome was Satan's Syn^gogue;
they rejected also the Popes election by Cardinals, Indulgences, decretal
Epistles, the Popes excommunications, and his supremacy; they held also that
Austin, Benet, and Bernard were damned for instituting religious orders; that
God ought to obey the Devil; that he who gives alms to Monasteries should be
excommunicate: that they are Simoniacks who pray for their Parents or
Benefactors: that Bishops reserved to themselves the power of Ordination,
Confirmation, and Consecration for lucres sake: that Universities, Degrees and
Schools of Learning were hurtful to the Church. These, and such like Tenets of
Wickliff are let down in the Council of Constance, where they were condemned.
Other opinions are fathered upon him: See Florimundus Raymundus of the Original
of Heresies, Genebrard, Bellarmine, Prateolus, Gregory de Valentia, and others,
to wit, that man had no free will: that the sins of the Predestinate were
venial, but of the Reprobate, all mortal; that the Saints were not to be
invocated, nor their relics kept, nor the Cross to be worshipped, nor images
to be placed in Churches: they rejected also Vows, Canonical hours.
Church-Musick; Fasting, Baptizing of Infants, Benedictions, Chrism, and
Episcopacy. He held also that the Brother and sister might marry, that every
crea^ure may ^e called God, because its perfection is in God.

Q. 9. What opinions were taught the fifteenth Century.

A. John Hus of Bohemia publicly maintained the Doctrine of Waldus and
Wickliffe, Opinions and Heresies, of the fiftieenth Century.
and withal taught that Saint Peter was never head of the Church, that the
Church is only of the predestinate: John Hus.
that Saint Paul, when he was a persecutor, was not a member of Satan; that the
Divinity and the Humanity made up one Christ, whereas the personal union
consisted indeed, not between the two Natures, but between the Person of the
Word and the Humane Nature: That the Pope was subject to Caesar: that the Pope
was not Head of the Church, nor Vicar of Christ, nor successor of Peter: that
Bishops were murderers, in delivering over to the secular power such as did
not obey them; that canonical obedience was a humane invention; that Priests,
though excommunicate, ought to preach: that Excommunications, Suspensions and
Interdicts, were invented to maintain the Clergies pride. These, and such like
points did he defend, for which he was condemned in the council of Constance.
These same opinions were maintained by Hierom of Prague, Hierom of Prague.
for which also he was by the same Council condemned the next year. One Pickard
of F^anders renewed in B^hem^a the Heresy of the Ad m^tes. Hussites.
The Hussites divided themselves into thr^e Sects, to wit, the Pragense^, the
Thabo ite^, so called from mount Thabor, where Christ was transfigurrd, which
name Zisca their Captain gave them, calling the Castle where they used to meet,
Thabor, as if they had seen there Christ's transfigurat^on: The third Sect were
called Orphans after Zisca's death, as having lost their Father and Patron: all
these used barbarous cruelty against Priests, Monks, Churches, Images,
Relics, and such as professed the Roman Catholic Religion. The Mos^ovites or
Russians fell off to the Greek Religion, and held that the Pope was not the
chief Pastor of the Church; that the Roman Church was nor head of the rest.
They rejected also the Latin Fathers, the definitions, canons, and decrees of
the general Councels, and used leavened bread in their Eucharist. One Rissuich
a Hollander, taught that the Angels were not created; that the soul perished
with the body; that there was no Hell; that the matter of the Elements was
coeternal with God. He blasphemed Christ as a Seducer, and not the Son of God.
He held that Moses never saw God, nor received his Law from him; that
Scriptures were but Fables; that the Gospel was false: and such like
blasphemous stuff did he spue out, See the above named Autho^s.
for which he was burned.

Q. 10. What opinions did the Sixteenth Century h^ld?

A. Martin Luther, an Augustine Friar, ^aught tha^ Indulgences were unlawful;
Opinions of the si^teenth Centurie.
that the Epistle to the Hebrews, the Epistle of James, the second of P^ter the
two last of John, the Epistle of Jude, and the Apecaly^e, were not canonical.
Luther his opinions.
He opposed inv^cation of Saints, Image w^rship, Free-w^ll, the Popes
Supremacy, Excommunication, temporal posse^^ions of ^he Clergy, merit of Works,
possibility of tu^filing the Law, the Monastical life, caeliba^, canonical
ob^dience, distinction of Meats, Transubstantiation, communion under one kind,
the Mass, auricular confession, Absolution, Purgatory, extreme Unction, and
five of the Sacraments. He held also that General Councels might err; that
(...) was not a particular person; that Faith only justified; that a faithful
man may be assured of his salvation; that to the faithful sin is not imputed;
that the first motions are sin; that Sacraments did not confer grace. Diverse
other opinions are fathered upon him by his adversaries, as may be seen in the
above named Authors. Anabaptist^.
The Anabaptists, so called from Re-baptizing, had for their author one Nicolas
Storke, who pretended familiarity with God by an Angel, promising him a Kingdom
if he would reform the Church, and destroy the Princes that should hinder him.
His Scholar Muncer raised an army of 4000. Bores and Tradesmen in Suevia and
Franconia to maintain his Masters dreams; but they were overthrown by Count
Mansfield. John of Leyden, a Tailor, renewed the said dreams, and made himself
King in Munster of the Anabaptists, whose Viceroy was Knipherdo^ing; but this
fantastical Monarchy was soon destroyed, the Town taken after 13. months
Siege, where the King and his Viceroy, with their chief Officers were put to
death. Their Tenets were that Christ was not the Son of Mary, nor true God;
that we were righteous not by faith in Christ, but by our own merits, and
sufferings. They rejected original sin, baptism of Infants, communion with
other Churches, Magis^^acy among Christians, Oaths, and punishments of
Malefactors. They refused to swear allegiance to Princes; and held that a
Christian may have many wives, Of these see the above named Author, and
besides, P^ntanus, Bullinger, Sleidan, Osian^der, and others.
and that he may put away his wife if she be of another Religion, and marry
another. That no man must possess any thing in proper, that re-baptization may
be used; that before the day of judgment the godly should enjoy a Monarchy
here on Earth; that man had free will in spiritual things; and that any man may
Preach, and give the Sacraments.

Q. 11. What are the Anabaptists of Moravia?

A. These at first called themselves Apostolical, Anabaptists of Moravia.
because they did imitate the Apostles in going barefoot, and in washing one
another feet, in having also all things in common amongst them. But though
this custom be now, left, yet at this day in Moraviae they have a common
Steward who does distribute equally things necessary to all. They will admit
none into their Society, but such as have some trade, and by their handy work
can get their livings. As they have a common Steward for their temporals, so
they have a common Father for their spirituals, who instructs them in their
Religion and prays with them every morning, before they go abroad to work.
These public prayers, are to them instead of Sermons. They have a general
governor or head of their church, whom none knows, but themselves; for they
are bound not to reveal him. They communicate twice in the year; the men and
women sit promiscuously together. On the Lords day they walk two and two
through the Towns and Villages, being clothed in black, and having slaves in
their hands. They are much given to silence; at table for a quarter of an hour
before they eat, they sit and meditate covering their faces with their hands:
the like devotion they show after meat. All the while their governor stands
by, to observe their gesture, that if any thing be unbeseeming, he may tell
them of it. When they come to any place, they discourse of the last judgment,
of the eternal pains of hell, of the cruelty of Devils tormenting men's
bodies and souls; that so they may afright simple people into their religion;
then they comfort them by showing them a way to escape all those torments if
they will be but rebaptized, and embrace their religion. Of these see
Florimundus Raymundus de origin Haeres.
They observe no festival days, nor will they admit of any disputations.

Q. 12. What Sects are sp^ung out of Lutheranism?

A. Besides the Anabaptists already mentioned; there be Adiaphorists of which
Melancthon is thought to be author; Sects sprung out of Lutheranisme.
these hold the customs and constitutions of the church of Rome to be things
indifferent, and that they may be professed or not professed without scruple.
2. Vbiquitaries. These hold that Christ's humanity as well as his divinity is
every where; even in hell. Bre^tius is thought to be father of this opinion.
But if Christ's humanity be every where, then we must deny the articles of his
Resurrection, Ascension, and coming again to judge the Quick and the dead; for
what needs there such motions if he be everywhere. 3. Majorists, so called from
one George Mayor one of Luthers disciples, who taught that no man, (nay not
infants) can be saved without good works. But its ridiculous to expect good
works from Infants who have not as yet the use of reason, nor organs fit for
operation. 4. Osiandrists, so called from Andrew Osiander a Lutheran, who
taught that Christ's body in the Sacrament suffered, was corruptible, and died
again, directly against Scripture saying that Christ being risen from the dead,
dies no more, death has no more dominion over him. He taught also that we are
not justified by faith or works, but by the essential righteousness of Christ
dwelling in us. But the essential righteousness of Christ, is the
righteousness of his divinity, which is not communicable, nor separable from
him. 5. Augustinians in Bohemia, these taught that none went to heaven or hell,
till after the last judgment: whereas Christ tells the contrary to the good
thief, this day thou shall be with me in Paradise, and affirms that the soul
of Lazarus was carried by Angels into Abraham's bosom, and Dives into hell.
Wherefore did Christ ascend to heaven but that we might be where he is. They
make also dormice or swallows of men's souls, saying, that they sleep till the
resurrection; if Saint Steven when he was dying had known this Doctrine, he
would not have called upon the Lord Jesus to receive his spirit. The story also
of Lazarus and Dives does overthrow this conceit. They say also that Christ's
human nature is not as yet ascended into heaven, which directly overthrows
our Creed in that article; as likewise, the Scriptures, and withal the hope
and comfort of a Christian. 6. Stancarians so called from one Francis Stancarus
a Mantuan, who taught that Christ justifies us, and is our mediator only
according to his humane nature; whereas our redemption is the work of the whole
person, and not of one nat^re alone. 7. Adamites so called from one Adam*
author of the Sect; they use to be naked in their Stoves and Conventicles,
after the example of Adam and Eve in Paradise. And therefore when they marry
they stand under a Tree naked, having only leaves of trees upon their
privities, they are admitted as brethren and sisters, who can without lust look
upon each others nakedness; but if they cannot, they are rejected. 8.
Sabbathar^an^, so called because they reject the observation of the Lords day,
as not being commanded in Scripture, and keep holy the Sabbath day only,
because God himself rested on that day, and commanded it to be kept. But they
forget that Christ came to destroy the Ceremonial Law, whereof the Sabbath in
respect of the seventh day was a branch; and therefore Christ himself brake it,
when he commanded the sick man whom he cured, to carry home his bed on that
very day 9. Clancu^arii were those who professed no religion with their mouth,
thinking it sufficient to have it in their heart. They avoid all Churches and
public meetings to serve God; thinking their private houses to be better then
Temples; whereas they should remember, that private prayers cannot be so
effectual as public; neither is it enough to believe with the heart, except we
also confess with the mouth; for he that is* ashamed to confess Christ before
men* shall not be confessed by Christ before his Father and his holy Angels.
10. Davidistae so called from one David George a Holl^nder; he gave himself
our to be the Messiah sent by the holy Spirt, to restore the house of Israel,
that the Scriptures were imperwect, and that he vas sent to bring the true Law
and Doctrine, that the ^oul was pure from sin, and that the body only sinned;
whereas indeed they both concur in the act of sinning, and therefore are both
punishable, especially the Soul which is the chief agent, the body is but the
instrument. He taught also that a man may have many Wives to replenish
spiritual Paradise, that it was no sin to deny Christ with the mouth, so long
as they believed on him in their heart. He rejected also the books of Moses.
11. Mennonists so called from one Mennon a F^^eslander. These deny Christ to be
born of Mary, affi^ming that he brought his flesh from Heaven; he called
himself the Judge of men and Angels. 12. Qeistae and (...) who taught there
were three distinct Gods differing in degrees. One George Paul of Cracovia is
held to be author of this Sect. 13. Antitrinitarians, these being the spawn of
the old Arrians and Samosatenians, deny the Trinity of Persons, and the two
natures of Christ, their author was Michael Servetus a Spaniard, who was burned
at Geneva. 14. Antimarians, who denied Mary's Virginity, affirming she had
other children besides Christ, because there is mention made of Christ's
brethren in the Gospel; this is the old Heresy of Cerinthus and Helvidius;
whereas they consider not that in Scripture those of the same kindred are called
brothers. So is Lot called Abraham's brother; and L^^an Jacobs Uncle is called
his brother. 15. Antinomians who reject the Law, affirming there is nothing
required of us but faith; this is to open a wide gap for all ^mpiety. Christ
came not (as he says himself) to abolish the Law, but to fulfill it. If there
be no use of the Law, then they must deny Gods justice; and that it is now an
useless attribute of the divinity. ^16. Infernale^, these held that Christ
descended into no other hell but into the grave only, and that there is no
other hell but an evil conscience, whereas the Scripture speaks of hell fire,
prepared for the Devil and his Angels, and calls it the bottomless pit, etc.
17. Bequinians so called from one Boquinus their Master, who taught that Christ
did not die for the wicked, but only for the faithful, and so they make him not
to be the Savior of mankind, and of the world, but a particular Savior only
of some; whereas Saint John says, that Christ is the reconciliation for our
sins, and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world, 1 John
2. 2. 18. Hutistes so called from one John Hut, who take upon them to prefix
the very day of Christ's coming to judgment, whereas of that day and hour
knows no man, nay not the Angels in Heaven. 19. Invisibiles; so called
because they hold that the Church of Christ is invisible, which if it be, in
vain did he compare it to a City built upon a hill ^^in vain also does he
counsel us to tell the Church, if our brother will not be reformed, in vain also
does the Apostle warn Bishops and Presbyteries to look to their stock, to rule
the Church which Christ has purchased with his blood, Act. 20. How can he be
called the sheepherd of that ^^ock which he never saw? 20. Qnintinistae, so
called from one Quintinus of Bicardy a Tailour. He was author of the Libertins,
who admit of all Religions. Some of them mock at all Religions, at that
Lucianist who ^rot a book of the three Impostors. Some of them deny the souls
immortality, and doubt whether there be any other Deity except Heaven and
Earth. 21. The Family of Love, whose author was one Henry Nicolas a Hollander.
They reject all Sacraments, and the three last petitions of the Lords prayer.
They say that Christ is only the image of God the Fathers right hand, and that
man's soul is a part of the divine essence. 22. Effro^tes, so called from
shaving their foreheads till they bleed, and then anoint them with oil, using
no other baptism but this; they say the holy Ghost is but a bare motion
inspired by God into the mind; and that he is not to be adored: all which is
directly repugnant to Gods word, which proves that the holy Ghost is true God.
Thou have not lied, says Saint Peter, unto man, but unto God, meaning the holy
Ghost. This Sect took up their station in Transylvania. 23. Hosmanists, these
teach that God took flesh of himself, whereas the Scripture says that Christ
was made of a Woman. They deny pardon to those tha^ relapse into sin; and so
they abridge the grace of God, who wills us to repent, and thereupon receives
us into ^avour. 24. (...), so called from one Gasp^^ Schewenkfeld a Silesian;
he taught that the Scripture was needless to Salvation, and with the old
M^nichees and Valentinians that Christ was not conceived by the holy Ghost in
the Virgins Womb, but that God created a man to redeem us, and joined him to
himself, and that this man became God, after he ascended into Heaven; they
confound the Persons of Father and Son, and say that God did not speak these
words, This is my beloved Son. That faith is the very essence and nature of
God. That all Christians are the Sons of God by nature, procreated of the
divine essence. That the Sacraments are useless; that Christ's body is every
where. Of these Sects and many more of less note, see Florimundus Raymund^s;
hence we may see what a dangerous Gap has been made, since Luther began to
oppose the Church of Rome, for the little Fo^^es to destroy Christ's Vineyard;
what multitudes of Ta^es have grown up (...) the good Corn in the Lords field;
what troublesome Frogs, worse then those of Egypt, have crawled into m^st men's
houses; what swarms of Locusts have darkened the Sun of righteousness whilst
^e was ^^ining in the Firmament of his Church.

Q 13. What other opinions in religion were maintained this age*

A. Carolostadius, Arch Deacon of Wit^ber^, and Oecol^^padius, Monk of the
Order of S. Bridges, opposed Luthers Doctrine in the point of the real presence,
showing that Christ was in the bread only sacramentally, or significatively.
The Libertius, whose author was one Quintious, a Tailor of Pi^cardy, taught
that whatsoever good or evil we did, was not done by us, but by Gods Spirit in
us; that sin was nothing but an opinion; that in reproving of sinners, we
reproved God himself; that he only was regenerate who had no remorse of
conscience; that he only re^euted who confessed he had committed no evil: that
man in this life may be perfect and innocent; that the knowledge we have of
Christ, and of our Resurrection, is but opinion; that we may dissemble in
Religion, which is now the opinion of Master Hobbs; and lastly, they slight the
Scriptures, relying on their own inspirations; and they slight the Pen men of
the Holy Ghost, calling Saint John a foolish young man, Saint Matthew a
Publican, Saint Paul a broken vessel, and Saint Peter a denyer of his Master.
Zuinglius, Canon of Constance, held the Doctrine of C^rolostadius against
Luther, concerning the real presence. David George, a Glasier in Gaunt, taught
that he was God Almighties Nephew, born of the Spirit, not of the flesh, the
true Messiah, and third David that was to reign on Earth; that Heaven was void
of inhabitants: and that therefore he was sent to adopt Sons for that heavenly
Kingdom. He denied Spirits, the Resurrection, and the last judgment, and life
eternal. He held promiscuous copulation, with the Adamits; and with the
Manichees, that the soul was not polluted with sin* that the souls of Infidels
shall be saved, and the bodies of the Apostles, as well as those of Infidels,
shall be burned in Hell fire; and that it was no sin to deny Christ before men;
therefore they condemned the Martyrs of folly, for shedding their blood for
Christ. Mela^^ct^on was a Lutheran, but not altogether so rigid: so was Bucer,
except in the point of Christ's real presence; Westphalus also, but he denied
original sin, and the Holy Ghosts procession from the Son; See Prateolus,
Sanderus, Genebrard, Coch^aeus, Gualterus, etc.
and that Christ's did not institute the Lent Fast, nor was any man tied to keep
it.

Q. 14. What were the chief Heads of Calvin's Doctrine?

A. That in this life our ^aith is not without some doubtings and incredulity;
that the Scriptures are sufficient without traditions; that an implicit faith
is no faith; Calvin's Doctrine.
that the Books of Tobias, Judith, a part of Hester, The Wisdom of Solomon,
Ecclesiasticus, Baruch, The History of Bell and the Dragon* and the books of
Macchabees are not parts of the Canonical Scripture; that the Hebrew Text of
the Old Testament is only authentical, and so the Grek of the New Testament;
that the Scripture in Fundamentals is clear of it self, and is a sufficient
judge of controversies; that the Elect have saving faith only, which can never
totally and finally be lost; that predestination to life or death depends not
on man's foreseen merits or demerits, but on Gods free will and pleasure; that
no sin comes to pass without the will of God; that the Son of God received not
his Essence of the Father, nor is he God of God, but God of himself; that
Christ, in respect of his humani^y, was ignorant of some things; that the
Virgin Mary was obnoxious to diverse sins, and infirmities; that Christ is our
Media^or in respect of both natures; that Christ was in the state of damnation
when he suffered for us, but did not continue in it, that Christ by his
suffering merited nothing for himself: that he descended not truly into Hell,
but by suffering the pains of Hell on the Cross; that there is no Limbus
Patrum, nor Purgatory; that our prayers avail not to the dead; that the
torments of the evil Angels were deferred till the day of judgment; that
Christ came not out of the grave whilst it was shut; that the true Church of
God consists only of the Elect, and that it is not visible to men; that the
Church may err; that Saint Peter was not Bishop of Rome, nor the Pope his
successor, but that he is Antichrist; that the Church and Magistrate cannot
make Laws to bind the conscience; that caelibat and the monastical life is
unlawful, and consequently the vows of chastity, poverty, and obedience; that
man has not free will to goodness; that concupiscence, or the first motions,
before the will consents, are sins; that all sins are mortal, and none in
themselves venial; that in this life our sins are still inherent in us,
though they be not imputed to us, that we are justified by faith without
works, and that faith is never without charity: that the best of our works
deserve damnation; that here we may be assured of our justification and
salvation; that the Church Liturgy ought not to be read in Latin, but in the
vulgar tongue: that faith is a more excellent virtue then charity; that there
is no merit in us: that in this life we cannot possibly fulfill the Law: that to
invocate the Saints, to worship Images and Relics, or the Cross, is
Idolatry: that usury is not altogether unlawful: that Lent and other set Fasts
are not to be kept: that there be only two Scaraments, Baptism, and the Lords
supper: and that the Sacraments cannot justify or confer grace: that the
Baptism of water is not of absolute necessity, nor depends the efficacy of it
from the intention of the Minister, nor ought it to be administered by private
men or women, in private houses. That Christ is not corporally in the
Eucharist: that in the want of Bread and wine, other materials may be used, and
that Wine alone without Water is to be used; that there is no
Transubstantiation, nor ought to be any adoration of the Bread: See Calvin's own
works, Beza, and others that have followed Calvin's Tenets.
that the ^up should be administered to all, that Extreme Unction was only
temporary in the Church: that the Clergy ought to marry. He rejected also the
Church-Hierarchy. and Ceremonies, and exorcisms, Penance, also Confirmation,
Orders, Matrimony, and Extreme Unction from being Sacraments.

Q. 15. What other opinions in Religion were held this age?

A. Servetus a Spaniard, who was burned at Genev^, taught with the Sabellians,
that there was but one Person in God, and that there was in Christ but one
nature with Eutychees; he denied the holy Ghost, and Baptism to Infants, which
he would have to be deferred till the thirtieth year of their age. He held also
that God was Essential in every creature. Brentius a Lutheran taught that
Christ's body after its ascension is every where, whence sprung up the
Vbiquitaries. Castelli^ a Schoolmaster in Geneva, held that the Canticles was
not Scripture, but a Love Ballade between Solomon and one of his Concubines.
One Postellus taught that men of all Sects and Professions should be saved by
Christ. O^iander held that we were justified not by ^aith, but by the Essential
righteousness of God, which he said was the formal cause of our justification.
One (...) a Ma^tuan, taught that Christ justified us, not as he was God, but as
he was man. Amsdorphius wrote a Book to prove that good works were pernicious to
salvation. One George Mai^r taught that Infants could not be justified for want
of good works. John Agric^^^ affirmed that the Law was altogether needless,
and that Christians were not tied to the observation thereof. Hence sprung up
the Antinomians. One Steunbergetus in Mor^via denied the Trinity, the Divinity
of Christ, the holy Ghost, and Virginity of Mary* he rejected also Baptism,
and the Lords day, affirming we had no command in Scripture to keep that, but
the Sabbath only. One O^inus taught that ^olygamy or multiplicity of Wives was
lawful: One Valentinus Gentil^^ of Naples, denied the Trinity, and rejected the
Creed of Ath^^^^ius. One (...) of Cracovia in ^oland denied also the Trinity
and th^^ty of Essence, and taught that neither the Second nor Third Person were
God; that Satan was created evil; that man's intellect is eternal; that our free
will was a passive power moved necessarily by the appetite; that God was the
Author of sin, and that the will of man in sinning was conformable to the will
of God; that it was not adultery to lie with another man's Wife; that we must
belive nothing but what is evident to sense or reason; that the same body which
dies, rises not again; that the soul perished with the body; that there
should be no care had of burial; that separated souls could not suffer
corporeal fire, and that God being a Spirit, should not be invocated by our
mouth, but by our heart. One Swenkfeldius taught that the Scripture was not the
Word of God, nor that our faith depended on it, but it rather on our faith.
That Christ brought his body with him from Heaven. That Christ's humanity became
God after his ascension; that every man was endowed with the same essential
virtues of justice, wisdom, etc. which were in God. That the power and efficacy
of Gods word preached, was the very Son of God. In Moravia there started up
some professors called Nudipedales, because they went barefooted; these in
imitation of the Apostles forsook houses, Lands, Business and Children, and
lived together in common, avoiding the society of other people. Of these see
Prateolus, Genebrard, Raymundus, Sanderus, Gualterus, and others.
Another Sect sprung up, which called themselves Free Men teaching that they
were freed from obedience to Magistrates, from Taxes, Tithes, and other duties;
that after baptism they could not sin. That they were not only like God, but
already deified. And that it was lawful among themselves (but no where else) to
have women in common.

Q. 16. Were there no other opinions held this Century?

A. Yes, Christian Religion pestered with diversity of opinions.
many more: so vain and luxuriant are the wits of men, in finding out many
inventions, and shaping to themselves forms and Ideas of Religions, every one
esteeming his own the best, and as much in love with his own imaginations, as
Narcissus was with his shadow in the Water, or Dercalion with his own picture.
Some reject Scriptures, others admit no other writings but Scriptures. Some say
the Devits shall be saved, others that they shall be damned, others that there
are no Devils at all. Some hold that it is lawful to dissemble in Religion,
others the contrary. Some say Antichrist is come, some say not; others that he
is a particular man. others that he is not a man, but the Devil; and others,
that by Antichrist is meant a succession of men; some will have him to be Nero,
some Caligula, some Mahomet, some the Pope, some Luther, some the Turk, some of
the Tribe of Dan; and so each man according to his fancy will make an
Antichrist. Some only will observe the Lords day, some only the Sabbath, some
both, and some neither. Some will have all things in common, some not. Some
will have Christ's body only in Heaven, some everywhere, some in the Bread,
others with the bread, others about the bread, others under the Bread, and
others that Christ's body is the bread, or the bread his body. And others again
that his body is transformed into his divinity: Some will have the Eucharist
administered in both kinds; some in one, some not at all. Some will have Christ
descend to Hell in respect of his soul, some only in his power, some in his
divinity, some in his body, some not at all: some by Hell understand the place
of the damned, some Limbus Patrum, others the wrath of God, others the state of
the dead, others the grave. Some will make Christ two Persons, some give him but
one Nature and one Will; some affirming him to be only God, some only man,
some made up of both, some altogether deny him: some will have his body come
from Heaven, some from the Virgin, some from the Elements; some will have our
Souls Mortal, some Immortal, some bring it into the body by infusion, some by
traduction; some will have the soul created before the world, some after: some
will have them created altogether, others severally: some will have them
corporeal, some incorporeal: some of the substance of God, some of the
substance of the body: So infinitely are men's conceits distracted with variety
of opinions, whereas there is but one truth, which every man dims at, but few
attain it; every man thinks he has it, and yet few enjoy it, The main causes
of these distractions are pride, self-love, ambition, contempt of Church and
Scripture, the Humor of Contradiction, the Spirit of Faction, the desire of
Innovation, the want of preserment in high Spirits, Anger, Envy, the benefit
that arises to some by fishing in troubled waters: the malignant eye that some
have on the Churches prospe^ity, the greedy appetite others have to Quails and
the Fleshpots of Egypt, rather then to Manna, though sent from Heaven: the
want or contempt of Authority, Discipline, and order in the Church, which like
Bulwarks, Walls, or Hedges keep out the wild Boars of the Forfest from rooting
up the Lords Vineyard, and the little Foxes from eating up the Grapes thereof.
Therefore wise Governors were forced to authorize Bishops, Moderatours, or
Superintendents (call them what you will) for regulating, curbing, and
punishing such luxurious wits; as disturbed the peace of the Church, and
consequently of the State, by their fantastical inventions, knowing that too
much liberty was no less dangerous then Tyranny, too much mercy as pernicious
as cruelty: and a general permission in a Kingdom or State, no less hazzardous
to the public tranquillity; then a general restriction.

The Contents of the Ninth Section.
The first original of the Monastical Life. 2. The first Eremites or
Anchorites. 3. The manner of their living. 4. Their Excesses in Religion. 5.
The pre-eminence of the Sociable Life to the Solitary. 6. The first Monks after
Anthony. 7. The rules of Saint Basil. 8. Saint Hieroms order. 9. Saint Austins
order. 10. If Saint Austin instituted his Eremites to beg. 11. Of Saint Austins
Leathern Girdle used at this day. 12. The institutions and exercises of the
first Monks. 13. Why Religious persons cut their Hair and Beards. 14. Whence
came that custom of Shaving. 15. Of the Primitive Nuns. 16. Of What account
Monks are at this day in the Roman Church. 17. How the Monks and Nuns of old
were consecrated. 18. The Benedictine order. 19. Of the orders proceeding from
them. 20. Of Saint Bennets rules to his Monks. 21. The Benedictines Habit and
Diet. 22. Rules prescribed by the Council of Aix to the Monks. 23. The Rites
and Institutions of the Monks of Cassinum. 24. The manner of electing their
Abbots. 25. The Benedictine Nuns and their rule. 26. Of the Laws and
Privileges of Monasteries.

SECT. IX.
Quest. 1. HAving taken a view of the Opinions in Christian Religion for 1600
years; it remains that we now take notice of the strictest observers thereof:
therefore tell us who they were that separated themselves from other
Christians, not so much in opinion as in place and strictness of living; and
what was the first original of this separation.

A. When the Christian Religion in the beginning was opposed by persecutors,
Eremites or Anchorites.
many holy men and women to avoid the fury of their persecutors, retired into
desert places, where they gave themselves to fasting, prayer, and meditation in
the Scriptures. These were called Eremites from the Desert where they lived,
and Monachi from their single or solitary life; And Anchorites from living a
part by themselves. Such were Paul the Eremite, Anthony, Hilarion, Basil,
Hierom and others. Afterward the Eremites growing weary of the Deserts, and
Persecution at an end, betook themselves into Towns and Cities, where they
lived together, and had all things in common within one building which they
called Monastery, Covent, or Cloister. These Monks were called (...)
Worshippers, (...) Exercisers or Wrestlers in Christianity; Clerici also, as
being the Lords inheritance; and Philosophers from their study and
contemplation of Divine and Humane things. Their houses were called Caenobia
because they held all things among them in common, and Claustra or Cloisters,
because there they were enclosed from the rest of the world. (...) Schools of
cares and discipline, and (...) places of exercise. As the men had their
peculiar Houses or Cloisters, so had the women, who were willing to separate
themselves from the world; these were called N^nn^, or Nuns from the Egyptian
word Nennus, for there were the first Monasteries: from their solitary life
they are named Moniales, and from their holiness Sanctimoniales; and from the
Roman phrase Virgins Vestoles; now, because these holy men and women lived at
first in caves and subterraneal holes, they were named Mandritae; for Mandrae
signifies caves or holes; and Troglodyta, from those Ethiopians in Arabia near
the Red Sea, who lived on Serpents flesh, and Roots, whose skins were hardened
with the nights cold, and tanned with the Suns heat. They were so called (...)
from their caves where they dwelt.

Q. 2. Who were the first Eremites, or Anchorites?

A. If we take Eremites for such as have lived in deserts for a while, to avoid
persecution; then we may say that Eliah, John Baptist, and Christ himself were
Eremites. For they were forced sometimes to live an Eremitical or solitary life
in deserts. But if by Eremites we understands such as wholly addicted
themselves to an Eremitical or solitary life from the world and worldly
affairs, that they might the more freely give themselves to fasting, prayer,
and contemplation, then the first Eremite we read of since Christ was Poul the
Theban: who having lost in the persecution under Decius both his Parents, and
fearing to be betrayed by his Sisters Husband, betook himself to a cave at the
foot of a Rocky Hill, about the year of Christ 260. and there continued all his
life, to wit, from fifteen years of age till he died, which was the one hundred
and thirteenth year of his life. All which time he saw no body but Antonius,
who being Ninety years old, by divine instinct came to Paul on the day he died.
This Antonius instituted this Eremitical life in Egypt. Being twenty years old
he sold his Estate, and bestowed it on the poor; See Hierom in the life of Paul
and Anthony, and in his Chronicle. See also Marcellus* Sozomen, Sabellicus, in
their histories, and others.
then in remote places he lived alone, but that sometimes he would visit his
disciples. At 35. years he betook himself to the desert, till he was 55. Then
he returned to the Cities and preached Christ there. Afterward he returned
again to the desert, where he spent, the remainder of his life, and dyed the
105. year of his age, and after Christ 361. To him succeeded Hilarion, the
first Eremite in Palestina and Syria. Then Paul surnamed the Simple, Amen an
Egyptian, with diverse others.

Q. 3. How did these first Eremites live?

A. They spent their time in working, sometimes in preaching, Eremites, their
first manner of living.
praying, fasting, and meditating, and sometimes in composing differences
between Christians, in visiting the sick, and in such like holy exercises did
they place their Religion. Paul the Theban was content with a cave in stead of
a palace; with a piece of dry bread brought to him by a Raven every day, in
stead of delicate cheer, with water in stead of wine; and with the leaves of
Palms in stead of rich apparel: And to avoid idleness, he would work
sometiems with his hands. Anthony contented himself with bread, salt, and
water; his dinnertime was at Sunsetting; he used to fast sometimes two days
together, and to watch and pray whole nights: he lay on the bare ground:
disputed often times with the Ar^i^ns and Meletians in defense of Athanasius:
did intercede many times with the Emperor Constantine for distressed
Christians, and was always ready to compose their quarrels. Hilarion was
content to live in a little hovel which he made himself of shells, twigs and
bulrushes, four foot broad, and five foot high* spending his time in praying,
fasting, curing of diseases, casting out Devils. His garment was sackcloth,
which he never put off; his food, roots and herbs, which he never ^asted before
Sun set; six ounces of Barley^bread contented him from 30. years till 35. from
that time till 63. he used Oil to repair his decayed strength. See Hierom,
Sozomen, Ni^^ pherus, and others describing their lives: And Athanasius (...)
the life of Anthony, if that Book be genuine.
From 64. till 80. he abstained from bread. That he might not be idle, he made
him baskets of bulrushes, and used to lie on the ground. Thus did these
Primitive Eremites spend their time; Not in chambering and w^^t^nnesse,
sur^etting and drunkenness; but in temperance, sobriety, continence, hunger,
thirst, heat and cold, reading, praying, preaching, and fasting; not placing
Religion in saying, but in suffering; not in good words, but in good works; not
in talking of Scripture, but in walking by Scripture.

Q. 4. Wherein did some Eremites exceed in their Religious, or rather,
superstitious kind of living?

A. As Jealousy is too much Love; so is Superstition too much Religion; Their
too great rigor.
but too much of one thing (as we say) is good for nothing: Ne quid nimis
should be in all our actions. God will have merey, and not sacrifice; He will
say, Who required these things at your hands? Such kind of bodily exercise, as
the Apostle says, avails little; It is not a torn skin, nor a macerated
body, nor a pinched belly that God requires, but a broken and contri^e spirit;
a renting of the heart and not of the garment; and therefore the excess of
Eremitical penance is (...) willworship, and not that which God requires, to
wit, mercy and justice; to relieve the oppressed; to comfort the comfortless;
to visit the Fatherless and widows, and to keep our selves unspotted of the
world. To place Religion in abstinence from certain meats, is against the
Apostles rule, ^ Tim. 4. saying, That every Creature of God is good, and
nothing to be rejected, which is received with thanksgiving. Altogether to
abandon the society of Christians, is contrary to Saint Paul's counsel, Heb. 10,
Let us consider one another, to provoke unto love and to good works, not
forsaking the fellowship that we have among our selves, as the manner of some
is, under pretense of forsaking the world, to abandon all care of Friends and
Family, is condemned by the Apostle, 1 Timothy 5. If any man has not a care of
his Family, he has denied the Faith, and is worse then an Infidel. They that
willingly deprive themselves of the means of doing good to their neighbors,
transgress the Law of God which commands us to love our neighbors as our
selves. These subsequent examples will show how far some men have exceeded the
bounds of Christianity, and outrun Religion, by too much superstitious
devotions and excessive penance. One Asepes^^a lived Sixty years together in a
Closet, all which time he never was seen of any, nor did he speak to any. The
like is recorded of one Didymus, who lived ninety years by himself. One
Batthaeus an Eremite of Caelosyria, fasted so long, till Worms crawled out of
his teeth. One Martinus tied his leg with an Iron Chain to a great Stone, that
he might not remove thence. One Alas never tasted bread in eighty years
together. John Sor^^ny the Egyptian stood praying within the Cliff of a certain
Rock three years together, so long till his legs and feet with continual
standing swelled with putri^ied matter, which at last broke the skin and run
out. One Dominicus and Eremit wore continually next his skin an Iron Coat of
Male* and almost every day used to scourge himself with whips in both hands.
Some have killed themselves with hunger, some with thirst, some with exposing
themselves to excessive heat have been stif^ed, others by extremity of cold have
been frozen to death; as if God took delight in self-murder, which in him to
affect were cruelty, and in any to act, were the greatest impiety. Some again
not content with ordinary ways of Eremitisme, have spent their days within
hollow pillars, whence they were named Stylitae, neither admitting the speech
nor sight of any man or woman. O (...) hominum! O quantum est in rebus ina^e!
What needed all this toil? Christ says, that his Yo^k is easy, and his
Burden light; They that will read the superstious sufferings of these men above
named, and of others, let them look in Sozomen, Theodoret, Socrates,
Nicephorus, Evagrius, etc.
but these men laid heavy burdens on themselves, which God never required; he
made man Animal Politicum, a sociable creature, therefore said, It was not good
for man to be alone. Woe to him that is alone, says Solomon. Besides no place,
though never so remote and solitary, can privilege a man from sin. Lot was
righteous among the wicked Sodomites, and yet in the solitary Cave committed
Incest with his two Daughters; what place could be more retired then Paradise,
and more secure then Heaven? yet Adam fell in Paradise and the Angels fell in
Heaven.

Q. 5. Whether is the solitary life in a Desert, or the sociable life in a
Covent to be preferred?

A. 1. The sociable life, because the end of our creation was not to live
apart, Sociable life preferred to the solitary:
like wild beasts, but together, like men. 2. Because we are hound to help each
other, by Counsel, Instruction, Admonition, Exhortation, to bear one another
burdens, to comfort the comfortless, to support the weak, to cloth the
naked, to seed the hungry: for as the Orator said, we are not born for our
selves, but our Parents, Country and Friends challenge a share in us. 3.
Because he that lives alone, as he sins against his creation, and humane
society, so he sins against himself, in that he debars himself of those
comforts and aid, both spiritual and corporal, which he has in a sociable
life. 4. Because God is more present with many, then with one. Therefore his
Church, which he promises to be with till the end of the world, and on which
he has bestowed the Spirit of Truth, to conduct her into all Truth, and which
he has built upon the Rock, so that Hell Gates shall not prevail against her;
his Church I say, is a congregation, and consists not of one but of many; and
Christ has promised that where two or three are gathered together in his name,
he will be in the midst of them. 5. Because God is better praised and more
honored of many together, then by one alone; therefore David will praise God,
and declare his name in the great Congregation. Christ will have our light to
shine before men, that they seeing our good works, may glorify our Father
which is in heaven. This cannot be done by him that lives amongst wild beasts
in a Desert* How can he honor God by the exercise of justice, mercy, charity,
humility, and other virtues, chiefly of his patience in suffering injuries, and
of his obedience to superiors? How shall he find out his own infirmities and
failings, seeing self-love is in every man, and no man can so well pry into
himself, as another; and the heart of man is deceitful above all things? 6.
And lastly no man alone can be so secure from danger of enemies, as when he is
in company; and therefore Satan is more ready to assault man by tentations when
he is alone, then when he is in the company and society of others. So he set
not upon Christ when he was in Jerusalem, but when he was led by the Spirit
into the D^sart; therefore woe to him that is alone, for when he falls, there is
not a second to help him up. As then in the body natural, God did not separate
one member from another, but united them all in one bulk, under one head, to be
animat^d by one heart or soul, that they might help each other; so has he done
in the body Pol^tick of mankind.

Q. 6. Who were the first Monk^ after Anthony?

A. The Thabennesii, so called from Thabenna, an Island in the Province of
Thebais. Monks, who were the first.
In this one Pachomius an E^emite, about the time of Constantius, Constantines
Son, assembled diverse Monks together, and by the advice of an Angel (so goes
the story) prescribed them these rules; to wit, that they should live together
in one house, distinguished into diverse Cells* and in each cell should remain
three Monks, but should all eat in one Hall. No man must be forbid to eat or
fast; they must sleep not lying on beds, but sitting in their chaires: they
must wear Goats skins, which they must never put off but when they communicate;
then they must come only with their hood, with which their heads must be
covered when they eat, that they may not be seen to eat; for in eating they
must neither cast their eyes off from the Table, nor must they speak. No
stranger must be admitted without three years trial. See Sozomen, Nicephorus
and Vincentius in his Spec. hist.
They must pray twelve times in the day time, likewise in the evening, and in
the night, a Psalm preceding each prayer. The Monks were divided into 24
Orders, according to the number of the Greek letters.

Q. 7. What were the Religious rules that Sa^nt Ba^il p^escribed to his Monks?

A. Saint Basil, Monks of Saint Basil and their rules.
Presbyter of Caesarea in Cappadocia, being molested by Eusebius, Bishop there,
to avoid trouble and disturbing of the Church, retired to a Monastery in
Pontus, where he preached to the Monks of that place; and departing thence,
traveled about the country of Pontus, and persuaded the Eremites, who lived
apart in caves and cells of the Deserts, to unite themselves in Monasteries,
and withal prescribes to them these 95. subsequent rules, which were embraced
by most of the Eastern Monks. The Rules were these. 1. To love God with all
their heart, soul and strength, and their neighbors as themselves. 2. To
ground this Love of God upon his power, glory, and excellency, as ^e is in
himself, and on his goodness, mercy, and bounty toward us. 3. That the love
of our neighbor be grounded on the command and will of God, and on his love
toward us his enemies; for if God has so highly loved us that were his
enemies, shall not we when he commands us, love our neighbors? 4. That they
should not live any longer a sunder, but together, because of the mutual helps,
comforts, instructions, exercise of virtues, efficacy of prayers, security from
dangers which are in the sociable, not in the solitary life. ^. That they
should forsake the delights and vanities of the world, and with the Apostle, to
crucify it, and to be crucified to it. 6. That they should dispense their
wealth to the poor and indigent. 7. That none be admitted into their Fraternity
without probation. 8. That Infants be also admitted, but not without the
consent of their Parents. 9. That they study to be continent and sober in their
diet and behavior. 10. Is set down the m^asure of their eating and drinking,
and simplicity of food. 11. That there be no affectation or contention for
superiority of place at the Table, but that all things be done there with order
and decency. 12. That their appa^el be plain, simple, and homely; and that they
wea^ a girdle, after the example of John Baptist, and the Apostles. 13. That
they walk not after their own sense and pleasure, but as they are directed by
Gods word. 14. That they be obedient to their Superiors, but chiefly to God.
15. That they should serve God with the same affection as David did, when he
said As the Heart brayeth for the Rivers of water, so does my soul after thee O
God. 16. That he who is their Governor should conside^ whose minister he is;
and that he should be as tende^ of his charge, as a nutse of her child. 17.
That he reprove at first gently, and in the spirit of meekness; but that he
esteem of the obstinate as Heathens and Publicans. 18. That he suffer not the
least offense to go unreproved, seeing the least is a breach of Gods Law. 19.
That repentance be in sincerity. 20. That it be accompanied with good works.
21. And with confession. 22. That if a man relapse into sin, he may use more
sincerity in his repentance then before; for it seems the disease was not
perfectly cured. 23. Let him that reproves be as a Father or a Physician; and
he who is reproved, as a Son and a Patient. 24. That no man defend or excuse
himself in his evil courses. 25. That among them all things be in common. 26.
That men of Estates bestow on their Kindred what is their due, and the
remainder on the poor. 27. That none return to their Parents houses, except it
be to instruct them, and by their Superiors leave. 28. That none give way
through idleness for their minds to waver, or wander up and down. 29. That to
avoid idle and sinful dreams in the night, let every one be diligent in
meditating on the Law and the word of God by day. 30. That with the same
affection which Christ showed in washing his disciples feet, should the strong
and whole serve the sick and infirm. 31. That they should love one another, as
Christ has loved us. 32. That their speech be not idle, but seasoned with
salt, and edifying. 33. That they should abstain from upbraiding or defaming
words. 34. That they who either defame, or patiently hear their brother
defamed, be excommunicated. 35. That they give not place or scope to anger. 36.
That they set their affections on heavenly, not on earthly things. 37. That
they neither sorrow nor rejoice, but when they see God honored or dishonored.
38. That they take heed of worldly cares and too much security. 39. That what
ever they do, may be done to the glory of God. 40. That they beware of pride.
41. That by a mean esteem of themselves, they may learn humility. 42. That
every one be obedient to another, as servants are to their Masters, or as
Christ was obedient to his Father. 43. That no man (...) occasion of scandal or
offense to his brother; that every (...) do his duty with cheerfulness,
without grudging; that ^conciliation may be made where there is any difference:
44: That they judge not, lest they be judged. 45. That they be truly zealous
against sin. 46. That no man do his own will, nor undertake any thing
without leave, seeing Christ came not to do his own will, but the will of him
that sent him. 47. That they be thankful to God, (...) has made them partakers
with the Saints in light. 48. That they instruct novices in their duties. 49.
That they debar not any man from entering into their Covent upon trial; and
withal, that they give them no offense. 50. That in their Fasting they use
moderation and devotion. 51. That no man scorn to wear in old garment when it
is given him. 52. That every man observe the hour appointed for eating. 53.
That they give their alms with due consideration, and according to the
discretion of the Superior. 54. That a younger brother, instructing his elder,
do it with reverence; and that no man disturb the Orders settled in the
Monastery. 55. That great care be had of the Utensils belonging to the
Monastery. 56. If any be necessarily detained from public prayer and singing,
that then he pray, and praise God in his heart. 57. That they be reverent in
their prayers, and not suffer their minds to wander, seeing the eyes of God are
upon them. 58. That the Steward, and other Officers of the Covent be prudent
and faithful in their dispensation. 59. That there be diversity of rewards,
according to the diversity of works. 60. That he who returns to God by
repentance, must weep, and be sorry for his former life, and hate his former
actions. 61. That they should not be dismayed who have not wealth to give to
the poor, seeing they have forsaken all for Christ. 62. That they take heed of
affected ignorance, and consenting to other men's sins. 63. That they must not
be silent, or connive at their Brothers offenses, but must reprove him. 64.
That they should never be without compunction and care, by reason of the
remainders of sin in them 65. That they endeavor to be poor in spirit, which
is to forsake all for the love of God. 66. That they presevere in doing good
till the end of their life. 67. That thoug^ in respect of themselves, they must
not care what they eat, or what they drink; yet, that they may be helpful to
others, they must labor with their hand* 68. That to think of meat and drink
out of season is a sin. 69. That sackcloath be worn for humiliation, other
garments for necessity; that in spea^ing they neither be too loud nor too low.
70. That the Eueharist be received with fear, reverence and faith. 71. That
they observe when it is fit to speak, when to be silent. 72. That they have
always the fear of God before them; That they avoid the broad way, and strive
to enter in at the narrow gate. 73. That they beware of coverousnesse,
vainglory, and vanity in apparel, to please men. 74. That they abstain from
all defilement of the flesh, and endeavor to be pure in heart. 75. That they
hate sin, and take delight in Gods Law. 76 That they try their love to God,
by their thankfulness to him; by obedience to his commands, and by denying
themselves. Their love to their neighbor, by fellow-feeling and sympathy in
his prosperity and adversity. 77. That they should imitate God and Christ, in
loving their enemies. 78. That they should be angry, but sin not; that they
give place to anger, and not resist evil, but being persecuted, either to
suffer, or fly. 79. That they strive for the peace of conscience; and like new
born babes receive the sincere milk of Gods word, without resisting. 80. That
no man be puffed up with a conceit of his own worth, nor brag thereof, or glory
therein. 81. That they beg true wisdom from God, and acknowledge him the
Author of all good. 82. That they may know what it is to b^ holy, to be just,
not to cast pearls before Swine, and to be content with their daily bread. 83.
That no brother alone visit a sister but in company, and that by permission,
and for edifica^ion to avoid offense. 84. That reproof be joined with
gentleness; and that none rely on his own judgment* 85. That they hear one
another infirimities. 86. That they pray against tentations. 87. That they do
no^ speak, or act any thing rashly, but advisedly. 88. That in giving, they
should chiefly have regard to those of the household of faith; and that every
one must not be a dispenser, but he only to whom that charge is committed. 89.
That they labor not for faith, as some do, without charity; and that they hide
not their Talent in a Napkin. 90. They must distinguish between fury, which is
always evil, and just indignation against sin in their brother. 91. That Satan
is not the cause of sin in any man* but as he consents to it; therefore the
more watchful should each man be over his own heart. 92. If any man, being in
debt, enter into the Monastery, he ought to pay his dept, if he be able. 93.
That when a Sister confesses, the Priest-Confessor do nothing but by order and
decency, and in the presence of the Mother or Abbaresse. 94. If Satan strive to
hinder any good action, they must not leave off their holy purpose and
resolution. 95. That no man be wise in his own eyes, nor trust in his own
strength, but in the Lord.

These Canons we may read more fully in Saint Basils Works. Ruffinus translated
them into Latin; And here we may see that such a Monastical life is not to be
condemned: for these Monks were not to be idle, but to work with their hands;
therefore their Monasteries were called (...), places of Exercise, and the
Monks (...), Exercisers, which signifies not only the exercise of their
hands, but also of their minds; as Hospinian observes out of Budaeus. These
Monks were tied to wear a white garment.

Q. 8. What Religious Order did Saint Hierome erect?

A. S. Hierom, who was coetaneal with S. Basil, being offended at the
Heathenish lives of Christians in Rome, Saint Hierom.
betook himself, with some others, into Syria, where he lived in the Desert for
a time, giving himself to study, prayers, and meditation; afterward returning
to Rome, was so hated there by the Clergy, whose vices he sharply reproved;
that he betook himself again to his Monastical life in Syria, where Paula, a
noble Roman Marton, erected four Monasteries, three for Women, and one for men,
in Bethlehem, near the stable where Christ was borne. In this Covent Saint
Hi^rom lived many years with diverse of his friends, spending his time in
devotion, Monks of S. Hierom.
writing, and meditating on the Bible, and educating also of diverse noble
youths, to whom he read Rhetoric, and the Poets: And thus he ended his days
the 91. year of his life, and of Christ 421. The Monks of his Order are called
Hieronymiani, See Sabellicus, Polydor Virgil, Baronius, Erasmus on the life of
Saint Hierom, and in his Antidote to Rusticus the Monk.
whose garments are of swart or brown color: Over their coat they wear a
plated cloak divided; they gird their coat with a leather girdle, and wear
wooden shoos. There is also an Order of Eremites of Saint Hierom, set up by
Charles Granellus a Florentin, about the year of Christ. 1365. These Hier^mites
flourished most in Italy, and Spain, and have large revenues.

Q. 9. Of What Religious Order is Saint Augustine held to be author?

A. Of those who are called Canon Regulars, bearing Saint Augustines name,
Monks of S. Austin.
and of the Eremites of Saint Augustine. Which of these two Orders was first
instituted by that great light and Doctor of the Church, it not yet certain; we
find that this holy man was at first a Manichee till he was 31. years of age,
and professed Rhetoric at Rome and Millan; but by the persuasion of
Simplicianus, and reading the life of Antony the Monk, he became a convert, and
in a Garden with his friend Alipius, as he was bewailing his former life, he
heard a voice accompanied with the Music of Children, saying to him, Toll,
lege, Toll, lege, that is, Take up and Read; looking about, and seeing no
body, he took this for a divine admonition, and so taking up the Bible, the
first passage he lighted on was this: [Not in Surfeiting and Drunken^esse, not
in Chambering and Wantonness, but put you on the Lord Jesus, etc.] Upon this
resolving to become a Christian, he went with Alipius to Millan, where they
were both baptized with his Son, by Saint Ambrose Bishop the^^* After this
having spent a few years in fasting, prayer, and study in the holy Scripture,
he was called to Hippo in Africa, where he was at first Presbyter, and then
Bishop. He built a Monastery within the Church of Hippo; where he lived with
other learned men ^s in a College, and from thence sent abroad diverse Divines
to be Clergy men in Hippo, and Bishops to other places. Now whereas Saint
Austin was first an Eremite and lived in the Desert, before he erected a
Collegiate life in Hippo, it is likely that the Eremites of his Order are more
ancient then his Monks or Canons. But some doubt, whether either of those
Orders were instituted by him, as diverse other Orders who profess to live
after his rule; as the Scopettini instituted by Steven and James of Sena, and
confirmed by Gregory 11. about the year 1408. The Prison^rii called also
Lateranenses; these sprung up in the Territory of Luca in Hetruria, which
Eugenius 4. ratified. The Order of Saint George in Alga, instituted at Venice
by L^^rentius Iustinianus, Anno. 1407. and confirmed by Pope John 22. These
wear a Blew habit. The D^minicans also, Brigidians, Iesuati, Servants of the
blessed Virgin Mary, Hieromites, Antonians, Trinitaries, Brothers of Saint John
of Jerusalem, Cruci^eri, Brothers of Saint Peter the Confessor, Brothers of the
Lords Sepulcher Eremites of Saint Paul, with diverse others. The habit of the
Canons regular is a White Cloth Coat, open before, and down to their feet. This
is girded to their body, and over it they wear a Linen Surplesse to their
knees, and over that ^ short black Cloak to their elbows, with a Hood fastened
to it; their Crowns are shaven like other Friars; and when they go abroad, they
wear a bread Hat, or a black Cornered Cap. But Saint Austins Eremites wear a
black Coat, with a Hood of the same color; underneath there is a White little
Coat. Their Girdle is of Leather with a Buckle of Horn. After the example of
these Monastical Canons, there were Ecclesiastical Canons erected, who instead
of an Abbot, had the Bishop for their Governor; these were seated near the
Cathedral Church, which sometimes was called Mon^stery, and corruptedly
Minster: these Canons* whilst they lived strictly according to their rule, were
named Regular; but when they fell off from their strict way of living, and
meddled with worldly business, they received a new name of Canons Secular. With
him see Sabellicus, Pol. Virgil, Crant^ius, Balaeus, Alph^nsu^, Alvarez de
Guevarra, etc.
Volaterran reckons 4555. Monasteries of Canons in Europe. 700. in Italy,
whereas now are scarce 60. Popes, 36. Cardinals, 300. of Canonised Saints 7500.

Q. 10. Did Saint Austin institute his Eremites to beg?

A. It is not likely, for Saint Austin never begged himself, but did live by
his learned and pious labors; Christ and his Apostles did not live idly, and
by begging; Monks of S. Austin are not to beg.
Saint Paul labored working with his own hands and said, 1. Cor. 4. That he
who will not work, should not eat. And 2. These. 3. That it is a more blessed
thing to give then to receive. A beggar was not to be suffered in Israel, and
amongst Gods people it was held a curse to beg; therefore David wished that his
Enemies might beg their Bread, and shows that the children of the righteous
shall never be driven to beg. Besides, they that are able to work, and will
not, but live upon the alms of such as are sick and impotent, are robbers of
the poor and weak. I deny not, but Christ undertook voluntary poverty; because
he confesses, Luc. 6. That the Son of man had not whereon to lay his head* and
Luc. 8. 3. that the Women did minister to him of their goods, and elsewhere
That he had neither, House of his own to be born in, nor a Chamber of his own
to eat his last Supper in, nor an Ass of hi^ own to ^ide on, nor a Grave of
his own to lie in. Yet we do not read that he begged, or lived idly; for he
went about preaching, working miracles, and doing good, therefore he needed not
to beg; for he that will thus employ his life, shall not want, nor need to beg.
And so if the Monks would take pains in praying and preaching, they needed not
to be Mendicants; For the labourer is worthy of his wages, no man goes a
Warfare on his on ch^rges; he that serves at the Altar; must live by the
Altar; and be that sows Spiritual things, should reap Temporal. I deny not
also, but there were Lazarus. the two blind men in the Gospel* the cripple in
the Acts, who did beg; but the^ the Jewish government was much altered from its
first purity, and their Laws much neglected or corrupted, by their subjection
to the Romans. Again that Christ and his disciples needed not to beg, is
plain, by the common purse among them, whereof Judas was the carrier. Now
Christ assumed voluntary poverty; though he did not beg; to show that he came
to suffer want, and that his Kingdom was not of this world; and to sanctify
our poverty to us, and to ^each the rich of this world, that they trust not in
uncertain riches; and that the poor should not be dejected, seeing Christ
himself was poor. God also to humble us does suffer us sometimes to be in ^ant.
So he dealt with Elias, when he asked ^read of the Widow; and David when he
desired bread of Abimelech; and Lazarus, when he begged at the rich man's door:
but this is seldom, and to let us see, that on earth we have not true
happiness. Again I deny not but a single man, who has no charge of Wife,
Children, and Family, may renounce his wealth, that he may be the less
burdened with the cares of this life, and the more apt for prayer and
contemplation; but this is not lawful in him who has the charge of Wife and
Family, for whom he ought to provide, If he be not worse then (...) Infidel. To
be brief, these Monks, who can work or preach, and will not, ought not to beg;
for wages are due to those that work, not so much out of charity, as out of
justice.

Q. 11. Was that Leathre^ Girdle ever worn by S. Augustine, with which the
Monks of this order used to cure Diseases, and ease Pains in the body?

A. ^. That Saint Austin ever wore this Girdle, Austins girdle
is not known to me, nor can it be proved but by their own traditions. 2. That
this Girdle has mi^^culously cured Diseases, and assuaged Pains, is believed
by diverse lay people, even by some Princes, who have for this end, wore the
same. 3. That wonderful cures have been wrought by this Girdle, is a^^evered
by diverse, but how truly, I know not. 4. God sometimes by weak means produces
strange cures* as by Christ's Spittle, Saint Peter's Shadow, S^int paul's
Handkerchieff* the Hem of Christ's Garment. ^. God permits Satan sometimes to do
strange things, that they who will not believe the truth, may be deluded. 6.
Many strange cures are to be ascribed to the force of imagination, rather then
to such weak outward means. 7. To deny all miracles which have been written, is
too much temeriti^^ and to believe all, is too much credulity. 8. We read of
miracles not only done by Moses, Christ, and his Apostles, but also by the
Sorcerers of Egypt, Simom Magus, Antichrist, Apollonius and others. 9. As
Scriptures at first were proved by miracles, so miracles are now to be proved
by Scriptures; for such miracles as are not consonant to Gods word, are not
true. 10. Diverse of the Roman Church doubt the truth of many of their miracles;
Canus Loc. 1. 11. c. 6. calls the Author of the Golden Legend a man of a brazen
Face, and a Leaden Heart. Espencaeus upon 2. Tim. 4. says, That the Legends
are full of fables. Caietan Digr. 21. Opusc. de concep. Virg. C. 1. tells us,
That it cannot be known infallibly, that the miracles on which the Church
groundeth the Canonisation of Saints be true, because the credit thereof
depends on men's reports, who may deceive others, and be deceived themselves.

Q. 12. What were the Institutions and Exercises of the first Monks?

A. At first they used to work, Monks, their first institutions and Exercises.
when occasion served; to eat and drink soberly, to go decent in their apparel,
to fast and pray often, to possess all things in common; to Read, Meditate,
Preach, and hear the Word of God, to study Temperance, Continency, Modesty,
Obedience, Silence, and other Virtues* They were divided into tens, and
hundreds; every nine had their Decurio, or tenth man to overlook them, and
every hundred had their Centurio, to whom the ten Decurions were subject, they
had their distinct beds; at the ninth hour they met to sing and hear Sermons,
at Table they fit silent, and content themselves with Bread, Herbs, and Salt;
the old men only drink Wine; in the night they had their ho^^ of prayer; in
the Summer they dine, but (...) not: Their chief Governor they called Father;
in Syriack Abbot, who for his learning was eminent, and for his life exemplary.
These ancient Monks used to wear Hoods and Girdles, they went also with staves,
and scrips of Goat skins. But in Egypt they wore no shoos, because of the heat
of that Country. The affairs of the Covent was committed to some Brother, till
he grew weary of it; but in Mesopotamia, Palestine, and Cappadocia; the
Brothers did serve by turns weekly; at the end of the week, the servant did
wash the feet of his Brothers, and so resigned up his office to the next. In
most places they observed the third, sixth, and ninth hours for prayer; none
were admitted into the Monastery till they were (...) tried by waiting ten days
together without the Gate, and patiently enduring all the opprobrious speeches
that should be uttered against them; then did the Abbot receive them with a
long exhortation, admonishing them of their duties, and chiefly exhorting them
to Mortification, Humility, Silence, Obedience, Meekness, Patience, Sobriety,
Submission, Confession of their infirmities, and such like duties. Then are
these Probationers stripped of their own Garments, and clothed in Monks habit,
and are tried one whole year under strict discipline; if there be dislike on
either side, they receive their own clothes again from the Steward, and are
dismissed the Monastery. Small offenses among these Monks were punished with
public humiliation and acknowledgment, the offender lying flat on the ground,
till the Abbot bid him rise; but great faults were punished with stripes, or
expulsion: during their sitting at Table, they were to hearken to what was read
out of the Scripture, to the end, they might be taken off from idle talk, and
that their minds might be sed as well as their bodies, seeing not by bread
^lone man does live, but by every word that ca^neth out if the mouth of God.
These primitive Monasteries also were subject to the Bishops of the Diocese,
without whose leave, they were not to go abroad from their Covents. I do not
find that in these Primitive Monasteries they were tied to set Fasts, See
Cassianus^ Hierom, Erasmus, Vadianus, etc.
^^ the three Vows of Chastity, Poverty, and Obedience, or to different
clothes and colors; or to stay longer in the Monastery, then their own liking.

Q. 13: Why did Religious Persons cut their Hair and Beards?

A. Because long Hair was abused among the Gentiles to Pride, Why they cut
their hair and beard.
Luxury, and Superstition. It did argue also Effeminatnesse, Childishness, or
Slavishnesse; for in some places slaves used to wear long hair, which when
they were made free, they laid aside; so children, when they came to years o^
puberty, cut their Hairs, and offered them to Apollo who by the Poets is
called Crinitus, and (...) the nourisher of Hair; the Gentiles gave long
Hairs to their gods; So Jupiter, Apollo, Bacchus, Neptune, Aesculapius, are
described with long Hair. Nature gave the Woman long Hair, to distinguish her
from the Man; therefore men with long Hair were noted for Effeminate, and in
derision called (...)* Hair-trimmers. The Apostle reproves it in men; therefore
the Clergy by the Canons of Councils and Decretals, are forbid to nourish their
Hairs, but to cut them; yet I do not find that they used in those times to
shave, or were enjoined to do so, but rather the contrary: therefore Optatus
Milevitanus, L. Cont. Parmen. reproves the Donatists for shaving the Catholic
Priests: and Clemens Alexandrinus, L. 3. Paedag. c. II. says that the Hairs
are to be clipped with Scissors, not shaved with a Rasor. And the reason why
shaving was then prohibited among the Christians, was because it was used by
the Gentile Priests in honor of their Idols; for in the time of the Primitive
Christians, were the Priests of Isis yet extant, who used to shave their Heads:
for this cause God would not have the Jewish Priests to shave, seeing he would
not have them to be like the Idolatrous Priests; nor would he have them to
shave in Funerals, Levit. 21. Now the reasons why Monks and Clerks, were shaved
among Christians, and that only on the top of their Head, so that their hairs
hanging about their Ears, represented a Crown, were these. 1. To resemble the
Crown of Thorns which Christ wore. 2. To show that Christ's Priests are also
spiritual Kings. 3. They shave off their Hairs to show that they should lay
aside all superfluities of the flesh, and sinful lusts; but the Crown of the
Head must be bare, to show that the mind must be free for contemplation 4.
their naked and bare Crowns were to show the nakedness, purity, and simplicity
of their lives. Con, Agath, can. 11: Tolet. 3. can. 12.
5. To show their repentance and conversion; for such were commanded to cut
their Hairs, before they were admitted again into the Church. 6. To
discriminat the Christian Monk^ from the Jewish Nazarites, who wore long Hair,
as Moses did Veil, to show that the mystery of redemption was not as yet
revealed. 7. They cut or shave to avoid the uncleanness and inconveniences
that accompany long Hair. 8. To show their contempt of the world, See Platina,
Balaeus, Pol, Virgil, Bellarmin, and others.
and of those vain Effeminate men who pride themselves in their long Hair. 9.
They shave their Beards that they may look smooth like Children and Angels, who
are always painted young, by this showing, they should be Children in malice,
and Angels in innocence.

Q. 14. Whence came the custom of shaving, or cutting the hairs of head and
beard among religious persons?

A. Some will have Saint Peter to be the first Christian that was shaved on the
crown, Their shaving whence it came.
at Antioch, by the Gentiles in derision. Others ascribe this custom to
Anicetus, who lived about 165. years after Christ; but this is rejected by
Bellarmine. Others again will have the Fourth Council of Toledo, about the year
of Christ 631. to enjoin this shaving of the crown; and in the council of
Aquisgran, an Christi 816. the Monks are enjoined to shave in Easter week. But
shaving of the Beard is not so ancient; for it came in with the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, taught by Peter Lombard, Anno 1160. and established by
Innocent 3. in the Council of Later^n, in the year 1200. The reason of this
shaving was, left any hairs of the beard might touch the body or blood of
Christ; or least any crum of the bread, or drop of the wine might fall upon, or
stick to the beard. In the time of Epiphanius, about 400. years after Christ,
it was not the custom among Monks to cut their beards; for he inveighs against
the Monks of Mesopotamia, for wearing long hairs like women, and cutting their
beards, which also was the custom of the Messalian Heretics. But that this
custom of cutting the beard was not generally received by the Clergy, appears
in the French Story; for Fr^ncis the first caused the Churchmen with a great
sum of money to redeem their beards which he threatened to cut: but indeed the
custom of shaving was used among the Gentile Priests; for which reason God
would not have his Priests to shave, that they might not seem to follow the
ways of Idolaters. The Egyptian Priests, by shaving off all their hairs, did
signify that the Priests should be pure and clean, and free from all
pollution. They used also in Mourning and Funerals to cut their hairs; so
Statius says, 1. 6. The^^ Terg^que and ^ectore fusam Caesariem minuit, and to
cut the hairs of the dead, which they laid on the Tomb, or cast into the fire,
as a sacrifice to Pluto and Pr^serpina, as may be seen in Euripides and Homer.
Of this custom speaks Virgil, in the death of Queen D^do;

Nondum illi flavum Proserpina vertice crinem
Abstulerat, Stygieque caput damnaverat Orco, etc.
Sic ait, and dextra crinem secat, etc.
They used also to spread their cut hair upon the Coffin, as Heliodor 1. 6.
shows (...). And as they offered the hairs of the dead to Orcus; so they did
of Children to the Rivers, from whence they held all things had their Original,
or else to Apollo and Hercules, that is, the Sun; for by the heat of the Sun,
and the moisture of Water, hairs are procreated. But in their Marriage
Solemnities they used to offer their hairs to Diana or Juno, cui vincla
jugalia cur^^; for she was held the Goddess of marriage. Childrens hair were
cut with ceremony in the Temples, and preserved in boxes or cases of Gold and
silver. Seamen in danger of shipwreck used to cut their hairs, thinking
thereby to appease the angry Sea gods. Among some Gentiles the hairs were cut
in sign of liberty; among others in token of servitude: It was a punishment to
cut the hair among the Germans, as T^citus de mor. Ger. shows of the women
there, who for adultery had their hair cut: Accisis crinibus nudatam domo
expellat maritus. Such also as stood guilty of capital crimes were shaved; as
Nicolaus Damascenus shows, and Philostratus in the life of Apollonius. But
sometimes again guilty persons wore long hair, and were forbid to shave; to be
half shaved was the badge of a slave; Frontes literati, and capisllum
semirass, and pedes annulati, says Apuleius ^. 9. Slaves were stigmatized on
the forehead, half shaved, and had rings about their feet. David's servants
were sent back by the Ammonites ha^fe shaved. Sometimes shaving was a note of
Effeminatenesse; sometimes of Craft; sometimes of Foolishness; sometimes of
Liberty; and sometimes (as is said) of Slavery. But however it was used among
the Gentiles, it is expressly forbid to the Jews, Lev. 19:
and threatened as a punishment. Yet among Christians it is indifferently used;
Isa. 7. 20.
but among the Monks and Priests it is used as a mark of distinction; and 15. 2.
and to show that as dead men were shaved among the Gentiles, Ier. 48. 3^^
so that our Monks are dead to the world, and as the Gentiles thought by
cutting their hair to pacify their angry Gods; so the Monks, by laying aside
all fleshly superfluities, strive to avoid Gods wrath. This I should like well,
if they were as careful about the thing signified, as they are about the
sign: And as shaving was sometimes a sign of Liberty, so I wish it were among
them, who as they pretend, See Hadrian Iunius, Pol. Virgil, Hospinian,
Schedius, Bellarmine, etc.
they are free from the world, so they were free also from the Devil, and the
flesh, and from those sins that enslave them; for he that commits sin is
the servant of sin; yea a servant of servants, whatsoever badges of liberty
he pretend.

Q. 15. Where there any Religious Women, which we call Nuns, in the Primitive
times of the Church?

A. Yes: For we read of Marcella, Nuns in the Primitive times.
Sophronia, Principia, Paul^, Eustochium, and others, who did profess
chastity, and contempt of the world, and an earnest desire of heavenly things.
This retired life they undertook of their own accord, and not by force; for
every one is not capable of perpetual Virginity nor were they tied to it by
vow: For the Apostle says, That if a Virgin marry, she sins not. Indeed
such Virgins as had dedicated themselves to God and a single life, if afterward
finding their own inability to persevere, did marry, these marriages were
thought scandalous, yet lawful; For it is better to marry then to burn;
therefore they were not rescinded; and the parties so marrying were evil
reported of for their inconstancy; for this cause penance was in* joined them.
And afterward Iovinian made it capital for any man to marry, or to solicit a
Nun, because the Donatists of his time defloured diverse Nuns. Such married
couples were Excommunicated by the Church, perpetually imprisoned, or pur to
death, by the Civil Magistrate, and the marriage absolutely disanulled as
incestuous. Before Censtantine's time, I do not read of any Monasteries or
Nunneries erected for Women, by reason of frequent persecutions, and the
uncertain condition of Christians then: But after that peace was established in
the Church, Houses were built for Virgins, but yet with liberty to be
elsewhere; for Eustochium the Virgin lived with her own Parents, and so did the
Virgin Demetrias; and we find in Cyprian, Hierom, and Austin, that such
Virgins had liberty to go abroad, to hear Sermons in the Church, and to
receive the Eucharist with the rest of Gods people; they were enjoined to be
modest and frugall in their clothes and diet; not to converse with men; not to
walk alone; not to bathe, except their hands and feet; to fast and pray often;
to be veiled; to abstain from wine; to wash the Saints feet; not to be idle,
but either to sing, pray, hear, or be working with the needle. And seeing hair
was given to the woman as an ornament and badge of distinction, and for
modesty; therefore Nuns of old were not shaven^ as now, but were prohibitted
by the Council of Gangren, Can. 17. to shave at all. Yet in the Syrian and
Egyptian Monasteries, Nuns at their admission used to offer their hairs to
the Abbatesse because it was not lawful for them to wash or anoin^ their
heads: They that will read more fully what is written of the Primitive Nuns,
let the^* read Basil, Athanasius, Cyprian, Hier^in Austin, etc. who have
written largly of this subject.
therefore to keep their heads the cleaner from filth and vermin, they cut
their hair. Its likely they learned this custom from the Vestal Virgins at
Rome, who used to cut their hair, and offer it on the tree L^tos, called
Capill^ta, as Pliny shows.

Q. 16. In what account are Monks, at this day in the Roman Church?

A. They are of that high esteem, that their very garments are counted sacred,
and that there is power in them to cure diseases, to work miracles, to drive
away evil spirits, to further them toward Heaven, so that some Kings and
Princes have desired to dye in a Francisca^ Hood. Monks, in what account at
Rome at this day.
2. They count this the state of perfection, the Angelical life, the life that
Eliah and Saint John Baptist, Christ and his Apostles did embrace, and a life
meritorious of Heaven. 3. Whereas in the beginning Monks were altogether
Laymen, and not to meddle with any other employment but what was proper to
their profession, to wit, prayer, fasting, virginity, poverty, and obedience:
now they are admitted into, and privileged with all Ecclesiastic Dignities,
from the Doore-keeper even to the Papacy. 4. The married life, amongst many of
them, is accounted pollution, compared with the Monastical; Notwithstanding
the Apostle tells us that marriage is honorable, and Christ honored it
himself with his presence and first miracle; and would be born of a Virgin,
but after she was espoused to a Husband. 5. Such is the respect they give to
this life, that they prefer it to all natural affection and duty between
Parents and Children, to which not only are we tied by nature, but also by
special command from God. Hierome commends Paula in her Epitaph for abando^ing
Brother, Kindred, and her own Children, whose tears she slighted, preferring
this kind of life to them all; but this preposterous zeal is condemned by the
Council of Gangra, Can. 15. 6. So likewise they prefer it to the mutual duty
and stipulation that is between man and wife, permitting, yea teaching that
they may forsake each other, and enter into a Monastery; which is to put
asunder those whom God has joined together; to defraud one another of due
benevolence, and by this means occasion adultery. The Apostles counsel is,
that the married couple should not defraud one another, except it be for a
time, by consent, to give themselves to prayer, seeing the man has not power
over his own body, but the woman; and so the man has power over the woman. 7.
They will not permit Monks and Nuns ever to marry, though they have not the
gift of continency, accounting all such marriages Sacrilege; whereas the first
Monks were left to their own freedom, and not constrained to stay longer then
their conveniences would permit: And in the Primitive times of the Church,
marriages contracted after the vow of continency made, were not dissolved, but
held lawful; only the parties for their inconstancy were enjoined penance,
and the man made incapable of Eccelesiastical employment: Neither were their
Monks forced to vow chastity, seeing every one is not capable thereof, and much
mischief has proceeded from this constrained Vow: but men were left to their
own freedom. Neither was it at that time counted a more heinous sin for a
Monk to marry a Nun, then to keep a Concubine. 8. The modern Monks are
permitted to wear Rings; See Erasmus, Polyd. Virgil, Hospinia^, Baronius,
Bellarmine, etc.
to converse in Kings and Princes Courts; and such is the opinion they have of
Monasteries, that they think a man cannot sufficiently repent him of his
sins, or be truly mortified; except he be shut up in a Covent.

Q. 17. How were the Monks and Nuns of old consecrated?

A. The Monks after prayers and exhortation made by the Priest, How consecrated
anciently.
is by the same signed with the sign of the Gross, and shaved or polled
rather; then is his old garment taken off, and he is clothed in a Monastical
habit, Nunns, how consecrated anciently.
and with other holy men present, is made partaker of the Divine mysteries. The
Nuns were consecrated either by the Bishop or the Priest, and by them covered
with a Veil; if the Abbatesse presumed to do this, she was excommunicated:
Twenty five years of age was then held a fit time for Virgins to be Veiled,
but now they may at twelve, or before; the days of the year for receiving
their Veil, and Consecration, were the Epiphany, Easter-eve, and the festival
days of the Apostles, except in case of death. The Virgin to be consecrated
was presented to the Bishop in her Nuns habit; then before the Altar with
Music and burning Tapers, the Priest before he puts on her Veil, thus says,
Behold Daughter, and Forget thy People and thy Fathers House, See Ambrose,
Tertussian, Hierom, Austin, and Di^nysius the Areopagite, in his Hierarchy, if
that book be his.
that the King may take pleasure in thy beauty: To this the people cried Amen,
and so the Veil is cast over her, and all the religious Martons present do
kiss her, after the Priest has blessed and prayed for her: in this Veil is
placed as much Sanctity, as in Baptism; and that such Virgins as depart out of
this world without it, are in danger of damnation.

Q. 18. What was the Religious Order of the Benedictines?

A. Benedict or Be^et in Vmbria, Benedicti^^ Monks.
a country of Italy, being weary of the wars and tumults there, retired
himself into a Desert place, after the manner of Autho^y the Theba^, to whom
did flock multitudes of people; from thence he goes to Cassinum, an ancient
Town where he settled, and prescribed Laws to his Monks, after the manner of
Saint Basil. He is said to found twelve Monasteries, over which he placed
twelve Abbots, that were his Disciples. His chief Monastery, Cassinum, was
richly endowed by Tertullus, a Roman Patritian, who bestowed on it, Castles,
Villages, Lands, and large possessions. Equitius, a Senator followed his
example, and conferred large revenues on it, and so did diverse others after
him. This Order did quickly spread through France, Germany, Sieily, Spain,
England, and other places. By the means of Ma^rus his Disciple, who was Son
to Equitius the Roman Senator, near Orleans; the first Monastery of
Benedictines is founded, consisting of one hundred and forty Brothers, which
number was not to be altered. By Placidus Son to Tertullus, the Roman
Patrieian, Benet set up a Monastery in Sicily. By Leobardus, he erected a
Monastery in Alsatia, four miles from Strasburg; he planted also a Monastery
at Rome, near the Lateran Church, in the time of Pelagius. By D^natus a
Benedictine Covent is erected in Spain about the year of Christ 590. By
Austin, Archbishop of Canterbury, the Benedictines got footing in England,
Anno 596. and so by degrees they spread through other places; chiefly in
Germany, by Boniface the German Apostle, and Bishop of Mentz, Anno 545. These
Benedictines were afterward divided into diverse Sects; Namely the Cluniacenses,
instituted in Burgundy, by one Otho, an Abbot, to whom William, Surnamed the
Godly, D. of Aquitain gave a Village called Mastick, Anno 916. The
Carnalduenses were erected by one Romoaldus a Benedictine, on the top of the
Appenin Hills. The Vallisumbrences, so called from Vallis Vmbrosa, on the side
of the Appenins were erected by one Gualbertus a Florentine, Anno 1060. the
Montelivetenses were set up by one Bernard Ptol^mens at Sienna in Tuscany. Anno
1047. The Grandimonte^ses about the same time were instituted by one Steven, a
Noble man in France. The Cistertians, so called from Cistertium in Burgundy,
about the same time were erected by one Robert, Abbot of Molismenia. Saint
Bernard was of this order, who about the year of Christ, 1098. was made Abbot
of Claravallis, whose Monks were called from his name Bernardines, who are all
one with the Cistertians, saving that the Cistertians wear all white; but the
Bernardines, a black Gown over a white Coat. The Celestini, so called from
Pope Celestinus the Fifth, their founder, whose former name was Peter Moroneus.
See Antoninus, Sabellicus, Bruschius of the German Monasteries, Baleus in his
Centuries, etc.
This Order was confirmed by Gregory the tenth, in the Council of Lions. All
these were branches of Benedictines. The Camalduenses, Montelivetenses, and
Cistertians wear white; the Monks of the Shaddowy Valley, Purple; the Celestins,
Sky color, or blew. The Grandimontenses wear a Coat of Mailes, and a black
Cloak thereon.

Q. 19. What other Orders proceeded from the Benedictines:

A. Benet may be called the founder and author of all the Religious Orders that
were in the West, Benedictines, Authors of other Orders.
for 666. years together, that is, till the times of the Dominicans and
Mendicants; so that there were of Benedictine Monks reckoned by Trithemius, L.
1. c. 4. above Fifteen thousand Abbeys; out of which proceeded multitudes of
Cardinals, Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, and other eminent men, besides Popes.
The Gregorian Order was a branch of the Benedictine. Gregory the great,
afterward Pope, was at first a Monk, who, after his fathers death, erected on
his own charges Six Monasteries in Sicily, and at Rome converted his Fathers
house into a Monastery, and dedicated it to Saint Andrew; to these Monks he
prescribed the rule of Saint Bennet, and assigned to them a large dark or brown
colored cloak to be worn, on which was woven a red cross in the breast; these
did not shave their beards: The Monks called Gerundinenses were after the Order
of Bennet instituted by John, Bishop of the Geru^dinenses in Portugal about the
year of Christ, 610. He was warned in a dream to build a Monastery; which he
did, and had it ratified by the Pope. He gave them a white Garment to wear, Of
these passages see Platina, Francus in his Chronicles, Sabellicus, Volaterran,
Trithemius, etc.
with his own arms on the breast* thereof; they were ordered to wear four
Ribbands, to wit, two red, and two green. This order was erected under Pope
Boniface the fourth. The rule which Bennet prescribed to his Monks, was written
out by Pope Gregory the great, and confirmed by Pope Eugenius the Second.

Q. 20. What were the rules which St. Bennet prescribed to his Monks?

A. He first shows what the duty of the Abbot is, namely to be careful of his
charge, to be holy, just, wise, and charitable in his deeds; and to be powerful
in his words, Benedictines, their rules prescribed by Saint Benet.
to exhort, correct, reprove, to beware of partiality, and dissimulation, and
chiefly of covetousness, and pride, not to do any thing of himself without
advice of the Covent; he enjoyneth all to be obedient, silent, humble, to be
watchful to prayer in the night; he prescribes what Psalms they are to sing
every day and night; and what Psalms in their canonical hours. That Haleluia
should be said continually between Easter and Pentecost, that they should
praise God with David seven times a day; to wit, in the morning, at the first,
third, sixth, and ninth hours; in the evening, and completory, and at midnight.
Particular Psalms are appointed for each of these canonical hours; that they
must pray with all reverence. That their be Deanes chosen in each Monastery to
ease the Abbot; That every Monk have his own bed to sleep in, that a candle
burn by them till the morning; That they sleep in their clothes girt, that at
the ringing of the bell they may be the more ready for prayer; diverse degrees
of Penance are enjoined according to the degrees of offenses; That the Abbot
use all the means he can to reclaim the excommunicate persons, that the lost
sheep may be brought home with joy; That if no correction will prevail, the
obstinate person be expelled the covent; who upon repentance may be received
three times; but never after the third time; That the Steward of the Monastery
be a man of discretion, government, and trust; That the Abbot keep an inventory
of all utensils belonging to the Covent; That all things be common among the
Brothers; That there be no grudging or murmuring; That every one serve in the
kitching, and in other places when his turn is; That a special care be had of
the sick and infirm, so likewise of the aged and children; That their be
chosen a weekly Reader, to read in time of refection; That each man be content
with a pound of bread for a day: and that only the sick be permitted to eat
flesh; That wine be drunk sparingly; That from Easter to Pentecost the Brothers
may have their refection at the sixth hour, and their supper in the evening; in
the Summer let them fast every fourth and sixth day in the week, till the ninth
hour. The other days let them dine at the sixth hour; From the midist of
September till Lent, let them have their refection at the ninth hour; but in
the Lent time at the evening, so it be by day light; That after the Completory
there be no speaking at all; if any come late to prayers, or to the table, he
is to stand apart by himself; and to be last served, and shortened in his
victuals; if any for some great offense be excommunicated out of the Oratory,
he shall make satisfaction by prostrating himself before the Oratory; that they
shall not only give themselves to prayer and meditation, at the appointed
hours, but shall also labor some part of the day with their hands, to keep
them from idleness; That they observe Lent with all strictness; that they use
strangers with all reverence and cheerfulness, and that the Abbot salute them
with a holy kiss, and wash their feet; that none receive letters or tokens
from their Parents without the Abbots leave; That the Abbot cloth his Monks as
he finds the seasons of the year requires; That no Novice be admitted into
the Monastery, without sufficient trial of his constancy, and patience; That if
a Priest desires to enter into a Monastery, he submit himself to the Laws
thereof; and that he have the next place to the Abbot; That Noble men, who
offer their Children to God in the Monastery, swear they will never give them
any part of their Estate, but that it be conferred on the Covent; That if a
stranger Monk desire to continue in the Monastery, he be not denied, so his
life be not scandalous; If the Abbot desire to have a Priest or Deacon
ordained, let him choose one of his own Covent; That he shall be Abbot whom the
whole Covent, or the greater and better part shall choose; That the Provost or
Praepositus be chosen by the Abbot to whom he must be subject; That the Porter
be an ancient and discreet man, who may receive and give answers, and that the
Monastery be provided with Water, and a Mil, and other necessaries within it
self, left the Brothers should wander abroad; If the Abbot enjoin to any Monk
impossibilities, he must with reverence and submission excuse his inability; if
the Abbot urge it, he must obey, and trust to Gods assistance; That in the
Monastery none presume to defend, or strike, or excommunicate another: But that
they be obedient and loving to each other; That they be zealous for Gods Glory,
and when they are working, to be still singing of Psalms. These rules are set
down at large (...) Hospinian, out of Gregory, and contracted by Isidor
Hispalensis.


Q. 21. What habit and diet do the Benedictines use?

A. Their habit is a round coat, a hood called. Cuculla, Cappa, and Melos from
Melis, a brock, gray or badger, because it was wont to be made anciently of the
skin of that beast. Scapulate is so called from Scapulis the shoulders, Their
habit and Diet.
which this covers. In winter their hoods are lined. They were not wont to
wear breeches but when they traveled into the country. The color of their
upper garment is black, under which they wear a white woollen coat with
sackcloth, and they go booted. The ancient Benedictines were wont, after they
were Bishops, to wear the habit of their former profession; and to this they
were enjoined by the eighth General Council held at Constantinople; they were
also tied by their rule to lie in their coats and hoods, and to wear course
cloth; but now the case is altered, and so it was in Saint Bernards time, Of
the Benedictines habit and diet see more ^n Polyd. Virgil, Hospi^ian,
Sabellicus, Antoninus, Turre-cremata, etc.
who complains against the Monks luxury in apparel, wearing, Non quod utilius,
sed quod subtilius: Silk garments to show their pride, but not of cloth to keep
them warm. Their simple and course Diet, as it was prescribed by Benet, is
changed into dainty fare; they now eat Flesh and drink Wine plentifully; of
this Hugo de Sancto Victor^ complains.

Q. 22. What Religious Rules did the Second Council of Aquisgran or Aix
prescribe to be observed by the Monks?

A. This Council being held the eight hundred and sixteenth year after Christ,
Rules prescribed to the Monks by the Council of Aix.
ordered that no Layman or Secular Priest be received into a Monastery, except
he become a Monk; that the Monks do not swear, that in the Parasceve they use
nothing but bread and water. That before they go to sleep, the Prior
besprinkle them with holy water; tha^ the tenth part of their alms be given to
the poor; That they has not without the Priors leave; That particular Psalms
be sung for the dead; That they how not their knees in Whitsun-week, nor fast:
but they must fast the Ember-weeks, and on the Eves of the Apostles; that in
case of necessity the Brothers walk with slaves; That in uncertain theft,
there be a suspending from supper, till the guilty party confess; That at
Christmasse and Easter for eight days together, they that will, may eat the
flesh of birds; That all Monks, if they can, learn their rules by heart; that
in the Kitchen, Mill, and other such places they work with their own hands;
That the delinquent cast himself on the ground before his Abbo^, or Prior;
That they kiss no Women; That in Lent they wash each others feet. At the Lords
Supper let the Abbot wash and kiss the feet of his brethren. In Easter and
Whitsun-week; and on Christmasse, and other festival days, let there be no
speaking in the Cloister, but hearing Gods Word read. That the Abbot exceed not
the proportion of his Monks in eating, drinking, clothing, sleeping, and
working; and that he be not given to gadding abroad; That the servants after
the refection of the brothers, eat by themselves; and that the same Lessons; be
read to them, which were read to the Brothers; That Hallelujah be omitted in
the Septuagesi^a. That Novice must neither be shaved nor clothed with a Monks
garment, till his time of probation be expired, and promise made by him of
obedience, according to Saint Bennets rule. That none be set over Monks, but he
that is a monk. That in Lent the Brothers do work till the nineth hour, then
repair to Mass; and in the evening let them take their refection. These are
the chief duties, to which Saint Bennets Monks are enjoined by the aforesaid
Synod. And whereas at first the Monks were Laymen, and had no Priest, but such
as came from abroad; at last they were permitted to have Priests of their own,
and that they should receive Tithes, First Fruits, Oblations, and Donations, as
well as other Priests, by Gregory the great, Boniface, and other Popes, as may
be seen in Gratian.

Q. 23. What were the Rites and Institutions of the Monks of Cassmum?

A. This was the first Monastery of the Benedictins, Monks of Cassinum.
where diverse Rites were observed, which are not in Bennets Rule. The chief are
these. Fourteen days before Easter all the Altars are stripped of their
ornaments, and covered with black; the Images are veiled; Gloria Patri is not
sung. Three nights immediately before Easter the Night Service continues till
the morning, and is joined to the Mattins; no hells are rung; the lights are
put out; the Abbot washes the Monks feet. In the Parasceue late, a little
bread and water is taken. On Easter Eve in the night time the Tapers are
kindled. On Easter day, before Mass, there is a Procession with Burning
Tapers, and Holy Water, the Priests singing and praying. The two next days
after, Crosses, Holy Water, and Relics are carried about with the Gospel, and
burning Tapers, with singing and saluting each other with holy kisses, the
Priests being in their rich Copes. Six several times in the year they enter
into the Refectory singing; namely, on Christmasse day; on the Epiphany; on
Palm Sunday; on the Holy Sabbath; on Easter day; and the third day in Easter
week. Every Lords day they have 12. Lectures, and so many on their chief
Festivals, namely, Christ's Nativity, the Epiphany, the Purification of Mary,
the two Martyrs, Faustinus and Iuletta, S. Scholastica, S. Bennet, Ascension
day, the Festivals of the Apostles, S. Laurence, S. Mary, S. German, S. Andrew;
on these Eves they fast, they do not kneel, nor work; but on the lesser
Festivals they read but eight Lessons, and afterward they work. Their meat and
drink is measured to them, according to the discretion of the Abbot. When they
receive new garments, which is about S. Martins day, they march singing, with
Tapers burning in their hands, into the Vestry, or Wardrobe, where this Gospel
is read [Be not careful what you shall eat, nor what you shall drink; nor for
your bodies, with what they shall be cloathed] Then having prayed, they lay
down their old garments, and receive new. They begin their Lent on
Qu^^quagesima Sunday; and a few days before they receive wax for lights, with
which they are to read in the night time. They confess to one another twice a
day; These Rites, besides their Ceremonies about the dead, are Recorded by
Thedomarus, the twelfth Abbot of that Monastery, and out of him set down by
Hospinian de Orig. Monachatus.
in the morning of their failings by night; in the evening of their failings by
day. They must not walk either within or without the Covent with a staff,
except they be weak. What work soever they are about in the kitchen, or
elsewhere, they sing Psalms. They are shaven all together on certain days,
namely, at Easter, Ascension day, the first of August, the first of September,
and first of October, and at S. Martins day, and Christmasse. If Easter fall
out late, they are shaved a little before Septuagesima, and in the
Quinquagesima.

Q. 24. What is the manner of electing their Abbots?

A. Each Monastery is to choose an Abbot from among themselves, Abbots, how
Elected.
either by general consent, or of the better part: If there be none among them
fit for that place, then they may choose out of some other Monastery; when he is
chosen, it is not in their power to depose him. If a Clergyman be chosen
Abbot, he must leave off his former Function. Two Abbots must not be chosen for
one Monastery; nor must one Abbot be over two Monasteries; they must not meddle
with secular affairs. If an Abbot do not punish grievous enormities, he is to
be sent to another Covent, where he is to do penance; but not in his own,
because of the strict subjection and obedience, by which the Monks are tied to
their Abbots: If the Covent choose an unfit man for their Abbot, the Bishop of
the Diocese, with the neighboring Abbots, or the Prince of the place, may
depose him, and choose another. Now Princes ordinarily choose such as they
please, and impose them upon the Monks; but the Abbot, when he is chosen, must
be consecrated by the Bishop of the Diocese, who has power to visit the
Monasteries within his jurisdiction, and to correct what is amiss. If the
Abbot shall refuse to submit to the Bishop, he is suspended from the Communion
till he repent. Neither must he alienate any thing that belongs to the Covent
without the Bishops consent; if he do otherwise, he must be degraded, and the
things alienated restored again by the Bishops command. What is conferred by
devout persons on the Monastery, must not be converted by the Abbot to his own
particular use. No man must erect a Monastery without the Bishops consent; nor
must the Abbot travel into a foreign Country without leave from his Diocesan,
who must not do any thing that may tend to the prejudice of the Monastery;
which if he do, he is to be excommuncated; Neither must he, without the
consent of the other Abbots, depose an Abbot, or alienate the things belonging
to the Monastery, for the Abbots offense. In case of injury, the Abbot may
appeal from the Bishop to the Prince, or to a Counel; and some Abbots there
are, who, with their Monasteries, are only subject to the Pope, as Cassinum.
The Monastery of S. Maximinus, near Trevers, is subject only to the Emperor
in temporals, and to the Pope in spirituals. Anciently the Election of the
Abbot was ratified by the Emperor, Of these passages see Bruschius in his
German Monasteries; Baleaus in his Centuries; Hospinian, and others.
or Prince, in whose Dominion the Monastery was; but afterward the Pope
extorted this power from the Emperor, and drew all investitures to himself; to
whom the Abbots swear allegiance and fealty. The Ceremony used by the Emperor
in the Abbots confirmation, was the delivering of a Staff and Ferula into his
hands, to put him in mind of his Pastoral Office.

Q. 25. What were the Nuns of this Order, and what were their Rules?

A. Scholastica, Nuns of S. Bennets order, and their Rules.
Sister to Bennet, erected the Order of Nuns, after Bennets Rule. They are not
permitted to be Godmothers in Baptism, not to go abroad, except in case of
great necessity, and that with some ancient women. They must give themselves to
singing, prayer, and meditation, and must observe the Canonical hours. They
must not speak with any man, except in public before witnesses. None must be
admitted into the Nunnery without one years probation at least. If any be found
unchaste, after three whippings she is sed with bread and water for one whole
year in prison. None must wear Silks; they are consecrated and veiled by the
Bishop alone. When the Nun is clothed with her Sacred Vestiments, she
approaches to the altar, holding in each hand burning Tapers; there she
kneeleth, and having heard the Gospel read, the Bishop prays for her
perseverance in patience, chastity, sobriety, obedience, and other virtues. The
Abbatesse ought to be a woman of d^scretion, gravitie, and religion; who should
be careful and vigilant over her charge; who must not suffer any man to speak
either with her self, or with her Nuns, after Sunset, till the morning, and
that before witnesses. She must not go abroad without the Bishops leave, and
upon urgent necessity, and must leave in the interim a Deputy to look to her
charge; Of these things see Gregory, and the Councels, chiefly of Tours,
Forojulium, the sixth of Constantinople, of Paris, under Ludovicus and
Lotharius, etc.
neither must she go abroad without some Nuns to accompany her. No young woman
must be chosen Abbatesse, nor any under 60. years of age. No woman must be
suffered to come into the Monks Covent, nor must men be permitted to enter the
Nunnery, except the Priest to officiate, who must stay no longer then whilst
he is officiating. The Monasteries of Men and Women must be built apart, to
prevent scandal and the temptations of the Devil. The Abbatesse must not
presume to impose hands, to ordain Priests, or to Veil the Virgins.

Q. 26. What Laws were prescribed for Monasteries?

A. 1. That they should be built in such places, Monasteries, and their Laws.
where all conveniences may be had, that the Brothers may not have occasion to
gad abroad. 2. That they may not, being once dedicated, be converted to secular
uses; but if the Monks live disorderly, they may be thrust out, and Secular
Canons be put in their place. So likewise the houses of Secular Canons may be
converted into Monasteries. 3. That in Synods or other public meetings, the
Abbot of Cassinum take the place before all other Abbots, because of the
antiquity and dignity of that Monastery, being the Mother of all other
Monasteries in the West. 4. They were exempted from all civil exactions, and
Secular affairs, that they might the more freely serve God. 5. Every Monastery
was permitted to have an Advocate, who was a Lawyer, to maintain the
Privileges, Lands and Revenues of the Covent, for the ease of the Monks, who
were not to meddle with secular affairs; but the Advocate was to do nothing
without the consent of the Abbot and his Monks, nor they without him in secular
business. 6. Most Monasteries were erected not only to be houses of devotion,
but also Schools of good learning; in which the learned languages and liberal
sciences were professed. For this cause Oswald, King of the Angles, as Beda l.
3. c. 3. witnesses in his History, gave large Possessions and Territories for
building of Monasteries, in which the youth might be educated; and so Gregory
the great employed diverse Monasteries in England, for extirpating of the
Pelagian Heresy. Balaeus cen. 13. Maidulfus Sc^tus the Philosopher erected the
Monastery of Malmesbury, in which he set up a School for the Greek and Latin
tongue, where he read the Arts himself, as Balaeus Cent. 14. c: 16. shows.
For the same end were the Monasteries of Saint Dennis in Paris, of Millan* of
Rhemes, of Saint Gall, of Tours, of Trevers, and many more erected; so were the
Canons houses, near Cathedrals, built for this end, that youth might there, as
in Colleges and Schools, be targht and educated; that from thence able Divines
might be sent abroad to preach the Gospel. Therefore the Canons were enjoined
to maintain Professors of Divinity, and to assign Prebendaries for their
sustinance. 7. Though in the beginning Monks were Laymen, and lived not upon
Tithes, but on their Lands and Rents, or on their own labors, yet afterward
when they were admitted into the Priesthood, and permitted to preach, and
administer the Sacraments, they were invested with Tithes, Oblations, first
Fruits, and other Ecclesiastical duties. Paschalis the second, about the year
of Christ 1100. ordained that no Monks should pay Tithes of their own labors.
And afterward Pope Adrian, exempted from paying of Tithes, the Cistertians,
Saint John's Knights of Jerusalem, and the Templars. 8. Monasteries had the same
privilege that Lords have over their Vassals, namely, to demand mortuaries,
which was the chief horse or other beast belonging to the party deceased. 9.
Great men and Princes thought no prison so sure as a Monastery; therefore the
Greek Emperors used to shut up in Moasteries their rebellious Children, and
potent Subjects whom they suspected either of greatness or ambition. So
Ludovicus Pius was shut up in a Monastery by his Son Ludovicus the second:
diverse other examples are extant upon Record. 10. Princes had such a conceit of
the sanctity of Monasteries, that they thought they could not make sufficient
satisfaction to God for their sins, except they had for some time shut
themselves up in Monasteries. 11. The Benedictine Monks by the rule of their
Founder, were not to eat flesh, except birds at Christmas and Easter; yet they
may drink Wine, except in Lent: But children, aged, and sick people were
dispensed to eat flesh. 12. When children by their Parents are shut up in
Monasteries, though afterward, when they come to years of discretion, they
should desire to remove, yet they may not, by the Laws of the Covent; because
(say they) who are once dedicated to God, may not return to the world again:
for this they allege the example of Samuel, who in the Temple being dedicated
by Hannah his mother to the service of God, persisted therein. But this was not
the custom of the first Monasteries, which left men to their own liberty; and
the Pope has power to dispense with monastical Vows; so he did, when he
dismissed out of the Monastery Casimir of Polonia, whom the people chose for
their King; in memory whereof, the Polonians were enjoined by Clement 2. to
shave their crowns like Monks, and the Knights at certain Feastivals to wear
white Surplices, like Priests, in time of Divine Service. Fraternities.
13. Of Monks and Laymen were instituted Fraternities. For many devout
Seculars, not being able to use the habit, or be subject to the rigid rule of
the Monks, were notwithstanding willing to partake of their prayers and merit
of their order; so that at certain times they had their meetings for relieving
of the poor, for prayers and public supplications, in which they had their
Processions in sackcloth, and their faces covered with linen, whipping their
naked backs in figne of repentance. Of these Fraternities were diverse Families,
to wit, of 8. Sebastian, S. Roch, S. Ann. S. Anthony, S. Dominie, S. Martin of
the Rosary, and diverse others. Of these passages see Bruschius, Balaeus, Pol.
Virgil, Surius in the lives of the Saints, the Centuries of Magdeburg, Isidor,
and diverse others.

The Contents of the Tenth Section.
Of new religious orders sprung out of the Benedictines; and first of the
Cluniacenses. 2. Of the Camaldulenses and Monks of the Shadowy Valley. 3. The
Sylvestrini, Grandimontenses, and Carthusians. 4. The Monks of S. Anthony of
Vienna, the Cistertians, Bernardins, and Humiliati. 5. The Fraemonstratenses,
and Gilbertins. 6. The Cruciferi, Hospitalarii, Trin^tarians, and Bethlemits.
7. The Johannites, or first religious Knights in Christendom. 8. The Templars.
9. The Teutonici or Mariani. 10. The Knights of S. Lazarus, Calatrava, and S.
James. 11. The orders of Mendicant Friars, and first of the Augustinians. 12.
Of the Carmelits. 13. Of the Dominicans. 14. Of the Francisca^s. 15. Of things
chiefly remarkable in the Franciscan order. 16. Of the Knights of the holy
Sepulcher, and Gladiatores. 17. Of the Knights of S. Mary, of Redemption, of
the Montesians, of the order of Vallis Scholarium, and Canons Regular, of S.
Mark. 18. Of S. Clara, S. Paul's Eremites, and Boni-homines. 19. The servants of
S. Mary, Coelestini, and Jesuati. 20. The order of S. Briget. 21. The order of
S. Katherine, and S. Justina. 22. The Eremites of S. Hierom, S. Savior,
Albati, Fratricelli, Turlupini, and Montolivetenses. 23. The Can^ns of S.
George, the Mendicants of S. Hierom, the Canons of Lateran, the order of the
Holy Ghost, and of S. Ambrose ad Nemus, and of the Minimi, of Iesu-Maria. 24.
The orders of Knighthood, from the year 1400. namely of the Annunciada, of S.
Maurice, of the Golden Fleece, of the Moon; of S. Michael, of S. Stephen, of
the holy Spirit, etc.

SECT. X.
Quest. 1. WHat new Religious Orders did there spring up in the West, upon the
decay of the Benedictines, and what were the Cluniacenses?

A. After the Benedictines had flourished in the West about 400. years, namely
from the time of Justinian, tili Conradus the first, about the 900. year of
Christ; out of this root sprung up new branches, who being offended at the
loose lives of the Benedictines, and that they had fallen off from their
Founders rule, resolved to retain the old rule of Benet, but to add some new
stat^^es thereto, and to underp^op the old decaying house, with new posts. The
first that began this reformation was Ber^o, who built a Monastery near
Cluniacum, over which, when he was dying, he placed one Odo to be Abbot
thereof; which Odo, was the first indeed, that revived Bennets rule, and
enforced it with new additions, and so from the place his Monks were called
Cluniacenses, Monks, or Cluniacenses.
and not Benedictines; by their rule, the Abbot must eat with his Brothers, and
not always with strangers; a revolting Monk may be recevied again above three
times; fearing least the wandering sheep should become a prey to the Woolf.
They renewed the custom of dipping the consecrated bread into the Cup; which
was used in case of necessity to children and the sick; and afterward was
promiscuously used by all at the Communion, till it was condemned by Pope
Julius, 340. years after Christ: but this custom revived again An. 580. and was
condemned again by the third Synod of Bracara: at last An. 920. it was revived
by these Monks of Cluniacum. When any is to be admitted into their order, they
are brought to the Monastery, there they are clipped, shaved, Of them see
Bernard, and Peter Cluniacensis, Sabellicus, Antoninus, Cassander, etc.
washed, and stripped of their old clothes: and then being new clothed, are
admitted. These Monks at first were very strict, but afterward became more
loose.

Q. 2. What were the Camaldulenses and Monks of the Shady Valley?

A. About the year of Christ 1030. according to Sabellicus, Monks, or
Camaldulenses.
one Romualdus of Ravenna, perceiving how the rule of Bennet was neglected,
began to lay the foundation of a new Order in the Field Camaldulum; whence he
gave the name of Camaldulenses to his Monks. He erected, as we said before, a
Monastery upon the top of the Appenins; having obtained a place from one
Modulus, who dreamed he had seen in his sleep Ladders, reaching from that place
to Heaven, on which he saw Mortals clothed in white, mounting upward;
whereupon Romualdus procures the place, builds a Covent, and gave his Monks
white hoods to wear. He enjoynd them also to silence, except in time of divine
service; and yet some, to keep their rule of silence the more strictly, will
not join with the rest, but pray by themselves: two days every week they feed
on bread and water, which is their fast; and sit barefooted on the ground.
About half a mile from thence are wooden crosses, which women must not go
beyond, under pain of the Popes curse. The order of Vallis Vmbrosa, or the
Shadowy Valley, Monks of the Shadowy Valley.
was instituted An. 1060. by one John Gualbert, a Florentine, as is said: this
John having forgiven his enemy, who had killed his Brother, (for which mercy
showed to his enemy, in a certain Abbey Church, whither he went for devotion, he
was thanked (so the story goes) by a Crucifix there, which bowed its head to
him) resolved to renounce the world, came to the Shadowy Valley, where there
were two Monks living. In that place he makes up a like house of boards; but
his fame grew so great, that many both Clergy and Laymen flock to him; And the
Lady of the soil being Abbatesse, bestowed the ground upon him, with other
large possessions. So he being made Abbot, by the consent of the Monks, who
were gathered together there, proposed Saint Bennets rule to be observed; which
he enlarged by causing lights to burn still in the night, both in their Chapel
and Dormitory; and ordering that they should wear no other cloth, but what they
made of the wool of their own sheep. See Surius de vitis Sanctorum,
Volaterran, Pol. Virgil, Antoninus, Sabellicus, etc.
He reformed diverse Monasteries, and placed over them Provosts of his own
choosing; he built also diverse in Lombardy, and elsewhere; for which he was
Canonized, and by Alexander 2. and Gregory 7. Popes; his order was ratified.
Their habit was of a purple, or as others write, of an ash color.

Q. 3. What were the Sylvestrini, Grandimontenses, and Carthusians.?

A. The Sylvestrini were so named from one Sylvester, Monks, or Sylvestrini.
who instituted this order after the rule and habit of the Monks of Vallis
Vmbrosa. This order was begun in the Marquisate of Ancona in Italy. Monks, or
Grandimontenses.
The Grandimontenses were so called from the voice that three times uttered
these words in Grandi Monte, that is, in the Great Hill, where one Peter was
advised by the same voice to build his Monastery. This Peter was disciple and
successor to one Steven, who in the year 1076. erected this order in Gascony,
where on the Hill Muretum he built him a cottage, after he had wandered through
many deserts. He prescribes a rule to his disciples, patched up of Bennets
rule, and of the Rites of the Canons Regular, of Saint Austins Monks, and of
his Eremites. He, as we said before, wore on his naked body a Coat of Males,
his bed was a hard board, without either straw or coverlid; with often
kneeling, kissing of the ground, and beating it with his forehead and nose, he
made his hands and knees hard like a Callus, or Corn, and his nose crooked.
This order at first was ruled by a Prior; afterward Pope John 22. gave them an
Abbot. The Carthusians or Charter Friars were instituted by Bruno, Carthusians.
born in Collen, and professor of Philosophy in Paris, about the year of Christ
1080. upon this occasion; being present at the singing of the office for his
fellow Professor now dead (a man highly reputed for his holy life) the dead
corpse suddenly sits up in the Beer, and cries out [I am in Gods just
judgments condemned] these words it uttered three several days: at which Bruno
was so affrighted, that a man held so pious, was damned; what would become of
himself and many more? therefore concluded there was no safety for him, but by
forsaking the world: hereupon he with six of his scholars betook themselves to
a hideous place for dark woods, high hills, rocks, and wild beasts, in the
Province of Dolphinie near Grenoble; the place was called Carthusia, whence his
Monks took their name, and there built a Monastery, having obtained the ground
of Hugo, Bishop of Grenoble, who also became a Monk of that order. By their
rule, these Monks should wear sackcloth, or a hair shirt next their skin, a
long white cloth-coat loose, with a hood, and a black cloak over, when they
walk abroad. The Lay-Brothers wear a short coat to their knees. They eat no
flesh at all, they buy no fish, but eat them when offered; they eat branny
bread, and drink wine mingled with water. On the Lords day, and fifth day of
the week, they feed only upon cheese and eggs. On the third day or Saturday
on pulse, or pot herbs; on the second, fourth, and sixth, upon bread and water
only. Every one dresseth his own meat; they eat apart, and but once a day. Yet
on the chief Festivals of Christmasse, Easter, Whitsuntide, Epiphany,
Purification, the twelve Apostles, John Baptist, Michael, Martin, and
All Saints, they eat twice a day, and together at one Table, and then may talk
together; at other times, they must keep silence: every one has his own cell,
wherein they pray, read, meditate, and write books; and in these cells they
observe the Canonical hours; but their Mattins and Vespers they keep in their
Churches, and have Mass on these days, wherein they eat twice. They are not
suffered to go abroad, except the Prior and Procurator, and that upon the
affairs of the Covent. They are limited to enjoy a certain quantity of land, a
certain number of sheep, goats, and asses, which they must not exceed. They
must admit no women into their Churches, nor were they to have in one Covent
above twelve Religious me^, besides the Prior, and eighteen Converts or
Lay-Brothers, with a few servants, who are not to come into the Quire where the
Prior and his brothers sit; See Balaus, Surius, Panuinius in his Chronicles,
Genebrard, Antoninus, Pol. Virgil, Vincentius, etc.
but these are in a lower Quire by themselves. They never admit any again into
their society, who once leaves them. These were the ancient rules, to which
they were tied,but in some things are fallen off now: the Monks of this order
have a meeting or chapter yearly at Carthusia, about their own affairs; hither
two Monks out of every Cloister do repair, where they stay fourteen days; this
order was confirmed by Pope Alexander the third, An. 1178. they came into
England, An. 1180. and seated themselves at Witham, near Bath.

Q. 4. What were the Monks of Saint Anthony of Vienna, S. Anthonies Monks of
Vienna.
the Cistertians, Bernardins, and Humiliati?

A. About the year of Christ 1095. Saint Anthonies Monks of Vienna, were set up
by Gastho and Gerondus, two Noble men of that place, and were to live according
to Saint Austins rule: of which we have already said. Monks, or Ci^^ertians.
The Cistertians began about the year 1098. by one Robert Abbot of Molismenia,
who, as we have said, taking offense at the loose lives of the Benedictines, by
the persuasion of Steven Harding an Englishman, forsook that society; and being
accompanied with one and twenty other Monks, came to Cistertium in Burgundy,
where they erected their Covent. Here they resolved to stick close to the rule
of Saint Bennet, and to cut off all the superfluities of apparel and dyer,
introduced by the loose Monks of that order: and because they did not find that
Saint Bennet ever possessed Churches, Altars, Oblations, Tithes, and
Sepultures, or that he had Mills* Farms, or that he ever suffered Women to
enter into his Covent, or that he buried there any, except his own Sister;
therefore they meant to abandon all these things, and to profess poverty with
Christ* they would not suffer their Monks to meddle with Husbandry, or any
secular affairs; and with Saint Bennet they ordered, that their Monastery
should consist but of twelve Monks and an Abbot. They must keep silence, except
it be to the Abbot or Prior. If any Monk run away from his Monastery, he must
be forced back again by the Bishop. The Cistertiant must be contented with two
coats, and two hoods; they must work with their hands, and observe strictly
their fasts; they must salute strangers by bowing their head and body; and in
imitation of Christ, must wash their feet. No Fugitive is to be received into
the Covent, after the third time. The Abbots Table must be furnished for
strangers. This order was confirmed by Pope Urban the second, An. 1100. and
came into England An. 1132. Their color was gray, whence in the beginning they
were named Grisei. Monks, or Bernardines.
The Bernardines, so called from Saint Bernard, Abbot of Clarivallis, were the
same with the Cistertians, but that, as we said before, they wear a black coat
over a white cloak: Yet on festivals they wear the Cistertian habit, to show
whence they came. The Bernardines and Cistertians are not subject to Advocats
or Bishops. And Pope Alexander the third, ordered that if the Bishop refused to
bless the Abbot, he may receive benediction from his own Monks. The Humiliati
arose in Germany about the year of Christ 1164. Monks, or Humiliati.
in the time of Frederick Barbar^ssa, who in his Wars against Lambardie brought
captive thence into Germany multitudes of men, with their Wives and Children;
these growing weary of their long exile, cloth themselves in white, and
approaching to the Emperor, fall down at his feet, begging pardon for their
delinquency; from this posture they were called Humiliati; the Emperor being
moved with their tears and habit, Of these orders see Polydor, Sabellicus,
Antoninus, V^laterran, Balaeus, Trithemius, Crantzius, and others.
gave them leave to return home into their Country: who being returned,
resolved to live a Monastical life; therefore they built Monasteries, in which
they gave themselves to prayer, fasting, meditation, and making of cloth.
Innocent the third, did first ratify this order, and then their succeeding
Popes. They wear a plain coat, a Scopular, and a white cloak over it; they
follow Bennets rule in some part.

Q. 5. What were the Praemonstratenses, and Gilbertins?

A. One Robert of Lorrain, or N^bert, as others write, Archbishop of
Magdeburg, to which Church he procured the title of Primate of Germany from the
Pope; This Nobert I say, being offended at the dissolute lives of Monks, betook
himself into a desar^, in the Diocese of Liege, with thirteen others. He went
about barefooted in the midst of Winter* preaching repentance, about the year
of Christ 1119. These Monks live after the rule of Saint Austin, which they
say, was delivered to them in golden Letters, from himself in a vision* They
were named Praemonstratenses, Monks, or Praemonstratenses.
from the place where they first settled in the Dioc^ss of Landunum, called
Praemonstratum, or because this place in a vision was Praemonstratus, or fore
showed to them. Their habit is a white coat, with a linen Sarpless, under a
white cloak. Calixtus the second confirmed this order, and gave them the title
of Canons Regular exempt; their Abbot by their rule must not wear a Mitre and
Glove^, whereas other Abbots wear both, with Rings also on their singers, and
Staves in their hands. All the Abbots of this order, or their Deputies are to
meet once a year at Praemnstratum, to consult about the affairs of their order.
If any out of stubbornness refuse to come, a penalty may be inflicted on him,
by the other Abbots, which neither Bishop, nor Archbishop can take off, but
the Pope alone. The Abbots also have power of excommunication and absolution,
in reference to the Monks under their power: If differences arise, they must
compose them among themselves, and not appeal to secular Courts: They must not
keep or feed Deer, Dogs, Hawks, Swine, or any such thing as may bring scandal
upon their order: If their Dio^esan refuse to give them ordination, they may
receive it of any other Bishop: they were exempted from the Bishops
jurisdiction. These and many other privileges Pope Innocent the third bestowed
on them; they had n^ Schools among them for education of the youth they came
into England about the year 1145. and seated themselves in Lincolnshire. They
had liber^^ from the Pope to have Nunneries close to their Mon^^stries. The
Gilbertins were so called from one G^lbert of Lincolnshire, who in the year
1148. instituted this order, and erected in a short time thirteen Monasteries;
See Balaeus, Capgrave, and Scrope in Chron. Matthaeus Paris* Cranizius,
Trithemius, Sigiberts Continuator, etc.
to which he prescribed statutes, collected out of the rules of Austin and
Bennet. This order was confirmed by Pope Eugenius the third. Gilberts chief
Cloister was at Sempringham in Lincolnshire, where he was born; in which were
700. Friars, and 1100. Nuns.

Q. 6. What were the Cruciferi, Hospitalarii, Trinitarians, and Bethlemites?

A. These Cruciferi, Crucigeri, or as we call them, Cruched Friars, Monks, or
Cruciferi.
came into England An. 1244. and had their first Monastery at Colchester; but
were instituted, as the story goes, by Cyriacus Bishop of Jerusalem, in memory
of the Cross which Helena found by his direction. These were to carry a Cross
in their hand still when they went abroad; afterward in the year 1215. they
were restored or confirmed by Pope Innocent the third, or rather newly
instituted, because the great commotion raised in Rome by the Albigense^, was
suppressed by the Croysud^s, or Army of Christians, whose hadge on their
garments was a Cross; these were then going for Syria against the Infidels.
This order was ratified by Pope Innocent the fourth, and Alexander the third.
They wear a sky-colored habit by the appointment of Pope Pius the second.
Monks, or Crucigeri.
Polyd^r takes the Crucigeri for another order, because they wear a black
cloak, and carry not in their hands, but on their breast a white and red Cross,
and observe St. Austins rule. Monks, or Hospitalarii.
The Hospitalers of the Holy Ghost had their beginning at Rome, about the year
1201. and were confirmed by Pope Innocent the third; they had the same rule and
privileges that other Monks before them. Their chief office was to take care
of, and lodge the sick and poor, and to bury them when they were dead. Monks,
or Trinitarians.
The Trinitarians, or order of the Trinity, began An. 1211. by John Ma^ta, and
Felix Anachoreta. These two were warned in a dream to repair to Pope Innocent
the third, to obtain of him a place (...) their order* he likewise being warned
in a dream to entertain them, confirms their order, clothes them both in
white cloaks, with a red and ^ky colored Cross wrought on the breast of the
same, and calls them Brothers of the Holy Trinity, and Monks of the redemption
of Captives; for their charge was to gather money for redeeming captive
Christians from the Infidels. This order came into England An. 1357. Two parts
of all their Revenues they were to reserve for their own maintenance, the third
was for the Captives. By their rule three Clergy, and three Lay-brothers may
cohabit, with one Proc^^ator, who was not to be called by this name, but by the
name Minister: Their garments must be of white cloth; they must lie in woollen,
and must not put off their breeches when they go to bed. They may ride on
Asses, but not on Horseback. They are to fast, as other orders do, and to eat
flesh upon Sundays only, from Easter till Advent Sunday, and from Christmas
till Septuagesima Sunday: Likewise on The Nativity, Epiphany, Ascension, and on
the Assumption, and Purification of Mary, and on All Saints days. They are to
labor with their hands; to hold a Chapter or meeting every Sunday for
regulating of their Covent: And a general Chapter is to be kept every year, on
the Octaves of Pentecost. Their Minister must be chosen by common consent of
the Brothers, he must be a Priest; every Covent must have his Minister; and
over these must be a great Minister. None must be admitted into this Order till
he be past twenty years of age. They must shave, but the Lay-Brothers may
permit their Beards to grow. Monks, or Bethlemits.
At certain times of the year the faithful that are dead must be absolved in
the Churchyard. Their Rules concerning love, sobriety, continency, and other
Christian virtues, See Balaeus, Polydor, Sabellicus, Volaterranus, Panuinius,
Genebard, Mat. Westminster, etc.
^re the saine that we have mentioned before in the rules of Basil, Austin,
Bennet, etc. The Bethlemites about the year 1257. had their first residence in
Cambridge. They were apparelled like the Dominicans or Praedieants, but on
their breasts they wore a red Star, like a Comet, in memory of that Star, which
appeared at Christ's Nativity.

Q. 7. Who were the first Religious Knights in Christendom?

A. The I^^^nnites Knights, Hospitalers of Saint John.
or Knight Hospitalers of Saint John Baptist, who got leave of the Calyph^ of
Egypt to build a Monastery in Jerusalem, which they dedicated to to the Virgin
Mary: The first Abbot and Moaks of this Covent were sent thither from Amalphia
in ^^ly: The same Amalphitans built also at Jerusalem a Nunnery for such women
as came on Pilgrimage thither. The first Abbatess hereof was Saint Agnes, a
noble Matron; these Monks of Jerusalem for the greater ease of poor pilgrims
built an Hospital, to receive them in, and withal a Chapel or Oratory to the
honor of Saint John Baptist; or as some think, to John Eleemosynarius, so
called from his bounteous alms to the poor; he in the time of Pho^^, was
Patriarch of Alexandria; this Hospital was maintained by the Amalphitans. The
Hospitalers, Anno 1099. when Jerusalem was taken by the Christians, began to
grow rich, potent, and in great esteem, both with King Godefrid, and his
Successor Baldwin; their Order was confirmed by Pope Honorius the second; so
having obtained much wealth, they bind themselves by Vows to be Hospitable to
all the Latin pilgrims, and to defend with their arms Christianity against all
Infidels. They follow the rule of Saint Austin, and instead of canonical hours
say so many Pater-N^sters: They go armed, having a belt with a white cross:
over which they wear a black cloak with a white cross: many of them in time of
peace wear a black cross; but in time of war a red one: they have a Master over
them, whom they choose themselves. Their first Master was Gerard; the next
Raymundus de Podio a Florentine, chosen in the year 1103. In every Province
they have also a Prior. Every one that enters into this order voweth to God,
the Virgin Mary, and Saint John Baptist, obedience, poverty, and chastity: they
are tied three times yearly, to wit, at Christmas, Easter, and Whitsuntide, to
receive the Eucharist; they must not use merchandising, nor be usurers, no^
make wills, or make any their heirs, or alienate any thing without consent of
their Masters: no^e borne of In^^dels, Jews, Saracent, Arabians, and T^rks,
must be admitted into this order; nor murdere^^, nor married men, nor bastards,
except they be of Earls or Princes: they must have special care of strangers,
and of the sick, to lodge them; they must admit only such as are sound and
strong of body, nobly descended, and at least eighteen years old. They are
distinguished into three ranks, to wit, Priests or Chaplains. 2. Serving men.
3. Knights: these last must be of noble extraction. When Christian Princes fall
at variance, these Knights must side with neither, but stand neutrals, and
endeavor to reconcile them. Pope Hadrian the fourth exempted them from paying
of Tithes to the Patriarch of Jerusalem, who claimed them as his due. Pope
Alexander the third, for their brave exploits against the Infidels, exempted
them also from tithes, and the jurisdiction of Bishops. At length about the
year 1299. when the Western Princes by reason of their domestic Wars, could
afford these Knights no help, they were forced by the Governor of Damascus,
called Capcapus, to quit all their Castles, Lands, and Garrisons they had in
Syria, and totally to abandon that Country, in the year 1300. after almost 300.
years possession; and so having got a Fleet of Ships, they invade, and take the
Isle of Rhodes from the Turks, Knights Hospitalers of Rhodes.
An. 1308. and possessed it against all opposition 214. years* From this they
were called the Knights of Rhodes; and had eight several Families, in eight
Provinces of Europe: to wit, in Gallia, Avernia, Francia, Italy, Arragon,
England, Germany, and Castile. Each of these provinces has a Prior, these
Priors chose the great Master; they have also their Marshal, Hospitaler, Baily,
Treasurer, and Chancellor; these send out of their Provinces to the great
Master young men nobly born, who gives them their oath to be chaste, poor, and
obedient, and to promote the welfare of Christendom against the Infidels,
and so he is admitted Knight of the Order. Here they stay five years, and have
fifty ducars yearly pension for their service; then they are sent home into
their Country, and by the great Master are set over some house. If in the
election of the great Master there be equal suffrages, one chief Knight is
chosen for Umpire, who by his s^^frage ends the controversy. The great Master
in spiritualities is only subject to the Pope; in his temporalties, to secular
Princes. After these Knights had possessed Rhodes (...). years, and had endured
a siege of six months, for want of help from the Western Princes, were forced
to deliver up the Island to the Turk* Anno 1523. From thence they sailed to
Candy, where they were entertained a while by the Venetians, at last they
resolved to seat their great Master in Nicea, a Town under Charles Duke of
Savoy, upon the Ligustick Sea, in Brovino^ between Marsiles, and Genua, being a
fit place to descry, and suppress Pirates, But when Buda in Hungary was taken
by the Turk, fearing least Solomon would assault Italy, they fortify Nicea,
and from thence remove to Syracuse in Sicily, which then with the Kingdom of
Naples belonged to Charles the Emperor* there they stoutly defended the
Christian Coasts from Turks and Pirates; but Charles the Emperor perceiving they
might do more good if they were seated in Malta, Knights of Malta.
gives them that Island, which they accept, Anno 1529. promising to defend
Tripolis, to suppress the Pirates, and to acknowledge the Kings of Spain and
both Sicilies, See Crantzius, Polydor, Iacobus de Vitriaco in his history of
Jerusalem, Volaterran, Aemilius the French Historian, Hospinian, etc.
for their Protectors, to whom every year they should present a Falcon. This
Island they stoutly defended against Soylman for five months Anno 1565 who was
forced to leave it. The great Masters revenue is ten thousand Ducats yearly,
besides some thousands of Crowns out of the eommon Treasury, and the tenth of
all goods taken at Sea. They have for the most part six Galleys, every one
being able to contain five hundred men, and sixteen great Canons.

Q. 8. What were the Templars?

A. About the year of Christ 1123. not long after the institution of the
Iohannites or Hospitalers, Hugo de Paganis, and Gaufrid de S. Aldema^o, with
seven other prime men vowed to secure the Highways, and to defend from Robbers
all Pilgrims that came to visit the holy Sepulcher. And because these had no
habitation, Baldwin, King of Jerusalem, assigned them a place in his own Palace
near the Temple to dwell in; Templar^.
whence they were called Templarii: they lived after the manner of the Canon
Regulars, possessing nothing in propriety, but were sustained by the bounty of
the Patriarch, and Christian Pilgrims. Thus they continued nine years, till the
year 1122. then did Honorius the second, Bishop of Rome, with the Partiarch
erect them into an Order, assigning a white cloak to be worn by them; afterward
Pope Eugenius added a red Cross: These in few years by their valor, and care
of Pilgrims, grew mighty, numerous, and rich; so that sometimes in public
meetings, three hundred Knights have been together, besides infinite numbers of
brothers; they had above nine thousand manors in Christendom, whereas the
Hospitalers had but nineteen. They had the same rule prescribed them, that
other Monks had, to wit, obedience, poverty, chastity, gravity, piety, charity,
patience, vigilance, fortitude, devotion, and such like virtues. When any of
them were taken prisoners by the Infidels, they were to be redeemed only with a
girdle and a knife. They were exempted from the Bishops jurisdiction by Pope
Calixt^^ the second, in the Counsil of Rhemes, Anno 1119. and from Tithes by
Pope Alexander the third. It was excommunication to lay violent hands on any
Templar. At last this order with their pride and luxury became so odious, that
having continued 200. years, they were utterly rooted out of France by King
Philip the fair, and likewise out of other Kingdoms by the instigation of Pope
Clement 5. In france they were put to death, and their estates confiscated to
the Pope and King. But in Germany their lives were spared, See Matthaus Paris,
Antoninus, Volaterran, Sabellicus, Pol. Virgil, Peucerus, Crantzius, Balaeus,
Hospinian, P. Aemilius, etc.
and their estates bestowed on the Hospitalers, and the Teutonick Knights of
Saint Mary. Some think they were put to death for worshipping Images covered
with men's skins, for sacrificing men, for burning a Child begot of a Templar,
and a Nun; with the fat of which Child they anointed their Image; and for
diverse other crimes, yet doubtful whether true or false.

Q. 9. What were the Teutonici, or Mariani?

A. These were a mixed Order of Iohannites and Templars, Teutonicks or Marians,
and their instalment.
for they both used hospitality to Pilgrims, and defended them in the Highways
from Robberi. They were called Teutonici from their Country, for they were
Germans that undertook this Order, who living in Jerusalem, bestowed all their
wealth on the maintenance of Pilgrims, and by the Patriarchs leave, assigned to
them our Ladies Chapel; from this Chapel of Saint Mary, they were named
Mariani. The chief promoters of this order, were the Lubikers and Bremers, with
Adolphus Earl of Holstein, who with a Fleet of Ships, assisted the Christians,
besieging Ptolemais, and provided Tents, with all necessaries for the sick and
maimed Soldiers. This order was erected before Accona, or Prolemais by the
King of Jerusalem, the Patriarch, diverse Archbishops, Bishops, and Princes of
Germany then present, and was confirmed by the Emperor Henry the sixth, and
Pope Cal^st^ine the third, who assigned them a white cloak, with a black
cross; and added a white target with a black cross also, and gave them leave
to wear their beards, and granted indulgences, with other acts of graces, to
those that should undertake or promote the order; they had power to bestow
Knighthood on such as deserved, and are enjoined to follow the rule of Saint
Austin: But none must be admitted into this order, except he be a Teutonick
born, and nobly descended. Their charge was to be ready on all occasions, to
oppose the enemies of the cross; and are tied to say 200. Pater-Nosters,
Creeds and Ave Ma^ies in 24. hours: When the holy land was lost, these Knights
came into Germany, on whom the Pope and Emperor Frederick the second, Anno
1226. bestowed the Country of Prussia, conditionally that they subdue the
Infidels there* which they did in the space of 53. years, and so got the full
possession thereof. Upon the River Vistula; where they had raised a Fort
against the enemy, they built their chief City, and called it Marie^burg: they
set up three great Masters, the one in Germany, the second in Liv^nia, and the
third in Pr^ssia; this was over the other two: they aided the P^^^rians against
the Lituanians, much of whose Country they subdued; which caused great Wars
between these Teutonicks and the Polonians, after that Poland and Lituani^ were
united under own Prince. After many bickrings, at last the Polonian forced the
great Master to swear-sea^ty to him, to admit into his order as well Polonians
as Germans, and make them capable of offices, that what land soever the
Teutonicks obtain, they should hold the same in ^ee of the King. This
occasioned a War between Albert Marquess of Brandeburg, and the Polander King
Sigismund, to whom for want of help from the Emperor, being then employed in
Wars against France and the Turk in Hungary, he was fain to submit, and to
acknowledge the King for his Lord. Then he obtaines Prussia, but changed his
title from Master, to Duke of Prussia, An. 1393. Venceslaus King of the Romans
and Bohemians, drove all the Teutonick Knights out of Bohemia, and seized on
their estates. The Knights are thus installed. The Commendator places him that
is to be Knighted in the midst of the Knights, then asks every one of them,
if they find any exception against him, either for his body, mind, or
parentage; the same is demanded of the party to be Knighted, and withal if he
be skilful in any useful Art, if in debt, if married, or if he have any bodily
infirmity; if he has, he must not enter into that order: then he is commanded
to kneel, and by laying his hand on the Gospel, and rule of the order, to vow
and promise obedience, chastity, poverty, care of the sick, and perpetual War
with the Infidels; which done, the Commendator promises to him sufficient
bread and water, and course cloth for his lifetime; then he rises, and having
kissed the Master, and each one of the Brothers, he sits down in the place
appointed for him. Then the Master or Commendator exhorts the brothers to
observe their rule carefully: after this, he is inaugurated, his kindred attend
on him to the Church with a Torch burning before him, in which are fastened 30.
pieces of silver and a Gold-Ring. Then he kneels before the Altar, and rises
again behind the offertory, and so are delivered to him, a Sword, Target,
Spurs, and a Cloak, which were all consecrated before; then the Commendator
draws his Sword, with which he is girt, and with it strikes his Target twice,
saying, Knighthood is better then service; and with the same Sword striking him
on the back, says, Take this blow patiently, but no more hereafter; See
Polidor, Crantzius, Funccius, Trithemius, P. Aemilius, Peucerus, Sleidan^^,
Vrspergensis, Sebastian Frank, Hospinian, etc.
then the Responsory being sung, the rest of the day is spent in feasting and
drinking.

Q. 10. What were the Knights of Saint Lazarus, of Calatrava, of Saint James
and diverse others?

A. The order of Saint Lazarus was instituted about the year of Christ 1119.
and being almost extinct, was renewed by Pope Pius 4. they wear a dark-colored
garment with a red Cross before their breast. This order is highly esteemed by
the Dukes of Savoy, who also were instituted the Knights of the Annunciada in
memory of the Anunciation of Mary; he ordained fourteen of the prime Nobility
to be of this College, Knights of S. Lazarus.
on each of whom he bestowed a Golden Collar, with the Virgins Picture hanging
at it; within the Links of the Collar are engraven these four Letters, F. E. R.
T. which was the Motto of Amadeus the great, who took Rhodes. The meaning is,
Fortitudo Ejus Rhodum Tenuit; the annual solemnity is held on our Lady Day in
the Castle of Saint Peter in Turin. But this is scarce to be reckoned among the
Religious Orders. The Knights Of Calatrava.
of Calatrava, are so called from that Province in Spain; they were instituted
Anno 1121. or as some say, 1160. by Sanctius, (others write) by Alphonsus King
of Spain, in the Country of Toledo, where the Templars had a Monastery, who not
being able to resist the Saracens, were forced to give place to these new
Knights, who were of the Cistentian Order. They wear a black Garment with a red
Cross; the revenue of their Master is forty thousand Crowns yearly; they are
enjoined by their rule to sleep in their clothes girded; to be silent in the
Chapel, Hall, Kitchen, and Dormitory; to eat flesh but on Sundays, Tuesdays,
and Thursdays, and but of one kind and but once a day, and must fast Mondays,
Wednesdays, and Fridays, from the exaltation of the Cross till Easter, if they
be at home; If any lay violent hands on them, they shall be excommunicated. In
the Lands that they shall acquire from the Saracens, it shall not be lawful for
any to build Churches, or Chapels, without leave from, the Knights; who also
may choose their own Clergy; other immunities and privileges they have, as may
be seen in the Confirmation, or Bull of Pope Innocent the third, which is
extant in the Second Book of his Decretal Epistles. The Knights of Saint James
in Spain, Of Saint James.
were instituted under Pope Alexander the third, who confirmed this order, and
were to follow Saint A^tins rule. The first Master was Peter Ferdinand, whose
yearly revenue is one hundred and fifty thousand Crowns* Diverse orders of
Knighthood.
They were instituted Anno 1170. the great Master i^ next to the King in power
and state; they wea^ both in Peace and Wars a Purple Cross before their
Breast, Who would see more of the Religious Orders of Knighthood, may read
Sebastian Frank in his Chronnicle, Panuinius in his Appendix to Platina, and in
his Chronicle, Polydor, Hospinian, and others.
resembling the Hilts of a two-handed Sword called Spatha; therefore these
Knights are called* Milites S. Iacobi de Spatho; and the order from Compostella
is named Compostellanus. Many other orders of Knighthood there are in
Chrisstendom, as of Saint George in England, of Saint Andrew in Scotland, of
Saint Michael in France, of the Lilly in Nava^, of Saint Mark in Venice, of the
Dove in Castile of the Golden Fleece in Burgundy, of Saint Maurice in Savoy, of
Saint Stephen in Tuscany; and many more which are rather Secular, then
Religious Knights. Th^^^st of which may be seen in our continuation of Sir
Walter Raleighs History, to be sold at the Greyhound in Little Britain London,
the edition which I own.

Q. 11. What were the Orders of Mendicant Friars?

A. Of these were four sorts; namely, Augustinians, Carmelites, Friars
Meendicants.
Praedicants, and Minorits. The Augustinians were erected by William Duke of
A^nitania, about the year 1150. from whom they were named ^uilehelmits, but
afterward Pope Innocent the fourth, Monks, or Augustinians.
understanding that their were many sorts of Eremiles in diverse parts of the
world, living under different title^ and rules, Eremites of S. Austin.
he invited them to live under one ^^^d, and to profess one rule, to wit, that
of Saint Austin. But this Pope dying in the interim, Alexander the fourth
succeeded, to whom Saint Austin appears in a vision, having a great head, but
small links; by this he is warned to perfect the Union which (...) began, which
he did accordingly, and so he (...) all in own order, and calls them by one
(...) to wit, the Eremites of Saint Austin, whose rule he commanded they should
follow, and be subject to one General Prior; and so dispensed with their former
rules and obse^vances. Withal he enjoynes them to forsake the Desares, and to
live in Cities, that they might ^each the people. To this end he gave them
diverse privileges; and so did He^erius the fourth, about the year of Christ
1290. They wear a black coat with a hood of the same color, and under a white
short coat, a l^^thren girdle with ^orn buckles. They came into England Anno
1252. before Alexanders vision, and by their sermons in deavoured to advance
King Richard. the third his title against the heirs of King Edward. These
Eremites did spread so fast through the world, that there were reckoned of this
order about 200^. Covents. These Monks have three rules to which they are
bound, given them by Saint Austin, as they say. The first is that they possess
nothing in property, but have all things in common; that they be not
sollicitous what they shall eat or drink, or wherewith they shall be clothed;
That none be admitted without trial; That none depart of carry any thing out
of the Monastery, without the Superiors leave; That no man maintain any point
of Doctrine, without ac^^ainting the S^perior with it; That secret faults be
first reproved, and if not repented of, punished: In Persecution, let them
repair to their Praepositus* Their Second rule contains the times and manner of
their praying and singing; their times of working, reading and refreshing; of
their obedience, silence, and behavior, both at home and a broad, and how
contumacy must be punished. The third rule contains their duties more largely,
as that they must love God above all things, that they maintain unity; that
^^eat drink and cloth be distributed as need is; that all things be common,
that there be not pride, contempt, or rain glory amongst them; here they are
enjoined to prayer, reverence, devotion, abstinence, (...): to hear the word
read at table; to be (...) of the sick and infirm; to be modest in apparre,
worth and gesture, in their looks, when they (...) to see a woman; to reprove
immodesty in their Brothers, to receive no letters nor gifts without the
Superiors knowledge, to have their clothes well kept from moths, to beware of
murmuring and repining; that to conceal any thing, shall be counted^ theft,
that they be not too nice an washing them clothes; That in sickness the
Physician be advised with; That they may bathe sometimes; That the^ sick want
not any thing needful for him, That there be not strife, envy, nor evil words
among them; That the Superior use not harsh words in reproving; That he show
good example to his Brothers in holy conversation; That he be wise, humble, and
careful of* his charge; and that the duties here enjoined may be the better
performed, these rules must be read once every week; which rules are followed,
and observed, not only by all the Canon Regula^s, and the Eremites of Saint
Austins order, Monks of S. Austin.
but also by the Mendicants, except the Minors; and likewise by the Dominicans,
the Servants of our Lady, the Bridgidians, Iesuati, Canons^ Regular of Saint
George, Montolihetenses, Eremites of Saint Hierom, See Alphonsus Alvares
Guerrera, and Hospinian out of him. See also Polydor, Antoninus, Sebastian
Frank, Sabellicus, Volaterranus, Balaeus, etc.
Hieronymites simply, Cruciferi, Scopetini, Hospita^arii, St* A^^onii,
Trinitatis, Servitae, Feruerii, Ferie^^, or of Saint John of Jerusalem,
Cruciferii with the Star; the Friars of Saint Peter the confessor de Magella;
Sepulchritae, or Brothers of the Lords Sepulcher; The Friars of the
V^lliseholarii, Victoriani, Gilbertini, The Eremites of Saint Paul, whom some
think to be all one with the Augustinians; Fratres de ^oei^ite^tia, Coronati^
The Knights of Saint James de Spatha, and diverse (...), who notwithstanding
differ in their habits; exercises, and manner of living.

Q^ 12. What were the C^^meli^es?

A. These were Eremites, Monks, or Carmelites.
whose habitation was in Caves and Rocks within the hill Carmel, famous for the
Prophets, Elias and Elisha. About the year of Christ 1160. or as others say
11^1. Almericus Patriarch of Antioch, and the Popes Lega^ came thither* and
gathered these dispersed Anchorites into one body* and built them a Monastery
on the top of the Hill near the Well of Elias, by which stood an ancient
Chapel of our Lady; Perhaps from this Chapel, the Carmelites were called the
Virgins Brothers. The same Almericus translated into Latin the Book concerning
the institution of the first Monks, written in Greek by John, Bishop of
Jerusalem, for the benefit of these Carmelites; and placed over them a Latin
Governor in the time of Pope Alexander the third* who began this Popedom A^.
1170. The Governors name V as ^ertholdus Aquitanus; some think this Order was
instituted 40. years after, to wit, in the Papacy of Innocent the third: Their
second Governor was Brochard of Jerusalem, who made them a rule, much after
the rule of Saint Basil; which in the year 1199. was abridged and confirmed by
Albert, Patriarch of Jerusalem, who tied them to fasting, silence, and
canonical hours; and the Lay-Brothers to Peter the Eremites Beads or Prayer,
and to our Ladies Psalter. They were as, yet tied to no Vow, but that of
obedience to their Superior. They came into England about the year 1240. Ralph
Fresburn was their first Governor here, and Hunfrid Nekt^n the first Carmelite
that read School Divinity in Cambridge, and was of that order the first Doctor
of Divinity. This order came into Lituania Anno 1427. Whilst they were in
Syria, their Garment was a striped cloak of party colors, which they say was
used by the Prophet Eliah; but Pope Honorius the third, or as some say the
fourth, took from them this habit, as not beseeming or agreeable to Religion;
and instead thereof gave them a white cloak, and a white hood, and under, a
coat with a scapulary of hair-colour. The use of the white cloak was confirmed
by Pope Nicholaus the fourth. Whilst they used the former habit, they were
highly esteemed by the Egyptians, and maintained by the Sultan; but when they
began to wear the Popes new Livery, he expelled them out of Egypt, and burned
down their Monastery and Chapel. Honorius the fourth, exempted them from the
jurisdiction of Princes and Bishops. Gregory the ninth forbade them to enjoy
possessions, or revenues; but to beg from door to door. Honorius the fourth
will have them called instead of Carmelites, Brothers of the Virgin Mary:
Alexander the fourth, allowed them prisons to punish their apostates, and John
23. took them into his immediate protection, and by a vision was warned to keep
them (...) of purgatory. Many of the Carmelites fell off from their first
strictness of life, and gave themselves to all (...) and voluptuousness;
whereupon they were divided into two Sects: the one were called Observantes,
the other Non Observantes; to undertake this order is h^ld meritorious, Of
these passages see Balaeus, Sabellicus, Mantuan Eclog. 10. Scrope, Vincentius,
in Specal. Hist. Polyd. etc.
and three years indulgence is promised to him that shall at any time call them
brothers of Saint Mary. In many of their Cloisters they have the picture of
John Baptist in their habit, because he is named Eliah, and they say that Eliah
did wear this habit; they have changed now (I mean the Non Observantes) their
hair-coloured coat into black.

Q. 13. What were the Dominicans?

A. These were so called from Dominicus a Spaniard their first Author; Monks or
D^minicans.
they sprung out of the Humiliali, and were instituted by Innocent the third,
Anno 1205. the chief end of their institution was to write, expound, and preach
the word of God, whence they are named Praedicantes or Praedicatores. Friars
Pradicants.
Dominicus was by Pope Innocent the third, Anno. 1207. employed with twelve
Abbots of the Order of Cister^iae^s, to preach down the Doctrines of the
A^^igenses. He by his preaching, so incensed the Princes against them, that
they took arms, and killed above One hundred thous^nd of them. Dominicus with
twelve more, accompanied by Fulce, Bishop of ^oled^, went to Rome, where he
petitioneth Innocent the third, to confirm his order, who was somewhat averse,
till he dreamed that he saw D^minicus supporting with his shoulders the Church
of Lateran that was ready to fall down; hereupon he advises Dominick to pitch
upon some rule, and he would ratify it; Dominick returns presently to his
Disciples being sixteen together, acquaints them with the Popes intention; they
all resolve to profess the rule of Saint Austin the preacher: In the interim
Innocent dies, Honorius the third, succeeded; (...) confirmed their rule and
institution. D^^inick added some things to Saint Austins rule. He divided his
Monastery into three parts, one for himself and contemplative Brothers, the
other for contemplative Sisters, the third was for both sexes, that were given
to the active life: these were called Brothers and Sisters of Saint Dominick;
or the Soldiers of Jesus Christ: for as Dominick with the spiritual, so these
with the corporal sword were to subdue Heretics. The Dominicans are tied to
reject all kind of wealth, money, and possessions, that their work of
preaching may not be hindered. To hold every year a general Chapter. To fast
seven months together; namely, from holy (...) day in September, till Easter;
and at all other times on Friday to abstain from flesh, except in times of
sickness. To lie in Blankets, not in Sheets; nor on Feather-beds. To be
silent. To wear a white coat, under a black cloak, which they say was
prescribed by the Virgin Mary, to one Rheginaldus in his sickness. To have
low-built Monasteries answering to their poverty and humility. To be content
with the title of Friars Praedicants, whereas before they were styled Friars of
the blessed Virgin Mary. To celebrate on every Saturday the Office of the
Virgin Mary, except in Lent, and on Festival days. To disperse themselves
through all parts of the world, for preaching the Gospel. To choose them a
General Master, whose subordinate Prelates should be called Priors but not
Abbots. The first that was elected Master General was Dominious himself Anno
1220. who died the next year after. The (...) do not promise to live according
to their rule, or to keep it, (because not to perform such a promise is a
mortal sin) but only to obey according to the rule; because in this case
omission or transgression obliges not to the sin, but to the punishment, as
they think* For Dominick's good service against the (...), he is made by
H^^^rius the third, Master of the sacred Palace. And so the Dominicans are
ordina^^^^ m^sters of this place. And because a Dominican poisoned Henry the
seventh, Emperor, in the Eucharist* therefore the Pope inflicted this
punishment on the ^^der, that their priests should ever after in the Eucharist
use their left hand. Antoninus writes that Dominick received a Staff from
Peter, and a Book from (...) with ^ command to preach the Gospel every where;
hereupon his disciples dispersed themselves into all parts. Dominick himself
went to Rome, where by the concession of the Pope and Cardinals, he gathered
together in one Covent all the Nuns dispersed through diverse places of the
City, where they had the Church of Saint Sabina assigned them; 44 of them met
together, and took upon them the profession and habit of Saint Dominick. The
order of Praedicants increased so fast, that in the time of Sabellicus, about
the year of Christ. 1494. were reckoned 4143. Monasteries of Dominicans, in
which were 1500 Masters of Divinity; besides diverse Cloisters of them in
Armenia and Aethiopia, and 150^* Covents of Dominican Nuns, in diverse parts of
Europe. The cause of this great increase of Praedicants, was partly the
mortified life, humility, and abstinence of Dominick; for they write of him
that he preferred Bread and water to the best cheer, a Hair Shirt to the finest
Linen, a hard Board to the softest Bed, and a hard Stone to the easiest
Pillow. He did use to wear an Iron Chain, with which he beat himself every
night, both for his own sins, and the sins of the world, for which also he did
frequently weep, and pray whole nights together in Churches. He offered himself
twice as a ransom, to redeem others. And partly the cause was, his frequent
visions and miracles, (which whether true or false, Of these passages see Mat.
Paris, Antoninus, Vincentius in Speculo Hist. Sabellicus, Florentius,
Crantzius, Theodoricus de Apoleia in vita Dominici, Surius, de vit. Sanct.
Frank in Chron. etc.
I leave for others to judge;) partly also by receiving Children and Infants
into their society before the years of probation; besides the great respect
which the Popes carried toward this order; for Gregory the ninth, canonised
Dominick Anno 1233. They were subject to no ordinary, but to the Pope: they had
many privileges granted them, as to preach in any man's Pulpit, without asking
leave of the Bishop; to make Noble men and their Ladies confess to them, and
nor to their Curates; to administer the Sacraments when they pleased, to be
exempt from all Ecclesiastical censures, and this privilege they had from Pope
Innocent the fourth, that no Dominician could change his order, or enter into
any other.

Q. 14. What were the Franciscans?

A. Franciscans.
They are so named from Francis an Italian Merchant, who before his conversion
was called John. He living a wicked and debauched life in his younger years,
was at last reclaimed by a vision, as the Story goes, of a Castle full of
arms and Crosses, with a voice telling him, that he was to be a spiritual
soldier. Afterward as he was praying, he was warned by a voice to repair the
decayed houses of Christ; which he did by stealing money from his Father, and
bestowing it on the reparation of Churches; whereupon his Father beats him,
puts him in prison, and disinherits him; he rejoicing at this, stripped himself
naked of all his Garments, which he delivers to his Father, showing how willing
he was to relinquish all for Christ. Within a short while he gathered many
Disciples, to whom he prescribes this rule, Anno, 1198. That they shall be
chaste, poor, and obedient to Christ, to the Pope, and to their Superiors; That
none be admitted into their order, till they be duly examined and proved; That
the Clergy in their divine service follow the order of the Roman Church, and
the Lay-Brothers say 24. Pater-Nosters for their Matte^s, etc. That they fast
from All Saints, till Christmasse. etc. That they enter not into any house,
till they say peace be to this house, and then they may eat of what is set
before them; That they meddle not with money, nor appropriate any thing to
themselves; that they help one another; that penance be imposed on those who
sin; that they have their public meetings or chapters, and that they choose
their provincial Ministers, and these must choose a General Minister over the
whole Fraternity; that their preach^^^ be men of approved gifts, and that they
preach not abroad without leave from the Bishop; That they use Brotherly
admonition and correction, that they give themselves to prayer, modesty,
temperance, and other virtues, and that they enter not into Nun^er^es, except
such as are authorized; that none go to convert Sarace^s or other Infidels, but
such as are sent by the Provincial Ministers; that they all remain constant in
the Catholic faith, and that none break this rule, except he will incurr the
curse of God, and of the two blessed Apostles, Peter and Paul. This rule
Francis strengthened by his Will and Testament which he enjoyneth to be read,
as often as they shall read the rule. This rule and order was confirmed by Pope
Innocent the third, but not till he was warned by visions of a Palm tree
growing and spreading under him, and of a poor man supporting the decaying
Lateran; Who would know more fully these passages, let him read Bonaventure in
the life of Saint Francis, Antoninus, Sebast. Frank, Trithemius in Chron.
Balaeus, M^ Paris, Vincentius, etc.
and until he had tried Francis his obedience, which he showed by wallowing in
the mire with swine, as the Pope advised him. This order was also confirmed
again by Pope Honorius the third, and by Pope Nicholaus the third, in his
Decretal Epistles, which he enjoined should be read in Schools. Francis would
not have his Disciples to be called Francis^ans from his name, but Min^res, and
so he would have the Superiors or Governors of his order to be called not
Masters, but Ministers, to put them in mind of their humble condition, and to
follow Christ's advice to his Disciples, Whosoever will be great among you, let
him be your servant.

Q. 15. What things else are observable in the Franciscan order?

A. 1. Monks, or Franciscans their habit, Schisms, Families, Rules and
Privileges.
Francis divided his Disciples into three Classes or Ranks; the first was of
the Friars Minorites, whereof himself was one, and whose life was most rigid,
For they were neither to have Granaries, nor two Coats. The Second was of
Ladies and poor Virgins, who from Saint Clara were named Clarissae, this Order
was not so strict as the former. Friars Minorites.
The third was of Poenitents instituted for married people, who desired to do
penance; these might enjoy propriety in their goods. The first sort was for
contemplation and action too; namely, in preaching; the second for
contemplation only, the third for action only. This third order is not
properly called Religious, because they may continue in their married estate,
and enjoy propriety. These are called Friars Fenites of Jesus Christ, and
Saccii from their sackcloth which they wore; and Continentes, not that they
vowed continency, but because certain days every week, they abstained from
carnal Copulation. The Women are called Sisters Penitents. The first order were
not to permit any of the third order to enter their Churches in time of
interdict. This order was condemned in England An. 1307. but is again advanced
by Peter Teuxbury a Franciscan Minister, and allowed in the Chapter at London.
2. Many Families sprung out of this Minorit order; namely, Observantes,
Conventuales, Minimi, Caputiani, Collectanei, who gathered or collected the
moneys; Amadeani, Reformati de Evangelio, Chiacini cum barba, de Porti^^cula,
Paulini, Bofiaini, Gaudentes, de Augustinis with their open shoes, and
Servientes. 3. Francis himself wore a short coat without any artificial
tincture; instead of a girdle, he used a cord, and went barefooted; hence
after long altercation among his Disciples about their habit and shoes, it was
ordered that they should wear soles only, having no more upper leather then to
tie the shoes. That they should travel either on foot, or upon Asses. And
whereas they could not agree about the form, measure, and color of their
habit, (for Saint Francis in this determined nothing,) the matter is referred
to Pope John 22. who leaves it to the arbitrament of their General and
Provincial Ministers. At this day they wear a long coat with a large hood of
gray, or hair-colour, barefooted, and girded with a cord. 4. Such virtue has
been held in a Franciscan Garment, that diverse Princes have desired to be
buried in it, thinking thereby to be safe from the Devil. So we read of Francis
the second, Marquess of Mantua, of Robert King of Sicily, and diverse others,
who have by their last will ordered that they might be interred in a Seraphick
habit. And yet we read that Francis h^mself died naked, because he would be
like Christ, who hung naked on the cross. 5. I read of diverse Schisms among
the Franciscans about the form of their habit; one I find in the time of
Crescentius de Esey^ their sixth General Minister, Anno 1245. Some among them
bragging much of the Spirit, would not live after St. Francis rule, but after
their own, accouting themselves the Saints. These despised a long habit, and
would go in short cloakes. Another schism they made in the Province of Narbon,
Anno 1315. after the death of Pope Clement 5. during the vacancy of the Popedom
almost two years. These Monks chose their own Ministers and Governors, and
flung away the habit of their order as profane, wearing short Garments,
imprisoning and excommunicating the Obedientes. Pope John 22. condemned these
Minorities as Heretics; and the Fratricelli starting up at that time,
condemned the same Pope of Heresy, for saying Christ and his Disciples had a
common stock among them, whereof Judas bore the bag. Another Schism they had
about the year 1352. some petitioned the Pope for leave to live after the
letter of Saint Francis his rule, and not after the gloss, as they all did.
They obtain four places to reside in, and in each of them twelve brothers. But
these aiming at liberty, rejecting the rule of their order, and wearing short
undecent Garments, were suppressed by Pope Innocent the sixth. Another rupture
was among them, during the Schism of the Church, begun by Urban the sixth, who
sat at Rome, and Clemens at Avinion; for the Minorites of England, France, and
Spain, chose them one General, and those of Italy, Germany, and Hungary
another. An. 1431. they divided themselves into Conventuales, and Observantes;
these despising the Conventual Prelates, chose their own Governors, calling the
others profane and impious. These touch no money, eat no flesh, and wear no
shoes: they multipled exceedingly in all parts, chiefly in Italy. They were
confirmed by the Council of Constance, and diverse Popes. 6. Francis prohibited
his Monks to meddle with Ecclesiastical preferments, to be called Lords or
Masters, to hear confessions, to eat flesh, to wear rich apparel, and to dwell
in sumptuous houses. Bonaventure their eight General, ordered that they should
continue singing till the Epipha^y, Glory to thee O Lord, who wast born of a
Virgin, etc. He taught them also to exhort the people to salute the Virgin Mary
at the ringing of the bell, after the Completory, in memory of the Angel
saluting her that hour. Pope Gregory the eleventh limited the power of the
Minorites Protectors, that they should not meddle with any, except he disobey
the Pope and Church, apostatize from the faith, and forsake his rule Honorius
the third decreed, that no Minorite should ever forsake his order. The
Minorites obtained this favor, that they might make Masters of Divinity among
themselves; where of Alexander de Ales was the first. 7. The Franciseans did
increase so fast in all parts, that from the year 1211, till the year 1380.
being the space of 169. years, there were erected in Christendom above 1500.
Monasteries of this order. Sabellicus records that in his time were Ninety
thousand Minorites. The cause of this increase was partly their diligence and
sedulity in making Proselites, partly their privileges, and partly their
pretended sanctity and mortification, but chiefly their incredible miracles and
visions of Saint Francis, which are obtruded on the peoples belief; as his
five wounds, his bearing of Christ in his arms, his mansion in Heaven next
Christ, and much other stuff to this purpose, with which their Legends are
fraught. Poverty, threefold.
8. There be three sorts of poverty among the Mendicant Friars; one is to have
nothing, either in common or in propriety; and this is the Franciscan poverty,
which is the greatest of all: another is which the Dominicans profess; that is
to have nothing in property, yet some things in common, as books, clothes, Of
these things see the Authors above named.
and food. The third is and the least, to have some things both in common and
in property, but only such as necessity requires, for food and raiment; and
this is the poverty of the Carmelites and Augustinians.

Q. 15. What were the Knights of the holy Sepulcher, and the Gladiatores?

A. These ascribe the original of their order to Saint James our Lords brother,
Knight of the the holy Sepulcher.
and son of Alphaeus; but its more likely that this order began when Jerusalem
was taken by Godsrey of Bulloigne; at this day, it is quite extinct. When
Jerusalem was taken by the Sultan, these Anno Christi 1300. with all the other
religious Knights of Christendom were driven out of Syria; yet the care of the
holy Sepulcher, which these Knights had charge of, was committed to the
Franciscans by the Sultan, who of all the Christian profession suffered none to
stay in Syria and Jerusalem, but the Armenians, Syrians, Georgians, Greeks and
Franciscans; the Pope allows eight of this order with a Christian Knight, who
is their Guardian, to keep the Sepulcher. The manner of installing the Knights
of the Sepulcher was this: The Knight after preparation, being brought within
the Sepulcher, where Hymns are sung, and prayers said, declares kneeling, that
he is come to be made Knight of the most holy Sepulcher of our Lord; that he
was nobly descended, and had means sufficient to maintain him; withal
promises to hear Mass daily, to expose his life and estate against the
Infidels, to desend the Church of God and Ministers thereof, from their
persecutors, to avoid unjust Wars, Duells, filthy Lucre, and such like, to
maintain peace amongst Christians, to shun oppression, perjury, rapin,
blasphemy, and all other grievous sins. Then the Guardian laying his hand on
the Knights head, bids him be a stout, faithful, and good soldier of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and of his holy Sepulcher. Upon this he gives him a pair of
gilded Spurs, with a naked Sword, signing him three times with the cross, and
bidding him in the name of the Trinity, use this Sword to his own and the
Churches defense, and to the confusion of the enemies thereof; then the Sword
being sheathed, is girt to the Knight by the Guardian; the Knight rises, and
bending his knees and bowing his head over the Sepulcher, is by the Guardian
struck on the shoulder three times with the Sword, saying, Iordain thee Knight
of the holy Sepulcher of our Lord Jesus Christ, in the name of the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost. This he repeats three times, and crosses him three times, then
kisseth him, and puts a Golden Chain about his neck, with a double red Cross
hanging at it; at last the Knight having kissed the Sepulcher, the Monks
present sing Te Deum, and after a short prayer, he is dismissed. This order was
by Pope Innocent the eighth, Anno 1485. made one with the Knights of Rhodes.
Gladiators.
The order of Gladiators began in Livonia, much about the time that the
Tutonicks began in Jerusalem, Anno 1204. They were called Gladiatores, from
carrying on their cloak two red Swords acrosse. Albert Bishop of Riga beg^n
this order, and allowed the third part of his Chutohes revenues toward the
maintenance thereof. Their habit was white, on which were woven two bloody
Swords, in manner of a Cross as is said; to signify their innocence, and
warfare against the Pagans; whom they converted to Christianity, See Crantzius
L. 7. Funccius L. 10. Munster in his Geography, Balaeus Cent. 4. etc.
not only in Riga the Metropolis, but in most places of Livonia. Pope Innocent
gave them all the Lands they could subdue there. The rule they professed was
the same with that of the Templars; but by the Popes persuasion both the
Cruciferi and Gladiators incorporated themselves into the Teutonick order.

Q. 17. What were the Knights of Saint Mary of Redemption, of Montesia, and the
order of Vallis Scholarium, and Canons Regular of Saint Mark?

A. The Knights of Saint Mary de Mercede, Of Saint Mary of Redemption.
or of Redemption, because their charge was to redeem Captives, was instituted
by James King of Arragon, who in the year 1212. subdued the Isles Baleares.
This order began about the year 1232. and is confirmed by Gregory the nineth.
They wear a white garment, with a black cross. They are of the Cistertian
order. The Knights of Montesia, Of Montesia.
are so called from that place in the Kingdom of Valentia. They were iustituted
much about the time of the former Knights of Saint Mary, by the same King
James, and confirmed by the same Pope Gregory the nineth; the badge of this
order is a red cross, Monks of Vallis Scholarium.
and are also Cistertians. The order of Vallis Scholarium, began Anno 1217. by
one Guilelmus Richardus, a Scholar of Paris, who with Edward and Manasses
professors of Divinity, betook themselves to the Desare in Champanie, where
they set up a new order, Monks, or Saint Marks Canons Regular.
but after the rule of Saint Austi^. They borrowed also some things of the
Cistertians, that the Prior should visit all the Churches of his order without
exacting any temporalties; that they hold a general Chapter every year; See
Panuiuius in his Chronicle, and Genebrard. See also Volaterran L. 21. Balaeus,
Polydor, Hospinian, and others.
that they wear no linen shirts, nor sleep on feather-beds; that none eat
flesh, but such as are sick and weak. The place where they first resided in,
was called Vallis Scholarium. This order was confirmed by Pope Honorius the
third. The order or Congregation of Saint Marks Canon Regulars began in Mantua,
about the year 1231.

Q. 18. What was the order of Saint Clara, Saint Paul's Eremites, and
Boni-homines?

A. Clara was of the same Town Assisium with Francis, Nuns of Saint Clara.
and his intimate acquaintance; she was Daughter to Ortulana, who undertook
Pilgrimages both to Rome and to the holy Sepulcher; in her Childhood she wore
sackcloath next her skin, and would never hear of marriage. She stole away from
her Parents, cut off her hair, and could not be drawn away by any persuasions
from her intended course of life. About the year 1225. at the Church of Saint
Damianus she instituted the order of Poor Ladies, called from her name
Clarissae, and from the place the Nuns of Saint Damian. Near this Church in a
Cottage she lived two and forty years, afflicting her body with fasting,
watchings and all kind of hardness. Next her flesh she wore the brisley side
of a Hogs skin, lay on hard boords, Eremites of Saint Paul in Hungary.
went barefooted. In Lent and other fasting times, she used only bread and
water; she tasted wine only upon Sundaies; her rule was that of the
Franciscans. Pope Innocent the third, or as others say, Honorius the third,
Monks or Boni Homines.
confirmed this order. She could not be persuaded by Pope Gregory the nineth,
to reserve any of her possessions, but forsook all for Christ, as she thought.
See Polydor, both in his History, and in his Inventions, Frank in his
Chronicles, Balaeus in his Appendix, Antoninus in his Titles, etc.
Saint Paul's Eremites in Huugary were instituted in the year 1215. after the
rule of Saint Austin by Eusebius of Strigonia, and was confirmed by Gentilis
the Popes Legate, Anno 1308. They came into England, and seated themselves in
Colchester, Anno 1310. The order called Boni Hom^^es, or Boni Viri, that is,
good men, was instituted by Edmund, son to Richard Earl of Cornwall, who had
been elected Emperor. These did follow Saint Austins rule, and wear a
skiecoloured garment.

Q 19. What were the Servants of Saint Mary, the Caelestini, and Jesuati?

A. One Philip Tudert a Florentine by birth, and a Physician by profession,
Monks or Saint Mary's servants.
instituted this order of Saint Mary's Servants; they follow the rule of Saint
Austin; they wear a short black coar, and over that, a long black cloak pleated
about the shoulders. They were confirmed by Pope Bennet the eleventh, and seven
other Popes after him. They are permitted to carry a Satchel or Bag to put the
alms in, which they beg. In Italy there he eight and forty Monasteries of
these Servants. Monks or Caelestini.
This order was instituted Anno. 1282. or as others say, 1285. The Caelestini
were so called from Pope Caelestine the fifth, who having before his Popedom
lived an Eremiticall life in diverse Deserts, at last erected this order after
the rule of Saint Bennet, and procured it to be confirmed by Pope Gregory the
tenth, in the General Council of Lions. Their habit is of skie-colour without
a hood. Caelestin their Author being elected Pope, and cheated out of it by
Boniface the eight, who by a Cane and a hole in the Wall, speak to him to
relinquish his Popedom; which he did, Monks or Iesuati.
thinking an Angel had spoken to him, I say Caelestine returned again to his
Eremiticall life, which he could not long enjoy; for Pope Boniface put him in
prison upon jealousy, See Frank in Chorn. Sabelli^us, Enne. 9. Crantzins L. 9.
Volaterranus L. 21. Polydor L. 7. Surius Tom. 3. De Vit. Sanct etc.
where he died. These Monks came into England, Anno 1414. The Iesuati began at
Senae by John Columbanus, and Francis Vincent, Anno 1365. they were called
Iesuati from using the name of Jesus often in their mouths. Pope Urban the
fifth, approved them, and enjoined them to wear a white garment, a white cover
for their head, a leathern girdle, and to go barefooted, using only wooden
soles. These Monks were afterward called Apostolici.

Q. 20. What was the Order of Saint Briget?

A. Briget, not that of Scotland, who lived about the year, 530. but a Princess
of Sweden, Anno 1360. obtained a confirmation of her order (which she received
immediately from Christ, Monks and Nuns of Saint Brigets order.
as she said) by Pope Urban the fifth. Her rule was according to that of Saint
Basils. The Monks and Nus may have their Covents contiguous, and the same
Church, but the Brothers must officiate below, the Sisters above. Both Sexes
must use gray cloaks and coats, with a red cross thereon. They must have
nothing in propriety, touch no money, must lie only upon straw. The fashion,
color, and measure of their clothes are set down; on their Veil they must
wear a weite linen Crown, on which are sowed pieces of red cloth,
representing drops of blood, and so placed that they may resemble the cross.
The Sisters are enjoined how to officiate, and what prayers they shall use
every day, to be silent, to avoid conference with men, except it be at a
window, upon urgent occasion, on Sundays and great Festivals, and that only
from nine till the evening. She that opens not her window at all, shall have
the greater reward in Heaven. Days of fasting are prescribed them; none must be
admitted into the order, without a years probation: then she must be examined
and consecrated by the Bishop, who is to bring her into the Church with a red
Cross carried before her, having the Crucifix on the one side, and the Virgins
Image on the other, to put her in mind of patience, and chastity: two Tapers
burning must be carried before the Cross; then the Bishop consecrates a Ring,
and prays. She having testified her constant resolution to that kind of
life, the Bishop by putting the Ring on her finger, marries her to Christ, and
prays; she comes to the Altar and offers, then returns to her place again.
Her new clothes are also consecrated, and she is called by the Priest to come
barefooted to the Altar; the Bishop prays again, and withal puts on her the
coat of her profession, her shoes, hood, and cloak, which he tieth with a
wooden button, in memory of Christ's wooden Cross, to which her mind should be
fastened. Then her Veil is put on, the Bishop at every action, and parcel of
her clothes prays, and at last her Crown, the Bishop praying that she may be
Crowned with joy. She returns to her place, and is called again to the Altar,
where she falls on her face, the Bishop with his Priests read the Letanie,
absolves her, and gives her the Eucharist; her Coffin, which during the time of
the Mass stood there, is carried by four Sisters, sprinkling dust on it, into
the Covent; at the gate whereof stands the Abbatesse with her Nuns, the Bishop
with two Tapers carried before him; and the Priests singing, brings the new
Nun, and recommends her to the care of the Abbatesse, which she receives, shuts
the gate, and brings her into the Chapter. The first eight days she is tied to
no discipline. At Table and in the Quite she sits last. The number of the
Sisters is sixty, and no more. Thirteen Priests according to the number of
Apostles, whereof Saint Paul was one, four Evangelists, or Preachers,
representing the four Doctors of the Church, Ambrose, Austin, Gregory, and
Hierom; and eight Laymen. All these together make up the number of the
thirteen Apostles, and 72. Disciples. The Priests Garments shall be of course
gray, on which shall be worn a red cross, and in the midst a round piece of
white cloth, to resemble the host which they daily offer. The four Evangelists
shall carry on their cloaks a white circle, to show the incomprehensible wisdom
of the four Doctors which they represent. Within these circles red pieces of
cloth shall be inserted like tongues cloven, to show their learning and
eloquence. The Lay-brothers shall wear on their cloaks a white cross, to show
Christ's innocence, with five pieces of red cloth, in memory of Christ's five
wounds. The number of Brothers in the Covent, must not exceed five and twenty,
who are to be blessed by the Bishop, after the same manner that the Sisters
were; but instead of a Ring, the Bishop shall hold the Priest by the hand, and
for a Vail, shall lay his hands on his head; and instead of a Crown, shall use
the sign of the Cross. The Abbatesse shall be among the thirteen Priests, as
Mary was among the Apostles; she shall have for Confessor, him whom the Bishop
allows. Confession must be made at least three times yearly, and every day if
need be, to such Priests as the Confessor shall choose; the Priest shall be
diligent in preaching, praying, and fasting. Every Thursday shall be a Chapter
held, wherein the delinquent Sisters may be punished with fasting, standing
without doors in the Churchyard, whilst the other Sisters are within at
Divine Service, and with prostrating her self on the ground, till the Abbatesse
take her up, and intercede for her absolution. If a Sister possess any thing
in propriety, and dies before she confesses it, her body is laid on a Beer
at the Church door, where they all say an Ave-Mary for her, and then is
absolved, and after Mass is carried from the Quite to the Church door by the
Sisters, where the Brothers receive her, and bury her. Neither the Abbatesse,
nor any Sister must receive gifts, or have any thing in proper. Every one after
the first foundation, must bring their yearly revenues to be employed by the
Abbaresse; but after the number of Sisters is filled, and a revenue settled,
they that come after need brin^ nothing. If any dye, her clothes and allowance
in diet shall be given to the poor, till another be chosen. Every year before
the Feast of All Saints, let there be an audit of expenses kept; if any thing
remain over and above the expenses, let it be reserved for the next years
expenses, or bestowed on the poor, on whom also the Nuns old clothes must be
conferred. Every Novice must bring a present or alms gift to the Covent, but
nothing that has been got by oppression, cheating, stealing, or any other
sinistrous means; such gifts must be restored again, and so must gifts
doubtfully got be rejected; and if the Covent stand not in need of any persent,
let it be given to the poor. In every Church must be thirteen Altars, on each
of which one Chalice, but on the high Altar two Chalices, two pair of Flaggons,
so many Candlesticks, one Cross, three Censers, one for daily use, the other
two for solemn Feasts, a Cibory for the Host; let there be no Gold nor Silver
in the Covent, except where the Holy Relics are kept; Let every one have her
office or service Book, and as many other books as they will, for good arts;
Let each Altar have two Altar-cloths; Let no Sisters be admitted under
eighteen, nor Priest or Brother under five and twenty years of age; Let the
Sisters employ their time in devotion, laboring with their hands, and about
their own affairs, after the manner of Christ and his Mother; Let rich and poor
have the same measure of meat and drink; and let not any afflict their body too
much; for not their own correction, but Gods mercy, must save them Let the
sisters confess at the lattess of the windows, where they may be heard, but
not seen; but in receiving the Eucharist, they may be heard and seen. But they
must do nothing without the leave of the Abbatesse, and some witnesses, except
in time of confession. Priests must not enter the Nunnery, except to give the
Sacrament in the agony of death, and that with some witnesses; all the Priests
and Brothers may enter to perform Funeral obsequies. The Bishop of the
Diocese must be the Father and Visitor of the Monasteries and Nunneries; the
Prince of the Territory shall be the Protector, and the Pope the faithful
Guardian; without whose will no Covent shall be made. Let there be a hole like
a grave still open in the Covent, that the sisters may pray every day there
with the Abbatesse (taking up a little dust between her fingers) that God who
preserved Christ's body from the corruption of the grave, would also preserve
both their bodies and souls from the corruption of sin. Let there be a Beer or
Coffin at the Church-door with some earth, that all comers in may remember
they are dust, and to dust shall return: to the observers of this rule Christ
promises his aid, who revealed himself to Saint Briget, and counsels her to
convey it to the Pope, to be confirmed. So goes the story, as it is set down
by Hospinian, who translated it out of the German into the Latin tongue: See
Antoninus, Balaeus, Nauclerus, Trithemius, Crantzius, etc.
this order came into England An. 1414. and was placed at Richmond. There be
few of these elsewhere, except in Sweden.

Q. 21. What was the Order of S. Katherine, and of S. Iustina?

A. Katherine born at Senae in Tuscany, Saint Katherine of Senae.
in her Childhood vowed Virginity; and in a dream saw Dominick with a Lilly in
his hand, and other religion-founders, wishing her to profess some of their
orders; she embraced that of Dominick, in which she was so strict that she
abhorred the smell of flesh, drunk only water, and used no other cheer but
bread and raw herbs. She lay upon boards in her clothes. She girt her self so
close with an Iron Chain, that it cut her skin; she used to watch whole nights
together, and scarce slept half an hour in two days, in imitation of S.
Domimick. She used to chastise her self three times every day with that Iron
Chain, for an hour and half at a time, so that the blood run from her shoulders
to her feet. One chastisement was for her self, the other for the dead, and the
third for those that were alive in the world. Many strange stories are recorded
of her, as that Christ appeared and married himself to her with a Ring; that he
opened her side, took out her old heart, and put a new one instead of the
former; that he clothed her with a bloody colored garment, drawn out of the
wound in his side; Nuns of Saint Katharine.
so that she never felt any cold afterward: and diverse other tales to this
purpose Some say this order began Anno 1372. others, Anno 1455. Monks of Saint
Iustina.
The Nuns of this order wear a white garment, and over it a black Veil, with a
head-covering of the same color. The order of Saint Iustina, was instituted by
Ludevicus Barbus, See Frank in Chron. Polyd. Virg. Hospinian, Antoninus, Franc.
Modius, etc,
a Venetian, Anno 1409. after the ancient discipline of Benedict. This rule was
enlarged by Eugenius the fourth, and confirmed by John 24. The Monks of this
order are careful not to eat out of the Covent with seculars, and to wash the
feet of strangers.

Q. 22. What were the Eremites of Saint Hierom, of Saint Savior, the Albati,
Fratricelli, Turlupini, and Montolivetenses?

A. Saint Hieroms Eremites in Spain, Eremites of S. Hierom.
under Saint Austins rule was instituted about the year 1366. in Vibinum a City
of Vmbria in Italy, in the time of Pope Gregory the nineth, and was confirmed
by Gregory the twelfth. Of this order there are in Italy five and twenty
Covents. They differ in their habit, and other things, little or nothing from
the other Monks of Saint Hierom. Canons of Saint Savior.
The Canons of Saint Savior were instituted also in Italy, near Senae, in a
place called Scopetum, whence they are named Scopeti^i. They follow Saint
Austins rule. Their Author was one Franch of Bononia, Anno 1366. in the time of
Pope Urban the the fifth, and were confirmed by his successor, Gregory the
eleventh, Anno 1370. They wear a white cloak, with a white hood above a white
linen gown Albati were so called from the white linen they wore; Albati.
these in the time of Pope Boniface the nineth, Anno 1399. came down from the
Alps into Luc^, Flaminia, Hetruria, Fisa, and other places of Italy, having
for their guide a Priest clothed in white, and carrying in his hand the
Crucifix: he pretended so much zeal and religion, that he was held a Saint.
These people increased to such a vast body, that Boniface the nineth grew
jealous their Priest aimed at the Popedom; therefore sent out some armed men
against them, apprehended their Priest, and put him to death; upon which the
whole multitude fled, every man returning to his house. These made profession
of sorrow, weeping for the sins and calamities of those times; they eat
together in the Highways, and slept all promiscuously together like beasts:
they are by most reckoned among the Heretics, and not religious orders, and so
are the Fratricells, or Beghardi, who would be counted the third order of
Franciscans; Fratricelli.
they were called Fratricella, Brothers of the Cells and Caves where they
dwelt. Their Women were named Beghinae, and Beguttae. These sprung up Anno
1298. they went with their faces covered, and their heads hanging down; their
lives were ^^agirious, and their opinions heretical, as we have already showed
among the Heresies; therefore they are condemned by Boniface the eight, Clemens
the fifth, and John the twenty second: yet Gregory the eleventh, and Eugenius
the forth, defended such of them, against whose life and faith, no just
exceptions could be taken: Gregory about the year 1378. Eugenius Anno 1431. The
Turlupini also, Turlupini.
though they would have been thought a religious order, were heretical in their
Teners, and therefore condemned and burned, Anno 1372. Montolivetenses, or
Monks of Mount Olivet, Monks of Mount Olivet.
began Anno 1407. when the Church was divided between three Popes. In this
distracted time many of Seen betook themselves to the next Hill, which they
called Mount Olivet, and clothed themselves in white, professing St. Bennets
rule. See Frank, Sabellicus, and the other Authors already named.
They were confirmed by Pope Gregory the twelfth. There were others of the same
name loug before these but Boniface the eighth, Anno 1300. put them down, and
executed their Author at Viterbium; he only wore a linen cloth about his wast,
the rest of his body naked.

Q. 23. What were the Canons of Saint George, the Mendicants of Saint Hierom,
the Canons of Lateran, Order of the Holy Ghost, of Saint Ambrese ad Nemus, and
of the Minims of Jesu Maria?

A. The Canons Regular of Saint George, Canons Regular of Saint George.
called also Apostolici, were instituted by Laurence Justinian, Patriarch of
Venice, Anno 1407. they were confirmed by Gregory the twelfth. They wear a
linen surplesse over their garments, and a black hood; but out of the Cloister
they wear a black cloak, with a black hat. There be two orders more of this
name; the one wear white, the other blew; they abstain from flesh, except in
their sickness and are not tied by vow to their profession. Mendicants of
Saint Hierom.
The Mendicants of Saint Hierom were iustituted by Carolus Florentinus, Anno
1407. and are confirmed by Gregory the twelfth. They profess Saint Austins
rule; they wear dark-colored clothes, and over their coat a pleated cloak
divided, they use a leathern girdle, Canons of Lateran.
and wooden shoes. The Canons of Lateran make Saint Austin their Author; these
were expulsed, Saint John Lateran, by Pope Calixtus, after they had been seated
there by Eugeuius the fourth, who expolled the Seculars thence; but Paul the
second, called back the Regulars, and by degrees expelled the Seculars. Their
cloak, Scapulars, and hood are black. The order of the Holy Ghost was
instituted near Venice by Gabriel of Sp^letum, Monks of the order of the Holy
Ghost.
Anno 1407. they use the same habit that the Canons Regular do wear. The
Brothers of Saint Ambrose ad Nemus, were instituted at Milan, and confirmed, Of
Saint Ambrose ad Nemus.
Anno 1433. They wear dark-colored clothes, and profess Saint Austins rule*
The Minimi of Jesus Maria, Monks or Minimi of Jesus Maria.
were instituted by one Francis Paula, a Cicilian, Anno 1471. he made three
rules; one for the brothers, another for the Sisters, and the third for both
Sexes called Tertiarii. He would have the Brothers to be called Minimi, and the
Sisters Minimae, to teach them humility. They were enjoined to keep the Ten
Commandments, to observe the Church Laws, to obey the Pope, and to persevere
in their Vows of Chastity. See Surius Tom. 2. de vit. Sanct. with the other
Authors already named.
Poverty, Obedience, and Fasting. This order was allowed by Julius the second,
Innoce^^ the eighth, Sixtus the fourth, Alexander the sixth, and Leo the tenth.
They abstain altogether from flesh, they wear only corse linen, and wander up
an^ down bare-headed, and bare-foote.

Q. 24. What Orders of Knighthood were there erecte^ in Christendom after the
year 1400?

A. The Knights of the Annunciation of Mary by Amadeus the fifth, Knights of
the Annunciation.
Earl of Savoy, and first Duke thereof, Anno 1420. of this order we have
already spoken. The ord^^ of Maurician Knights was instituted by Amadeus the
seventh, Of St. Maurice,
Anno 1490. to the honor of Saint Maurice, whose Ring was delivered to Peter
Earl of Savoy, that by him it might be conveyed to his successors, as a badge
of their right to, and soveraignity over that Country. Of the Golden Fleece.
The Knights of the Golden Fleece were instituted by Philip the good Duke of
Burgundy, and Father to Charles, whom the Switzers defeated and flew. This
Philip on his wedding day, with Isabel, the King of Portugals daughter, erected
this order, Anno 1429. which he called by the name of the Golden Fleece, in
memory of Jason, and those other worthies, who ventured their lives for that
Golden Fleece, to encourage Christians to venture their lives like courageous
Argonautes, for the defense and honor of the Catholic Church. There were
appointed thirty one Knights of this order; the chief whereof was the Duke of
Burgundy: now the Kings of Spain are chief, in right of that Dukedom. Of these
Knights we have spoken already in our History of the world; in the impression
by me owned as before is mentioned. The Knights of the Moon were instituted by
Reiner, Of the Moon.
Duke of Anjou, when he obtained the Kingdom of Sieily, Anno 1464. These
Knights wore a silver half Moon on their arm, and were bound to defend one
another in all dangers; and never to fall at variance among themselves. The
Knights of Saint Michael the Archangel were instituted by Lewis the French
King, Of St. Michael.
Anno 1469. These wear a Golden Chain, at which hanged the image of Saint
Michael treading on the infernal Dragon. This picture his Father Charles the
seventh wore in his banners; and it is worn by his posterity in memory of
Saint Michael, who was seen in the battle at the bridge of Orleans, fighting
against the English, whom he forced to raise their siedge. The King appointed
there should be of this order 36. Knights, whereof himself should be the first.
They are tied to hear Mass every day. Of Saint Stephen.
The Knights of Saint Stephen were instituted by Cosmo, Dake of Florence, and
confirmed by Pope Pius the fourth, Anno 1561. in imitation of the Knights of
Malta. They differ from the Ioannites, that instead of a white, they wear a red
Cross set in Gold. They may also marry once, which the Ioannites could not do.
Their seat is in Ilua an Island in the Ligustick Sea. They are called Saint
Stephens Knights, not from Stephen the first Martyr, but from Stephen Bishop of
Florence, who was Canonised, or from Pope Stephen. The Knights of the holy
Spirit were instituted by Henry the French King, Of the Holy Spirit.
Anno 1579. Of the Knights of Saint George in England, or of the Garter,
instituted by King Edward the third, Anno 1351. and of the Knights of the Star,
set up by King John the first of France, in memory of that Star which appeared
at Christ's Nativity; the Knights also of Jesus Christ in Portugal, and of the
Knights of Alcanthara in Castile, we have already spoken. He that wll see more,
let him read Panuinius in Chron. Sabellicus, Enne. 9. Crantzius L. 9. Frank in
Chron. Polyd. L. 7. Volaterran L. 2^. Girard. Hist. L. 15. Balaus Cent. 5.
Heuterus L. 4. re^. Burgund. Tilius, Hist. Franc. Genebrard in Chron. Hospinian
de orig. Monach. and the continuation of Sir Walter Raleighs History of the
World, in the edition by we owned; to be sold by I. S. at the Greyhound in
Little Britain London, etc.

The Contents of the Eleventh Section.
Of Religions Orders and opinions from the year 1500. till this day. 2. The
order of Jesuits. 3. Of their general rules. 4. Of their other rules. 5. Of
their rules for Provests of houses, Rectors of Colleges, etc. 6. Of their
rules for Travelers, Ministers, Admonitors, etc. 7. Of their privileges
granted by Popes. 8. Of other Orders in the Church of Rome. 9. How Abbots are
consecrated at this time. 10. Wherein the Christian Orders of Knighthood
differ. 11. Of other Orders of Knighthood besides the French. 12. of the
Orders of Knighthood in Germany, Hungary, Bohemia, Poland, etc. 13. The Orders
of Knighthood in Italy. 14. Of the Christian Military Orders in the East.

SECT. XI.
Quest. 1. WHat Religious Orders, and opinions in Religion are there sprung up
in these latter times, that is, from the year 1500. till this day in the
Christian World?

A. In the year 1500. started up a new order, Order of poor Pilgrims.
called Poor Pilgrims; these came out of Italy, into Germany bare-foote, and
bare-headed; some covered their bodies with linen, others with gray cloth,
carrying every one in his hand a wooden Cross, but without scrip or bag, staff
or money; drinking neither Wine nor Beer; feeding all the week, except on
Sundays, upon Herbs and Roots sprinkled with salt: they abstained altogether
from Eggs, Butter, Milk, Cheese, Fish, and Flesh. In the Church they stretch
out their arms in manner of a Cross, and praying fell flat on the ground. They
stayed not above four and twenty hours in any place, they went by couples
begging from door to door. Among them were diverse Priests, Deacons, and
Subdeacons: this penance they undertook voluntarily, some for three years,
others for five or seven, as they pleased, and at the end of their years
returned home, and betook themselves again to their callings: they excluded
from their Pilgrimage only Monks and Women. About six years after, was
instituted the order of Indians, Of Indians.
under Pope Julius the second, and Maximilian the first Emperor: These were of
the Carmalite race; and were called Indians, as I suppose from their intention
to convert the Indians then discovered; they wore black cloaks, and over them
white gowns, as appears by that verse of Franc. Modius: Qui tegimus pura
pallia pulla ^oga. Under Pope Clement the seventh was instituted the order of
the society of Divine love; Of Divine love or Theatini.
these were devout people, who met in retired places, remote from the company
of the vulgar: here they prayed, sung, administered the Sacraments, and did
other acts of devotion; they were called also Theatini, from Theatinu^^; the
Bishopric of which place was rejected by John Peter Carrafa, that he might the
more freely enjoy that devout life, and give himself the more seriously to
contemplate divine mysteries, and to regain the honor of the Clergy, so much
degenerated from their former integrity. He refused also the Bishopric of
Brundus^um, which Charles the fifth would have conferred upon him; yet
afterward he was content to change his name from John Peter to Paul the fourth,
and to accept the Popedom. Of this society also were Caietan the Apostolical
Proton^tarie, Boniface a noble man of Piemont, and one Paul a Roman. In the
year 1537. was instituted the order of Paulini, Paulini.
by a certain Countess called Gastalia at Mantua, hence her disciples were
named Gastalini. The Brothers and Sisters of this Sect were by their own
strength thus to came their flesh; they were to lie two and two together in one
bed, but with a Cross laid between the man and the woman, that they might not
touch one the other. See Hospini^n, Franc. Modius, Nauclerus, and others.
This course they were to use so long, till they had quite subdued the tickling
of the flesh. But this order lasted not long; for the inconveniences found in
it occasioned the extirpation thereof.

Q. 2. What is the order of the Jesuits?

A. This order which is called the Society of Jesus, Of Jesuits:
(because they take upon them to advance the Name, Doctrine, and Honor of
Jesus more then other orders heretofore,) was instituted about the year 1540.
by Ignatius Loyola of Cantabria, who being at first a Soldier, Ignatius Loyola.
and receiving some wounds in the French War, of which he lay sick above a
year, resolved upon recovery of his health, to renounce the world, and wholly
to addict himself to the advancing of the name of Jesus; for this cause being
^ix and twenty years of age, he forsakes all, and travels to Jerusalem; thence
(having done his devotion to the holy Sepul^hre) returns into Spain, where at
Complutum and Salamantica, he gives himself to study; in the interim he took
upon him to preach mortification, both by his Doctrine and mean habit, though
as yet he was furnished neither with sufficent learning, nor was he called;
wherefore he was imprisoned, and examined by the Inquisitors, and being found
zealous for the Roman faith, was dismissed, and thence goes to Paris, where he
studied ten years in great poverty and weakness of body, and was at last made
Master of Arts. In the year 1536. he returns to Spain with ten more of his
profession, and from thence to Rome, to have leave of the Pope to travel to
Jerusalem; but finding the peace broken between the Turk and Venetian, they go
to Venice, and their did dress the wounds and sores of poor people in
Hospitals. Seven of these ten companions of Ignatius took the Priesthood upon
them, and preached up and down the territories of Venice; having neither
temporal nor ecclesiastical means to sustain them. After this they all go to
Rome, where they are hated and molested by the Clergy, yet their society
increased daily, and procured a confirmation of their order from Pope Paul the
third, which since was ratified by Julius the third, Paul the fourth, Pius the
fourth, and the Council of Trent. At first they were not to have above 60. of
their society; but afterward the Pope perceiving how needful this order was to
the decaying Roman Religion, permitted all that were fit to enter into the
same. They have their chief or General, their coadjutors in spiritual things,
such are their Priests, and professors of Divinity, Philosophy, and inferior
Arts: Their coadjutors in temporals, who look to their clothing, diet, and
domestic affairs; their Scholars and Novices are maintained, least this order
or society might fail, who are bound to obey their Superiors without doubting
or inquiring into the nature of the thing enjoined them. This order differs
from others, in that besides the three ordinary Vows of Chastity, Poverty, and
Obedience, they bind themselves to the Pope, in undertaking cheerfully,
readily, and without charging him, any journey ^he shall command for
propagating the Roman faith: the title also of Professor among them is more
honorable then of Priest; for one may be a Priest many years, before he be
admitted Professor. The Jesuits, instead of a hood, wear a Philosophical
cloak, See Christianus Franken in Colloq. Jesuit. Surius, Hospinian, etc.
that is long and black; their cap resembling a cross is called Bareta; this
they do not wear abroad; their cassocks they call Solannas, which they tie with
Silk girdles; And they spread so fast over the world, that above sixty years
ago they had 256. Colleges.

Q. 3. What be the general rules to which the Jesuits are tied?

A. To examine their conscience twice daily; To be diligent in prayer,
Jesuits, their rules.
meditation, and reading; To be daily at divine service, at the times appointed
to confess their sins; To renew their Vows every year twice; To be abstinent
on Fridays, not to preach without the Superiors leave; nor to keep money by
them, nor to have any thing in proper; To read no Books without leave, nor to
meddle with any thing that is not theirs; To learn the language of the Country
where they live; not to lock their Chests, or Chamber doors; Not to sleep in
the night with the window open, or naked, or to go out of their chamber without
their clothes; Not to teach or learn without the Superiors leave; Not to drink
between meals, or to eat abroad without leave, or to take Physic, or to
consult with the Physician, till they be permitted by the superior; To harken
to the bell when it rings; To keep their beds neat, and chambers clean; To
aquaint the Superior, when any is grievously tempted; To be obedient, humble,
and reverent in uncovering the head to their Superior^, not to complain of one
superior to another; To be silent, or else to speak briefly, with moderation
and submission; To avoid contentions, contradictions, or speaking evil of one
another native Country; let him only reprove and command who is authorized so
to do. Let none enter into another man's place, office, or chamber, without
leave; whilst two are in one chamber, let the door stand open; Let no man mock
another; Let no man at table put off his hat, except to his superior; No talk
with strangers, or commerce by letters without leave; Let no man report idle
rumors, nor divulge abroad what is done at home. None without leave may write
any thing of instruction or consolation, nor meddle at all with secular
affairs. Every one ought to instruct and exhort his Brother to confess; Let
none go abroad without leave, and he must show the cause of his going abroad,
and what effect it took, when he does return; he must also write down his name,
and aquaint the Porter whither he goes, and must return before night. That
when any travelleth he shall lodge no where but in a Jesuits College, if
there be any in that place; and shall be as obedient to the Superior there, as
to his own. Let every one have these rules by him, that he may read, or hear
them read, once every month; but the Coadjutors must read their rules every
week. They have also their Constitutions, wherein is showed that the end of
their Society is to do good to their own souls, and the souls of their
neighbors, and that therefore they are bound to travel to and fro in the
world; to confess their sins to the Priest every sixth month, and then to
receive the Body of Christ; to cast off all inordinate affections of Kindred,
Friends, and worldly things, to deny themselves, to take up the Cross of
Christ, and to follow him; to study humility, to aim at perfection and all
other virtues, chiefly charity; to have a special care of the inward man; to
embrace poverty with cheerfulness, to give freely of their spiritual things,
as they have received freely; to study purity and chastity, and to be very
vigilant over their senses, chiefly over the eyes and tongue. To be temperate,
modest, decent and devout in all things, chiefly at table. To labor diligently
for obedience, and to refuse nothing that the superior shall command. In
confession to conceal nothing from the Ghostly Father. To study unity and
conformity in judgments, and affections. To avoid idleness and secular
affairs. To be careful to preserve health, and to avoid all excess that may
impare it, Of these passages see the Jesuits rules printed together in one
Book at Lions, Anno 1607.
as too much watching, fasting, laboring, or any other outward penance, and
in sickness to to be humble, patient, and devout. To desire the Superior once
every year that he would enjoin them some penance for their failings in the
observation of their rules and constitutions, which ought to be heard or read,
every month.

Q. 4. What other rules have they besides these common rules and constitutions?

A. They have rules for every particular officer amongst them, Jesuits, their
constitutions and rules for Provincials.
As the Provincials rule is to use diligence, fidelity, mildness, bounty
tempered with severity in his government, to alter or add nothing in the rules
and customs of the Province, without the consent of the General; in his
absence or sickness, he may name (if the General do not) a Subprovincial; he
must always have with him four Counselors, with whom he may advise in matters
of weight. He has power to choose diverse Officers, such as Masters of the
Novices, the, Governors in spiritual things, Confessors, Preachers, and
Readers, etc. He may dispense in diverse things, and admit such as he thinks fit
for probation; and may dismiss also in some cases, if the General hinder not:
none must be admitted, who have forsaken the society, or dismissed, without a
new examination and probation; he is to take care of the Masters and teachers
in Schools and Colleges, what proficiency there is, what books are read, who
are to study Divinity, and the learned tongues, that no Stageplayes be acted,
but in Latin, and such as are modest; etc. He must confer no degrees in
Divinity or Philosophy without the Generals leave. The degree or title of
Master and Doctor, must not be used among them. He may choose Coadjutors in
spiritual and temporal affairs. He must look to the Edifices, Revenues, and
Lands of the society within his Province; to avoid Suits in Law, yet to
maintain their rights by Law, if need be; to look to all expenses and accounts,
to avoid running in debt, and to have a care of the wardrob, and all the
Utensils; that if any Lands or Goods be given to the society, the General be
acquainted therewith, and some share thereof be given to the poor of that
place, where the Goods or Lands are. He is to be obedient, faithful, and
reverent to his General; to call Provincial assemblies at fit times, and to
help other Provinces when need requires. To see that Masses be had, and
Sacraments administered according to the custom of the Roman Church; That
Preachers and Confessors do their duties; That none be made Confessors, chiefly
to women, but such as are well struck in years; That in time of infection he
appoint such as may look to the sick; That he depart not out of his Province
without the Generals leave; nor the Provost or Rector from his House, or
College without leave from the Provincial. That he be careful what laborers
he sends abroad into the Lords Vineyard, that he give them full instruction;
that they travel on foot, rather then ride. He must visit every place within
his Province once a year, and first the Church, the place where the Eucharist is
keept, the holy Oil, Of these passages see more fully in the forenamed Book.
the Relics, Altars, Seats of the Confessors, etc. then the persons, with
whom he must deal prudently: and lastly, the Superior of the House or College.

Q. 5 What rules have they for the Provosts of Houses, Rectors of Colleges,
Masters of Novices, and Counselors, etc

A. Jesuits, their rules for Provosts.
The Provost is bound to observe the common and particular rules; as also, all
customs approved by the General or Provincial; to be careful of his
Underofficers, and Confessors; to impose ordinary penance, such as public
reproof, to eat under the table, to kiss the feet of others, to pray in the
refectory, to impose fasting, etc. He must have a Book, in which he must record
what concerns the good of his house. He must see that all the rules and
constitutions of the house be duly observed. That confessions be made at the
appointed times. That Scholars and Coadjutors not formed, renew their Vows
twice a year. That every other Friday he make an exhortation to obedience,
penance, patience, charity, humility, and other virtues. That he carry himself
sweetly and wisely to his inferiors, moderate in reproving and punishing; to
send (if occasion be) one who man beg alms from door to door, for the
Hospital, or who may accompany the Caterer, or who may preach in the streets.
He must chiefly preserve love and unity in his house, and must read all
Letters, that are either sent to, or from any under his charge, and must suffer
none to have a seal, without the Provincials leave; let there be no arms nor
musical instruments, nor wanton Books, nor idle recreations within his house.
The Provost may, if need be, preach and hear confessions, but must not suffer
Priests of the society to preach, and hear the Nuns confessions, except upon
extroardinary occasion. He must take care that all spiritual exercises be duly
performed, and divine service every day. Let there be seven hours allotted for
sleep; and eight hours between dinner and supper. Let the table be blessed, and
thanks given according to the Roman Breviary; Let an hour be allowed for
recreation after dinner and supper, and on Friday after evening collation half
an hour, Let there be conferences touching cases: of conscience held twice a
week, at which all the Priests should be present. Let there be an account taken
every month of what is received and expended in the house. Special care must
be had of those that labor in the Lords Vineyard, that they may not want. If
any thing of moment is to be done in the house, let the Provincial be
acquainted therewith. Let no man keep a horse, except upon urgent occasion, and
with the Generals leave. Women must not be permitted to enter into the house.
Lands given by Will must be sold for the use of the society, but not without
the Generals leave. Let no man walk abroad without a companion; Their rules for
Rectors of Colleges and the Examiner.
let travelers of the Society be entertained kindly, etc. The Rectors of
Colleges also have their rules, which are in a manner the same with those of
the Provosts. Which rules, and constitutions, must be read twice or thrice a
year in the Refectory. The examiner also of those that desire admission, has
his rules; he must be a man skilful and discreet, who must signify to his
Superior how he finds the party affected and qualified. If unfit, he must be
cheerfully dismissed; If fit, he must ask him if he is resolved to forsake the
world? and why? what induced him to be of this Society: If he be in debt, or
subject to any infirmity; what is his age, his country, his parents, and their
condition; if he be born in marriage, of Christian parents, or of Heretics; if
he be a Seholar, where, and how long he has studied; if he will be a
Coadjutor, and content with Martha's lot? Then he must be well instructed in
the constitutions and rules of the Society. Their rules for Masters of the
Novices.
The Master of the Novices by his rules is tied to be courteous and loving to
his Novices, to help, comfort, and instruct them upon all occasions: He has
power in some cases to enjoin penance on them, and in some cases to absolve
them. He must also be well exercised in Basils Rules, Gregory's Morals; Austins
Confessions and Meditations, in Bernard, Bonaventure, Cassian, Dorotheus his
Homilies, Caesarius, Ep^raim, Huge, and Richard de S. Victore, Vmbertus de
Eruditione Religiosorum, Innocentius of contempt of the world, Thomas de Kempis
of the imitation of Christ, and such like Books; for Histories he must read
Gregory's Dialogues, Gregory Turonensis of the glory of Confessors, and life of
Saint Martin, Eusebius his Ecclesiastic History, Sulpitius of Saint Martins
life, the select lives of the Fathers, the lives of Lippoman, and Surius, Pet.
Damianus, Pet. Cluniacensis of Miracles, the Indian Letters, and the life of
Ignatius. The Probationer for the first three weeks is to be used as a guest:
in which time he is to be instructed in the rules and constitutions of the
house: Then must be examined, and must promise that in a years space after his
entrance he shall part with all his estate: If he be a Scholar, he must read
some lectures; if no Scholar, he shall do some handiwork. A General confession
must be also made; what he brings with him into the house must be inventoried
in a Book, where the day and year of his entrance, with his Country, must be
registered, and subscribed with his own hand; he must also perform some
spiritual exercises in his second probation, and he must be tried how he can
serve for a month; and then for another month, he must be employed in begging
from door to door, to show how willing he is for the love of Christ, to forsake
all worldly hopes. And for a fourth experiment, fie must be exercised in some
base employment, about the house. After this he shall be employed in teaching
the ignorant and Children the doctrine of Christianity, and must be tried with
mean clothes and diet, and with moderate penance also: and must be
instructed in the practice of devotion and mortification, and modesty, and must
be made a chamber-fellow to one by whom he may profit. He must not speak with
his kindred without leave, and witnesses, and therefore must not be in any such
office as has relation to strangers, as Caterer, Porter, etc. The Novices once
a week must have a day of recreation. The Coadjutors must be taught the rosary.
After all this, the Novices must be asked if they are able to undergo the
burdens of that Society; if they bo, let it be recorded, and then let them
confess to the Priest. In the morning after the ringing of the bell, they must
by their private devotion, prepare themselves for publcik prayer. Half an hour
is allowed them, for dressing up their Beds and Chambers, then they must hear
Mass, and exhortations, which are made to them twice a week for half an hour,
the other half hour they shall repeat and conferr. Then the next day their
Master shall propose them ways to overcome tentations and difficulties, the
rest of the time till examination before dinner, shall be employed in some
exercise. Having recreated themselves an hour after dinner, at the ringing of
the Bell, they shall repair to their Chambers to study; an hour after they
shall repeat something to their Master, and twice a week they shall ask one
another the grounds of Christianity; they must be silent, except in times of
exercise and recreation: before supper, they shall pray, and so before they go
to bed. After two years of probation, they are examined again, touching their
resolution and constancy in that order, and then certain rules of modesty,
Their Counselors rules.
and behavior are prescribed them. The rules for Counselors are, that they be
sincere, judicious, faithful, intelligent, free from partiality, Of these
things see the Jesuits book before named.
considerate, and not rash in giving sentence, to use few words, to submit to
the judgments of the Superior, to divulge nothing without him, to maintain his
dignity, and with submission to give him their best advise, etc.

Q. 6. What rules have they for Travelers, or Pilgrims, for the Minister, for
the Admonitor, and other officers?

A. Their rules for Travelers.
Travelers must ease the wearisomnesse of their journey with spiritual fruits;
every day when they begin their journey, they must say all the Letanies, and
other prayers; their talk must be of heavenly things, that Christ may be their
fellow-traveller. They must beg alms for the love of Christ, who was poor
himself; let them accustom themselves to patience In bearing all injuries; let
the stronger follow the weaker, and not go before; if any fall sick by the way,
let one stay with him, to look carefully to him, to edify in the Lord all such
as give them entertainment. Let them in all places show good examples of
holiness and modesty. If they travel near any House or College of the
Society, they must not beg of strangers without leave from the Superior of that
House or College. Let none travel without his Superiors Letters Parents. Their
Minister or Controllers rules.
The Minister or Controller of the house, is bound by his rules, to be
assistant to the Provost or Rector, to be exact in all the rules, constitutions
and customs of the house, to visit every other day all the offices and
chambers in the House or College. In the Spring and Autumn he must acquaint
the Superior that the diet and clothes of the Society must be changed. Let him
be present with the Physician when he visits the sick; every day he must know
the Superiors mind touching the household affairs; and must acquaint him with
what is fit to be done, and what is amiss. He must see that all things be in
good order, and clean, that the gates be shut every night, to look to the
windows, candles, fires, and linen. Let him see there be no disorders or
quarrelling; he may supply the Superiors place in his absence, and may have an
under-Minister. The Admonitor is tied by his rules, Admonitor his rules.
to put the Superior in mind wherein he fails in his office. But this he
must do with reverence and submission, and with advice of the Counselors, and
must not acquaint others what is done in this case: If the Superior be
incorrigible after diverse warnings, he must acquaint the higher powers: he must
have a seal for those letters which are sent to the Superiors. The Jesuits
have also rules in writing of letters. The Superior or Rector of House or
College, is to write every week to the Provincial, and so is he that is sent
abroad to preach or convert, of all matters of moment concerning their Society;
the Provincials are to write once a month to the General; but the Superiors
and Rectors of Houses and Colleges once in three months; the Provincials must
write once a month to Provosts, Rectors, and those that are sent abroad in
messages; the General shall write to the Provincials once in two months, but
to Rectors once in six months, except there be urgent occasion to write
oftener; jest letters be lost or intercepted, they must be written diverse times:
and the coppies thereof, if they be to the General, must be recorded in a book:
secrets must be written in characters or mystical terms. The letters written at
Rome by the General, shall be read in the Houses and Colleges, and there
safely laid up. He that has the charge of spiritual things, is tied by his
rules, to be careful over the souls committed to him, in admonishing,
instructing, exhorting, and examining. Overseer of the Church, his rules.
The Overseer of the Church, is by his rules bound to acquaint the Provost
every Saturday of the next Feasts and Fasts, that warning may be given on
Sunday in the Refectory at supper-time: He must every Saturday set down in
writting, what Ceremonies are to be used the next week at the high Alter. He
must take care of the Masses and Prayers to be used for their deceased Founders
and Benefactors, as also for the defunct of their Society. He must see that the
Priests be shaved, and that they observe their rules. He must suffer no alms
to be given for hearing of confessions, or saying Divine Service, He must have
special care of the Host, of the Holy Oil, Crosses, Chalices, Relics, etc.
When the Relics are to be showed, two Wax Candles must be lighted. He must
look to the Fabric of the Church, and must admonish the Superior to nominate
preachers for the next day. He must take care over all the Church movables,
and keep an inventory of them. He must also take care of the linen, candles,
prayers, graves. When the holy linen grows old and useless, let it be
burned, and the ashes thereof cast into the holy Pond or Lake; a Catalogue also
must be kept of all the Masses that are to be celebrated by the Priests, and
the prayers to be said by those that are not Priests, yearly, monthly, and
weekly, besides extraordinary times; Priests their rules.
the Priests are tied by their rules, to be devout, holy, and reverent in the
exercise of their Function; to observe all the Roman rites, uniformity, and
decency; to be expert in cases of conscience, and diligent in hearing
confessions; but the Confessor and Penitent must not see one another in time of
confession; and there must be an eye witness present, though not an ea^.
witness, if the Penitent be a Woman Confessions must be heard from the morning
till noon. The Priests may exhort the sick to make their Wills, but not to
assist them in making thereof. Preachers, their rules.
Preachers are tied by their rules to teach sound and wholesome Doctrine, tending
not to curiosity, but edification; to be diligent in reading the Scripture, and
Fathers, to be exemplary in their conversation, to abst^in from reproving
Princes, Bishops, and Magistrates in their Sermons or any Religious Orders; to
forbear any expressions that may, move laughter, or contempt. Let them beware
of Pride, Arrogance, Vainglory, or affected eloquence; let their gestures be
modest and grave, let them chiefly commend the frequent use of confession, of
the Encharist, of good works, of obedience, of the Church Ceremonies, of
penance, prayer, etc, and let not their Sermons be extemporary, or exceed an
hour. They that are sent to preach abroad in remote places, are tied by their
rules to walk on foot, to live upon alms, to lodge in Hospitals, to ask leave
of the Ordinary to preach, to take notice of the most devout people In every
place where they come. They shall not only preach, but likewise conferr,
catechize* pray, administer the Sacraments, visit the sick, resolve doubts of
conscience, compose differences, etc. They must strive to make all men their
friends, and to pray for their persecutors, and bear their burdens patiently.
Let them write every week to their Superiors, what progress they make in their
preaching, and other spiritual exercises; to preach to themselves as well as to
others: and to do nothing but what they are enjoined to by their Superior^s.
Generals Proctor, his Rules.
The Generals Proctor is tied by his rules, to entertain no Suites in Law, if
he can otherwise (...) them: to give an account of all his actions to the
Provost General; to keep in books all accounts of expenses and receivings; to
keep a lift of all Church (...) united to their Colleges; to have a great care
of all the Writings, Popes Bulls, Records; and other papers committed to his
charge, etc. The Proctor of the House is tied by his rules, chiefly to have
care of the Houses, Records, and Money, how it is expended; and to give an
account thereof to his Superiors. The Proctor of the College and House of
probation is tied by the same rules to be careful of the records and moneys; to
keep a good account of what is laid out and received; and to write down all in
his book. Readers, their rules.
He that has charge of the Readers at Table is bound by his rules, to take
care that they have a loud, clear, and distinct voice; that they be perfect in
what they read; that first they read a Chapter in the Bible, except in chief
festivals, for them Homilies must be read concerning the day. Letters also from
the Indies are to be read yearly. In the beginning of every month their
constitutions and common rules, with Ignatius his Epistle of obedience must be
read. In the evening after the Lesson, must be read the Martyrology of the next
day. Leviticus and the Canticles, with some obscure Chapters in the Prophets
are not to be read at all. Eusebius his history, Nicephorus, Gregory's
Dialogues, Ambrose, Austin, Bernard, with such like books, (whereof the
Catalogue is set down in the rules) are to be read. The Superior is to appoint
what is to be read every day. He that has the overseeing of the sick, is tied
by his rules to be careful of them, of their diet, Physician, and all things
else that may concern them; Infirmarius.
that his substitute called by them Infirmarius, have all kind of physical
Druggs, that he acquaint the Superior with the sickness and quality of it;
that every eighth day the sick receive the Encharist, that prayers be made for
him, and all things performed which may tend to his comfort and recovery; if he
die, that the corpse (if without offense) be kept above ground four and twenty
hours, and then decently interred. The Library keeper by his rules, Librarii.
must have still by him I^dex Expurgatorius, and that he keep no prohibited
books, to keep the Library locked, except to those who are permitted to be in
it, to keep the books clean, to write down their Titles, to have a Catalogue
of them, to lend no book without the Superiors leave, etc. The (...) Minister
of the House is to look to the Chambers, ^^^ectory,

Kitchen, Buttery, and other places, that all things be fit and in order. The
Aedituus or Sexton must be subject to the Praefectus or him that has the
charge of the Church, to have a care of the sacred Vestiments, of the Linen,
of the Host and Wine; he must in divine Service light two candles, and at the
elevation of the Host a wax Torch or Taper, and then shall ring the bell; he
must keep clean the Church Plate; before Mass or Sermon let him ring the bell,
and the Virgins salutation bell, in the morning, at noon, and in the evening;
and to ring the passing bell when any of the Society is departing: he must have
a light continually burning before the Host; and there must never be wanting
holy water; he shall deliver to the Praesectus all oblations that he shall
find; he must be careful of the Church-doors, to shut them at noon, and at Sun
set: and whilst they stand open, he, or one for him, must not be wanting: he
must suffer none to walk up and down, to make any noise, and let all things be
kept cleanre The Porter must have a list of all the Domestics names, he must
suffer none to go out without the Superiors leave: all letters he shall
deliver to the Superior; none that returns from the Country, must be let in
till the Superior know it: if Bishops or great men come in, let a Priest
attend them, whilst he acquaints the Superior. Let the keys of the gate be
delivered every night to the Provost or Rector: He must acquaint the Superior
if any poor be at the gate, or if any alms be given there, etc. The keeper of
the Wardrobe must have an Inventory of all the clothes in the house, and
linen thereof, of which he must be careful; he must every Saturday night
furnish each chamber with clean linen, and carry away the soul every Sunday
morning to the Washer. In Summer every fifteenth day he must give out clean
sheets; and in Winter every three weeks, etc. The Steward of the house must be
careful of the Wine, and Water, and Diet of the Society; and to have the
VVine-casks kept clean. He that has the charge of the Hall or Refectory, must
look there be not wanting Water, Towels, Napkins, Tablecloths, which must be
changed once or twice a week; that the due hours of refection be observed by
ringing the Bell; that he have a list of all their names who are in commons;
that the remainders of the meat be reserved for the poor; and that he have the
names of the VVaiters at table every week, and of the Readers, etc. The Cook
has his rules, to be cleanly, frugal, diligent, to touch no meat in cutting or
dividing with his hands, but with a fork; to cut as he is directed by the
Superior; to dress nothing for any particular man, except he be sick; not to
be wastful of the VVood; to keep a list of all things belonging to the Kitchen.
The Excitator who wakeneth the Jesuits in the morning, must go to rest half
an hour before others, that he may rise so much the sooner, ring the bell, and
carry lights to every Chamber: a quarter of an hour after, he must visit each
Chamber again, and if he find some in bed yet, he must tell the Superior:
another quarter of an hour after, he must ring to prayers; he that visits the
Chambers at night, must ring or knock, that every one may examine his
conscience: about a quarter of an hour after, he must ring to bed: and a
quarter after that, he must see if every one be a bed, and the candles put out;
if not, to acquaint the Superior. Each House or College has one who buyeth
all things necessary for the house; his rule is to be diligent and faithful in
buying and employing the money delivered to him, that he may give a just
account thereof. These are the principal rules to which every Officer and
Member of the Society is bound. Some of lesser note I have omitted for
brevities sake, which may be seen at large in the Jesuits own rules, set out
by themselves in one Book at Lions, by their Superiors permission, Anno 1607.

Q. 7. What Privileges have been granted to this Society from the Popes?
Privileges granted by diverse Popes to the Jesuits.


A. Pope Paul the third, gave them power to make what, and how many rules and
constitutions they pleased, toward the advancement of their Society: to admit
as many into their order, as their General shall please, whereas in the
beginning they were stinted to sixty only: he also excommunicates all such as
shall either hinder, or not aid this Society. He gave them also power to
preach, administer the Sacraments, hear confessions, absolve, etc. in any place
where they please, and to have their Coadjutors, both spiritual as Priests, and
Temporal as Cooks, Bakers, Caterers, Butlers, etc. on whom the Jesuits
professed can conferr sacred orders. The Jesuits have this privilege also to
change their General, and he power to send them whither he pleases, and call
them back again without asking leave of the Pope. They may also absolve all
Heretics confessing, and the General may excommunicate, and imprison
Delinquents. They are exempted from the secular power, and from all Taxes and
Tithes; they may carry with them moveable Altars when they travel, and may
disguise themselves into any habit; he that visits a Jesuits House or
College, shall have a plenary indulgence. They have also power to exercise all
Episcopal Functions; namely, to ordain, anoint, exorcise, confirm, consecrate,
dispense, etc. All these privledges were given to them by Paul the third, in
several Bulls. Pope Julius the third, Paul's successor, gave them a privilege
to erect Universities where they pleased, and to conferr what degrees they
will; to dispense also with fasting, and prohibited meats. Pope Pius the
fourth, confirms all the former privileges. Pius the fifth, grants that such
Jesuits as forsake their order by leave from the Pope or General, shall enter
into no other order except the Carthusian; if they apostatise without leave,
they shall be excommunicate; he gives them also power to read publicly in any
University they come to, without asking leave and that none must hinder them,
but all are bound to hear them. Gregory the thirteenth, gave them power to have
their Conse^vators, Judges, and Advocates, and to recite their Canonical hours
without the Quire, and to correct, change interpret, expunge and burn such
books as they dislike, and to be the Popes Library keepers, and exempteth them
from being necessarily present at Processions or Funerals. Of all their
privileges see the Popes Bulls and Apostolical Letters, printed at Rome by
their Superiors leave, in the Jesuits College Anno 1568.
By reason of these and other privileges granted to this order; besides their
own industry, they grew so numerous in the space of 75. years, that they had
Anno 1608. as Ribadene^a shows, 293. Colleges, besides 123. Houses, and of
their Society were reckoned 10581. Out of their Colleges they raise a reven^e
of Twenty hundred thousand Crowns yearly.

Q. 8. Are there no other orders in the Church of Rome?

A. There are diverse more, but of less note, whose original is uncertain, both
in respect of their Author and time, Franciscans, subdivided into diverse Orders.
besides there be many subdivisions of one and the same order, as the
Franciscans are subdivided into Observantes, C^nventuales, Minimi, Capuci^l,
Collectanei whose charge was to receive the money that is given them.
Observantes.
Amadeani, Reformati de Evangelio; Chiacini cum barba, de Portiuncula, Paulini,
Bosiani, Gaudentes, de Augustinis with their open shoes, Servientes. All these
differ little except in some small matters. There be also some Monks called
Ambrosiani, Ambrosiani,
who wear red cloaks over white coats. Others are called Capellani, Capellani.
whose garments are partly black, and partly blew. Chal^meriani wear a white
cross upon a white cloak. Cellarii.
Cellarii, from their Cells are so called, and Brothers of mercy from visiting
the sick, and carrying the dead to the grave; in the inside they wear black
linen, on the outside a sooty color garment: Clavigeri wear upon a black
cowle two keys, Clavigeri.
intimating by this, that they have power to open and shut Heaven. They make
Saint Peter the Author of their order. Cruciferi.
Cruciferi, these bow their bodies and heads as they walk, go barefoot, and
wear a white cloak girt with a rope, they carry always in their hands a little
wooden cross. The Brothers of the Cross wear a black cloak without a hood,
and bear the Cross before their breast. For^^cifer^;
For^^ciferi, so called from wear^ng a pair of sheers on their cloak, by which
they show that they clip off all carnal lusts, as it were with a pair of
sheers. They wear a black cloak and hood, these we may call Sheet-Brothers. The
Brothers of Helen, brag that they were instituted by Helen, Constantin's
Mother, after she had found out the Cross; they wear a white garment, and on
it a yellow Cross, Hospitalarii, Hospitalarii,
so called from looking to Hospitals, they wear black; they differ from the
former of this name, and so do the Cruciferi. The Brothers of Saint James wear
a fandy-coloured garment, and shells hanging at it; they make Saint James their
Patron. The Order of Ignorance: These Monks think it man's chief happiness to
know nothing. This order of Ignorance is now the greatest in the world, and is
like to swallow up all the Orders and Degrees of Learning, as Pharao's lean
Kine did devour the fat. So much the more happy will this Order be, when it is
fed with Tithes and Colleges. There is an order of Ioannites differing from
the former; these wear a read garment to represent Christ's Blood, and on the
breast thereof is woven a Chalice, to show that in his Blood our sins are
washed; they also hold a Book still in their hand. The order of the Valley of
Iosaphat goes in a Purple ^arment; these appoint Judges to decide
controversies of marriage. The order of Joseph was erected in honor of Mary's
supposed Husband: These wear ash-colored clothes, and a white hood. The order
of Lazarus or Magdalen wear a green cross upon a black cloak with a hood:
there be two sorts of them, some contemplative, who are black within, and white
without, using ordinary food, the others wear a brown or ^awny color, and are
active, their food is only herbs and roots. The order of Nuns of Saint Mary de
december virtutibus, that is, Of the ten virtues, which consist only in repeating
the Ave Mary ten times: They wear a black Veil, a white Coat, a red Scapular,
and an ash-colored cloak. There be two other orders of Saint Mary, the one
wears a white coat, and a black cloak like Carmelites, the other are all white;
there is also the order of Mary's Conception. The order called Reclusi, shut
themselves up between two walls, or in narrow cells, whence they never go out
so long as they live. The order of Saint Ruffus, instituted by him; these go
like the Canon Regulars, wearing a Scapular over a linen Surplesse, and a
black colored hood. There is an order of free Nums, who maintain themselves,
and may marry when they will. The order of Speculari^ are so called from their
looking glasses which they always carry; their inward garment is black, their
outward white: They wear on their breast a black cross. Among the Romans it
was counted an Effeminate trick for men to carry about a Looking glass; Of
which see Seb. Frank in Chron. Franc. Modius, Heuterus de reb. Burgaund.
Hospinian, etc.
therefore Otho is mocked by Juvenal* who speaking of the Looking glass, calls
it, Pathic^ge^t amen Othonis. The order of the S^ellati, wore Stars on their
clothes; some of them have black gowns and black hoods, some have cloaks
without hoods. Some other perty orders there are of small account.

Q. 9. How are the Abboots consecrated at this time?

A. If the Abbot be not a Monk, Abbots, how consecrated.
he is thus consecrated: On the consecration day, which is some Festival, or
the Lords day, both the Bishop, and the Abbot elect, confess, and fast the day
before. In the Church two Chapels are trimmed up, me bigger for the Bishop,
the lesser for the Abbot. On the Altar of the greater Chapel, stands a Cross
and four Candlesticks. At the foot of the Altar the ground is covered with
Turkey Carpets, or Tapestry: there is also in the Chapel a Table placed for
the Bishop, on which is clean Linen, two Candlesticks, Basins with Towels, the
Holy Water pot, with the As^ersory, the Censer, etc. Likewise the Bishops
Masse-Ornaments; there be also three Chaites, one ^or the Elect Abbot, the
other two for the two assistant Abbo^s. The Bishop has three Chaplains. In
the lesser Chapel for the Abbot, is an Altar with the Cross, and two
Candlesticks, with the Pontifical and Missal; there is also a Table covered
with clean Linen, with Basins, and two Candlesticks, and the Ring which is to
be consecrated, etc. The Bishop having prayed at the Altar, ascends his Chair
of State over against the Altar, with his Mitre on his head; the Elect Abbot
sits in his ordinary clothes, between two ^^tred Abbots his assistants; then
the Elect boweth himself to the Bishop, who rises, takes off his Mytre, and
says some prayers: after this the Bishop without his Mytre blesses the Elects
new clothes, and besprinkles them with holy water, then he sits down, puts on
his Mytre, and takes off the Elects secular garment; saying, The Lord take off
from thee the old man, etc. and then clothes him in a Monastical habit; saying,
The Lord cloth thee with the new man, etc. This done the Bishop laying aside
his Mytre, rises and prays, and sits down again. Then the Elect rises,
and beseeching him with bended knees, and his hands on his breast, that he
would receive him, the Bishop rises and prays over him; then the Elect being
now made a Monk, promises Canonical obedience to the Bishop and his
successors, fidelity to the Covent, continency and renunciation to his own
Estate; with this the Bishop receives him into the society of the Monks, and
withal into the kiss of peace. After this the Elect Abbot goes into his
Chapel, where he is habited like a Priest, and thence brought between the two
Abbots assistants to the Bishop, who uncovering their heads, bow to him, and
the elder of the two presents him to the Bishop, desiring he would ordain him
Abbot of such a Monastery, according to the Apostolical authority committed to
him. Then the Popes Mandate is read; the Elect swears upon the Gospel, the
Bishop asks if he will be faithful over the flock committed to him, if he
will reform his life, be sober, humble, chaste, and patient; if he will be
subject, obedient, and reverent to the Pope and his successors; if he answers
I Will, then the Bishop prays that God will keep and strengthen him; if the
Abbot be not exempted from Episcopal Jurisdiction, he is to promise obedience
to the Diocesan and his successors. This done, the Elect kisseth the Bishops
hand, who standing before tht Altar makes confession, kisseth the Gospel and
the Altar, which he does also incense, and says Mass. After this the Elect
goes to his Chapel where he is trimmed in the Abbots ornaments; and is
brought again before the Bishop, to whom he boweth himself, and then the
Music begins: the Bishop after this takes the Pastoral staff, blesses it and
prays for the Elect Abbot, who all the while is on his knees, then the Bishop
lays both his hands on the Abbots head, prays, and gives to him the rule
of the order, whereof he is to be head, with an exhortation to be careful over
them. After the Bishop has blessed the Staff, he besprinkleth the Elect with
Holy Water, delivers him the Staff, with an exhortation to use it with
discretion. Then he blesses the Ring and casts Holy Water on it, and puts it
on the Ring finger of his right hand, and prays for him; this done, the Abbot
receives the kiss of peace, then* retireth to his Chapel, thence returns
with his two assistants, and presents to the Bishop two burning Tapers* two
Breads, two vessels of Wine, and kisseth his hand. Then Mass is said, the
Sacrament administered, and the Abbot is solemnly blessed; at length the Mytre
is blessed, and washed with holy water, which the Bishop puts on the head of
the Abbot; saying, Lord we put on the ^ead of this thy servant the Helmet of
Salvation, that he having his ^ead armed, may with the Hor^es of both
Testaments appear terrible to the adversaries of the Truth, etc. At last the
Gloves are blessed and washed, and put on the Abbo^s hands, who with his Mytre
on his head, See Alber^u^ Castellanus in Pontificali, and Hospinian out of him.
is by the Bishop brought to the Quire and set in his predecessors Chair;
whence he rises, blesses the people present, and thanks the Bishop. The rest
of the day is spent in good cheer. The consecration of the Abbatesse and Nuns
is much after this manner.

Q. 10. Wherein do the Christian Orders of Knight-^ood differ from one another?

A. In the Times, Authors, Occasions, Habits, Ends, Ornaments and Ceremonies of
their institution. The first order of Knighthood in France, Knights of the
Gennet.
was that of the Gennet, instituted by C^arls Martel, in memory of the great
Victory he obtained against A^^dira^^, in whose Camp were found good store of
Gennets* which are beasts like Spanish Cats in bigness, with long and slender
snow^s, their furs (whereof good store were found in the enemies Camp, and
presented to Charles Martel) do smell like those of Ci^^ (...): From this beast
the order is so called, consisting of sixteen Knights only, who were collars
of Gold made of three chains, linked with red Roses enam^lled; at the end of
this collar hung a Golden Genne^^. The order of the Crown Royal, (instituted by
Charlemaigne, Of the Crown Royal.
in favor of the Prisons, who had done him good service in his wars against
the (...) or ancient Saxons) wore on their breasts a Crown Royal in embroydery
of Gold, wherefore this was called L' Ordye de la Coronne Royal. The order of
the Star instituted by King Robert of France, Of the Star^:
Anno 1022. was composed of thirty Knights, whereof the King was chief. These
wore cloaks of white Damask; on the left side of the breast, was embroydered a
Scar wrought in Gold, with five pointed beams. Their Oath was to say in honor
of the Virgi^ Mary (whom they called Star of the Sea* and Lady of the Star) a
Corons or Chaplet made up of five tenns of Ave Mary's, and five Pa^er Nosters,
with an Antheme. Of the Broom Flower.
The order of the Broom Flower, instituted by Saint Lewis the French King, did
wear a collar composed of Broom husks, or codds, interlaced with Flowers de
sys. King Lewis chose this Broom for his emblem, adding these words, Exaltat
humiles, intimating that God had exalted him for his humility to the Royal
Throne of France, in stead of his eld^^, Philip of France. The Knights of this
order (...) of white Damask. The order of the Ship, Of the Ship.
instituted also by Saint Lewis, for encouraging the French Nobility to attempt
the Seas with him against the Saraoens, wore a collar interlaced with double
Scallops (signifying the sandy shore) and doubl^ ^r^scents or half Moons,
which with the Ship hanging thereat declared his enterprise was to fight with
Infidels and Mahumetans, and to plant the Christian faith; Therefore these
Knights were tied by their order to hear daily the office of our Saviors
passion, to defend the Catholic Faith, Church, and Ministers thereof; and to
protect Widows, Orphans, and other afflicted people. The order of Saint
Mi^hael was instituted by Lewis the eleventh, Of S. Michael.
Son to Charles the seventh, in honor of Saint Michael the French tutelar
Angel, who commanded Aubert Bishop of Auranches to erect a Church to him on
that Hill, which ever since has been called Mount Saint Michael, frequented
yearly with Pilgrims from all parts of France: to whom also is dedicated the
nine and twentieth day of September, in memory of this Angel who fought against
the English at Orleans; hereupon Charles the seventh took for his Oriflambe the
image of Saint Michael, which was always carried before the King when he went
to wars. They wear a collar of Gold made of Scallops fastened on small chains,
from which hangs the Image of Michael treading on the Dragon. As often as any
Knight misseth the wearing of this collar, he is to cause a Mass to be said,
and to pay seven Sols and six Deniers Tournois. All the Knights are bound on
the Vigil of Saint Michael to wait in their habits on the King from his Palace
to the Church. On Saint Michaels day, they are to wait on the King in the same
ornaments to Mass, and to offer each man a piece of Gold; that day the King is
to entertain them at his Table; The next day they offer (being clothed in
black) wax candles for the dead, for whom Mass and Prayers are said. Their
oath is to maintain the dignity of the French Crown, and the Church. Of the
Holy Ghost.
The order of the Holy Ghost was instituted by Henry the third of France, Anno
1579. in memory of his Nativity, Election to the Crown of Poland, and his
coming to the Crown of France, all which happened upon VVhit-Sunday, when the
Holy Ghost descended upon the Apostles. The Knights of this order wear a collar
made of Flowers de Luce of Gold, cornered with flames of fire in^erwoven with
some Letters, the first whereof is H. the first letter of Henry's name. From
the collar hangs the image of a Dove in the midst of a Cross like that of
Malta, all beset with beams and four Flowers de Luce. The King is chief of the
order, whose oath is to maintain the Catholic Religion, and unity amongst his
Subjects. The Knights are all bound to communicate every first day o^ the year,
and on the day of Pentecost, and to swear their zeal to the Catholic Faith,
and their fidelity to the King and his successors. This order consists of the
King, and one hundred Knights; among which are four Cardinals, five Prelates,
the Chancellor, Provost, Master of the Ceremonies, the High Treasurer, and
Register. All the Knights are bound to wear the Cross on their garment. The
feast of this order is kept on the first of January, in which the King is
accompanied to the Church by the Knights, and they after Mass are feasted by
him at the Palace. At Even song, they for the deceased Knights wear black, and
the next day offer wax candles for their souls, and then dine with the King
again. The order of Christian Charity Of Christian Charity.
was instituted by the same Henry, for the benefit of poor Captains and maimed
Soldiers, to whom Rents and Hospitals were by him assigned. They wear on their
cloaks an anchored Cross, embroydered with white Satin. The Knights of Saint
Lazarus Of Saint Lazarus.
had their original at Jerusalem, but being expelled thence, were by Saint
Lewis brought from thence, and entertained with great revenues, to the end they
might look to the cure of leprous and other infected persons; but when these
Knights became idle, and married, their Rents were taken from them, and a part
thereof given to the Knights of Saint John of Jerusalem. By Gregory the
thirteenth, Emanuel Philbert Duke of Savoy was chosen great Master of this
order of Saint Lazarus, to whom he gave the command of all spittles for Lepers.
The order of the Virgin Mary in Mount Carmel, Of the Virgin Mary in Mount
Carmel.
consisting of one hundred French Gentlemen, was instituted by King Henry the
fourth of France, and confirmed by Pope Paul the fifth, Anno 1607. They are
tied to keep a feast every year the sixteenth of May, to the Virgin Mary of
mount Carmel, to wear on their cloaks a Cross of taway velvet, in the midst
where of shill be the Image of the Virgin Mary, entowered with beams of Gold:
about their necks they shall wear an anchored Cross of Gold, in the midst
whereof shall be the Virgins Image enamelled. They may not marry above twice.
They must ^ight for the Catholic faith. The order of Orleans Of Orleance or
Porcupine.
was instituted by M^nsieur L^^ie of France, Duke of Orleans, Anno 1393. it is
called also the order of the Porcupine, because there hangs the picture of this
beast from three chains of Gold, which Monsieur took for his Device, to ^et
John of Bourgong^e his mortal enemy know that he w^^ted not arms and courage to
be revenged on him, for his wicked and bloody intentions. The order of the
Golden Shield Of the Golden Shield.
was instituted by Lewis the second, third Duke of Burbon, firnamed the Good
Duke; in the Golden Shield was a bend of Pearls, whereon was written Allon,
which is as much as Allons in French, that is, Let us go all together to the
service of God, and defense of our Country. He instituted also the order of the
Thistle, Of the Thistle.
called also the order of Burbon in honor of the Virgin Mary, Anno 1370.
consisting of six and twenty Knights, who wore a belt, in which was embroydered
the word Esperance in Capital letters; it had a buckle of Gold, at which hung a
tufft like a Thistle; on the collar also was embroydered the same word
Esperance with Flowers de Luce of Gold, from which hung an Oval, wherein was
the Image of the Virgin Mary, entowered with a Golden Sun, Crowned with twelve
Stars of Silver, and a Silver Crescent under her feet; at the end of the Oval
was the head of a Thistle. The order of Anjou Of Anjou.
or of the Crescent or half Moon, was instituted by the good King Rene, being
Duke of Anjou; and King of Sicily: The Symbol of the order was a Crescent of
Gold, whereon was engraven this word Loz, which signifies praise; this the
Knights wore on their cloaks or gowns; there were of this order six and thirty
Knights. The order of Saint Magdalen Of Saint Magdalen.
was instituted by John Chesnel a Noble Gentleman of France, An. 1614. out of a
Godly zeal to reclaim the French from their quarrels, duels, and other sins,
that by remembering the repentance of Mary Magdalen, they might with her learn
to repent. The Cross which might serve to wear on the cloak, or about the
neck, had at three ends three Flowers de Luce; the foot stood in a Crescent, in
the midst was the shape of Magdalen; the Croffe is beset with Palm^ to show
this order was instituted to encourage Voyages to the Holy Land; within the
Palms are Sun beams, and four Flowers de Luce, to show the glory of the
French Nation. The Knights are tied by their vow to abandon all hazardous
gaming, blasphemy, reading of prohibited and vicious Books, etc. Their habit
is of skie-colour. Their Collar is made up of the letter M. doubled with L. and
A. to express Mary Magdalen, King Lewis, and Queen Anne, interlaced with
double hearts, wounded with darts of Gold crossed; the Ribband is Crimson, from
which hangs an Oval, having Mary Magdalen on the one side, and Saint Lewis on
the other. The device about the Oval on the cloak is, L' amor de Dieu est
pacifique. They had a house allotted them near Paris, wherein were ordinarily
five hundred Knights, bound to stay there, during two years probation; at the
end of which, they shall take the Oath of the order of charity, obedience, and
conjugal chastity; they must also abjure all duells, quarrels, and assasinates.
The Knights that live abroad shall meet every year at their house called the
lodging royal on Mary Magdalens Festival day, to communicate and to give an
account of their actions to the Great Master. The Knights that live in the
house, must on all Sundays and Festivals be assistant at Divine Service; the
Knights have their Academy for all kind of exercise. But this order as it
began, so it ended in the person of Chesnel. Of Britaigne or Hermine.
The order of Bretaigne, or of the Hermine, and Ears of Corn, was instituted
by Francis Duke of Bretaigne, Anno 1450. it was called of the Ears of Corn,
because the Golden Collar was made in the form of Ears of Corn, They that
would see these orders described at large, let them read the History of Andrew
Favine, Parisian, and Advocate in the Court of Parliament.
at the end of which hung by three small Golden chains a little white beast,
called an Hermine; his word or Motto was, A Ma Vie; intimating, that whilst he
lived he would preserve his courage, purity and integrity, resembled by the
Ermine which is so loath to defile his white skin by running through durty and
boggy places when he is hunted, that he will rather suffer himself to be
caught; whose skin is in great request for Furs. This order consists of five
and twenty Knights of the Ears of Corn, so called, to signify that Princes
should be careful to preserve Husbandry.

Q. 11. What other orders of Knighthood were there in Christendom, besides
those of the French?

A. In Flanders was instituted the order of the Golden Fleece by Duke Philip,
Of the Golden Fleece.
in the City of Bruges, Anno 1429. in memory of the great revenues which he
raised by Traffic of Wooles; or else in memory of Gideons Fleece, or of the
Golden Fleece at Colchos. This order consisted of thirty Knights, the Duke
being chief. The Great Collar was made of double Fusiles interwoven with Stones
and Flints sparkling flames of fire. The Flints were the Arms of the ancient
Kings of Burgundy; the Flames did signify the swiftness, fierceness, and
terror these Knights should show to their enemies, to this purpose was this
Motto, Ante ferit quam flamma micet. From the Collar hung a Golden Fleece. The
Patron of this order was Saint Andrew: The Knights were to keep three
Festivals; on the first day they wore Scarler, to show that Heaven and Glory is
got by Martyrdom and effusion of Blood. On the second day black, to show their
grief for the dead. The third day white Damask, to show their purity. The order
of the Garter Of the Garter.
was instituted in England Anno 1347. by King Edward the third, consisting of
five and twenty Knights, under the Patronage of Saint George. The great Collar
was of Gold, composed of white and red crosses knit in manner of true love
knots, instead of which knots the Thistles of Scotlands order were combined by
King James, who united the two orders as he did the Kingdoms. From the Collar
hangs Saint George on Horseback with the Dragon at his feet. In England were
instituted the Knights of the Bath Of the Bath.
by King Henry the fourth, as some write, who made six and forty Knights, who
having their several Chambers in the Tower, watched and bathed themselves on
Saturday night, and on Sunday* they were made Knights; At high Mass in the
evening before the Ceremony, they were clothed with gray cloth like Eremites,
to show they were willing to renounce the world for Christ; the next day they
swear To love God, defend the Church, honor the King, and to protest the
oppressed: and then they lay aside their Monks habit, and are richly clothed;
then they mount on Horseback, having on the front-stale the sign of the
Cross, and so they ride to the King, who girdeth them with the Girdle and
Sword, and commands two ancient Knights to put on their Gilded Spurs. At
dinner they wait on the King, after which they present their Swords to God on
the high Altar, and redeem them again with money. These and other Ceremonies of
the Knights Batchelors, or of the Bath, may be seen at large in our own
Histories. The order of the Thistle, Of Saint Andrew, or the Thistle.
or of Saint Andrew in Scotland was instituted by King Achaius, who made a
League offensive and defensive with Charles the Great, Anno 809. The Collar is
made up of Thistles and Rue, the one being full of prickles, and not to be
touched without hurting the skin, the other is good against Serpents and
poison. The Motto is Nemo me impure lacessit, intimating that he wanted not
power to defend himself, and offend his enemies. At the Collar hangs the
picture of Saint Andrew with his Cross. The order of the Lilly, Of the Lilly,
or of Navarre.
or of Navarre was instituted by Prince Garcia the sixth of that name, in the
City of Nagera, Anno 1048. where the Image of the Virgin Mary issuing out of a
Lilly, was discovered in the time of the Kings sickness, who thereupon
suddenly recovered his health; and in token of gratitude instituted the order
of Knights of Saint Mary of the Lilly, consisting of eight and thirty Knights,
whereof he was chief. They swear to expose goods and fortunes to preserve the
Kingdom of Navarre, and to expel the Moors. Each of these weareth^ Lilly on
his breast, made of silver, and a double chain of Gold, interlaced with this
Gothish letter (...) which stands for Mary, At the end of the chain hangs a
Flower de Luce, carrying the same letter crowned. The Knights are tied to
diverse, services and prayers, to confess also and to communicate. The order of
Saint James of the Sword was instituted Anno 1158. Of Saint James of the Sword.
under the reigns of Alphonso the nineth King of Castile, and of Ferdinand
King of Leon. The Knights wear on their breasts, and on the left sid^^
Scallo^shell. About their neck they wear three chains of Gold, from which hangs
the form of a sword, being of red Satin embroidered, and a Scallop shell upon
the same sword. The red sword signified their victory over the Arabians, with
whose Blood their swords were dyed. The Scallop shell was a mark of their
Pilgrimage to the Holy Sepulcher of Saint James; these they gather on the Sea
shore, and fasten them to their hats or hoo^s; who go on Pilgrimage. This order
took first beginning in Galici^ under the homage then of Leon; at first these
Knights lived in common with the Monks of Saint Helie, and shaved their Crowns,
vowing chastity, poverty, and obedience, but afterward they married; they both
were of Saint Austins rule. This order was also established in Portugal; above
six hundred Knights were of this order. Many Lords of Spain hold it an honor
to wear the habit of Saint James. The great Mastership of this order was
incorporated to the Crown of Castile, Anno 1493. by Pope (...) the sixth. The
order of Saint Julian, Of Saint Julian, or the Peartree, or Alcan^rara.
called of the Pear Tree, was instituted in the Kingdom of Leon, Anno 1179. and
was approved by Pope Alexander the third, L^cius the third, and Innocent the
third; The Knights have the Pear Tree for their (...). But after A ph^^so the
ninth King of Leon, beca^e Master of the City Alcantara, which he took from the
Moors and bestowed it on the Great Master of (...) and this gave it to the
Master of the Pear Tree; These Knights of the Pear Tree styled themselves
Knights of Alcant^ra, and forsaking their former Arms, were the Green Cross
Flower de (...) on their breasts; they live under the order of Benedict. They
first professed Chastity, but Pope Paul the fourth permitted them to marry. The
Great Mastership of this order was by Pope Alexander the six (...) Spaniar^
united to the Grown of (...), in favor of King (...) of Arragon, and Queen
^^abel his wife. The order of Calatravs was ^ounded in the Kingdom of
Castile-Anno 1158. Of Calatravs.
under the Reign of Sancio the third, and sixth King of Castile. They were
called Calatrav^ from a Castle of that name taken from the Moors, and given to
the (...), but they fearing their own weakness, surrendered it to the King
Sancio of Castile, who gave it to certain Monks of the Cistertian order, who
offered themselves to keep this frontiered Castle; Hence arose the order of
Calatrava. They wear a red cross Flower de luced. Pope Alexander the third
approved this order; at first these Knights wore Scapularies and robes of
white, but Pope Benedict the third dispensed with them for that Monkish habit,
and they were permitted by Pope Paul the third, to marry once only. At last
the Masterships of Saint James, of Calatrava, and of Alcantara were annexed to
the Crown of Spain, in favor of Charles the fifth Emperor and King of Spain,
who enjoy the revenues of these three great Masters. The order of the Band or
Red Scarffe, Of the Band or Red Scarffe.
was instituted in Castile by Alphonso the 11th, Anno 1330. King of Leon and
Castile. The Knights wore a broad Ribband of red Silk, and are bound to
accompany the King in his Wars, to be valiant, sober, courteous, discreet, etc.
The order of the Dove, Of the Dove.
or Holy Ghost, was instituted in Segobia in Castile, Anno 13^^, by John the
first of Castile. They wore a colla^ linked with Sun beams, whereat hung a Dove
of Gold, enamelled with white, as if it were flying down from Heaven. But this
order ended with the institutors life, to wit, the same year of his
institution. Knights of S. Savior of Montreal.
The order of Saint Savior of Montreal, called the order of Arragon, was
instituted in Arragon, Anno 1120. by Alphonso the eighteenth, King of Navarre,
and first of Arragon. The Knights wore a white robe, and on the breast an
anchored red cross; their rule was like that of the Templars, to whom they
succeeded in Montreal, but only that they had power to marry. The order of our
Lady of M^ntesia, Of Montesia.
or of Valencia, was instituted in the Kingdom of Valencia, Anno 1317. by
James the second, King of Arragon, upon the extirmination of the Templ^rs. The
Statutes of this order were answerable to that of Calatrava, under the rule of
the Cistertians, whose clothing they were dispensed withal to wear. Their
Cross was that of Saint George, a full red cross which they wore on their
breast. Of the Looking Glass.
The order of the Looking Glass of the Virgin Mary was instituted by Ferdinand
the Infant of Castile, Anno. 1410. upon a memorable Victory he had over the
Moors. The Collar of this order was composed of Bough-pots full of Lillies,
interlaced with Griffons. The order of Jesus Christ was instituted in Portugal
An. 1320. by Dionysius the sixth King of Portugal: Of Jesus Christ.
the Knights wear black, and upon their breast a red cross, and another white
over the red. Pope John the twenty second confirmed this order Anno 1320. gave
them the rule of Saint Bennet. Pope Alexander the sixth gave them leave to
marry. This order as that of D. Avis was annexed to the Crown of Portugal. Of
D. Avis.
This order D. Auis was instituted in Portugal under the first King Alphonoso
Henriquez Anno 1147. under the rule of Saint Bennet. They bear for their Arms
the cross like that of Alcantara, See Favine, etc.
with two black birds like Ravens.

Q. 12. What were the orders of Knighthood in Germany, Hungary, Bohemia,
Poland, etc.

A. The order of the Dragon was institu^ed in Germany, Of the Dragon.
by the Emperor Sigismund, Anno 1418. upon the condemnation of Husse, and
Hierom of Pr^gue. The Knights did wear on high days a Scarlet cloak, a double
Golden chain, at the end whereof hung a Dragon overthrown, her wings seeming
broken; and daily they wear a Cross Flower de Luced with green. This order was
famous throughout Germany, and Hungary. The order of Austria and Carinthia, or
of Saint George, Of S. George.
was instituted by the Emperor Frederick the third, first Archduke of Austria,
Anno 1470. The Knights wear a white coat, and a red cross; they were bound to
guard the Frontiers of Germany, Hungary, Austria, Styria, and Carinthia,
against the Turks. Of the White Eagle.
The order of Poland, or of the white Eagle, was instituted by King Ladistaus
the fifth, Anno 13^5. The Knights wear a triple chain of Gold, whereat hangs
an Eagle Crowned. The order of Denmark, or of the Elephant, was instituted by
Christierne the first, King of Denmark, Of the Elephant.
Anno 1478. The Collar which the Knights wear, is composed of Elephants, with
silver Castles on their backs; at the end whereof hangs the picture of the
Virgin Mary, beset with Sun beams, and a Crescent under her feet. The order of
Sweden, or of Jesus, or of the S^raphims, was instituted by Magnus the fourth,
King of Sweden, Anno 1334* The Collar of this order is composed of Cherubins,
and Patriarchall Crosses, in memory of the siege ^aied to the chief City of
Vpsala. At the end of the Collar hung an Oval, bearing these three letters, I H
S. that is, Jesus Honainum Salvator, with ^our nails enamelled whire and
black, to show our Saviors Passion. The order of Cleve, or of the Swan, Of the
Swan.
is at this day h^ld up by the Princes descended of the House of Cleve* who do
bear the Swan for their order, Crests, and Supporters of their Arms. Of the
order of Pr^ssia called the Marian or Te^tonick, we have spoken already. The
order of Livonia, or of the Sword-Bearers, Of the Sword-Bearers.
was instituted Anno 1203. by Albert a Monk of B^eme, with some rich Merchants,
who our of zeal to fight against the ^nfidels of Livonia, renounced the world,
and rowed obedience, and chastity, in the pres^nce of Bishop Albert, who
prescribed them the rule and habit of the Cistertians; a long white Cass^ck,
with a black hood, having on the left side, near to the shoulder, a red Sword;
and on the breast two Swords acresse, with the points downward. This order was
confirmed by Pope Inn^cent the third. Of Saint Gall.
The order of Saint Gall in Switzerland, was instituted by Frederick the
second, Emperor Anno 1213. when he came on Pilgrimage to the Abbey of Saint
Gall, the and instituted that order which he called the order of the Bear,
giving to the chief Lords thereof Collars, and Chains of Gold, at the end
whereof hung the form of a Bear of Gold, enamelled with black. The Abbot was to
conferr this order every sixteenth day of October, being the Feast day of Saint
Gall, the Apostle of the Germans. This order was instituted to the memory of
Saint V^sus, Mar^yred before the Temple of the Sun at Soleuerre. See the
Histories of these places.
The Ca^tons of the Switzers honouered this order, till they fell off from the
House of Austria; now it is quite lost.

Q. 13. What are the orders of Knighthood in Italy?

A. The Popes have been sounders of diverse orders. Diverse orders of Knights at
Rome.
Pope John the twenty second at Avignion, instituted the order of Jesus Christ,
Anno 1320. They did wear a Cross of Gold enamelled with red, and enclosed with
another Cross. Pope Paul the second instituted at Rome the order of the Holy
Ghost, Anno 1468. The Knights wear a white Cross. Pope Alexander the sixth
instituted the order of Saint George, Anno 1498. They carried a Cross of Gold,
entowered with a wreath made in form of a Crown. Leo the tenth instituted the
order of Saint Peter, Anno 1520. These wore within an Oval of Gold the effigies
of Saint Peter, at the end of a Tortis of Chains of Gold. These were to guard
the Sea Coasts against the Turk. Paul the third established the order of Saint
Paul, Anno 1540. Pope Pi^s the fourth erected the order of the Pies, Anno 1560.
Their charge was to carry the Pope when he went abroad in public. He would
have them take place of the Knights of Malta, and of the Empire^ Sixtus Quintus
ordained the Knighthood of Lauretto Anno 1587. to whom he erected our Lady
Church at Louretto, for a Cathedral. At Rome also, there be some Churchmen of
the order of Knighthood, as the Knights Hospitallers of Saint Anthony. The
General of this order is called Abbot of Saint Anthony of Vienna; the
principals of this order do wear on their black Cassocks, Cloaks, and Gowns, a
double Saint Anthonies Cross, that is, two T. T. of blew Satin; the meaner
sort wear but one. The Knights of the Virgin Mary ^yere instituted by brother
Bartholmew, Bishop of Vicenca, a Dominican, Anno 1233. and confirmed by Pope
Urban the fourth* the Knights follow Saint Dominick's rule, wearing a white
Cassock, with a red Cross on the breast, with two Stars. Their cloak is of
gray color. Their charge is to take care of Widows and Orphans, and to
reconcile differences between Man and Wife. They lived at home with their Wives
and Families, and not in Covents. Hence they were named Fratres Ga^dentes,
Brethren of joy. The order of the Glorious Virgin mary was instituted at Rome,
Anno 1618. by three Brothers, Pedro, John Baptista, and Bernardo. They were
confirmed by Pope Paul the fifth, who with his successors were to be Great
Masters thereof. Their Covent is in the Palace of Lateran. They are bound to
defend the Christian Faith, the Catholic Church, to suppress the Turks, to
be Nobly extracted. The Knights Layicks of this order, and Knights Priests that
are beneficed, are to wear about their necks a Ribband of blew Silk, and a
Golden Cross enamelled with blew, and on the Cloak a Cross of blew Satin, to
show the color of the Virgins garment which she wore, to wit, of a
blew-skie-colour; but the Knights Chaplains are to wear the blew cross on
their cloaks, but not about their necks. Within the cross is a round circle,
wherein is M. S. standing for Maria Sancta, with a Crown. About the circle are
twelve silver beams, representing the twelve Apostles; each branch of the
Cross has nine Tracts, demonstrating the nine Orders of Angels; the four ends
of the Cross are four Lillies, to show that the Virgin is the Lilly of the
Valleys; at the ends of the Cross are four Stars, figuring the four
Evangelists. Knights of Venice.
At Venice there is the order of Saint Marks Knights, instituted when Saint
Marks Body was brought thither from Alexandria. Of Genoa.
At Genoa are the Knights of Saint George, and so diverse Cities of Italy have
their peculiar orders of Knights-hood. In Sav^y there is the order of the
Annunciation, Of Savoy.
of which we have already spoken. The Collar of this order is composed of Roses
and Love-Knots, whereunto hangs an Oval, containing the Angel, holding a
Scepter, and saluting the Virgin, over whom hovereth a Dove. We have also
spoken of the orders of Saint Maurice, and Saint Lazarus. The former of these
two began Anno 1440. when Amadis the seventh, first Duke of Savoy, retired to
the Desert of Ripaille, to preserve the memory of that valiant Knight, as of
his Lance and Ring. They follow Saint Austins rule. The order of Saint Lazarus
was united by Gregory the thirteenth, to that of Saint Maurice; these are
Cistertians, and have diverse privileges and immunities. Of Florence.
The order of Florence, or of Saint Stepben Pope, was instituted by Cosmo de
Medicis, first Duke of Florence, Anno 1561. in honor of Pope Stephen the
ninth, Patron of Florence. They follow Saint Bennets rule, and have the same
Privileges with the Knights of Malta. They wear a long gown of white
Chamble^, on the breast a red cross, like that of Malta. The order of the
Precious Blood of Christ, was institu^ed by Vincenti^ de Gonzaga the fourth
Duke of Mantua, Of Mantua.
and second of Montferrat; Anno 1608. in honor of Christ's Blood, some dropps
whereof are kept in Saint Andrews Church at Mantua. The Collar is composed of
Ovals of Gold, and these two words, Domine Pro^asti; in the Ovals are flames of
fire, burning about Goldsmiths melting pots full of pieces of Gold. At the end
of the Collar within an Oval, are two Angels standing upright, See the above
named authors.
holding a Chalice and Pixe Crowned, on the Table whereof are three drops of
blood, with this Legend about the Oval, Nihil isto triste recepto.

Q. 14. What were the Christian Military orders in the East?

A. The order of Cyprus, Knighthood i^ the East.
and of Luzignan, or of the Sword, was instituted by Guye of Luzignan, King of
Jerusalem and Cyprus, Anno 1195. The collar of this order was composed of
Cordons of white Silk twined into love knots, interlaced with the letters S.
and R. at this hung an Oval of Gold, with a sword in it; about the Oval was
engraved these words, Securitas Regni. Of the other Eastern orders we have
already spoken; namely, of that of the holy Sepulcher, instituted by Baldwin,
the first of that name, and second King of Jerusalem, Brother to Godfrey o^
Bulloigne, Anno 1103. They were at first Canons Regular of Saint Austins order,
permitted to live in Jerusalem by the S^^acens: after they were Knighted,
retained their white habit, whereon they carried the Cross of Jerusalem, such
as the Kings bare in their Arms. Pope Innocent the eighth, Anno 1484. united
these Knights to the Hospitallers of Saint John; but this Union lasted not
long; for the Knights married, w^ereupon Pope Alexander the sixth took the
power of conferring this order himself, giving power to the Guardian of the
holy Sepulcher, who is always a Franciscan, to conferr this order on Pilgrims
to the Holy Land, provided they take their Oath on the Holy Sepulcher. We have
also spoken of the Hospitallers of Saint John Baptist of Jerusalem, instituted
by Baldwin, first King there, Anno 1104. Likewise of the Knights Templars,
instituted under Baldwin, the second, third King of Jerusalem, Anno 1119. Of
these I will make no further mention. There were other orders in the Holy Land,
as the Knights of Saint John of Acres, Of Saint Thomas, Of Saint Gerion, Of
Saint Blaze, etc. but these were of small note, and are now lost. See Favines
Theater of honor.

The Contents of the Twelfth Section.
The opinions of the Anabaptists, and wherein they agree with the old
Heretics. 2. The Tenets of the Brownists* 3. Of the Familists. 4. The
Adamites, and Antinomians. 5. The Religion of the Socinians. 6. Of the
Arminians Tenets. 7. Of the Church of Aruhem, and the Millenaries opinions. 8.
Of many other Sects at this day amongst us. 9. The opinions of the
Independents. 10. The Tenets of the Presbyterians, where by way of a Catechism
is delivered their whole Doctrine concerning the Ministry, Episcopacy,
Presbytery, Lay-Eldership, Deacons, Civil Magistrates, the Election of
Ministers, Ordination, power of the Keys, Excommunication. 11. Diver^s
erroneous opinions which have been lately revived or hatched since the fall of
our Church Government, etc.

SECT. XII.
Quest. 1. WHat opinions in Religion are there held at this day among them,
that are fallen off from Rome?

A. We have already spoken of the opinions of Luther, Calvin, Oecolampadius,
Zuinglius, and other Protestants, whose Tenets are followed by many thousands
at this day: We have also spoken somewhat of the original and increase of
Anabaptisme; now we will briefly set down their opinions, as they are recorded
by Pontanus, Bullinger, G^stius, Sleidan, Osiander, and others; and will show
wherein they agree with the old condemned Heretics. Anabaptists, their
opinions and names.
They hold that Christ took not his flesh from the Virgin Mary; so held the
Heretic Valentinus. 2. That Christ is not true God, so held Arrius.3. They
deny Baptism to Infants, so did the Pelagians. 4. They re-baptise, so did the
Novatians, Arrians, Aetians and Donatists.5. They believe to enjoy here, after
the day of judgment, an earthly Monarchy, so did the Cerinthians, Nepotians,
Millenaries, and Mahumetans. 6. They say our righteousness depends upon the
works of charity and affliction, not upon faith in Christ; so did the Cathari,
Meletians, Donatists, and Pelagians. 7. They maintain free will in spiritual
things; so did the Pelagians. 8. They account themselves the only pure Church
without sin; so did the Donatists.9. They say Laymen may administer the
Sacraments; so did the Marcionites, and Pepuzians. 10. They reject Magistracy
among Christians; so did the Minichees. 11. They say that Christian Magistrates
are not to punish Malefactors with death; so said the Tertullianists. 12. They
will have all things in common, with the old Nicholaitans. 13. They teach that
a man may put away his wife, though not for adultery; so taught the Jews. 14.
And that a Christian may have many wives; which is the Doctrine of M^homet. 15.
They will not swear at all; in this they follow the Tenet of the old Pelagians.
Now all these opinions are ancient Heresies as we have showed, which have been
refuted sufficiently by the ancient Doctors of the Church, and condemned by
General and Provincial Councils, besides that diverse late writers, both of the
Roman and Protestant Church, have fully refelled these opinions; whose writings
they that are at leisure may peruse. And by the way we must observe, that as
the Anabaptists have diverse opinions, so they have diverse names. Some are
called Manzerians, from Manzer, who raised the Boores in Germany against their
Lords. He taught that all things shall be common. 2. Separatists, for
separating themselves from the affairs of the World. 3. Cathirists, for
thinking themselves more pure then others; therefore deny original sin, nor
will they pray, Forgive us our sins. 4. Apostolicks, who like the Apostles go
without staff or scrip, up and down the world preaching. 5. Enthusiasts,
pretend revelations and brag they have the gift of prophecy. 6. Silentes, who
place all their holiness in silence. 7. Adamites, who believe that the wearing
of clothes is a cursed thing, therefore they affect nakedness. 8. Georgians,
so called from David George the Familist, who boasted he was greater then
Christ. 9. Liberi, who think they are made free by Christ from payments of
Taxes or Debts, and free from obedience to humane Laws. 10. Hatites, so called
from one Huta who denied Christ's Divinity, and made himself the only son of
God. 11. Melchiorists, so named from one Melchior of Strausburg, who taught
that Mary was the Conduit through which Christ did pass, as water through a
Pipe. 12. Menonists, so called of Menon a Friezlander. 13. Beuheldians, so
called from their Author, these affirm Polygamy to be an holy kind of life.
14. Augustinians, from one Augustine a Bohemian, who bragged he was the first
that opened Paradise for himself and followers. 15. Servetians, so called from
Servetus the Arrian, who was burned at Geneva, for denying Christ's Divinity,
1553. These will not baptize Children till they be thirty years of age. Of
these Alstedius in his History of Anabaptists, and Bullinger in his first Book
against them; have made a collection, and Mr. Pagit out of them.
16. Denkians, from one Denkius their author, who with Origin, would have the
wicked and Devils to be saved. 17. Monasterienses, so called from Munster,
where John of Leyden their King reigned, who taught that he had a commission
from heaven to take many wives. 18 Libertines, who make God the author of sin,
and deny the Resurrection. 19. Deo relicti, who rejected all means and relied
only upon God. 20. Semper Orantes, who with the old Euchytes, are still
praying, thinking they are tied to no other duty.

Q. 2. What are the Tenets of the Brownists?

A. These being so called from their author, Brownists, their Kinds and Tenets.
Master Robert Brown of Northamptonshire, sometimes a SchoolMaster in
Southwark, hold there is no other pure Church in the world but among them; so
did the Donatists of old. 2. They reject the Lords Prayer; in this they are
Jews, and agree with the old Heretics, called Prodiciani. 3. They will not
serve God in consecrated Churches, nor will communicate with those they called
wicked; in this they follow the old Cathari. 4. They reject tithes, and affect
parity; in this they are Anabaptists. 5. They hold all the Church Ceremonies to
be Popish. 6. That the love which is in God is not Essential. 7. That
Ordination of Ministers by Bishops is Antichristian. 8. That the Word preached,
and Sacraments administered by scandalous Ministers, are altogethers
ineffectual. 9. That Church-musick is unlawful. 10. That Laymen and Mechanics
may preach and expound Scripture. 11. That set forms of prayers are aboninable
in the sight of God, whereas notwithstanding we have diverts set forms, both in
the Old and New Testament, at which they quarrel, and chiefly at the Lords
Prayer. 12. There be diverse sorts of this profession; some Brownists, of which
we have spoken; some Barrowists, so called from Barrow, their first Martyr. He
called the Church of England; Sodom, Babylon, and Egypt. Some are called
Wilkinsonians, from Wilkinson their Master, who thought that he and his
followers were truly Apostles, and therefore denied communion with such as did
not give them that title. A fourth sort there is of Anabaptistical Brownists,
who hold themselves the only true Church, and condemn the other Brownists for
Pedobaptisme; therefore they re baptize such as come to them. They that would
see more of this Sect, let them read the Book called The profane Schism of the
Brownists; another called. The foundation of Brownisme, Master Whites Discovery
of Brownisme; Doctor Halls Apology against the Brownists; Giffords Declaration
against the Brownists; Pagits Heresiography, etc.

Q. 3. What are the Familists?

A. The Familists, Familists, their Heresies.
or Family of love, are so called from the love they bear to all men, though
never so wicked; and their obedience to all Magistrates, though never so
tyrannical, be they Jews, Gentiles or Turks. Their first Founder was one David
George of Delfe, who called himself the true David, that should restore the
Kingdom to Israel. He held 1. That neither Moses, nor the Prophets, nor Christ
could by their Doctrine save the people; but his Doctrine was the only means
of salvation. 2. That whosoever spoke against his Doctrine, should never be
forgiven, neither in this life, nor in the life to come. 3. That he would set
up the true house of David, and raise the Tabernacle of God, not by suffering,
but through love and meekness. 4. That he was the right Messiah, the beloved
son of the Father. 5. That he should not die; or if he did, he should rise
again. His Successor, Henry Nicholas of Amsterdam, maintained the same
Doctrine, but in his own name, calling himself The Restorer of the World, and
the Prophet sent of God. To the former Tenets he added 1. That there is no
other Christ but holiness, and no other Antichrist but sin. 2. That the Family
of love has attained the same perfection that Adam had before he fell. 3. That
there is no resurrection of the flesh. 4. That the day of judgment is already
come, and that this Nicholas is the Judge of the world. 5. That there has been
eight great Lights in the world, whereof Christ was the seventh, but himself
the eight, and greatest of all. 6. That none should be baptized till the
thirtieth year of their age. 7. That the joys of Heaven shall be only here on
the Earth, and so likewise Hell. 8. That they ought not to bury the dead, not
to give alms to such as are not of their profession. 9. That Angels are born
of women. 10. That every day of the week should be a Sabbath. 11. That the Law
may be fulfilled in this life. 12. That there was a world before Adam was made.
13. That there is no other Deity but what man partakes of in this world. 14.
That such wives as are not of their belief, may be rejected for whores. 15.
That in H. Nicholas dwells all perfection, As may be seen in Dr. Denisons
white Wolf. Mr. Knewstub in the Familists Confession, Mr. Iessop, and others.
holiness, and knowledge, and that their illun^inated Elders are deified in
this life, and cannot sin. There be also diverse sorts of Familists, as
Castalians, Grindletonians, of the Mountains, of the Valleys, of the scattered
(...), etc. which hold with these former opinions, that the Scriptures are but
for Novices; that we ought not to pray for pardon of sin after we are assured
of Gods love; that wicked men sin necessarily, and such more stuff.

Q. 4. What be the Adamites and Antinomians?

A. Of the Adamites in Saint Austins time, Adamites.
we have already spoken, as also of the Bohemian Adamites. Of late years there
were some of them in Amsterdam, where the men and women did pray in their
meetings, and perform other divine services naked. This posture they called the
state of innocence, and their meetings Paradise. In their opinions they were
Anabaptists. Antinomians.
The Antinomians are so called from their opposing and rejecting of the Law,
which they say is of no use at all under the Gospel, neither in regard of
direction, nor correction, and therefore ought not to be read or taught in the
Church. 2. They say that good works do neither further, nor evil works hinder
salvation. 3. That the child of God can no more sin then Christ could, and
therefore it is sin in him to ask pardon for sin. 4. That God never chastises
his children for sin; not is it for their sins that any Land is punished. 5.
That murder, adultery, drunknesse, are sins in the wicked, but not in the
children of grace, nor does God look upon them as sinners; and consequently
that Abraham's lying and dessembling was no sin in him. 6. That the child of
grace never doubts, after ^e is once assured of salvation. 7. That no man
should be troubled in his conscience for any sin. 8. That no Christian should
be exhorted to perform the duties of Christianity. 9. That an Hypocrite may
have all the graces that were in Adam before his fall, and yet be without
Christ. 10. That Christ is the only subject of all graces, and that no
Christian believes, or works any good, See also Gataker in his Preface,
Edwards in his Gangreen, Pagit, and others.
but Christ only believes and works. 11. God does not love any man for his
holiness. 12. Sanctification is no evidence of a man's Justification; Of this
and such like stuff you may read in Pontanus his Catalogue of Heresies, who
makes one John Agricola the author of this Sect Anno 1535.

Q. 5. What is the Religion of the Socinians?

A. Faustus Socinus, Socinians, their Tenets.
an Italian of Siena, placed all Religion in these old condemned Heresies, so
greedily embraced by his Disciples. 1. That man before his fall was naturally
mortal. 2. That no man by the light of nature can have any knowledge of God. 3.
That man before his fall, had not original righteousness. 4. That there is no
original sin in us, as it imports concupiscence, or deformity of nature. 5.
That there is a free will to goodness in us, and that we may here fulfill the
Law. 6. That God has no foreknowledge of contingencies determinately but
alternatively. 7. That the causes of predestination are not in God, but in us;
and that he does not predestinat^: to salvation any particular or certain
person; and that predestination may be frustrated. 8. That God could justly
pardon our sins without any satisfaction. 9. That Christ by his death did not
satisfy for us, but only obtained, power for us, to satisfy for our selves,
by our faith and obedience. 10 That Christ died for himself, that is, not for
his sins (for he was without sin) but for the mortality and infirmities of our
nature which he assumed. 11. That Christ became not our High Priest, nor
immortal, nor impassible, before he ascended into Heaven. 12. That Death
Eternal, is nothing else but a perpetual continuance in death, He that would
see these opinions at large, let him read Socinus himself, Crellius, Lubbertus,
the R^covian Catechism, Volke^ius, Ostorodius, and others.
or anni^ilation. 13. That everlasting fire, is so called from its effect,
which is the eternal extinction or annihilation of the wicked which shall be
found alive in the last day. 14. That Christ's incarnation is against reason,
and cannot be proved out of Scripture. 15. That Christ is not truly God. 16.
That the Holy Ghost is not God: that there is not a Trinity of Persons in one
God. 17. That the Old Testament is needless for a Christian man. These
opinions are but renovations of old H^resies broched by E^ian, Photinus,
Arrius, Samosatenus, Sabellicus, Servetus, An^^trini^arians, and others.

Q. 6. What be the Armimans Tenets?

A. James Arminius, Arminians, their Tenets.
Divinity Reader in Leyden, Anno 1605. published and taught five Articles,
which have occasioned great troubles in Holland, being eagerly maintained by
his Followers called Remonstrantes. They hold 1. that election to life, is the
will of God to save such as will believe, and persevere in obedience; that men
may be elected to faith, and yet not elected to salvation: that election is
sometimes absolute, sometimes conditional, that the act of faith is chosen as a
condition to salvation, and that in election to faith, the condition of using
the light of reason is required. That faith and obedience are foreseen by God,
as already performed by those who are to be chosen peremptorily and completely.
That election sometimes is changible, and some elect may finally perish; and
consequently no certainty of our elections immutability. That God has not
decreed to leave any man in the state of sin and damnation, merely out of his
will and pleasure; and consequently it is not Gods mere will that one Nation
should receive the Gospel, and not another, but a foresight of the goodness
and worth of one Nation above another. 2. They teach that God so ordained his
son to dye, that he did not determine to save any particular man expressly, so
that Christ's death was powerful and sufficient, in respect of impertation,
though there had been no actual application thereof to any particular man:
that Christ did not establish a new Covenant of grace by his blood, but only
procured a right to his Father, to make with men any Covenant whatsoever: that
Christ by his satisfaction did not merit faith and salvation to any man in
respect of effectual application; but only obtained power, that the Father
might make what conditions he pleased, with man; the performance whereof
depends upon his free will: that the Covenant of grace consists not in being
justified* and saved by faith in Christ, but in this, that God esteems our
imperfect faith and obedience as meritorious of life eternal, as if we had
fulfilled the Law: that all men are received into the Covenant of grace, and
all freed from original sin: that Christ died not for those whom God elected
and highly loved, seeing such stood in no need of Christ's death. 3. They teach
that original sin of it self was not sufficient to condemn man kind to temporal
or eternal punishment: that an unregenerate man is not totally dead in sin, nor
destitute of all strength to spiritual good things, but that he may hunger and
thirst after righteousness and life: that a natural man can (by using the
gifts of nature rightly) obtain saving grace, and salvation, and that God
affords sufficient means to bring men to the knowledge of Christ.

4. They teach that holiness and righteousness could not be seated in man's
will when he was created, and therefore in his fall, could not be separated
from it: that in spiritual death, spiritual gifts were not separated from the
will of man; seeing the will of it self was never corrupted, but entangled by
the darkness of the intellect, and unrulinesse of the affection: that in man's
conversion no new gifts are infused; and therefore the faith, by which we are
converted, is not a quality infused, but only an act of man: that the grace;
by which we are converted, is only a gentle persuasion, so that Moral grace
makes natural men become spiritual: and that God by moral reason, produces
the consent of the will: that God in man's conversion, does not use his
omnipotent power to bend the will infallibly, so that man may and does
oftentimes resist and hinder his own conversion: that grace and free will are
comperating causes in our conversion, so that grace in order of causality does
not precede the action of the will.

5. They teach that perseverance is not the effect of election, but a condition
of the new Covenant to be performed on man's part before his peremptory
election, and that by his own free will: that God furnishes the faithful man
with sufficient means to persevere, yet it is in the choice of man's will to
persevere, or not to persevere: that regenerate men may and do fall totally and
finally from grace and salvation; and that they may sin against the Holy Ghost:
that no assurance of perseverance can be had in this life without special
revelation: that the Doctrine of assurance is hurtful to all holy exercises,
and a means of presumption and security, whereas doubting is commendable: that
temporary, and true justifying faith, differ only in continuance: that it is
no absurdity, if man be oftentimes regenerated, his former regeneration being
extinct: that Christ never prayed for the faithfuls infallible perseverance in
faith. These are the five Articles of Arminianisme, as they are set down in the
Book called The Judgment of the Synod of Do^t.

Q. 7. What are the opinions of the new Church of Arnhem.

Answer, They hold that Independency is a beginning of Christ's temporal
Kingdom here on earth, The Church of Arnhem, and the Millenaries their
opinions.
that within five years, ( but these are already expired) Christ was to come in
the flesh, and with an iron sword to kill most of his enemies, and then that he
should reign here on earth with his Saints a thousand years, in all carnal
delights. 2. That God is not only the author of sin, but also of the
sinfulness or Ataxie thereof. 3. That all men are bound to know God in
abstracto without Christ, without Grace or Scripture. 4. They held extreme
unction to be a Sacrament and necessary for the sick, and of divine
institution: so they held the holy kiss of peace a religious and needful
Ceremony. 5. They put down, singing Psalms, and set up in lieu thereof
singing prophets, who are to chant out alone in the Congregation their own
hymns. 6. They teach that the soul is mortal. 7. That just men's souls go not
into heaven till the last day, but remain in the upper element of fire, whither
Enoch and Eliah, with the Soul of Christ before his resurrection, and the soul
of the good thief went, and no higher: they teach also that the Souls of the
wicked go not before the last judgment into hell, but remain in the lower
region of the air, or in the bottom of the sea. 8. They say, that after the day
of judgment, all the world shall be hell, except that part of heaven where God
resides with his Angels. Of these opinions, see the forenamed Authors.
9. In preaching, they will have their Ministers covered, and the people bare,
but in administering the Sacrament they will have the people covered, and the
Minister bare.

Q. 8. Upon what grounds do these Millenaries, build Christ's temporal Kingdom
here on earth for a thousand years?

An. Upon that place of the Revilation 19. 4, 5, 6. I saw the Souls of them,
The grounds upon which they build Christ's temporal Kingdom here on earth for
a thousand years.
who were beheaded for the witness of Jesus, and they lived and reigned with
Christ a thousand years but this place proves no such Kingdom, for it is
mystical, and symbolicall Divinity, not argumentative. Again, in this place
there is no mention at all of any earthly presence of Christ, nor of any
earthly reign with him: besides, the Kingdom of Christ is everlasting, for of
his Kingdom says the Angel, there shall be no end: therefore here is put a
definite number for an indefinite. Christ says, his Kingdom is not of this
world, the Kingdom of Christ is spiritual and within us, and if we speak of
Christ's Kingdom, as he is Mediator, reigning in his Church, by his word,
sacraments and discipline, we must conclude that he has reigned already above
1600. years; and how long more he shall reign here on earth we know not. 2.
They build their opinion upon Dan. 12. 2. Many of them who sleep in the dust
shall arise, etc. hence they infer two resurrections, in the first, many
shall rise to reign with Christ here on earth, in the second they say, all
shall rise to Judgment: but this interpretations is ridiculous; for the first
Resurrection mentioned in Scripture is spiritual, to wit, a rising from the
death of sin, of which the Apostle, if you be risen with Christ, seek the
things that are above; for as sin is called death, you were dead in sins and
trespasses, so the forsaking of sin is called a resurrection; this is the
rising of the mind, the other of the body. Again in Scripture, many and all are
promiscuously taken for the same, as here, many shall rise, that is all. So
Matthew. 4. Christ healed all Diseases, that is, many: Besides the words of
Daniel are directly spoken of the second Resurrection to Judgment, and not to
a temporary Kingdom: for he says, that some of those shall rise to life
eternal, not to a temporary of a thousand years, and others to everlasting
shame, which yet the Millenaries deny, in saying, the wicked shall not rise
till the expiration of the thousand years; and where they say, that the Saints
shall shine as stars, or the Firmament in the first Resurrection, but as the
sun in the second, it is vain; for in the second Resurrection shall be degrees
of glory, as the Apostle shows, 1 Cor. 15. For as one Star differs from
another star in glory, so is the Resurrection of the dead, some shall shine as
the Sun, who is the brightest of all the stars; and some shall be lesser
stars an glory; they do also vainly call their first Resurrection, a hidden
mystery, whereas indeed it is the second Resurrection that is a mesterie, and
so hidden, that the wisest Philosophers understood i^ not; and thought Paul had
been (...) when (...) preached this mystery as Athens, that which cannot be
apprehended by reason, but by faith (...) ^e truly called a hidden mystery. 3.
They misapply diverse places of Scripture to prove this imaginary reign of
Christ here on earth, as Psalm 102. 16. when the Lord shall build up Sion, he
shall appear in his glory. This Scripture was fulfilled when Jerusalem was
rebuilt, after the captivity. So they allege, Acts 3. 20. 21. The Heavens
shall receive Christ, till the times of restitution of all things, but this is
spoken of the second Resurrection; for then shall be a restitution of all
things, and not before; in their thousand years reign: for they confess that
then all the Jews shall not rise, nor all Christians, it must then follow, that
there shall not be a restitution of all things, at that time. That place of
Romans 11. 12. concerning the calling of the Jews is impertinent; for we deny
not, but they shall be called to the faith of Christ, but that they shall
return, to build Jerusalem, and be under Christ's earthly reign 1000. years, is
not at all spoken in that place: no less impertinent is that place of 2. Pet.
3. 13. We look for new heavens, and a new earth, wherein dwells
righteousness; for this is spoken of the last Judgment, wherein all things
shall be renewed by fire, and not before; as the circumstances of the Scripture
do show, and all Jnterpreters do agree: so without any sense or reason, they
apply the 65. chapter of Isa. to their Millenary reign, which is plainly spoken
of the calling of the Gentiles, and of Christ's first coming to preach the
Gospel, and to gather a Church, which there, and elsewhere; is called
Jerusalem, and the Prophets usually under the terms of planting, building,
eating, and drinking, new heavens, and new earth; the joy of hills, forests,
and trees, etc. do express the happy estate of the Church of Christ under the
Gospel. When the mountain of the Lords House shall be coealted on the top of
the mountains, and all nations shall flock to it, then Jerusalem, that is, the
Church, shall be the throne of the Lord. Then out of Sion shall go forth a Law,
and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem, then shall the God of heaven set up a
Kingdom, which shall never be destroyed, Christ shall reign over the house of
Jacob for ever, to this City of the Church, shall the Kings of the earth bring
their glory and honor: in that day, he that is feeble shall be like David, and
the house of David shall be as God. See Isa. chapter 2. chapter 55. and chapter 65. Ier.
16. Ezech. 21. Dan. 2. Zach. 12. Luke 1. Rev. 21 and many more places, which
speak of the Churches felicity under the Gospel, but not a word of a millenarie
Reign.

Q. 9. Wherein does the vanity of the Millenaries opinion consist?

An. 1. In giving to Christ a temporal Kingdom of a thousand years, The
vanity of the Millenaries opinion.
whereas, his Kingdom is eternal, it shall stand fast for ever, of his
Kingdom shall be no end, says the angel.

2. In giving him an earthly Kingdom, whereas his Kingdom is heavenly, My
Kingdom (says he) is not of this world; It is not from hence, it is within us.

3. In making his Kingdom to consist in earthly pleasures, in eating,
drinking, fighting, etc. all which are directly against the nature of his
Kingdom: which as the Apostle says, Romans 14. 17. Is not meat and drink, but
righteousness, peace, and joy of the Holy Ghost, the end of his coming was to
fight with no other weapon, but with the two edged sword of his word,
proceeding out of his mouth, he was the prince of peace, the dove that brought
the olive branch in his mouth: he brought peace in his birth, he preached peace
in his life, and recommended peace to us at his death: and as Saint Austin
says, pacem nobis reliquit, iturus ad Patrem, and pacem nobis dabit
perducturus ad patrem: his peace he left with us, and his peace he will bring
again to us.

4. In this their imaginary Kingdom, they bring Christ down from heaven before
his time; for the heavens must contain him till the restitution of all things,
which cannot be till the last Judgment: it is an Article of our Creed, that
Christ shall come down from heaven to judge the quick and the dead, which shall
not be till the last day.

5. He is to sit at Gods right hand, until be has made his enemies his
footst^^l, Ps. 110. 1. But these men will bring him from thence before he has
obtained this conquest and triumph, which is not to be obtained till the last
day, and consummation of all thing. 6. They are injurious to Christ, to bring
him from his place and condition of glory; to play the part of a butcher and
executioner in murdering of men with the sword, here on earth, an office ill
beseeming him, and no ways suitable to his glorious condition, and mercy, who
came to save sinners; and not to destroy them. 7. The Scripture mentions no
other Resurrection of the bodies, but such as shall rise at the last day, John
6. 39, 40, 44. in the end of the world, when he shall have delivered up the
Kingdom to God, 1 Cor. 15. 22. where we shall be caught up in the clouds to
meet the Lord in the air, and shall be ever with the Lord, 1 These. 4. 15. but
this Millenarie Resurrection is long before the last day, and end of the world;
neither in it shall we be ever with the Lord, if we are with him but a thousand
years. 8. The Scripture does not speak of three comings of Christ, but of two
only; the first when he came in humility, the second when he shall come in
glory: unto them that look for him shall he appear the second time without sin
unto salvation, Heb. 9. 28. let them show us out of Scripture a third coming,
and we will believe them. 9. Christ tells us John 14. 2. that in his Fathers
house, that is in heaven, are many mansions, thither he is gone to prepare a
place for us, that where he is, there we may b^; but he is in heaven, in his
Fathers house, there does he prepare a place for us, and not here upon earth;
for so we shall not be where he is, but he will be where we are; which is
repugnant to his own words. 10. They make the time of Christ's second coming to
Judgment certain, in affirming it shall be at the end of their thousand years;
but this is repugnant to Christ's words, who faith, that his coming shall be
sudden, secret, and unexpected, like the coming of a thief in the night: like
the coming of Noah's stood, or the fire of Sodom: so that, of that day and (...)
knows no man, no not the angels in heaven; nor Christ himself as he is man.
11. Whereas the condition of Christ's Church here on earth is mixed, consisting
of Saints and reprobates, of sheep and goats, of good and bad fishes, of wheat
and chafe, of corn and ^ares; they give Christ such a Church, as is without
sin or sinners, as need no preaching nor Sacraments, no Pastors and Jeachers,
no Advocate with the Father, no Christ to appear for us in the presence of God:
and lastly, such a Church as is not subject to persecution, affliction,
sufferings and trouble; all which is directly repugnant to Gods word; and
condition of the Church mi^^tant here, which is subject both to infirmities and
afflictions. 12. Antichrist shall not be destroyed, till Christ's second coming
to Judgment, as the Apostle shows, 2 These. 2. 8. That Christ shall destroy
him with the brightness of his coming; but the millenaries will have him to
be destroyed before the beginning of their thousand years, which is flat
against Scripture. 13. They do exceedingly wrong the Martyrs, in bringing their
souls down from heaven, where they have the fruition of God and his angels, to
reign here on earth, and to enjoy carnal and sensual pleasures; the meanest
of the Saints in heaven must be in a far better condition, than the greatest
martyr in this earthly Kingdom. 14. The reward that is promised to the Saints
after this life, is not a Kingdom here on earth, but the Kingdom of heaven; a
house made without hands, eternal in the heavens; a mansion in our heavenly
Fathers house: to sit with Christ in his throne, to be caught up in the clouds,
to meet the Lord in the air; and to be ever with the Lord; to be with Christ in
Paradise, to enjoy life eternal etc. 15. Whereas they dream that Jerusalem
shall be rebuilt, and the Jews shall reign in* Judea a thousand years with
christ, is directly also against Gods word, which Ezech. 16. 53. 55. shows,
that the Jews shall be restored to their former estate, when (...) and Sodom
shall be restored, which will never be, and Genesis 49. 10. The Scepter shall
depart from Judah when S^iloh comes: Jerusalem says Saint Hierom, est in
aetornos collapsa cineres, fallen into everlasting ashes, and never to rise
again. 16. Whereas they dream* that in the millenarie Kingdom, sacrifices,
circumcision, and all other Jewish ceremonies shall be used, it is plainly to
deny that christ ever came in the flesh; or that he offered himself a
propitiarory sacrifice, to put an end to all Jewish rites, which were but
shadows of christ's sufferings; the substance being come, the shadows were to
vanish: therefore the Apostle says, Gal. 4. 9. That they who turns to these
beggarly elements again, desire to be in bondage again, and in the next
chapter, he tells the Galathians, that if they be circumcised, Christ shall
profit them nothing. Lastly, this millenary kingdom of eating, drinking, and
sensual pleasures, was fitly devised by Cerinthus the heretic, as best
suiting with his swinish disposition; for he was noted for a person given to
gormandizing, and libidinous sports.

Q. 10. What other Sects and Opinions are there now stirring amongst us?

A. We have Anti-trinitarians or Polonian Arrians, which sprung up in Poland,
Sects of this Age.
Anno 1593. These deny the Trinity of Persons, the Divinity of Christ, and of
the Holy Ghost; that Christ was the Son of God essentially, but in respect of
his dominion, and say that the eternal generation of the Son, is against truth
and reason. We have also Millenaries, the spawn of Cerinthus the Heretic;
these dream of a temporary Kingdom bear on Earth, which they shall enjoy with
Christ a thousand years. But indeed they aim at the enjoyment of the temporal
estates of such as they call wicked, who (as they think) have no property in
their estates. We have Traskits, so called of one Trask, who would have no
Christian Sabbath kept, but the Jewish Laws observed, and their Sabbath or
Seventh day to be perpetually kept holy, till the worlds end. Others we have,
who will keep no Sabbath at all; these we call Anti Sabbatarians. We have
likewise Anti-Scripturians, who reject all Scriptures as man's inventions; there
are amongst us Divorcers, who hold that men may put away their Wives upon small
occasions. We have also Soul-Sleepers, who with the Arabic Heretics, hold
that the soul dies or sleeps with the body: whose souls I think are asleep
before the body dies; Amongst other professions, Seekers or Expe^^ers.
we have of late Seekers or Expe^^ers, who deny there is any true Church or
Ministry, and therefore they are seeking one, But they know not where to find
this Church, except it be in the Land of Utopia. There was one Hetherington a
Box maker, who rejecting all Church discipline, published that the Sabbath of
the Jews was abolished by Christ, and that every day now is a Sabbath; that the
books of Esdras were canonical Scripture, and in other opinions agreed with
the ^amilists.

Q. 11. What Opinions in Religion are held by Theaurau John.

Ans. He calls himself, Theauran John his opinions.
Priest of the Jews, sent as he says from God, to convert them: his wild
whimsies are these; 1. He calls it nonsense and a lie, to say that God is Father
of us all. 2. That we Gospellers (as he calls us) worship the Devil, because
(says he) the spirit of man is a Devil. 3. That it is a Monster, and absolute
blasphemy to say, the godhead dwelt in Christ bodily. 4. He wonders how he
that created all, could be born of a woman: by which we may plainly see he is a
circumcised Jew. 5. He says, that the child which the Virgin brought forth, is
love, as if the generation of christ were altogether mystical and not real.
6. He says, That Mary is christ, and christ is Mary, and that these are but
names of one thing. 7. He denies, That Christ was properly born, or that he
was born in one, or that he was begotten; or that be could be flesh properly;
or that he did descend into our flesh, but into our spirits only; or that he
could be included in the Virgins Womb, and withal he belyeth us in saying,
That we have brought the humanity to be very God: whereas we say, the same
person is God and man, one not by conversion of the Godhead into flesh, but by
taking of the manhood into God. One altogether, not by confusion of substance,
but by unity of person. 8. He calls the English clergy, thieves, robbers,
deceivers, sounding from Antichrist, and not from the true christ, in which we
see the Impudent spirit of an heretic, who can no other ways defend his lies,
and blasphemies, but by railing. 9. He prateth, That the Gospel cannot be
preached by another, but by it self; so that man's voice or outward sound, is a
lie, and Antichist. 10. That our Ministers, are not christ's ambassadors, but
that their call is a lie, for it is learning, and learning is that wh^re which
has deceived the Nations, and completed the work of Antichrist* See the
impudence and boldness of this blind ignoramus. 11. He denies, that the
Priests tips can preserve knowledge, though the Scripture is plain for it, but
by the Priest, he understands knowledge it self, and so he will make the Holy
Ghost to speak Tautologies, in saying, knowledge shall preserve knowledge: here
we see the fruits of ignorance. 12. He makes the spirit of man to be a
quintessence abstracted out of the elementarie motions, such is his dull
philosophy. 13. Out of his kind respect to the Devil, by whose instinct he
writes: he affirms, That he with the false prophet shall receive mercy at
last; because God with not punish a finite thing infinitely, but here be again
bewrayes his ignorance; for the devil is infinite a posteriore, both in regard
of his essence, and of his desire in sinning; besides, that God, whom he
offends, is infinite. 14. H^ ignorantly says, That ^e who conf^rs Gods gift,
is as great, yea, greater than God himself; is so, then it must follow, that
the Apostles were greater than God, when they gave the gifts of the Holy Ghost
by imposition of hands. 15. He impiously says, that Saint Paul wrote many
things which he understood not. 16. And as impiously does he say, that in them
books, which we call Scripture, is the lie, as well as in other books. 17.
After his ignorant manner, he c^^founds the gift of prophecy, with the Prophet
himself, in saying, man is not the Prophet, but the light in man from God. 18.
He will not have us to seek for Antichrist abroad, for man in darkness is
Antichrist. I deny not, but every man in darkness, is in some sort an
Antichrist: yet there is one great Antichrist to be sought for abroad. 19. The
Trinity, which he acknowledges is, God, the Son, and Man: this Trinity is
hatched in his crasie (...). 20. He is so mad, that he says, he can make one
word bear forty significations: so he can make (...) thou, stand for dark or
light, or hell, or heaven, or sea, or land, or angel, or Sun, or the devil.
21. He will not have Christ's body that suffered to be our Savior, nor Christ's
body; for christ's body says he, is obedience: thus he would fain make christ
our Savior, a (...) allegory; and therefore in plain terms affirms, that
true Christ has not, nor cannot have any true corporal body; for he is a
spirit, and a spirit is free from flesh, as if forsooth a spirit and flesh
could not be united in the same person then he concludes, that the body or
flesh which suffered at Jerusalem, was not christ body. 22. He makes the soul
of man to be all one with the Gospel; and the body of Christ to be the whole
Creation: by this and such like stuff with which his books are fraughted, we
may see that he deserves to have his brains purged with Hellebor, rather than
his crasie opinions refused by arguments, or Scripture. In the mean while, we
may perceive to our great grief, the lamentable fruits which are begot of two
much liberty in religion. These impious Opinions are in his printed Pamphlets
lately published. One Richard Coppi^ holds some of the before recited
opinions, and withal, lately, before a confused multitude, in an usurped
pulpit, asserted the lawfulnes of women's preaching; for such Ranters, a pillory
were more fit than a pulpit.

Q. 12. What opinions in Religion are lately broached by John Reeve, and
Lodowick Muggleton?

An. These two would persuade us, that they are the two last witnesses, John
Reeve and Lodowick Muggleton their opinions.
and prophets of Christ, sent by his spirit to seal the foreheads of the elect
and reprobate: that one John Robins is the last great Antichrist, and son of
perdition, spoken of by the Apostle in the Thessalonians, because he shows
lying signs and wonders, and assumes to himself the titles of the only God,
in that he calls himself Adam and Melchisedeth, and Father of Jesus Christ; in
saying, the three persons in Trinity are Adam, that is, himself, Abel, that is
his son Jesus, and Cai^, that is, the holy Ghost: Many such blasphemies they
ascribe to him. They affirm also that Christians using the sword of steel, are
ignorant of Jesus, and enemies to his Gospel, and they teach, that the two
uncreated substances of earth and water, were eternally resident in the
presence of God the Creator: that death was from Eternity: that the person of
the reprobate Angel or Serpent, entered into the womb of Eve, and there died,
but quickened in her all manner of uncleanness: that there is no devil at all
without the body of man or woman, but what dwells within them; so that the
devil spoken of so often in the Scripture, is man's spirit of unclean reason,
and cursed imagination: that God the Father, was a spiritual man from
Eternity, and that in time his spiritual body brought forth a natural body:
that if the very Godhead had not died, that is, (say they) the soul of Christ,
which is the eternal Father had not died, all men had perished eternally: that
Moses and Eliah are angels, and did represent the person of the Father in
heaven, as they did the person of the Son on earth, that Eliah was made
protector of God, when God became a child; and that he filled the Lord Jesus
with those great revelations of his former glory which he possessed in heaven,
when he was the immortal Father; and that it was Eliah who spoke these words
from heaven, saying, this is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased: they
say also, that all the Ministry in this world, whether Prophetical or
Ministerial, with all the worship taught by them, is all a lie, and
abomination to the Lord. Again, they declare, that whereas, there are three
witnesses on earth, water, blood, and the spirit: that by water is meant the
Commission given to Moses and the Prophets under the Law: by blood, the
Commission given to the Apostles, and Ministers of the Gospel: and by the
Spirit is meant the Commission of the two witnesses, that were to come in this
last age, whose ministry is invisible, and spiritual, cutting off all formal
worshipping of an invisible spiritual, personal God, they say there is hardly
a minister in the world, that confesses an invisible God, but they preach a
God of three persons, that is a monster instead of one true personal God: they
say, that the true God is a distinct body or person, as a man is a distinct
body or person: again, they say, that there is no Christian Magistrate in the
world, that has any authority from Christ, to set up any visible form of
worship, and that the spirits and bodies of men, are both mortal, both begot
together, and both of one nature: that the spirit is nothing without the body,
that it is the Spirit alone, that walks and works, eats and drinks, and dies,
for the spirit is a natural fire of reason: they say also that the bodies or
persons of holy men, wherein they lived and died, shall not appear again any
more; but when the Saints are glorified, they are absolutely of the very same
glorious nature, both in spirit and body, as God is: and that believing spirits
are of the very same divine nature of God This is the sum of their Divinity,
and Phylosophie, as may be seen in their transcendent spiritual Treatise, (as
they call it) which is full of transcendent nonsense, and blasphemie^, for here
they lay their axe to the very root of Christianity, in giving a new Father to
our Savior Jesus Christ; in calling the blessed Trinity a monster; in denying
the Creation, whilst they make earth and water eternal; in making angels, and
men's souls mortal; in making weak man, Gods protector, and author of that
divine knowledge which was in Christ; in denying the Ministry of the Gospel,
and the power of the Magistrates, and the outward worship of God, and making
the souls of men corporeal: in denying also the Resurrection of the flesh, and
transforming men into the Divine nature. By this and other wicked tenets,
permitted and countenanced among us, at this time; we see what Christian
religion is come to in this land; so famous heretofore for piety and zeal: we
received Christianity as soon as any Nation in Europe: whether by the preaching
of Saint Peter, or Saint Paul, or Simon Zel^tes, or Joseph of Arimathea, I know
not, but all agree we received it very early, and have continued ever since in
the profession thereof; neither was there ever any Nation more devout and
zealous in the advancement thereof, as our goodly Temples, Monasteries,
Hospitals, Colleges and Schools can witness; but alas! now Quantum mutamur ab
illis Angligenis? what is there left among us, but the bare Skeliton of
Religion, the vital substance thereof being eat up and consumed by heresies
and blasphemies, worse than any Sarcophagus. I may here with Jeremiah complain
that from the daughter of Sion, all her beauty is departed, her Princes are
become like Hearts, etc. How is the gold become so dim, and the most fine gold
changed, and the stones of the Sanctuary are scattered in every corner of the
streets, etc.

Q. 13. What are the opinions of the Quakers?

An. These fanaticall spirits are called Quakers, Quakers, or as some call them
Shakers their opinions.
because they use to quake and tremble when they prophecy; so did the Heathen
soothsayers of old, non vultus, non color unus, non compta mansere (...), sed
pectus anhelum, and rabie fera corda tument, etc. but the spirit of God, is the
spirit of peace* quietness and tranquillity, he is not in fire, earthquakes and
whirlwinds, but in the soft and still voice; its not the quaking of the body,
but humility and reverence of mind which he requires: these Sectaries deny all
ministerial Ordinances; and knowledge got by study and industry, pretending an
inward light from the spirit, and that all our Learning got by Preaching,
Hearing, Reading, or Catechizing, i^ but notionall and carnal and hanging upon
the tree of knowledge: they blasphemously prate also, that Christ had his
failings, and that he distrusted God on the Cross, when he cried out, My God,
my God, why have thou forsaken me? by which they overthrow the work of our
Redemption, which none could perform, but he that knew no sin, in whose lips
was found ^o guil, whom his enemies could not accuse of sin. They will not have
Ministers to preach for tithe^, which they call wages, and yet our Savior
says. That the labourer is worthy of his wages, and the Apostle, That they who
serve at the altar, should live by the al^ar, and if they communicate of their
spiritual things, why should they not participate of the peoples temporal
things. They will not have particular houses for preaching and prayer; and yet
among the Jews was the temple, and Synagogues, and after Christianity was
settled, Churches were erected. They cannot abide studied or methodicall
Sermons, nor expou^ding, nor learning in matters of Divinity, by which we see,
how ignorant these people are, who despise such helps as God has given for
propagating the Gospel. Is it not better to study and premeditat^, than to
utter quicquid in buecam ve^erit, undigested, immethodicall ignorant trash.
Christ and his Apostles expounded and opened the Scriptures; and yet these men
reject expounding: these men are also against singing of Psalms, a duty
practiced by Christ, and urged by Saint Paul and Saint James. They reject
Infant Baptism, and yet to infants belongs the kingdom of heaven. They will
have no set days for Divine worship, and consequently the Lords day must be of
no account with them. They will have no prayer before and after Serm^n; and yet
the Apostles joined prayer with their Doctrine and breaking of bread, Acts 2.
24. neither did they ever undertake any weighty business without prayer. They
condemn set hours of prayers, and yet we read in the Acts of the Apostles,
that the third and ninth hours, were set hours of prayer: but by these wild
Fancies we may see, how crosse-grained these people are in contradicting every
thing, even Gods word it self; if it be not consonant to their shallow reason,
which they call the spirit, but it is indeed the spirit of giddiness, with
which they are troubled, and trouble others; for the rejecting of all outward
forms, and decent ceremonies in Religion i^ the overthrow of Religion it self;
which thought it consist not in ceremonies, yet without them it is like a man
stripped naked of his garments, and so for want of them exposed to all injuries
of weather, and danger of death; The leaves of a tree are not the fruit
thereof, and yet without them, the fruit will not prosper.

Q. 14. What other opinions do the Quakers hold?

An. Not to mention their ^orrid blasphemies, in saying that some of them are
Christ, Other opinions of the Quakers.
some God himself, and some equal with God, because they have the same spirit
in them which is in God, They maintain that the Scripture is not the word of
God: that out preaching is conjuration, that expounding of Scripture is adding
to it: that the letter of Scripture is carnal, that the word is not the rule
to try the spirits: that the soul is a part of God, and long existent before
the body: that there is no Trinity: that Christ has no other body but his
Church: that Christ's coming in the flesh was but a figure: that all men have a
light in them sufficient to salvation: that the man Christ is not ascended into
heaven: that there is no imputation of Christ's righteousness: that prayer for
remission of sins (...) needless: that we are justified by our own inherent
righteousness: that there is no (...) life or glory to be looked for, but in
this world: that there is no local heaven nor hell, nor resurrection of the
body: that many of them cannot sin: that the calling of our Ministry is
Antichristian: that our preaching is altogether useless: that themselves are
immediately called by God: that our worshipping of God in the Church is
heathenish: that the of children with water in Baptism, is Antichristian: that
we have no Sacraments: that D^vids Psalms are ^arnall, and no^ to be sung: that
in our Churches which they ^ll breasts houses, God is not worshipped: (...)
Christ (...) to destroy all property; and that therefore all things ought to
be common: that no man is to be called Master or Sir, or to be saluted by the
way; and that one man ought not to have power over another: here we see, that
these men despise Magistracy, reject the Ministry, slight all decency and
ordinances in Christ's Church, and in a word overthrow, as much as in them
lies, all Religion and piety, setting up a Babel of their own, full of
impiety, ignorance and blasphemy: these are the fruits of too much liberty,
and the effects of reading Scripture, See what has been written against them
by Sa. Robert Eaton, Sherlock and others.
by ignorant and malicious spirits, who like spiders, suck poison out of the
sweetest and wholesomest flowers, and like mad men, use that sword of the word
to destroy themselves and others, which was ordained to say and defend us from
our enemies.

Q. 15 Wherein do the absurdities and impieties of their opinions consist?

An. 1. In rejecting all University Learning, because Christ and his Apostles
were never taught in Schools: Wherein the absurdities and impieties of their
Opinions consist?
but this opinion is ridiculous; for Christ and his Apostles, taught no other
Divinity for the matter, than what is taught in Universities; the difference is
only in the manner of attaining this knowledge, for they had it by
inspiration, we by study, labor and instruction; and yet the prophets had
their Schools and Colleges both, on the hill of God, 1 Samuel 10. 5. 10. and at
Bethel, 2 Kings 2. 3. and at Jericho, v. 5. and at Nai^th, 1 Samuel 14. 20.
Elisha had his College, 2 Kings 6. 1. 2. They will not have us expound
Scripture because the Apostles expounde^ them; but this conceit is also
frivolous; for to what purpose did Christ appoint Doctors, and Pastors, to
continue still with his Church, if they are not to expound Scripture: what the
Apostles expounded briefly, we expound more fully. In their expositions, there
be many intricate, obscure, high and figurative passages, which require a
further exposition. God did never reveal all his truth at one time. Among the
Jews we read that Ezra the Scribe, and the Levites expounded the Law, Neh. 8.
Christ took a Text and expounded it Luke 4. and so did Philip Acts 8. 3. They
will not have Ministers to be called Masters: but I would know of these men,
whether they that labor in the word and Doctrine deserve not honor, even
double honor, that is, honorable titles, and honorable maintenance; it is
true, they should not ambitiously affect honors, nor ought they to reject
them. Christ was oftentimes called Master, and yet he never reproved any for
calling him so. 4. They quarrel with the word Sacrament, because not found in
Scripture; but I would know, whether thing meant this word sacrament be not
found in scripture: where has the scripture forbid us to call sacred things by
significant terms; they may as well say, that God is not every where, or that
he knows not all things, because these words omnipresent and omniscient are not
in scripture. 5. They will not have Ministers to take tithes, then they will
not have those who wait at the altar, to partake with the altar, which thwarts
the Apostles words directly, why should not the Ministers under the Gospel as
well receive tithes, as the Priests under the law; is our burden easier or our
calling less deserving, its too much presumption to discommend what Christ
has commended; but he commended the Scribes and Pharisees for paying their
tithes, Luke 11. 42. 6. They reject Infant Baptism, because the Scripture
speaks not of it, but the Scripture speaks of baptising whole Families, and
Nations, Acts 16. 33. but infants are included in these: Infants were
circumcised, were admitted to Christ, to them belongs the Kingdom of heaven.
Jeremiah an infant, was sanctified by the holy spirit, Ier. 1. 5. 6. the hand
of the Lord was with John Baptist an infant, and he grew strong in the Spirit,
Luke 1. 66. 80. can any man then, forbid water, that these should not be
baptized, which have received the Holy Ghost. 7. They quarrel with public
prayers i^ the Church, because Christ bids us pray in private; this is a
childish consequence; for the one should be done, and the other not to be left
undone: ou^ Savior prayed sometimes privately by himself, and sometimes
publicly with his Disciples* he calls his Temple the house of prayer; but
the prayers there used were public. Saint (...) both prayed in public, and
taught in public, Acts (...) 36. and 21. 5. Public prayers were used among
the (...) also. Neh. 9. 3, 4. are we not co^^^^ded to pray continually, and to
lift up pure hands in all places, is it not by prayer that our preaching is
sanctified, and made useful? its true, we ought not to make public places,
(as the Pharisees did the Temple and Synagougue) the places of our private
prayers; we have chambers at home to pray in private; but this privacy does no
more exclude public prayers, th^n private instructions at home by the master
to his family, do exclude public preaching. 8. They will not have David's
Psalms to be sung in meeter. These dull souls do not know, that David made his
Psalms in meeter, and did sing them; and why may not we do the same in our
language, which David did in his? besides did not Christ sing a hymn, did not
Paul and Silas sing Psalms to God at midnight, Acts 16. Does not the Apostle
exhort us to Psalms and hymns, Ephesians. 5. and does not Saint* James will us to
sing Psalms, when we would be merry? there are in the Psalms as in a store
house, all sorts of materials for devotion, and for all occasions. 9. They
make faith and repentance necessary concomitants of Baptism; this they hold to
exclude-Infants from baptism, but they should know, that though Infants have
not faith, and repentance actually, yet they have both in possibility; the seed
of both are in them, and the actual faith of their Parents supplies the
actual defect of the children: besides Simon Magus, Alexander the Copper
smith, and others, were baptized, who neither had true faith, nor repentance;
and repentance is enjoined to Simon, long after his Baptism, Acts 8. 13, 22.
and Christ was baptized, who needed neither faith nor repentance. 10. They say,
That the Church is in God; therefore, God is not in the Church, by the same
reason they may say, that God is not in heaven, because heaven is in God; or
that Christ is not in us, because we are in Christ: Christ is in us as the
head, we are in him as the members. The Church is in God, because in him we
live, move, and have both our natural and spiritual being, God is in his
Church by his assistance, providence, and spiritual presence; and so he has
promised, that where two or three are gathered together in his name, there is
he in the midst of them, Mat. 18. 20. Diverse other absurd opinions they
maintain, as namely, against tithes, against maintenance for preaching, against
Clerks saying Amen in the Church, and such like; of which we have already
spoken, and indeed all or most of their opinions are An^baptisticall, and this
Sect is the spawn of Anabaptists, who are subdivided into different factions;
and such diversity there is amongst them, that the Anabaptists in Holland will
not admit those of Moravia and Suevia, without rebaptization. Sebestian Francus
in his Chronology reckons seventy sects of them.

Q. 16. Now you have satisfied me as to the Quakers, I pray do me the like
favor concerning a sort of people they call Ranters, which I have received
diverse horrid relations of, and such, as for their strange and impious
assertions, I have not yet admitted into my belief?

A. The Ranters are a sort of beasts, Ranters, their character, and opinions.
that neither divide the hoof nor chew the cud, that is to say, very unclean
ones such as hold no small correspondency with the Quakers, their lives and
demeanours are much alike, only what the Ranters act upon the stage, by an
open profession of lewdness and irreligion, the other do it within the
curtain, by crafty and seemingly innocent insinuations and pretenses of
sanctity, and the contempt of the things of this world. These are they that
make a laughing stock of Christianity by their bitter invectives, and derision
at the ordinances and ceremonies of Christian Religion; These are they that
make no distinction between Forms and Order, for having cried down the former,
their dispensations will not bear with the later; it being their main design to
bring the business of Religion to that condition, wherein man was before he
had assumed thoughts of government, that is to say, into Anarchy and confusion.
As for their blaspemies and horrid expressions of christian things!
Mahumetanes, Jews, and Pagans, own more modesty, and less profaneness. But to
retail their opinions, or to anatomize this monster, we must come to
particulars. 1. They hold that God, Devils, Angels, Heaven, Hell, etc. are
Fictions and Fables. 2. That Moses, the Baptist, and Christ, are impostors! and
what Christ and his Apostles acquainted the world with as to matter of Religion
perished with them, and nothing transmitted to us. 3. That preaching and
praying is useless, and that it is but public lying. 4. That there is an end
of all Ministry and Administrations, and people are to be taught immediately
from God. 5. They hold Baptism a pure, legal administration, not proceeding
from Christ, but from John. 6. They jest the Scriptures, that divine Legacy of
our salvation! out of all life; reverence and authority, quoting it in driblets
and shreds, to make it the more ridiculous. In their Letters, they endeavor to
be strangely profane, and blasphemous, uttering Athiesticall curses and
imp^ecations, which is a kind of canting among them, as among Cypsies; as for
exampe! in one you have this style, My own heart blood, from whom I daily
receive life, and being, to whom is ascribed all honor, etc. thou art my
garment of needle work, my garment of salvation. Eternal plagues consume you
all, rot, sink and damn your bodies and souls into devouring fire, where none
but those who walk uprightly can enter. The Lord grant that we may know the
worth of Hell, that we may scorn heaven. 7. Sin is only what a man imagines,
and conceives to be so within himself. 8. Ordinances they account poor low
things, nay the perfections of the Scriptures is so inconsiderable in their
apprehensions that they pr^^ead to l^ve above them! their lives witness they
live without them. 9. If you ask them what christian Liberty is, they will tell
you that it consists in a community of all things, and among the rest, of
women; which they paint over with an expression called The enjoyment of the
fellow, creature. 10. The enjoyment of the Fellow Creature, cannot but be
seconded with lascivious songs, drinking of healths, music, dancing and
bawdry. Lastly, They are (with the Anabaptists) those that most of all kick
against the pricks of Authority: for Magistracy cannot have in it any thing
more sacred than the Ministry, so that they wish as much policy in the State,
as government in the Church, which is none at all; so to bring an Eygyptian
darkness upon both: that the world might be the less scandalized at their
madness^s and extravagancies. But this age, which is much more fruitful of
Religions, than of good works, of Scripture-phrases, than of Scripture
practices, of opinions, than of piety, has spawned more religions, than that
Lady of Holland did In^ant, to mention all which, were to weary both my self
and the reader: therefore I will content my self to mention some few more, as
the Independents, Presbyterians,etc.

Q. 17. What are the opinions of the Independents?

A. 1. These are so called, Independents their Tenets.
because they will have every particular Congregation to be ruled by their own
laws, without dependence upon any other in Church matters,* 2. They prefer
their own gathered Churches (as they call them) in private places, to the
public congregations in Churches, which they flight, calling them
steeple houses. 3. They hold there is no use of learning or degrees in Schools,
for preaching of the Gospel; and withal, that maintenance of the Ministry by
Tithes, is Superstitious and Judaicall. 4. They are against set forms of
prayer, chiefly the Lords prayer, accounting such forms, a choking of the
spirit. 5. They give power to private men, who are neither Magistrates nor
Ministers, to erect and gather Churches; and to these also, they give the power
of election and ordination, (if we may call this ordination) of deposition
also, and excommunication, even of their own officers, and final determination
of all Church causes. 6. They commit the power of the Keys in some places to
women, and publicly to debate and determine Ecclesiastic causes. 7. They
admit private men to administer the Sacraments, and Magistrates to perform the
Ministers office in marrying. 8. They permit divorces in slight cases. 9. They
hold Independency to be the beginning of Christ's Kingdom, which is to be here
on earth a thousand years. 10. They place much Religion in names, for they do
not like the old names of Churches, of the days of the week, of the months of
the year; of Christmasse, Michaelmasse, Candlemasse, etc: 11. In preaching they
will not be tied to a Text, nor to prayer, but they make one to preach, another
to pray, a third to prophecy, a fourth to direct the Psalm, and another to
bless the people. 12. They permit all gifted men (as they call them) to preach
and pray, and then after prophesying is ended, they question the preacher in
the points of his Doctrine. 13. some of them allow no Psalms at all to be ^^ng
in public calamities, and will not suffer Wo^^en to sing Psalms at all, 14,
They will baptize no children, but those of their own Congregations; whom they
esteem not members of their Church, until they have taken their Covenant. 15.
They in diverse places communicate every Sunday among themselves, but will not
communicate with any of the reformed Churches. 16. Whilst they are
communicating, there is neither reading, exhortation, nor singing, not have
they any preparation nor catechizing before the communion; and either they sit
at Table, or have no Table at all, and because they would not seem to be
superstitious, in the time of administration they are covered. 17. They allow
their Ministers to sit in civil Courts; Of the Independents Tenets, see the
Antidote against Independencie, Baylies disswasives Edwards, Paget, and others.
and to voice in the choosing of Magistrates. 18. They are against violent
courses in matters of Religion, nor will they have the conscience to be forced
with fear or punishment, but gently to be inclined by persuasion and force of
argument; in which point, I commend their Christian moderation; for in
propagating the Gospel, neither Christ nor his Apostles, nor the Church for
many hundred years, did use any other sword, but the word, to bring men to
Christ.

Q. 18. What Tenets are held by the Independents of New- England?

An. Besides those opinions which they hold with other Independent;
Independents of New- England their Tenets.
they teach that the spirit of God dwells personally in all the Godly.

2. That their Revelations are equal in Authority with the Scriptures.

3. That no man ought to be troubled in his Conscience for sin, being he is
under the Covenant of grace.

4. That the Law is no rule of our conversation.

5. That no Christian should be pressed to practice holy duties.

6. That the Soul dies with the body.

7. That all the Saints upon earth have two bodies.

8. That Christ is not united to our fleshly body, but to the new body, after
the manner that his Humanity is united to his Divinity. 9. That Christ's
Humanity is not in heaven.

10. That he has no other body but his Church.

11. They reckon all Reformed Churches, Of these opinions, see Baylies
disswasive, Edwards his Gangrena, etc.
except themselves profane and unclean.

All these opinions, savor of nothing but of pride, carnal security,
blasphemy, and slighting of Gods written word, which is able to make the man of
God perfect, and wise unto salvation.

Q. 19. Upon what grounds do the Independents forsake our churches?

An. Because they do not see the signs of grace in every one of our members;
The grounds whereupon the Independents forsake our Churches.
but this ground is childdish; for many are in the state of grace, in whom we
see no outward signs; so was Saul when he persecuted the Church, he was then a
vessel of mercy; and many in whom we see the outward signs of grace, may be in
the estate of damnation; such are hypocrites, whose wolfish disposition is
covered with sheeps clothing: Moses did not separate himself from the Jewish
Church, because most of them were a stiff-necked people, a rebellious
generation of uncircumcised hearts, and ears, a people that erred in their
hearts, and knew not the ways of God. Neither did Christ separate himself from
the Apostles, though there was a Judas amongst them. Neither did Saint Paul
abandon the Church of Corinth, because of the incestuous person, and other
wicked men among them, Will the husband man for sake his field, because there
are ^ares among the corn, or will he abandon his Barn, because of some chafe
among the wheat? there will come a time of separation, when the sheep and
goats, the good and bad fishes, the green and withered trees shall be parted,
which shall be in that great day, when all secrets shall be disclosed, and the
visard of hypocrisy removed; till then the true Israelites must be content to
have some Canaanites live among them. 2. They say, that many among us profess
the faith of Christ outwardly, which have not the spirit of God within; but I
say, that whosoever among us professes Christ outwardly, has the Holy Ghost
for ought we know; we are to judge of the tree by the fruits; it is only God
that exactly knows who are his: it were uncharitably done of us to expel or
exclude any man from the body of Christ, that professes him outwardly; its
true, there be many hypocrites, such as are among us, but are not of us; these
we cannot discern, whilst they continue in their outward profession, but by
revelation; the servants that invited and compelled all sorts of guests to the
wedding feast, knew not who wanted the inward wedding garment of grace; it was
only the master of the Feast that could find that out. 3. They say that we
receive diverse into our Churches, which shall not be saved. I answer, that no
man is certain who shall be saved, or not saved, we are to judge charitably of
all men, till we know the contrary; we receive none into our Church, but such
as prosesse Christianity, and the children of believing parents, to whom also
the Covenant of grace belongs; and though we did know such, as were not to be
saved, yet we are not to debar them from the Church, so long as they join in
outward profession with Gods people. So Christ knew that Judas should not be
saved, yet he received him into the fellowship of the Apostles; but I would be
informed, how these men can so exactly know, who shall be saved or not; seeing
in outward profession, the hypocrite can go as far, as the best Saint, so
likewise, the best Saint may for a time seem to be in the state of damnation:
besides, John Baptist admitted Scribes, Pharisees, and all sorts of people to
his Baptism, if they confessed their sins and repented; and so Philip, Acts 8.
admits to his Baptism all outward professors of faith, which is many times
without the inward grace of Sanctification.

Quest. 20. upon what grounds do the Independents and Anabaptis, allow Lay men
to preach, without call or ordination.

An. The grounds whereupon the Independents and Anabaptists, allow Lay men to
proach without call or ordination.
Because the sons of the Prophets did preach, so did Ieheshaphat and his
Princes, so did the Disciples before Christ's Resurrection: so did Paul and
B^nabas; likewise the Scribes and Pharisees, and many in the Church of Corinth,
who were not Churchmen; besides, Moses wishes, that all the Lords people were
Prophets. But these are all weak and groundless reasons; For 1. The sons of
the Prophets were destinated for the Ministry, and therefore were by probation
sermons to give testimony of their gifts; which they acquired by their pains,
and industry in the Schools of the Prophets, which were their Colleges. 2.
Ieh^saphat and his Princes, in an extraordinary time of Reformation, made an
exhortation or speech to the people, to stir up the Levites and Judges, to
discharge their duty: Neither do we read, Chron. 2. 17. that the Princes did
preach or expound the Law, but only that they accompanied and countenanced the
Levites whilst they preached. 3. The Disciples were called to the Apostleship,
and to preach the Gospel before Christ's Resurrection: 4. And so were Paul and
Barnabas called to preach the Gospel. 5. Likewise the Scribes and Pharisees,
sat in Moses chair, in that confused time, and they were Doctors of the Law;
therefore Christ wills the people to hearken to them: they had their
Sinagogues, as well as the Levites had the Temple. 6. In the Church of Corinth,
there were some extraordinary Prophets endowed with infused gifts and
revelations, which can be no warrant for Laymen, who want these gifts to
undertake the ordinary function of preaching. 7. We deny not, but Moses wished,
that all Gods people were Prophets, and so do we, but neither he nor we, wish
that they should prophecy without a calling, either ordinary or extraordinary,
for how shall they preach, except they be sent says the Apostle, Romans 10. 15.
N^ man takes the honor of sacrificing to himself, but be that is called of
God, as was Aaron, Heb. 5. 3. much less should any without a call take upon
him the office of preaching, which is more noble than sacrificing: and
therefore the Apostle prefers Preaching to Baptising, 1 Cor. 1. 17. And surely
if Laymen may Preach, they may also baptize; for Christ joyneth these two
together, in his Apostles and their successors, with whom he is by his
assistance and spiritual presence, to the end of the world: but we see how far
they are from being sent by God, or from having the gift of preaching, by the
Errors and Heresies daily hatched among them; and how can it be otherwise,
seeing they are not bred in the Schools of learning, whereby they may be fi^^ed
and set apart for this great employment, which will require the whole man; and
who is sufficient for it? says the Apostle: neither do we read in the
Scripture, that this ordinary gift of Preaching, was communicated to any but to
Apostles, Evangelists, Prophets, Pastors, and Doctors; and to give way that all
men may Preach, without Call or Ordination, is to make him who is the God of
Order, to be the God of confusion.

Quest. 21. What are the Tenets of the Presbyterians?

A. The Presbyterians are so called, for maintaining that the Church in the
beginning was governed by Presbyters or Elders, Presbytery the Doctrine and
Tenets thereof
and that it should be so governed still, because the office of a Bishop came
not to be distinct from the Presbyter, till almost three hundred years after
Christ; before which time they had the same name, for Presbyters were Bishops,
as they show out of the fifth, sixth, and seventh verses, of the first chapter
to Titus; likewise out of Hierom ep. ad Evag. and ad Ocea. Ireneus l, 4. cont,
haeret. c. 43, 44, Eusebius Hiss. l. 5. cap. 23. and others. And as they show
their names to be one, so likewise that their office of preaching and
administering the Sacraments was the same out of 1 Pet. 5. 2. the power also of
ordination they prove to have been in the Presbytery, 1 Timothy 4. 14. which
Hierom calls the Ecclesiastical Scnat Isa. 3. and Ignatius Epist. ad Magnes.
the Apostolical Senate. And that in ruling there is no difference, they prove
out of Hebr. 13. 17. and 1 Th^ss. 5. 12. but because much has been written in
defense of this opinion, by the Presbyterians of England, France, Scotland,
Netherlands, and diverse parts of Germany, I have therefore out of their
writings reduced the whole sum of their Doctrine and Discipline into 95.
Questions or a short Catechism, by way of Question and Answer.

Quest. What is the Ministry of the Gospel?

Answ. It is the dispensation of Divine mysteries, manifested by Christ's coming
in the flesh.

Q. How many parts has this Ministry?

A. Three, to wit, the preaching of the Gospel, the administration of the
Sacraments* and the exercise of Church Discipline, commonly called the power of
the Keys, and of binding and loosing.

Q. wherein consists Church Discipline?

A. In two things, to wit, in Imposition of hands, and in correction of manners.

Q. Are all Church Ministers properly Ministers of the Gospel;

An. No; for they are properly Ministers of the Gospel, who preach and give the
Sacraments; but Deacons who look to the poor, and Deaconisses are only
Ministers of the Church; not of the Gospel.

Q. Are Prophets in the New Testament, and Ministers of the Gospel the same?

A. No; for Philip's four daughters were Prophetesses, yet not Ministers of the
Gospel. Many of the Laity had the gift of Prophecy, which were not Ministers
of the Gospel.

Q. Are Presbyters and Priests all one?

A. No; for he is a Priest that offers Sacrifice, Presbyters their Office.
but Presbyter is an Elder, which sometimes is called a Bishop, as Act. 20.
mention is made of many Bishops, that is, many Elders or Presbyters. The
Apostles also are called Elders, 1 Pet. 3. Presbyter, Bishop, and Pas^our are
taken for the same office, Act 20. we read also of many Bishops in Philippi;
Phil. 1. which is meant of many Elders: the Apostle uses promiscuously the
word Bishop and Presbyter, Tit. 1. for indeed Bishops or Pastors ought to be
Elders, that is, excel others both in years and knowledge.

Q. were the 70. Disciples subject or subordinate to the 12. Apostles?

A. No; for though they were called later than the Apostles, yet I find not
that their power in working miracles, in preaching, in administering the
Sacraments, in ecclesiastic discipline, was less or subordinate to the
Apostles; for both were immediately called by Christ, and equally subject to
him without subordination, or subjection to the Apostles, no more than of old
the Prophets were subject to the High Priests.

Q. Is the Ordinatio^ of the Church of Rome lawful?

A. Yes; for neither Husse, Wickliff, Luther, and other worthy men, who forsook
the errors of the Romish Church, did ever reject her ordination, no more than
they did her Baptism. She retains the faith of the Trinity, the two
Testaments, the Sacraments or Seals of the Covenant, the two Tables of the Law,
therefore though she be a wife of fornieations, as the Church of Judah sometime
was, yet she may bring forth sons to God.

Q In what things did the Apostles differ from their successors.

A. 1. Apostles and their Office.
The Apostles were immediately called by Christ, but their successors by men.
2. The Apostles were sent abroad into all the world, but their successors were
confined to peculiar places. 3. The Apostles Doctrine was the rule and Canon by
which their successors must frame their Sermons. 4. The Apostles were the
first, that gave the Holy Ghost by imposition of hands; as for preaching,
administering the Sacraments, and discipline, in these they agreed with their
Successors.

Quest. Who founded the first Christian Churches.

A. The Apostles, either immediately, as Peter and John founded the Church of
Samaria Acts 8. 5, 6. Peter the Church of Caesarea, Acts 10. 44, 45, Paul the
Church of Corinth, 1. Cor. 3. 6. and 4. 15. and the Church of the Galathians,
Gal. 4. 19. or else immediately by their Deputies, or Evangelists, as Banabas
founded the Church of Antioch, Acts 11. 22.

Q. Had any Apostle power or jurisdiction over the rest.

A. No; but they were all of equal power, and authority; whence it follows,
that neither the Pope should usurp any power over other Patriarchs, nor
Bishops lord it over their fellow Bishops or Presbyters, (for these I take here
for one) except by consent for a time a superintendency be given for quieting
of troubles in the Church; which perhaps was given to one of the Apostles, it
may be to Peter, whilst they lived together at Jerusalem, before their
dispertion, but if so, it was only temporary, and by consent.

Q. Was it the chief office of the Deacons i^ the Primitive Church to prea^h
the word?

A. No; but to take care of the poor, of Widows, and Orphans, and to attend on
the Tables, that is, on their Love Feasts, called Agapa, Deacons and their
Office.
of which burden they desired to be eased, who preached the Word, as not being
able to do both; yet we read that Stephen, Acts 6. 6. 8. 10. did preach, but
indeed in that place it is more likely that he disputed in the Jewish
Synagogues, than preached in the Temple; and if he had preached, it will not
follow, that the Deacons office is to preach; for this act of Stephens was
extraordinary, as having an extrorpinary measure of the spirit; and so we read
that Philip another Deacon of those seven-preached in Samaria, Acts 8. 5. but
this he did, as being an Evangelist in Caesarea; Acts 21. 8. not a Deacon in
Ier^salem.

Q. Does the ^are then of the poor rely upon the Deacon.

A. The care of collecting the charitable benevolence for the poor, and
distributing of the same, relyes upon the Deacon, but the care of exhorting to
benevolence, of recommending the poor, of inspection into the Deacons fidelity
and industry, relies upon the Presbyter; from which the Apostles exempted not
themselves.

Q. Did the Apostles in all the Churches, which they planted, appoint
Presbyters and Deacons?

A. Yes; otherwise they had left these Churches as sheep without shepherds, or
ships without Pilots, to be devoured by wolves, and to be swallowed by the
waves of confusion, Heresies and Schisms, therefore Paul having preached the
Gospel in Crete, and having settled some Presbyters there, he gives order to
Titus to set up Presbyters in every Town, and it is unlikely, that Paul, who
had continued at Corinth a year and six months, Acts 18. 11. would leave that
Church destitute of Presbyters and Deacons, seeing the Lord testified to Paul
in a Vision, that he had much people in that City, v^r. 10. and writing to the
Philippians, he salutes the Bishops and Deacons there.

Q. Why did he not salute the Presbyters there also?

A. Because in that place a Presbyter is all one in effect with a Bishop; for
if Presbyters had been distinct from Bishops, Paul would not have left them
unsaluted; for why should he salute the Deacons, and not the Presbyters, which
are a higher degree?

Quest. Why were the Pastors called Bishops and Presbyters?

A. To put them in mind of their duty and dignity: Presbyters, their Office.
for the word Episcopus or Bishop, signifies the care, inspection, and
oversight, which they should have of men's souls, in guiding, instructing, and
feeding them with the Word and Sacraments. Presbyter signifies the age,
dignity, and experience that ought to be in Ministers, whose grave carriage,
wisdom, and knowledge, should procure reverence of the people to that high
calling, and obedience to their Doctrine.

Q. Are young men then fit to be made Presbyters o^ Bishop?

A. No; except there be extraordinary gifts in them, as were in Timothy; or in
extreme necessity, when grave and ancient men cannot be found; Temeritas
florentis aelatis, prudentia sinectutes; Young men are rash, inconstant, head
strong, proud, inconsiderate, and indiscreet in their words and carriage for
the most part, which has brought this high calling into obloquie and contempt.
They have not that experience, wisdom, gravity, and knowledge, that are in old
men; nor are they Masters of their passions and affections; and how are they
fit overseers of others, who cannot oversee themselves? a young Presbyter is a
contradiction, and a young Bishop is incongruous. Young and green heads have
been the cause of so much distemper, so many Heresies and schisms in the
Church of Christ, Therefore little hope there is, that ever peace, Religion,
and truth shall flourish in that Church where giddy young men are Bishops or
Presbyters, and hot-spurs or green heads are preferred to gray hairs; ancient
Divines are fittest to serve the ancient of days.

Q. But if Paul constituted Presbyters and Deacons in all the Churches which be
planted, why does he not salute them, as he did these of Philippi?

A. For brevities sake, he oftentimes omits them, thinking it sufficient to
have saluted the Church in general, in which they are included; being members
thereof.

Q. Is not the degree of Bishops higher than that of Presbyters?

A. Sometimes to avoid heresy, Bishops.
schisms, and troubles in the Church* the Presbyters have chosen one of their
own society, to precede or oversee the rest; but this was only in some places,
and at some times, and rather an ecclesiastic custom than a divine tradition,
says Hierom.

Q. But why did Paul besides his custom salute the Deacons at Philippi?

A. Because by Epaphroditus they had sent him relief, therefore he would
particularly thank them, besides he would show, that under these two names of
Presbyter and Deacon, is contained the whole Ministry of the Church; the
Presbyter caring for the things of the soul, the Deacon for the things of the
body.

Q. What does the ward Deacon signify?

A. A Minister or servant; Deacons and their Office.
for so the Magistrate is called, Romans 13. a Deacon or Minister, Paul calls
himself the Deacon of the Gospel, Ephesians. 5. and he calls Christ the Deacon of
Circumcision, Romans 15. but this word is appropriated to him that has the
charge of the poor and strangers, in collecting and laying out the Church money
for their relief. Such were those seven mentioned Acts ^. and as Christ had
twelve Apostles, so one of them to wit Judas was a Deacon, for he kept the bag.

Q. Were there in the Church preaching Presbyters only?

A. No; there were also ruling Elders, of which Paul speaks, 1. Tim. 5. 1^.
Let the Elders that rule well, be counted worthy of double honor, especially
they who labor in the Word and Doctrine: for the preaching Presbyters thought
it too great a burden to preach, and to have the inspection of men's manners,
therefore they desired some of the Laity to assist them, whom they called
ruling Elders.

Q. What difference is there between a Minister and a Deacon?

A. The Greek word signifies both promiscuously, but we have appropriated the
word Minister to a preacher, and the word Deacon to the Overseer of the poor.

Q. How does it appear, that Presbyter and Bishop was the same?

A. Because the Apostle Phil. 1. salutes the Bishops of Philippi; but in one
Town, there is only one Bishop, usually so called. So Acts 20. having called
together the Presbyters, he bids them take heed to the stock, whereof the Holy
Ghost has made them Bishops: And leaving Titus at Crete to establish
Presbyters, shows that a Bishop must be without reproof.

Q. Have there not been sometimes two Bishops in one Town?

A. We read in Sozomen, l. 4. c. 14. that the Bishops assembled at Sirmium,
wrote to Foelix, and the Clergy of Rome, to admit of Liberius as an assistant
Bishop to Foelix; but the Council of Nice forbids two Bishops to be in one
City, Can. 8.

Q. Why do not the Reformed Churches now call our Ministers by the name of
Bishops and Priests?

A. Because these Offices have been abused in Popery, the one to pride and
tyranny, the other to superstition and idolatry.

Q. May a man exercise the office of Presbyter or Bishop without a calling?

A. No; for no man takes upon him this office, but he that is called of God, as
Aaron was. Vzza was struck with sudden death, for his rash touching of the Ark,
2. Sam. 6. God complains of those Prophets that run, and yet were not sent,
Ier. 23. and how can such preach, if they be not sent? Romans 10. Lepr^sie shall
seize upon King Uzziah, if he stretch out his hand to touch the Ark, 2 Chronicles.
26. Christ himself spoke not of himsel, nor was his Doctrine his own, but his
that sent him, John 5 and 7.

Q. How must a man be called?

A. First, Internally by the Spirit moving his heart, and furnishing him with
graces fit for so high a Calling. Ministerial calling.
Secondly, Externally by the Church; to which twofold calling we must yield
obedience, and not resist and run from it, as Jonah did.

Q. How shall we know the inward call of the Spirit, from the stattering
concept of our Fancies?

A. If we are called by the Spirit, we have no other ends but, Gods glory, and
the salvation of souls; we seek Christ for his miracles, not for his loaves, we
will not trust to our own strength, learning or eloquence, but will disclaim
our own sufficiency with the Apostle, will accuse our own uncircumcised and
defiled lips with Mos^s and Esaias, and will rely only upon the goodness and
promise of God, who will give us wisdom, and will put in our mouths, what we
shall speak.

Quest. How many sorts of callings are there in the Church?

A. Two; to wit, Extraordinary, as that of the Apostles, Evangelists and
Prophets; and Ordinary, as the callings of Presbyters or Bishops, of preaching
Prophets or Pastors, and of Deacons.

Q. Can both these callings be in one man?

A. Yes; for Jeremy and Ezechiel were ordinary Priests and Levites; yet were
extraordinary Prophets. So Luther had an ordinary Function in the Church of
Rome, yet was called extraordinarily to preach the Gospel in purity.

Q. In whom is the power of Election and Ordination of Presbyters or Bishops?

A. Election was anciently in the Laity and Clergy, till the Clergy shook off
the Laity. And the Pop^ excluded the Emperor, from whom both he, and other
Bishops were wont to receive their Investiture, by the Ring and crosier-Staffe;
not in reference to their spiritual Function, but to their temporal means,
which they enjoyed by the munificence of Princes; but Ordination is only from
the Clergy; the Bishop was won^ to ordain alone, but that was thought rather
out of Ecclasiastick custom, than out of divine institution. For apparently
ordination did belong to the whole Presbytery, 1. Tim 4. 14. as may be seen
also in diverse Canons and Councels.

Q. May any preach now without Calling or Ordination?

A. No; for if every one that pretends to have the spirit should be suffered to
preach, preaching would grew contemptible, Heresies, and Sects would multiply.
Now the Church is established, therefore Ordination, and an ordinary calling
must be expected. Indeed in the infancy of Christianity before the Church was
settled, private men in times of persecution dispersed themselves, and preached,
as we see, Acts 8. ^ and so the men of Cypr^s and cyrene preached the word at
Anti^ch, Acts 11 20. So Apollos a private man, who only knew the Baptism of
John and stood in need of more perfect instructions by Aquila and Priscilla,
yet he taught the word of God, Acts 18. 25, 26. but such examples were
extraordinary, in a time when no preachers were found, no ordinary calling to
be had, no Church at all settled.

Q. Are the names of Apostle, Presbyter, and Bishop of equal extent?

A. No; for Apostles are called Presbyters, 1. Pet. 5. 1. but Presbyters are
not Apostles, the higher dignity includes the lesser, but not on the contrary;
so Apostles are Bishops, Judas his Apostleship is called his Bishopric, Acts
1. 10. but all Bishops are not Apostles.

Q. Because an Elder must be apt to teach, will it therefore follow that there
ought to be none, but preaching Elders?

An. No; for a Ruling Elder should also be apt to teach his Children and
Family, and likewise apt to teach, that is, to advise and give Counsel in the
Consistory, though he preach not in the Pulpit.

Q. Is a Pastor and Doctor all one?

A. No; For all Pastors are Doctors or Teachers; but all Doctors are not
Pastors; Paul in the Synagogue at Anti^ch did the part of a Doctor or Teacher,
when he uttered words of exhortation, yet he was not their Pastor. The
Prophets, Christ, and John Baptist were Doctors or Teachers, but not Pastors.

Q. Should there be any superiority of Presbyters ever their fellows?

A. Yes of order, or at sometimes, as when they meet in Synods to determine
matters, there ought to be Moderators or Speakers, as we know there were among
the Apostles; sometimes Peter, sometimes James, see Acts 15. and perhaps, such
was the superiority, that Samuel had over the Prophets, in Naioth in Rama, 1.
Sam. 19. 20. Such Authority had Eliah and Elisha over the other Prophets in
their time. The superiority of the High Priest over the inferior Priests was
typical; as it had relation to Christ the High Priest of our profession, the
Prince of Pastors, and B shop of our souls.

Quest. Is it a novelty to have Lay Elders in the Church?

A. No; Elders.
for such were in the Church of the Jews, Ier. 19. 1. Elders of the people, as
well as Elders of the Priests; which the Apostle means, 1, Cor. 12. 28. for
besides Apostles, Prophets, Teachers, etc. he speaks of Rulers under the
abstract word of Governments: for having mentioned before in the same Chapter,
the diversity of gifts. Now in this verse he speaks of the diversity of
Functions in the Church.

Q. Are Laymen excluded from Church government, because they are Laymen?

A. No; For though they be no part of the Clergy* yet they are a part of the
Church, and Members of Christ's mystical body, as well as the Clergy. And it is
for the Clergies advantage, that there be Lay-Rulers; for by these means, the
Ministers are eased of much trouble, and they are backed with the greater
power; besides they are less obnoxious to envy and opposition, which the
Remish Clergy has brought upon themselves, by excluding the Laity from Church
Government; proudly monopolizing all to themselves. Lastly, many Clergy men,
though good Scholars, yet are indiscreet in their carriage, and unskilful in
matter of government.

Question, May a Lay Elder with a safe Conscience, leave his Function at the
years end, seeing it is not lawful to put the hand to the plough, and look
back, Luke 9. 62.

A. If there were not choice of such Elders, he could not leave the Church
destitute of Government, with a safe conscience. 2. He may not our of dislike
to the Function, or of his own head, leave it, but by order and authority he
may, where there be others to supply his place. 3. That Plough in Luke is not
meant of the Plough of Ruling, but of preaching, which no man called thereto
may leave off, seeing it is of such necessity, for the erecting of Christ's,
Kingdom.

Q. Is the Function of a Lay-elder unlawful, because he is not called to
preach and baptize?

A. No, for preaching and administering the Sacraments, do not belong to the
ruling, but to the preaching Presbyter; neither is ruling necessarily annexed
to preaching and baptising, but that it may be separated from them; yea it is
fit they should be separated, for the reasons above alleged; Ministers shall
have more time to study, and to follow their preaching better, if they be taken
off from the trouble of ruling, and God who gives to diverse men diverse gifs,
and not the same to all men, has made some fitter for preaching, others fitter
for ruling. And it is fit that some of the Laity should have place in the
Consistory, that nothing may be there concluded partially; or prejudicial to
the Laity; for so they shall avoid all suspicion of tyranny.

Q. Of what Elders does Ambrose speak in his Exposition of the fifth Chapter of
1. Tim.?

A. Both of Elders by age, and of Elders by office; for having showed that old
age is honorable among all Nations, from thence he inferres, that both the
Synagogue and Church of Christ had Elders, without whose advise nothing was
done in the Church; which Office in his time (as he there complains) was grown
out of date by reason of the pride of the Teachers, that they alone might seem
to be somewhat.

Q. Can ruling Elders be proved out of that fifth Chapter of 1. Tim. v. 17.

A. Yes; for the Apostle wills that the Elders who ruse well, be counted worthy
of double honor especially they who labor in the Word and Doctrine; in which
words, there is no opposition made between the reaching Presbyters, as if they
who teach and preach, were worthy of double honor, especially they who labor
in teaching and preaching; for there is no reaching and preaching without
labor; and where there is no labor, there can be no double honor merited;
but the opposition is plain between the ruling Elders, and the other Elders
that labor in the Word. The ruling Elder deserves much honor, but much more
deserves the preaching Elder, that labors in the Word; for preaching is a
toilsome labor, compared to ruling; and so this Exposition does not force the
words, as the form* does.

Q. What priority had the High Priest, or Chief Priests ^ver the other Priests?

A. The priority of order, but not of authority and command, all being equal in
the Office of Priesthood; such a priority was among the Presbyters, but when
the Church began to spread, and heresies to increase, there was some power or
authority given to the chief Presbyters, whom they called Bishops; but as there
was no distinction of parishes till 267. years after Christ, as Polydor Virgil
witnesses, so it is thought there could not be in that time any Diocese, or
Diocesan Bishops.

Q. Did all Christian Nations upon their conversian to Christianity receiv^
Episcopacy?

A. No; Bishops.
for the Scots admitted of no Bishops for 290. years after their conversion, if
we may believe Johannes Major l. 2. Hist. de gest. Scot. c. ^. And the
Cantabrians or people of Biscay in Spain, as yet admit of no Bishops; as it is
recorded in the Spanish Story.

Q. Was the power of Jurisdiction in the Bishop or Presbytery.

A. It was thought to be in both jointly: for in the time of Cornelius, lapsed
Christians were not admitted into the Church at Rome, until they confessed
their sins before the Presbytery* Cypriat Epist. 6. and Epist. 46. Yet the
peoples consent also was required, as may be seen in the same Cyprian Epist.
55. and Epist. 12. ad plebem.

Q. Were Timothy and Titus Bishops or not?

A. They were probably Evangelists who were not to reside in one particular
place, as Bishops or Presbyters, but to attend on the Apostles, and to perform
their messages, by preaching the Gospel from place to place: for Paul left him
with Silas at Berea Acts 17. 14. then Paul sent for him to Athens, verse. 15.
from thence he sends him to Thessalonica, 1 Thessalonians. 3. 2. from hence he
returned to Athens, and in sent by Paul into Macedonia, and returns from thence
to corinth, Acts 18. 5. after this he went to Ephesus, and from thence was sent
by Paul to Maccdonia, Acts 19. 22. whom Timothy accompanied thence into Asia;
and then to Miletum, where having sent for the Elders of Ephesus, gives them a
charge to feed the flock of Christ; not naming Timothy at all, to whom the
charge should have been given, had he been a settled Bishop there, which title
is not given to him at all in Scripture. So Titus traveled with Paul through
Antioch to Jerusalem, Gal. 2. 1. through Cilicia he went to Crete, where he was
left a while, and sent for by Paul to Nicop^lis, Tit. 3. 12. he was expected at
Troas, 2 Cor. 2. 13. he met Paul in Macedonia, 2. Cor. 7. 6. and conveyed that
Epistle of Paul to the Corinthians, 2 Cor 13. Postscript. He was with Paul at
Rome, and went from thence to Dalmatia, 2. Tim. 4. 10. by which it is plain, he
was not a settled Bishop in Cre^e.

Q. Were there any Lay Elders or Seniors in Austin's tim?

A. Yes; for L. 3. Cont. Cresconium Grammaticum, he speaks of Bishops,
Presbyters, or preaching Elders, Deacons and Seniors, or Lay Elders* and c. 56.
ibid. he speaks of Peregri^us Presbyter, and Seniors, by the one meaning the
preaching, by the others the ruling Elders. And in his 137. Epistle he speaks
of the Clergy, the Elders, and the whole people; and in diverse other places of
his works, he speaks of these Elders, as being distinguished from the Clergy,
and the rest of the Laity, and having a charge of Church affairs, whence it
appears, that to have ruling Elders is no novelty.

Q. What were those Elders which are mentioned 1. Tit. 5.

A. They were Bishops or preaching Presbyters; for Acts 20. Elders verse 17.
are named Bishops, verse 28. so in Titus Cap. 1. Elder verse 5. is called
Bishop verse. 7. every City then and Village had their Elder, that is, their
Bishop, and this is witnessed by Sozomen L. 7. these were then parochial
Bishops, not Diocesan, in all likelihood.

Q. Whether did the power of Jurisdiction and Ordination belong to the B shop
alone, or to the Church?

A. To the Church, for Christ says, Dic Ecclesiae; go tell the Church, and to
all the Apostles together, which were then the Church Representative, he gives
the Keys or power of binding, etc. and this is Jurisdiction. So likewise
ordination belongs to the Church or Presbytery, as we showed before out of 1 Timothy 4. 14.

Q. It is not lawful for one Clergy man to exercise Dominion or Lordly
authority over another?

A. No; for Christ will not have any of his Apostles to ^im at greatness or
superiority, but will have such become Ministers and servants, Mat. 20. 25.
Mar. 10. 42. Luke 22. 25. for Christ's Kingdom is spiritual and nor of this
world, as the Kingdoms of earthly Princes are; neither did he mean to set up
an earthly dominion for a thousand years, as the Millenaries thought; and the
Apostles themselves had a conceit of an earthly Kingdom, when they thought
that Christ did purpose to restore the Kingdom to Israel: neither does Christ
forbid tyranny or the abuse of dominion, but all kind of dominion; for the one
Evangelist uses the word (...), as the other does (...). Yet some respect is
to be given to the Ministers that have the greatest gifts, by those that have
lesser. And a priority of order, though not of Jurisdiction.

Q. What part of the Apostolical Function ceased with the Apostles, and what
was to continue?

A. The Universality of their Function, and the infallibility of their
authority were to cease with them; for they were temporary gifts: but the
preaching of the Word, the Administration of the Sacraments, and the exercise
of Discipline, were to continue in their successors; these gifts were
ordinary, but perpetual, the other extraordinary and temporary.

Q. Is the power of the Keys and Apostolical authority the same thing?

A. No; for the power of the Keys is the Church Discipline, which was to
continue for ever in the Church. But the Apostolical authority, which
consisted in their immediate calling from Christ, in the U^niversality of their
Embassage, in the infallibility of their judgments, In giving of the Holy
Gstost by Imposition of their hands, and such like privileges, were not to
continue longer than themselves.

Q. Had not Timothy and Tims the same power of the Keys, and Apostolical
authority that Paul had?

A. They had the same power of the Keys, that is, of preaching, administering
the Sacraments, and censuring; but not the same Apostolical authority, that
is, an immediate call from heaven, the same infallibility of judgment, or
power of giving the Holy Ghost, that the Apostles had; nor was their Doctrine
otherwise anthenticall, than as it was conformable to the Doctrine of the
Apostles.

Q. But was not the Church after the Apostles decease left an Orphan, being
destitute of these extraordinary Apostolical graces?

A. No; for though she was deprived of the personal presence of the Apostles,
yet she is not destitute of their infallible judgment left in their writings
with her, which supply the Apostles absence till the end of the World.

Q. Co^ld one man at the same time ^e both an Apostle, and a Bishop or
Presbyter?

A. Yes, Episcopacy what among the Presbyterians.
in case of necessity; for James was an Apostle and Bishop of Jerusalem too;
because that was the Mother Church, to which resorted Jews of all Nations, for
instruction and knowledge; therefore it was fitting that none less than an
Apostle should reside there, for the greater authority and satisfaction.

Q. Can Episcopacy be proved by the Canons of the Apostles, and Council of
Antioch?

A. Those Canons are much doubted, if they be the Apostles or not; however it
is probable to me, that the parochian, not the Diocesan Bishop is there meant,
for there is no superiority there given, but of order and respect, partly
because of the eminency of the place or City where he lived, partly by reason
of his own worth and learning, without whose advice matters of moment should
not be done by the other Bishops or Presbyters; nor should he do anything
without them; but should together ordain Presbyters and Deacons, for that is a
matter of moment; yet he is only named there, because, he being as it were the
head; the rest are understood.

Q. Was Acrius an Heretic for affirming there was no difference between a
Bishop and a Presbyter?

A. No; Though for this opinion Epiphanius, and out of him Austin place him
among the heretics: for the Scripture puts no difference between these. The
Church of Alexandria was the first that put difference between them* as
Epiphanius seems to affirm, when he says, Haeres. 68. that the Church of
Alexandria does not admit of two Bishops. But though Aerius was not in this an
Heretic, yet he was in an error, if he thought that there was no difference at
all among Bishops or Presbyte^s; for one is above another in gifts, in honor,
in order; though perhaps not in Jurisdiction, authority and pastoral Function.

Quest. Is the Church to be ruled by the Civil Magistrate?

A. No; for the Church being christ's spiritual Kingdom, Church how to be
governed.
and not of this world, is to be guided by her own spiritual Officers, as the
State is ruled by temporal Officers; Caesar must have what is Caesar's, and
God, Magistrates Office different from the Church Governors.
that, which is Gods's: And for this cause the Church and State have their
different Laws, and punishments. Neither had the Apostles chose^ Elders, and
other Officers in the Church, if the Civil Magistrate had been to rule it, and
had the Church of Ierus^lem been all one with the State thereof, or the church
of Crete, all one with the Kingdom of Crete, the Apostles had incroached upon
the temporal Government, had been guilty of Rebellion, and proved enemies to
Casar, when they set up Elders and other Church Officers, in those and other
places: besides Women sometimes, and Children are Magistrates and Princes, but
the one must not speak in the Church, 1. Cor. 14. 34. The others are not fit to
be made Bishops, 1. Tim. 3.

Quest. Are Church Governors ^y Divine Institution?

A. Yes; for Christ appointed Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists,
Church Governors.
Teachers, and other helps of Government, 1 Cor. 12. 28 Paul left Titus in
Cre^e to ordain Elders in every City, Tit. 1. 5. The Apostles ordained Elders
in every Church, Asts 14. 23. which Officers were in the Church, before there
was any christian State or christian Magistrate. And as Christ appointed Rulers
for his Church, so he gave them the Keys of heaven, or power to bind and
loose, Mat. 16. 19. and 18. 17. 18 and to remit and retain sins, John 20. 23.
these are said to have the rule over us, Heb. 13. 17. 24. this ruling power was
exercised by Paul against Hymeneus and Alexander, 1. Tim. 1. 20. and enjoined
to the Elders of Corinth, 1. Cor. 5. 3. 12, 13. and was practiced before them,
by the Priests upon V^ziah, 2. Chron. 26. 17, 18. 21. by Phine^as the Priest,
Number. 25. by Christ himself, in whipping the buyers and sellers out of the
Temple.

Q. Have we any president for appeals from the Classical to the higher
assemblies?

A. Yes; for then was an appeal from the Church of Antioch concerning some
Jewish ceremonies to the assembly of the Apostles and Elders at Jerusalem, Acts
15. 1, 2, 6.

Q. Who are to judge of scandals?

A. The Ministers, 1. Cor. 5. 12. for they succeeded the Priests and Levites in
the old Law, but these were appointed Judges by God in such cases, Deuteronomy. 17. 8,
9.

Q. Is the Church Government by Elders or Bishops, Deacons, Doctors and
Teachers, al^erable?

A. Not in the substance or essentialls thereof, but In the circumstances or
adjuncts it is alterable, Church government alterable.
as in the manner, time, place, and other circumstances of Election. So the
Government by Elders and Deacons is not to be changed, but that they should be
elected by all the people, and that there should be the strict number of seven
Deacons in each parish is not needful, though at first, as Acts 6. 5. there
were but seven chosen, and that by the multitude.

Q. Wherein is moderate Episcopacy different from Presbytery?

A. Presbytery, is Episcopacy dilated, and Episcopacy is Presbytery contracted;
Episcopacy how different from Presbytery.
so the government is in effect the same, differing only as the fist or hand
contracted, from the same hand expanded or dilated; only Episcopacy is more
subject to error and corruption than Presbytery, and this more subject to
disorder and confusion, by reason of parity, than Episcopacy; the peace of the
Church, the suppressing of schism and heresy, the dignity of the Clergy are
more consistent with Episcopacy than with Presbytery;; but this again is less
obnoxious to pride and tyranny, than Episcopacy, by which we see that no
Government is perfectly exempted from corruption in this life, nihil est ex
omni part beatum. But I find that as the Romans in their greatest dangers
betook themselves to the Dictatorship, so has the Church in her extremities
had recourse to Episcopacy.

Q. May the Civil Magistrate change the Church Government?

A. He may alter the outward form thereof, Magistrates office.
as it depends upon the circumstances of time, place, and persons; but the
substance of it he cannot change; he can also by his Laws force the observation
of the Government, and punish the disturbers of the Churches peace.

Q. May the same man be both a Magistrate and a Minister?

A. Though among the Gentiles it was lawful, as we see in Anius, that was both
King and Priest, Rex hominum Phoebique sacerdos; and in the Emperors of Rome,
that were also chief Pontifies: and though Melchisedech was King and Priest,
and among the Jews Abraham was a Prince and a Priest, Heli a Judge and a
Priest* the Machabees were Princes and Priests, yet this was not ordinary; for
Abraham, Melchisedech, Heli, were Types of Christ; the Machabees by usurpation
undertook both governments, but ordinarily these Offices were distinct among
the Jews, therefore Moses who gave Laws concerning the Priesthood, did not
exercise it himself; neither did Ieshua, David nor Solomon; but on the
contrary, Saul and Vzziah were severely punished for meddling with the Priests
Office; Saul for offering sacrifice lost his Kingdom; and Vzziah was struck
with Leprosy; but among Christian these Officers are much more distinct; for
Christ's Kingdom is not of this world; and the Ministry is burden enough
without other addition; who is sufficient for it, says the Apostle? besides it
is Christ's prerogative, to be alone King and Priest of his Church. Yet so far
may the Magistrate meddle with the Ministry, as to reform what is amiss, both
in their life and Doctrine; examples hereof we have in Iehosaphat, Ezechia, and
Josiah, and in Solomon too, who deposed Abiathar the Priest.

Q. Was the Presbytery in use among the Jews?

A. Yes; Presbyters among the Jews.
for besides the Civil Judicature, which by Moses his appointment, consisted
of 70. men, and had its seat in the City gates: there was a spiritual or
Ecclesiastic judicature kept in the Synagogues, which judged of things holy
and clean; and discerned between holy and profane, clean and unclean things,
and declared the Statutes of God; and because of the Scribes among them, they
decided matters of their Civil Law, Levit. 10. 10. This judicature consisted of
Priests and Levites, as also of the chief Fathers of Israel, which we may call
Lay, or ruling Elders, as we may see 2. Chro^. 19. 8. Ichosaphat did not only
restore and reform from the Civil Courts called Sanhedrim, in each City, the
chiefest whereof was at Ierusulem, but also he reformed the Presbyteries, or
Ecclesiastic judicatures, as may be seen there, placing Amariah the chief
Priest over these, but Z^badiah ruler or Prince of the house of Judah, over the
Synedria, or Civil affairs, called there verse 11: the Kings matters, because
the King was chief over these Courts; as the High Priest over the Presbyteries;
but afterward through the corruption of time, These Courts were confounded, and
the Presbyteries did not only judge de jure, as anciently they used, but also
de facto, even of life and death; as in the time of the Matha^ees, but under
the Romans this power was taken from them; for they neither could put Christ
nor Paul to death; as for Stephen he was stoned, not by the sentence of the
Court, but in a popular tumult.

Q. How are these two Courts named in the New Testament?

A. The Civil Court is called, (...) the Council; the Ecclesiastic Court is
named the Synagogue, Mat. 10. 17. The chief of the Synagogue was the
High Priest; but of the Council was the Judge, Deuteronomy. 17. 12. Ierem^ah was
condemned by the Synagogue, Ier. 26. 8. but absolved by the Council or secular
Judges in the Gate, verse 16.

Q. Why are Ministers called Presbyters and Bishops, but not Priests in the New
Testament?

A. Because they were to be put in mind of their dignity and Function,
Ministers called Presbyters.
which consists in the care and inspection of their stcok, not in offering of
sacrifice, which was the proper work of the Priest, but ceased when Christ our
propitiatory sacrifice was offered; besides Christ would reserve this
prer^gative to himself, in being the only Priest of the New Testament, not
after the order of Aaron, which ended when he was sacrificed; but after the
order of Melchisedech, which was in him to continue for ever without successor.
Therefore the Ministers of the New Testament are no otherwise Priests, then
they are Kings, but these titles are common to all Christians, who by Christ
are made Kings and Priests to God the Father.

Q. How are Ministers to be elected?

A. They must be examined, How to be elected.
whether they be apt to teach, and well reported of by them who are without*
Therefore Ti^^othy must not lay hands suddenly on any man, 1. Tim. 5. 22. and
3. 7. Secondly, the Bishop or Pastor must be chosen by all the Bishops or
Pastors of the Province, or by three at least, as it was ordained by the
Council of Nice Canon 4. Thirdly, the election of the Minister must be made
known to the people, as we may see in the sixth Canon of the Council of
Chalcedon. Fourthly, the people must give their approbation; Acts 6. 5.
therefore Saint Austin Epist. 110. presented his succcessor Eradi^s to the
people for their consent. Fifthly, there must be imposition of hands, a custom
used not only in the Christian Church, 1. Tim 4. 14. and 5. verse 18. (...)
also among the Jews, Number. 27. 18. Deuteronomy. 34. 9. Sixthly, in the Reformed
Churches the other Ministers give to him that is elected the hand of
fellowship; as Ia^s, Peter, and John gave to Paul Gal. 2. Seventhly, the new
elected Minister subscribes the confession of faith, and discipline of the
Church; which custom was used in the Churches of Africa.

Q. Are Romish Priests (converted to our Church) to be re-ordained.

A. There is no necessity of a new ordination; for though their commission in
the Church of Rome; (...) the body and blood of Christ in the Eucharist, yet
they were ordained to preach the Word, and to administer the Sacraments. Which
ordination is not nullified, when they shake off the errors of Doctrine, and
preach the W^^d in purity, (...) their ordination originally from the Pope, or
his subordinate Bishop, but from Christ^ neither must their Oath, taken in
ordination to maintain the Romish Doctrine, hinder them from preaching the Word
in purity; for an unlawful Oath must not be kept. Therefore Luther and others,
who forsook the errors of Rome received no new ordination.

Q. Had the Presbytery power to excommunicate?

A. Yes; and not the Bishop alone; for Paul would not by himself excommunicate
the incestuous Corinthian, Presbytery their power to excommunicate.
without the Presbytery, or the Church gathered together, 1. Cor. 5. 4. for
indeed the whole congregation should have notice given them of the
Excommunication, that they may avoid the party exommunicated.

Q. Upon what is this power grounded?

A. Upon Gods own practice, who excommunicated Adam out of Paradise, and Cain
from his presence. 2. Upon his command, who prohibited the unclean from entering
the Temple till they were purified; and from eating the Passover, or
commercing with Gods people, who commanded every soul not circumcised the eigth
day to be cut off from the people. 3 Upon Christ's words, Whomsoever you bind on
earth shall be bound in heaven. 4. Upon Christ's counsel forbidding to give that
which is holy to dogs ^rto cast pearls before swine. 5. Upon the Apostles
practice; Peter excommunicated Simon Magus in keeping him off from imposition
of hands. Paul excommunicated the incestuous Corinthian; and delivered over to
Satan the two blaspheme^s, Hymenaeus and Philetus. 6. Paul will have the
Corinthians purge out the old leaven and not to eat with such as are
notoriously wicked; and pronounces Maranatha against such as love not the Lord
Jesus, and Anathema against such as preach another Gospel, than what the
Galathians received, and wishes they may be cut off, who trouble them. And
wills us to beware of such as cause dissension and strife, and to reject an
Heretic, John will not have us receive such men within our houses, nor bid
them God speed; by all which it is apparent that excommunication is both
ancient and necessary in the Church.

Q. May an excommunicate person be debarred from public prayers and preaching?

A. Yes* for though meat is not to be denied to him that is hung^y, yet we may
justly refuse to feed him who is glutted, Excommunicate persons their condition
and has taken a surfeit. And Heathen or Infidel may be admited to hear the
Word, because he sins of ignorance, which is cured by preaching, but a wicked
or profane brother, who sins of wilfulness and perverseness, is not to be
admitted to that which he despises; for that pearl is not for Hogs, and such
by hearing the Word, do but aggravate their own damnation. Therefore Saint Paul
permits us to eat with an Infidel without scruple, 1. Cor. 10. 27. but with a
profane brother, he will not have us to keep company, 1 Cor. 5. 11. So we read
in Tertullian, that Cerdon the Heretic was not suffered to enter into the
Church: and Theodosius had the Church doors barred against him by Ambrose. Yet
in this case private exhortations and comminations are not to be neglected,
that the prodigal Son may be induced to return again to his Fathers house.

Q. May a man that is excommunicate remain still in the state of election?

A. Yes; for the sentence of the Church is declarative only, and not
effective; and Election as the other gifts of God, is without repentance.
Though Peter fell dangerously; yet in his fall he was the child of election,
for Christ prayed that his faith should not fail: the tree in Winter may seem
to be dead when it is stripped of its leaves, yet in the spring it revives again,
because the vital faculty lurking all that while in the root, breaks out and
shows its virtue upon the approach of the Sun. So the Root of grace remains
alive in the Godly, though the Leaves be dead, for which they are or may be
excommunicate.

Q. If exc^mmunication was in use among the Jews, why did not the prophets
excommunicate notorious sinners, nor the Pharisees excommunicate the Sadduces,
who were dangerous Heretics, nor the Priests and Elders of the people,
excommunicate Christ and his Apostles, whom they accounted pernicious seducers?

A. The prophets had no Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, The prophets, Pharisees,
etc. could not excommunicate.
they were sent to preach against sin, but not to excommunicate for sin. The
Pharisees and Sadduces were Sects different in opinions, but had no
Ecclesiastic Jurisdiction one over the other. Though Christ and his Apostles
were hated by the Priests, yet the Priests durst not excommunicate them, partly
for fear of the people, partly for fear of the Romans; neither had John Baptist
any power to excommunicate the Pharisees and Sadduces, though he knew them to
be a Generation of Vipers; nor had he any reason to exclude them from his
Baptism, seeing they came to confess their sins, Mat. 3. 6.

Q. Why did not Christ excommmnicate Judas, whom he knew to be unworthy of the
Sacrament?

A. Because the sin of Judas was not yet known, Why Christ did not
excommunicate Judas.
nor scandalous; for though it was known to some of the Priests, yet it was not
known to the Disciples; and though it was known to Christ, as he was God, or
else by revelation, as he was man, yet it was not publicly known; and though
it had been public, yet without admonition, conviction, and condemnation, he
should not have been Excommnnicate. Therefore Christ bids them all eat and
drink; but yet by this he does not give way, that such as are notoriously and
scandalously wicked, should be admitted to the Sacrament without repentance;
especially obstinate despisers of admonition; but only that such as are
admitted, though Hypocrites; should not refuse to eat and drink.

Q. May the Presbytery excommunicate any man for his absence?

Answer, If his absence be prejudicial to Church or State, Excommunication and
excommunicate persons considered.
or joined with obstinacy, he may be excommunicate for being absent; but if he
be absent upon unavoidale occasions, or upon the certain knowledge that he has
of the prejudicate opinion which the Presbytery has of him, he may absent
himself till they be better informed. Thus Chrys^stome absented himself from
the Synod of Constantinople; because he knew that The^philus Bishop of
Alexandria, and Epiphanius of Cyprus, before whom he was convented, were
enemies to his cause* therefore he was injuriously by them for his absence
condemned.

Q. How many sorts of excommunication were there?

Answ. Three. 1. Of those that were kept off a while from the Sacament, they
were called (...) 2. Of them who were excluded from the Sacraments, but not for
any certain time, these were named Excommunicati. 3. Of them whose condition
was desperate, they were named Anathematisati; which decree of excommunication
or Anathema, was de^ounced rather against the Doctrine, then persons of men; of
whom we should not despair while they live; and being dead are not in our
power: yet I find the persons of Julian the apostate, of Arrius the Heretic,
and some others, were Anathematised.

Q. Was excommunication used only among Christians?

A. No; for the Jews had this punishment among them, as we may see Ioh. 9. in
casting the blind man out of their Synagogue; and threatening to do the like to
those that should profess Christ, which Christ also foretold to his Disciples.
This kind of spiritual punishment was most strictly observed amongst the
Esseens, Joseph. de bell. Iudaic. l. 2. c. 7. for not only did they
excommunicate notorious sinners, but suffered them also in the time of their
excommunication to starve for want of food. This punishment also was in use
among the Gentiles. For the Druides among the Ga^les used to debar from their
Sacrifices scandalous livets, as Casar witnesses de bell. Gall. l. 6. and
Devoveri Diti, or Diris was a kind of excommunication among the Romans.

Q. What benefit has the Church by excommunication?

A. By this the Word, Sacraments, and other things are kept holy* and
vindicated from profanation; Swine are kept off from treading upon Pearls, and
Dogs from tearing us; the sheep are kept within their fold, the lost sheep is
recovered, the prodigal Son is brought home, the reputation of the Churches
holiness is kept up, and all occasion of obloquie cut off; the body is
preserved by cutting off the gangrened member, and the tree prospers by lopping
off the withred branches; and the contagion is stayed from creeping further,
which without this remedy would infect others; men by this are deterred from
sin; by this also Gods anger is appeased, and his judgment removed of
averted, and our communion with God is renewed and confirmed. Therefore we are
commanded Deuteronomy. 13. to remove the evil from amongst us, and to depart out of
Babylon; and not to communicate with the unfruitful works of darkness.

Q. Are excommunicate persons members of the Church?

A. As they are excommunicate, they are not members; for how can they be
members of the Church, from whose Union and Society they are separated; or how
can Heathens and Publicans be members of the Church, for such are excommunicate
persons to be accounted* yet in respect of their faith, which is not quite
extinguished, and as they are subject to the external government of the Church,
they may be called members thereof.

Q. Are we Protestants justly excommunicate by the Pope?

A. 1. No; for we are not Heretics, but Orthodox Professors. 2. He has no
power to exclude us out of the Church, who himself is scarce a member of the
Church. 8. It Is no wonder that we are rejected by those who seem to be the only
builders, whereas Christ himself the chief corner stone, was rejected by the
builders. 4. By being excommunicate from Babylon, we are made members of
Jerusalem, and indeed we had not been partakers of the true light, so long as
we remained in darkness; nor had we been the servants of Christ, so long as we
served Antichrist. 5. No sooner had the Hirelings cast out Christ's sheep out of
the fold, but Christ the true Shepherd found them out, and brought them home
with joy: So the blind man, Ioh 9. was no sooner cast out of the Synagogue, but
he was received and entertained by Christ. So we have gained Heaven by being
excommunicate from Rome; and Balaams curse is turned to a blessing.

Q. What has Rome got by Excommunication?

A. Though she kept the world a while in awe, and thereby got wealth, yet by
her excommuications, she has lost more then she has got; for she lost all the
Eastern Countries, when Pope Victor inconsiderately excommunicated the Eastern
Churches about the matter of Easter. What the Popes got by excommunicating the
German Emperors, and French Kings, Histories can tell us; they lost England by
excommunicating Henry the eighth, and his Protestant Children.

Q. Who are to be Excommunicate?

A. 1. Not Jews and Turks, but Christians; for we are not to judge them who
are without, but if any be called a brother, who is a fornicator, etc. 2. Not
every sinful brother, but he who sins of perverseness, after admonition; for
he does wilfully by his sins separate himself from God, therefore deserves to
be separate from the Church, by excommunication; and consequently to be
delivered over to Satan, who reigns without the Church, as Christ does within;
and this delivering over is to the destruction of the flesh, that is of the Old
Man, or body of sin; but that the spirit may be saved, that is, that Grace or
the New Man may be strengthened. 3. A brother must not be excommunicate for
every sin, but for that which is public and scandalous; private sins are to be
punished by him who knows all secrets. 4. A Brother must be excommunicate for
his own sins, but not for the sins of another; every man must bear his own
burden; therefore Bishop Auxlius, was justly reproved by Saint Austin Epist.
75. for excommunicating the whole Family for the Masters offense alone.

Q. Can excommunication consist with Charity?

A. Yes; for there can be no greater charity then to save the soul; but the end
of excommunication is to save the soul or the spirit; it is charity to keep a
man from blaspheming; but Hymeneus and Alexander were delivered up to Satan,
that they might learn not to blaspheme. 1. Tim. 1. it is charity to stay an
Infection or Plague, but excommunication is such a means, therefore Paul wills
the Corint^ians to take away the evil from among them, f^r Kn^w you not, says
he that a little Leven will sour the whole lump? 1. Cor. 5. It is charity to
keep a man from eating and drinking his own damnation, but unworthy eaters of
the Sacrament, eat their own damnation, if they be not suspended, or kept off
by excommunication.

Q. Is the Civil Magistrate prejudiced by the censure of excommunication?

A. No; for the weapon of the Magistrate is the Sword, but the Minister uses
only the Word. The end of the Ministers censure is to save the sinner. The end
of the Magistrates is to kill the sinner; The Minister is content to receive
the sinner into the Church again upon his repentance; but the Magistrate
regards not the repentance and sorrow of the Malefactor; the Minister takes
notice of many sins, which the Magistrate does not, because they are such as
trouble not the State, as private grudges of Neighbors, etc. There be also
Magistrates that wink many times at great sins, as for example drunkenesse,
which the Minister should not forbear to censure.

Q. May the Minister, or Presbytery excommunicate any man without the consent
of the Church?

A. No; for excommunication, or separation from the body of Christ, is of that
consequence, that it concerns all to take notice of it; but the Minister may
suspend from the Sacrament without the Churches consent, such as he knows are
scandalous and profane; and this he ought to do though the Church should
refuse to assent; for he is commanded not to give that which is holy to Dogs;
nor must he suffer any of his stock to eat his own damnation; this is to put
the Sword into his hand that would kill himself; which is to be guilty of his
sin. Qui no^ vetat peccare, cum possit, jubet.

Q. From what things can we not be excommunicate?

A. 1. From the love of God in Christ Jesus our Lord no man can separate us;
for the foundation of God remains sure. 2. Nor from the practice of those
duties which are grounded on the Laws of nature, can we be hindered by
excommunication; such as are the duties of Husbands and Wives, Fathers and
Children, Masters and Servants. Princes and People; therefore the Popes
excommunication cannot loose people from their allegiance to their Prince. 3.
Nor can excommunicate persons be hindered from practicing such things as are
grounded on the Law of Nations, such as traffic and commerce; for an
excommunicate person must be to us as a Publican and Heathen, but with such the
Jews might have commerce and traffic. 4. Excommunication does not debar us
from exercising the works of charity; for we are bound to feed the hungry, and
not suffer them to starve because they are excommunicate. 5. Excommunication
does not debar us from hearing the word, except we be scoffers of it.

Q. Is the Christian Magistrate subject to the censure of excommunication?

A. Yes; for though he be a Father as he is a Prince, yet he is a Brother as he
is a Christian; and therefore liable to be censered as a brother. Hence King
Vzziah was excommunicate by the Priest Azariah, and Theod^sius the Emperor by
Ambrose.

Q. Will it follow that there must be no excommunication, because Christ will
not have the Tares plucked up till the Harvest?

A. 1. No; for Christ speaks there of Hypoc^its which cannot be plucked up by
the Church, because she knows them not; but in the great Harvest, they shall
be plucked up by the Angels, at his command who knows the secrets of the heart.
2. If the place be meant of Heretics, they are not to be plucked up at such
times, as may endanger the Churches peace, but they must be left to a
convenient time, when the Church may excommunicate them without danger; or else
left to the judgment of the great day. 3. All Tares cannot be plucked up,
whilst the Church is here Militant; for there will be found still some Tares
amongst the Corn; some Goats among the Sheep; a Judas among the Apostles; as
there were Cananites and Iebusites among the Israelites. 4. Christ by this
condemns their rashness, who presently go to pluck up and fly to
excommunication, before they use reproof and admonition.

Q. Can the Minister exclude any man from the Kingdom of God?

A. 1. He cannot by his own power, but by the power of him whose Minister he
is, 2. He cannot exclude any man from Heaven, but he can pronounce and declare
that such a man is excluded thence.

Q. Can the delivering of a man over to Satan, be a means to save his spirit?

A. Yes accidentally: for God can draw good out of evil, and light out of
darkness; thus the bufferings which Paul suffered by the Angel of Satan,
caused him to pray heartily: it is the special work of Gods mercy, to save our
souls by affliction and misery.

Q. Can an excommunicate person be accounted as a Brother?

A. Yes; for excommunication takes not away true Brotherly love and affection;
an excommunicate person may be shut out of Heaven, but not out of hope; we may
exclude him out of our Society, but not of our ^owels of compassion and mercy:
we draw the Sword of excommunication against him, not to kill, but to cure him.
Who would be more fully resolved of these Presbyterian Tenets, let him read
their own writings.

Q. How many Erroneous opinions in Religion have been lately revived or hatched
since the fall of our Church government?

A. It were almost endless to number every particular, Diverse erroneous
opinions which have been lately revived or hatched, since the fall of our
Church Government.
it may suffice that I shall name more then one hundred of the most ordinary
and latest received of them, which are 1. That the Scriptures are a humane
invention, insufficient and uncertain, and do not contain half of his revealed
will. 2. That they are all allegorical, and written according to the private
spirit of the penmen, and not as moved by the Holy Ghost. And that the Old
Testament is now of no force. 3. That reason is the rule of faith. 4. That
Scripture binds us no further then the Spirit assures us that such is
Scripture. 5. That Scripture should not be read to a mixed Congregation without
present exposition. 6. That God is the Author of the pravity and sinfulness of
men's actions. 7. That Turks, Jews, Pagans, and others are not to be forced
from their opinions. 8. That God loves a crawling worm as well as a holy
Saint. 9. That Gods will, not sin, is the cause of man's damnation. 10. That man
was a living (...) before God breathed into him, and that which God breathed
was a part of his divine essence. 11. That God is the only Spirit, and that
Prince of the air, who rules in the children of disobedience. 12. That the
soul dies with the body. 13. That reprobation cannot be proved out of
Scripture. 14. That there is no Trinity of persons in God. 15. That every
creature is God, as every drop in the River is water. 16. That Christ is not
essentially, but nominally God. 17. That Christ was polluted with original sin.
18. That Christ was true man when he created the world, yet without flesh. 19.
That Christ died only for sinners, and not for unbelievers; for sins past
before our conversion, but not for sins done after conversion. 20. That no man
is damned but for unbelief, and that man can satisfy for his own unbelief.
21. That Heathens have the knowledge of Christ by the Sun, Moon, and Stars. 22.
That the end of Christ's coming was to preach Gods love to us, and not to
procure it for us; therefore did not obtain life for the Elect, but a
resurrection only, and deliverance us from death temporal. 23. That Christ
preached not the Gospel, but the Law; for the Gospel was taught by his
Apostles. 24. That our unction is all one with Christ's Divinity. 25. That
Christ with the Church of Jews and Gentiles shall reign one Earth a 1000
years in carnal pleasures. 26. That the Heathens are saved without Christ. 27.
That the Spirit of God neither dwells nor works in any, but it is our own
spirit which both works in the children of disobedience, and sanctifies the
Elect. 28. That God sees no sin in his Elect. 29. That a man baptized with the
Holy Ghost, knows all things, as God does. 30. That we may be saved without the
word, prayer, Sacraments etc. 31. That there is no inherent sanctification in
believers, but all is in Christ. 32. That Adam had died, though he had not
sinned. 33. That we have no original sin, nor is any man punished for Adams
sin. 34. That Gods Image consists only in the face, which Image was never
lost. 35. That men who know the Gospel, are of themselves able to believe. 36.
That one man is not more spi^itual then another. 37. That we have no free will,
not so much as in our natural estate. 38. That the moral Law is of no use among
Christians. 39. That we are not justified by faith; and that neither faith nor
holiness, nor repentance are required in Christians. 40. That the child of
God can no more sin, then Christ himself can. 41, That there should be no
fasting days under the Gospel. 42. That God does not chastise his children for
sin. 43. That God loves his children as well when they sin, as when they do
well, and therefore Abraham in denying his Wife sinned not. 44. That Gods
children ought not to ask pardon for their sins, for though they have sin in
the flesh, they have none in the conscience. 45. That the body of iniquity is
the great Antichrist mentioned in Scripture. 46. That men shall have other
bodies given them in the resurrection, and not the same they had here on Earth.
47. That Heaven is empty of souls till the resurrection. 48. That Infants shall
not rise at all, yet Beasts and Birds shall rise again. 49. That after this
life, there is neither Heaven nor Hell, nor Devil; but Hell is in this life, in
the terrors of conscience. 50. That there is no true Ministry, nor Church of
Christ upon the Earth. 51. That none are damned, but for rejecting the Gospel.
52. That now many Christians, have more knowledge then the Apostles had. 53.
That miracles necessarily attend the Ministry. 54 That there ought to be no
Churches built, nor should men worship in consecrated places. 55. That the
Apostles were ignorant of the salvation to be revealed in the last days. 56.
That all men ought to have liberty of conscience, and of prophesying, even
women also. 57. That circumcision and the old covenant was only of things
temporal. 58. That Paedobaptisme is unlawful and impious, and that others
besides Ministers may baptize, and that a man may be baptized often. 59. That
the people should receive the Lords Supper with their hats on; but the
Ministers in giving it should be uncovered. 60. That the Church of England is
Antichristian. 61. That there is no divine right to call or make Ministers;
that Ministers should work for their living, and that Tithes are Antichristian.
62: that Christians are not bound to observe the Lord day, and that we should
observe still the old Sabbath. 63. That humane learning and premeditation is
useless to preaching; and that preaching should only confist in disputing,
reasoning, and conferring. 64. That the Saints must not join in prayer with
wicked men, not receive the Sacrament with them, nor with any member of the
Church of England. 65. That ^ublick prayers are not to be used but by such as
have an in^allible Spirit as the Apostles had. 66. That set hours of prayer are
needless. 67, That singing of David's Psalms, or other holy songs, except they
be of their own making are unlawful. 68. That wicked men ought not to pray at
all. 69. That all government in the Church ought to be civil, not
Ecclesiastical. 70, That the power of the keys is as well in six or seven
gathered together, as in the greatest congregation. 71. That neither miracles
nor visions, nor anointing the sick with oil are ceased. 72. That in these days
many are with Paul rapt up into the third Heaven. 73, That the Magistrate is
not to meddle with matters of Religion, nor forms of Church government; which
if they do, they are not to be obeyed. 74. That there ought to be a community
of Goods, seeing all the Earth is the Saints. 75. That a man upon slight causes
may put away his wife, and that one man may have two wives. 76. That children
ought not at all to obey their parents, if wicked. 77. That parents should not
instruct their children, but leave them to God, 78. That Christians ought not
to maintain Religion by the sword, nor to fight for their lives, and liberties,
no^ to fight at all, nor to kill any thing, nay not a chicken for our use. 79.
That it stands not with Gods goodness to damn his own creatures eternally. 80.
That i'ts unlawful for a Christian to be a Magistrate. 81. That man lost no
more by Adams fall, then the rest of the whole creation. 82 That Christ has
not purchased eternal life for man, more then for the rest of the creation; and
that he offered up himself a full and perfect sacrifice; not only for man but
for all that man kept, even the whole creation. 83. None are sent to hell
before the last judgment. 84. It is not the Law, but the Gospel which threatens
us with Hell fire. 85. If God show not mercy to all, he is not infinite. 86.
Christians are not bound to meet one day in seven for public worship. 87. The
Saints are justified, not by Christ's obedience, but by the essential
righteousness of God. 88. A woman commits not adultery, in lying with
another man, if her husband be a sleep. 89. That the Saints may put away their
unbeleeving wives or husbands. 90. There is no other seal but the Spirit* the
Sacraments are no seals at all. 91. The Magistrate may not put to death a
murderer, being a member of the Church, till first he be cast out of the
Church. 92. The promises belong to sinners, as sinners, and not as repenting
sinners. 93. Apocrypha books are canonical Scripture. 94. To use set forms of
prayer, even the Lords prayer, is Idolatry, 95. Bells, Churches, and
Churchyards, preaching in Pulpits, in Gowns, by an hour-glasse, the names of
our months and days are all idolatry, 96. That the Apostles Creed is to be
rejected as erroneous; 97. That there ought to be no other laws among
Christians, but the judicial Law of Moses, and that the Magistrate has no
legislative power at all. 98. That all Learning, Schools, Universities, Arts,
Degrees are to be rejected as pernicious. 99. That Angels and Devils are not
substances, but mere qualities; and that men's souls are but terrestrial
vapors, perishing with the bodies. 100. That some in this life are perfect
without all sin, and need not pray for pardon. 101. That in God there is some
composition, and corporiety, and mutability also. 102. That Christ took not his
flesh of the Virgin Mary, but that his body was created without all
consanguinity with the first Adam. 103. That God does personally subsist in
every creature. 104. That the world is eternal. 105. That the Lords Supper may
be celebrated in Inns rather then Churches, and that in the end of a feast.
106. That the Devils have no sin. But I will leave these Devils, though I
could mention many more; but that it delights not my self, nor can it the
Reader, to be raking in such filthy mire and dirt. These are some of the
poisonous weeds, which have (too much of late) infested our English Garden; I
mean the Church, Church of England depl^red.
once admired (both at home and abroad) for the beauty of her Doctrine and
Discipline, and envied of none but ignorants, or men of perverse minds. The Poet
bewailing the ruins of Troy, said [Seges ubi Troi a fuit] Corn grows where Troy
stood, but I may sadly complain, that in stead of corn, that is, sound and
wholesome doctrine, which should be the food of our souls; now grows Tares and
Weeds, that choke the good word with which we were formerly fed, and might have
been, unto a life of glory everlasting, if we had therein abode. But least I
should bring thee into danger by giving thee only a fight of these Rocks and
Precepices, to prevent that, I shall commend to thy serious perusal Master
Wollebius his Abridgement of Christian Divinity, which for the good of my
country men I Englished, Enlarged, and cleared in obscure places, and have now
fitted for a second impression. A book worthy to be written in Letters of gold,
and imprinted in the heart of every good Christian; The knowledge therein
contained (by prayer, and through the assistance of Gods spirit) will root and
establish the in every good word and work, to the coming of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ; which God of his infini^e mercy grant.

The Contents of the Thirteenth Section.
The Doctrine of the Church of Rome concerning the Scriptures. 2. Their tenets
concerning predestination, the Image of God, original and actual sin, and free
will. 3. Their opinions concerning the Law of God, concerning Christ, Faith,
Justification, and good works. 4. Their Tenets concerning penance, fasting,
prayer, and alms. 5. Their opinions concerning the Sacraments, and Ceremonies
used in those controverted. 6. What they believe concerning the Saints in
Heaven. 7. Their Doctrine concerning the Church. 8. What they hold concerning
Monks, Magistrates, and Purgatory. 9. Wherein the outward worship of the Church
of Rome consists, and first part of their Mass. 10. Their dedication of
Churches, and what observable thereupon. 11. Their Consecration of Altars etc.
12. The Degrees of Ecclesiastical persons in the Church of Rome. Their sacred
orders, office of the Bishop, and what colors held Sacred. 13. Wherein the
other parts of the Mass consists. 14. In what else their outward worship
does consist. 15. Wherein consists the seventh part of their worship, and of
their holy days. 16. What be their other holy days which they observe,
canonical hours and processions. 17. Wherein the eighth part of their worship
consists, their ornaments and Vtensils used in Churches dedicated to Christ
and the Saints, their office performed to the dead.

SECT. XIII.
Quest. 1. WHat is the Doctrine of the Church of Rome at this day, and first of
the Scriptures?

A. Though they maintain the same Scriptures with us, the same Commandments,
the Lords Prayer, and the three Creeds, of the Apostles, of Nice, and of
Athanasius, yet in many points they differ from other Churches, Church of Rome
different from other Churches about the Scriptures.
which briefly are these. 1. They hold that Apocrythal Books are for regulating
our faith and manners, of equal authority with the Canonical Scripture; such
are Judith, Tobias, third and fourth of Esdras, the Book of Wisdom,
Ecclesiasticus, Baruch, the Epistle of Jeremy, the thirteenth and fourteenth
Chapters of Daniel, the Books of Macchab^es, and that part of Hester, which is
from the tenth verse of the third Chapter. 2. They prefer the vulgar Latin
Edition to the Hebrew and Greek Texts. 3. They hold that there is no necessity
to translate the Scripture into Vulgar languages. 4. That the Scripture is not
to be read of Lay People, except of such as are discreet, judicious, and
learned, and are authorized by the Ordinary. 5. That the Mass is not to be
celebrated in the Vulgar tongue. 6. That the sense and interpretation of the
Scripture depends upon the Churches approbation. 7. That the Scriptures by
reason of their difficulty and obscurity, are not fit to be read by the Laity,
or to be judges of controversies. 8. That the Scriptures have four different
senses; namely the Literal, Allegorical, Tropological, and Anag^gical; which
are to be expounded according to traditions written and unwritten, according to
the practice of the Church, the consent of Fathers, and interpretation of
Councels confirmed by the Pope. See Bellarmin, Eckius, Pighius, and the other
writers of controversies in the Roman Church.
9. That the Scriptures are not of absolute necessity for the being of a
Church, seeing there was a Church from Adam to Moses, for the space of two
thousand years, without any Scripture, being only guided and instructed by
traditions, without which the Scriptures are not perfect, as not containing all
Doctrines necessary to salvation.

Q. 2. What are their Tenets concerning predestination, the Image of God,
Original sin, and Actual, and Free Will?

A. 1. They hold election mutable, Roman Church different from others about
Predestination.
because the Elect may totally fall from faith and righteousness. 2. That sin
foreseen, was the cause of reprobation, in respect of the positive act of
condemnation; and some of them hold that foreseen works were the cause of
election. Gods Image, and Sin.
3. concerning the Image of God, they hold that it consists most in charity,
and that this is, Gratia gratum faciens, Grace which makes us acceptable, and
that it is a habit infused; whereas they say, that Gratia gratis data, is the
gift of Miracles. 4. That man in the state of innocence, did not stand in need
of any special assistance, by which he might be excited to good works. 5. That
original sin is not in the understanding and will, but in the inferior part of
the soul only, which they call the flesh; that concupiscence and ignorance are
only infirmities, and remainders of original sin. That the Virgin Mary was
without original sin. That Infants dying in original sin only, are punished
with the pain of loss, not with the pain of sense. That original fin is
taken away by baptism, and that in the regenerate it is remitted, and not
imputed, or to be called a sin, but only as it is the cause and punishment of
sin; that some actual sins are of their own nature venial, and some mortal.
That the sin against the holy Ghost is pardonable. 6. They hold that in
free will is required, not only a liberty from coaction, but also from
necessity; that an unregenerate man, can by his own strength, without Gods
special help, See the above named Authors, and the Catechism of the Council of
Trent.
perform some moral good, in which there may be no sin found. That an
unregenerate man has freedom of will in matters of salvation, though not
without the help of grace, so that he may hinder or further his conversion, and
may by his natural power cooperate with grace.

Q. 3. What are their opinions, concerning the Law of God, concerning Christ,
faith, justification, and good works?

A. 1. They divide the two Tables so, Romanists differ about the Law of God,
Christ, Faith, Justification, and good works.
that they make but three commandments in the first, and seven in the second;
making one commandment of the first two, and two of the last. They hold that
Idols and Images are not the same, and that the Images of Christ, and of the
Saints may be worshipped without Idolatry. That equivocation may be used in
some cases, and an officious lie. 2. Concerning Christ they hold that he was
not ignorant of any thing, and that he did not attain to knowledge by learning:
That he descended truly into Hell, in respect of his soul, and there preached
to the Fathers in prison, and delivered them from their Limbus, so that they
had nor as yet entered into Heaven, till Christ by his death had opened the
gates thereof, which Adam shut by his sin: That Christ did merit by his
sufferings, not only for us, but also for himself that glory which he enjoyes
after his Ascension: 3. Concerning faith, they say that Historical, miraculous,
and saving faith are one and the same; that the special application of the
promises of grace belongs not to faith, but to presumption; That faith has its
residence only in the intellect, and not in the will. That faith is an assent,
rather then knowledge: That justifying faith may be totally lost in the
regenerate; That true faith may be without charity: That we are not justified
by faith alone: That man by the natural strength of free will, can prepare
himself for future justification, being assisted by the holy Spirit. In his
preparation are contained these acts; namely, Fear, Hope, Love, Repentance, a
purpose to receive the Sacrament, a resolvtion to live a new life, and to
observe Gods Commandments. 4. Concerning justification, they say, that the
first is when a sinner of a wicked man is made good, which is by remission of
sins, and infusion of inherent righteousness. The second justification is,
when a just man becomes more just, and this is in doing of good works, by the
merit of which, he can make himself more just. They say Christ is the
meritorious cause of our justification, but the formal cause is either
intrinsecal, and that is the habit of infused grace; or extrinsecal, to wit,
the righteousness of Christ; or actual, which are our good works; so that
here is a threefold formal cause: they teach that justification consists not
in the bare remission of sins, but also in the inward renovation of the mind.
That we are not only justified, but also saved by good works, as efficient
causes. 5. Concerning good works, they teach that the good works of just men
are absolutely just, and in a manner perfect; that a just man may fulfill the
Law; that a man is justified by works, not in the first, but second
justification; yet not without the assistance of grace. See the Catechism of
Trent, with Bellarmin, and the other writers of controversies.
(...) unregenerate man by the works of repentance may merit the grace of
justification ex congruo, as doing works agreeing to the law of God; that they
who are justified by the first justification, do merit life eternal by their
works ex condigno.

Q. 4. What are their Tenets concerning penance, fasting, prayer, and alms?

A. They teach that faith is no part of penance; That repentance may be
totally lost: Differ about Penance, Fasting, Prayers, and Alms.
That the parts thereof are not mortification, and vivification, but
confession, contrition, and satisfaction. That penance is a Sacrament, that
contrition is to be ascribed partly to grace, partly to free will. That it is
necessary to justification, and the cause of remission of sins, and that by it
all sins are pardonable. That a^ricular confession to the Priest is necessary
to reconcile us to God. That a sinner before baptism is received into grace
without his own satisfaction, only by the satisfaction of Christ, but after
baptism, he must make satisfaction himself. That after the fault is forgiven,
there remains often times the guilt of temporary punishment either here or in
purgatory, which must make satisfaction; that the punishments of purgatory may
be redeemed by fasting, prayers; alms, etc. 2. Concerning fasting, They hold
it a sin, and deserving death, to eat of meats prohibited by the Church. That
fasting consists only in abstinence from meat, not from drink. That the
times of fasting, chiefly Lent, are of Apostolical institution. That fasti^g is
satisfactory and meritorious. That the tradition of the Church in such
indifferent things, obliges the conscience. 3. Concerning prayer, They say
that it is meritorious, that the Canonical hours of prayer should be observed,
that they are to be said or sung in Latin by the Clergy and Monks. That the
titles given to the Virgin Mary are true and holy. That to prayer in the Quite
ought to be joined singing, Organs, Trumpets, and other musical instruments. 4.
Concerning alms, They hold that the giving thereof is meritorious. That there
is not only a corporal, but also spiritual alms* consisting in comforting,
counselling, See the authors above named.
teaching, etc. That alms may be raised of ill gotten goods, and filthy lucre,
as of Whore-houses, etc.

Q. 5. What opinions do they hold concerning the Sacraments?

A. They teach that the efficacy of the Sacraments depends upon the intention
of the giver. Differ from others about the Sacrament.
That the Sacraments are not seals to confirm the promises of grace. That grace
is contained in, and conferred by the Sacraments ex opere operato, and that the
receivers thereof, by their justifying virtue are saved: That three Sacraments,
namely, Baptism, Confirmation, and Order, do imprint an indelible character,
form, or figure, in the very substance of the soul; the caracter of Baptism is
Passive, making a man capable of all other Sacraments; that of Order is Active;
that of Confirmation is partly Active, partly Passive. That there are seven
Sacraments of the New Testament. That all the Ceremonies used by them in the
Sacraments are necessary. 2. Concerning Baptism, They say that Laymen and
Women in case of necessity, may Baptize. That the Baptism of John was not the
same with that of Christ, nor had the same efficacy, and that after John's
Baptism, it was necessary to receive Christ's Baptism. That to Water in
Baptism should be added Oil, Spittle, Salt, etc. The sign of the Cross,
Exorcisme, Exsufflation, a White Garment, etc. That Baptized Infants have, if
not Actual, yet Habitual Faith infused into them. That Infants cannot be saved
without Baptism; that Baptism began to be absolutely necessary on the day of
Pentecost. That it totally abolisheth original sin. 3. Concerning the
Eucharist, They say, that only unleavened bread is to be used. That Christ by
way of Concomitance is wh^lly in the Bread; that is, his Body, Blood, Soul,
Divinity, etc. That the whole Essence of the Sacrament is in the Bread alone.
That there is no necessity to communicate under both kinds. That the Wine ought
necessarily to be mixed with Water. That the Priest may participate alone. That
the Eucharist is profitable for the dead. That the Bread should be dipped into
the Wine, that it should be elevated, carried in Procession, adored, etc. That
there is no trope in these words, This is my body, etc. That Christ's Body is
not only really, but substantially in the Sacrament. That it may be at one
time in many places. That the Bread is transubstantiated into Christ's body.
That the form of consecration consists in these words, This is my body. That
the Mas^e is a Propitiatory Sacrifice for the quick and the dead. 4. Concerning
Confirmation, Penance, Extreme Unction, Orders, and Matrimony. They teach that
these are Sacraments properly so called: that there is virtue in Extreme
Unction, either to cure the body, or to do away the remainders of sin; for this
cause they anoint 6. parts of the body, to wit the Eyes, Ears, Mouth, Hands,
Reins, and Feet. See the former authors.
That Ordination is a Sacrament, as well in Deacons, Subdeacons, Acoluthi,
Exorcists, Readers and Door-Keepers, as in Priests.

Q. 6. What Ceremonies do they use in the five controverted Sacraments?

A. In confirmation the Bishop anointeth the child's forehead with chrisme,
Ceremonies used in the five controverted Sacraments.
making the sign of the Cross thereon, and saying; I sign thee with the
sign of the Cross, and confirm thee with the chrisme of salvation, in the
Name of the Father etc. Then he strikes him on the cheek, to show he must not
refuse to suffer for Christ. In Penance, the Bishop goes to the Church door
where the Penitents lie prostrate on the ground, saying: Children come to me,
and I will teach you the fear of the Lord. Then he kneeleth and prays for
them; and having used some words of admonition, he brings them into the Church;
this is done on the day of the Lords Supper, that they might be partakers
thereof; all the Church doors are then opened to show that all people have
access to Christ. The Penitents being received into the Church, cut their
Hair and Beards, and lay aside their penitential garments, and put on clean
clothes, after the example of Joseph when he was delivered out of pris^n. This
casting off their old clothes puts them in mind of putting off the old man.
In Extreme Unction the Priest first besprinkleth the sick person, and the whole
room with holy water; then he anointeth the organs of the five senses, because
by them sin infecteth the soul; the reins also and feet are anointed to
expiate the sins that are in the concupiscible and motive faculties. They only
must be anointed of whom there is no hope of recovery. Of the Ceremonies used
in Sacred Orders, we will speak hereafter. In Matrimony the Priest blesses the
married couple with prayers, and oblations if they were never married before;
but they are not to bless the second marriage. The Woman is covered with a
veil, after the example of Rebecca; and to show her subjection to the man, she
is united to the man by a Lace or Ribband tied in a knot, See besides the above
named authors Eckius in his homily upon this subject.
by a Ring also put on the fourth finger of the left hand, because of the vein
that reaches from thence to the heart; signifying the mutual love that ought
to be between them; but marriages are not to be celebrated in Lent, and other
times of humiliation.

Q. 7. What are their Tenets concerning the Saints in Heaven?

A. They register their names in their Calendars after the Pope has canonised
them, Roman Church differs from others about the Saints in Heaven.
or given a testimony of their Sanctity, and decreed honors for them; namely
public Invocation, dedication of Altars and Temples to them, oblation of
Sacrifices, celebration of Festival days, setting up of their Images, and
reservation of their Relics. The honor they give to God is called by them
Latria, that of the Saints is Dulia; but the honor which they give to Christ's
humanity and the Virgin Mary, is Hyperdulia. 2. They say that the Saints make
intercession for us, not immediately to God, but through Christ they obtain
their requests. 3. That we ought to invocate both Saints and Angels. 4. That
their Images are to be worshipped; that the Images of Christ, and of the Saints
are not Idols, because Idols are representations of that which is not, and in
Scripture the word Idol is spoken only of Heathen Images; that it is not
unlawful to represent God by such Images as he has described himself;
therefore they pain^ God in the form of an old man, the Holy Ghost in the form
of a Dove. That though the Images of Christ and the Apostles, are to be
honored in relation to the persons which they represent, yet we must not think
there is any Divinity in them, or that they can help us; or that we ought to
ask any thing of them. 5. That the Images of Christ and the Saints should be
placed in Churches, because the Images of the Cherubims were placed in Salomons
Temple, and before in the Tabernacle. 6. That the Relics of Christ and of the
Saints are to be honored, and kissed, as holy pledges of our Patrons, yet not
to be adored as God, nor invocated as Saints. 7. That the true Cross of
Christ, the Nails, the Thorns, Of these passages see Thomas in his sums,
Gregory, de Valentia, Bellaranine, and the others above named.
etc. by way of of analogy, and reduction are to be worshipped with the same
kind of worship or Latria that Christ is; that the sign of the Cross in the
forehead, or in the air, is a Sacred and venerable sign, powerful to drive
away evil spirits. 8. That Pilgrimages ought to be undertaken to those holy
places, where the Images and Relics of Christ and of the Saints are kept. 9.
That days should be kept holy in memory of the Saints, the observation of which
is a part of divine worship.

Q. 8. What is their Doctrine concerning the Church?

A. They teach that the government of the Church is Monarchical, Church of
Rome, their doctrine concerning the Church.
as being the most excellent form of government. That the government of the
Church was founded on the Person of Saint Peter. That Peter was Bishop of Rome,
and so continued till his death. That the Pope is Peter's Successor, and Christ's
Vicar, by whom he is made head of the Church Militant. That the Pope is not
Antichrist, but that the great Antichrist shall be a particular man, of the
Tribe of Dan, who shall reign in Jerusalem three years and a half, and shall be
acknowleged by the Jews as their Messiah, whom he will make believe that he is
of the Tribe of Judah, and descended of David. 2. They hold that the Pope is the
supreme Judge in controversies of Faith, and manners; that his judgment is
certain and infallible; that he can err in particular controversies of fact,
depending upon man's testimony, and that he may err as a private Doctor in
questions of right, as well of faith as of manners; but that he cannot err,
when with a General Council he makes decrees of faith, or general precepts of
manners; and that the Pope is to be obeyed, though either by himself, or by a
particular Council^, he err in some doubtful matters: but they generally now
believe, that though the Pope were an Heretic, yet he cannot prescribe or
define any Heretical Doctrine, to be believed by the whole Church. That the
Pope has a spiritual coactive jurisdiction in making Laws to bind the
conscience, by his sole authority, without the consent of Priests or people,
and that he can judge and punish the transgressors of his Laws. That as, the
Apostles had their immediate authority from Christ, so the Bishops have the
same immediately from the Pope. That the Pope has a supreme power over the
temporal estates of Christians, to depose Kings, and dispose of their Kingdoms
in order to spiritual things, and so far, as it is necessary to the salvation
of souls. That it is not repugnant to Gods word, for the same man to be both a
Political and Ecclesiastical Prince, seeing Melchisedech, Moses, Eli, Samuel,
and the Macchabees exercised both powers. 3. They believe that the true Church
of Christ is only that Society which acknowledges the Pope to be head
thereof, and Christ's Vicar upon earth. That they which are not baptized, and
the Catechumeni, are not properly and actually members of the Church, but only
in possibility. That Heretics, Schismatics, and excommunicate persons are not
members of the Church. That reprobates are members of the militant Church,
Because in Noah's Ark were unclean beasts, in the same Net are good and bad
fishes, at the same Wedding-feast, many were called, but few chosen; in the
same Sheepfold are same Goats; in the same house are vessels of dishonor,
Judas was one of the Apostles, etc. That the true Catholic Church is always
visible; for it is compared to a Mountain, to a Candle, to a City on a Hill,
etc. That the true visible Church can never fail totally, Because it is built
on a Rock, against which, Hell Gates cannot prevail etc. That the true Church
cannot fall into error, Because it is the Pillar and ground of truth, etc.
That the true notes of the Church are, Universality, Antiquity, Continuance,
Multitude, Succession of Bishops from the Apostles Ordination, Unity in
Doctrine, Unity among the members themselves, and with their head, soundness
of doctrine, power and efficacy of doctrine holiness of life, miracles, the
light of prophecy, the testimony of her enemies, See the above named authors.
the unhappy end of those who oppress the Church, and the temporal felicity of
such as have defended her.

Q. 9. What do they hold concerning Councils, Monks, Magistrates, and Purgatory?

A. They teach that Diocesan Councils are to be convocated by the Bishops;
Romanists differ about Councils, Monks, Magistrates and Purgatory.
Provincial by Archbishops, National by Patriarchs or Primates, but General
Councils by the Pope alone, and not by the Emperor without the Popes
approbation; except it be when the Pope is either imprisoned, or dead, or mad;
in such cases the Cardinals may call a Council. That ordinarily Bishops have
the power of decisive suffrages, but by custom and privilege; Cardinals,
Abbots, and Generals of orders, have the same power, though they be not
Bishops. That in a General Council should be present all Bishops, at least of
the greater Provinces, except any be excommunicate. That the Pope and the four
Patriarchs, of Constantinople, Alexandria, Antioch, and Jerusalem, or their
Deputies, be also present, and at least some of the greater part of Provinces.
That the Pope is the supreme President, and Judge of Councils. That Christians
are bound to obey the decrees of Councils. That General and particular Councils
confirmed by the Pope, cannot err. That the Scripture is above Councils, as it
is the infallible word of God, but in respect of interpretation it is dependent
from Councils. That the Pope is above Councils, and not to be judged by any. 2.
Concerning Monks, they teach that their original is of Divine right; That their
institution is grounded upon Evangelical Counsel, not precept. That Counsels
are not commanded but commended to us; that commands are of things easy to be
performed, and taken out of the principles of nature; Counsels are of things
difficult, and above nature, and of things better then those of commands. By
precepts we are tied to obedience, by Counsels we are left to our Free Will;
Precepts have their rewards and punishments; but Counsels have no punishments,
but great rewards: Hence arise the works of Supererogation. That children if
they be come to years of puberty, may enter into a Monastery without their
Parents consent, if so be their Parents need not their help. And so may Wives,
without their Husbands consent. That Vows though of things not commanded, Who
would see more at lenght the Doctrines of the Church of Rome, let him read the
above named authors; and withal Baronius, Bonaventura, P. Lombard, Canus,
Canisius, Cassander, Alphensus de Castro, Coccius, Genebrard, Gerson,
Gretzerus, Suarez, Turrianus, Vasquez, Hugo de S. Victore, and others.
are a part of Gods worship. That the promise made in baptism, to renounce the
Devil, the World and the Flesh, is not properly a Vow. That the Vows of
poverty, obedience, and continency, are lawful. That the Pope may dispense with
Vows. That the habits and shaving of Monks, are of great use and antiquity. 3.
Concerning Magistrates, they teach that their Laws do no less bind the
conscience, then Divine or Ecclesiastic Laws. That Magistrates are subject and
inferior to the Clergy in matters of Religion. That Magistrates may inflict
death on Heretics. 4. Concerning Purgatory, they say, that it is one of these
four contignations or Rooms under ground; the lowermost is hell, where the
pain of loss and sense is eternal. The next above that is Purgatory, where
pain of loss and sense is temporary. Above that is the Receptacle of Infants,
where only is the pain of loss eternal. The uppermost was that of the
Fathers, where was only temporal pain of loss; now it is empty since Christ's
descent thither. That in Purgatory are those souls which depart hence with
venial sins, or whose sins are pardoned, but not the punishment. That the
suff^ages of the living are beneficial to the dead; namely, Masses, Prayer, and
satisfactory works, as alms, pilgrimages, fasts, etc. To which may be added
indulgences.

Q. 10. Wherein does the outward worship of the Church Rome consist, The
outward worship of the Roman Church, and first part of their Mass.
and the first part of their Mass?

A. 1. In Churches, Church yards, Bells, Altars, Pictures, ^rucifixes, Images,
Curtains, and other Church Orna^ents, as T^pestry, Candlesticks, etc. In
dedication also of Churches, consecration of Altars, Anoyntings* Sacraments,
etc. 2. In Ministers, Ecclesiastical Orders* and their Functions, such are
Singers, Psalmists, Door-keepers, Acholyths, their offices.
Lectors; or Readers, Exorcists, Acolyths, who are to light the Tapers, and
hold them whilst the Gospel is read, and to furnish wine for the Chalice, etc.
Subdeacons, Deacons, Priests, and Bishops, etc. The office also of the
Acholyths is to make Agnus Dei, of consecrated wax, mixed with chrisme
distributed by the Pope in the Church. These Agni or Lambs, represent the Lamb
of God, who takes away the (...) of the World; for as the wax is begot of the
Be, without libidinous copulation; so was Christ of the B. Virgin; and as the
honey is hid within the wax, so was the divinity hid under the humanity. The
oil or chrisme mixed with the wax, signifies, that mercy and gentleness which
was in Christ. They say that these Lambs are preservatives against lightning
and tempests, by virtue of their consecration. O Catholics, great is your
faith, be it to you as you believe. 3. In the Garments or Ornaments of Bishops,
Priests, and other Church Ministers; such are the Amictus, which like the Ephod
covers the head and shoulders of the Priest or Bishop; therefore it is called
Superhumerale. Alba, or Camis^a, is the Surplice of Linen; the Girdle or Belt,
with which the Priests loins are girt. The Stola is worn in form of a Chain
about the Priests neck, it covers both his sides, and hangs down to the knee;
it is called Orarium, because it is the habit of Orators, that preach to, or
pray for the people. Manipulus or Sudarium, or Mappula, or Phanon, (for all
these names it has) is a Towel or H^ndkerchieff, carried by the Minister or
Priest in his left hand, or on his left arm. Casula or Cappa, or Pianon, is an
upper garment which covers all the Body, as it were a little Cottage, called
in Latin Casa. These six Ornaments are common to Priests and Bishops: there be
nine Ornaments peculiar to Bishops; namely, Caligae, which are long hose, or
stockings; Sandalia, a kind of slippers or shoes; Succinctorium a kind of
girdle; Orale a linen veil cast over his head; Tunica a long coat down to the
heels, therefore called Talaris; Dalmatica, so called from Dalmatia, the
country where it was first woven, is a garment with long and large sleeves,
representing the Cross; Chiro^hecae are white gloves of Kids skins; Mitra is
the Mytre or Ornament of the head; Annulus is the Ring which the Bishop wears,
to show he is betrothed to Christ; Baculus Pastoralis, is the Bishops crosier
staff; Pallium, or the Pall, is the Ornament of Archbishops and Patriarchs.
The Pall is not to be worn but in the Church, and in time of Mass; yet Pope
Gregory permitted it to be worn in solemn Letanies out of the Church: upon it
are four red crosses, signifying the four Cardinal virtues, justice, prudence,
fortitude, and temperance, which ought to be in Prelates, which virtues are not
acceptable to God, but as they are sanctified by the cross of Christ, in which
only they should glory with the Apostle; for the Gentiles had these virtues,
but knew not Christ nor his cross. There are also in the Pall three pins or
bodkins, signifying the three Christian virtues of faith, hope, and charity,
without which he cannot justly claim or retain his Pall; they may signify also
a threefold pricking, or compunction which ought to be in Prelates. 1. Of
compassion toward those that are in misery. 2. Of care in the due and
conscionable execution of their office. 3. Of fear to offend God. 4. Their
worship consists in the Mass, where we have many ceremonies; first the
Bishop or Priest before he begins, sings five Psalms: then he combs his head,
and washes his hands, follows the aspersion of holy water, then is the
Introi^us or singing at the Priests approaching toward the Altar; whilst the
Introitus is singing, the Priest or Bishop walks toward the Altar between a
Priest and a Deacon, before whom walks the Subdeacon, carrying the Book of
the Gospel shut; before whom march two Taper bearers, and before them is
carried the Censer with incense. When the Priest or Bishop comes to the Altar,
he takes off his Mytre, makes confession, opens the book and kisseth it. Over
the Bishop also, a linen cloth full of pictures is carried by four Ministers
in form of a canopy. In their four solemn Processions, to wit, at Candlemas,
Palme-Sunday, Easter, and Ascension day, they have cross in banners, seven
Tapers borne by seven Acolyths, seven Deacons following, then seven Priors,
three Acolyths with incense, one Subdeacon carrying the Gospel, then the
Bishop in great state, whom the people follow with the Porters, Readers,
Exorcists, Singers, etc. Before the Bishop or Priest ascends the Altar, he
boweth himself to the ground, and then confesses; and during the time of the
Mass, he boweth his body eight times before the Altar. After confession and
absolution, the Priest blesses the incense, and puts it in the censer; then he
kisseth the Altar and the Book, and takes the censor from the Deacon, with
which he sumeth the Altar, and then removes to the right side of the same, and
withal Kyrie Eleeson is said, not less then nine times in the Mass. Gloria in
Excelsis is also sung, which was the Angelical Hymn at Christ's Nativity; then
the Priest turning to the people, salutes them in these words* The Lord be with
you; to whom the Quire answers, And with thy Spirit. Seven times in the Mass
the Priest salutes the people, but turns to them only five times. Then the
collects or prayers are said, and after them the Epistle is read, with the face
toward the Altar; its the Subdeacons office to read the Epistle; which done,
he delivers the Book (shut to the Bishop, who lays his hand on the
Subdeacon) which he kisseth. Alter the Epistle, is sung the Gradual, so called
from the steps of humility, by which we ascend to Heaven; it is called also the
Responsory, because the matter thereof answers the matter of the Epistle. Next
to this, Hallelujah is sung, but from Septuagesima Sunday till Easter, in stead
of Hallelujah, the Tractus is sung, so called a Trabend^, because it is sung
with a long drawing tone, as containing the mournful condition of man in this
life, as Hallelujah is the joyful song of Heaven. After Hallelujah, is sung the
prose which by them is called Sequentia, it is a song of exaltation. This done,
the Priest removes from the right to the left side of the Altar, whence the
Deacon takes the Gospel, and ascends into a high place, where he reads it, with
his face to the North; the cross, the censer, and two lights are carried
before the Gospel, Of these particulars see Stephanus Durantus de ritibus
Ecclesiae, Gul. Durandus his rationale, Alcuinus de divinis officiis, Innocent.
3. de myster. Missae, Hugo de Sanct. Victore de offic. Eccles. and in specul*
Ecclesiae, Berno de offic. missae, and diverse others.
which is laid upon a chshion, to show the yoke of Christ is easy; at the
reading of it, all stand up, and cross themselves, and give glory to God.
After this the Creed is rehearsed, and the Sermon follows, which concludes
the first part of the Mass.

Q. 11. What is their manner if dedicating Churches?

A. In the Church to be dedicated or consecrated, are painted twelve Crosses on
the walls, before which burn twelve Tapers. The Bishop in his Pontificalls
with his Clergy; and the people come to the Church door being shut, where he
prays, and then besprinkleth the walls with holy water, whilst the Clergy
and people go singing about the Church. The holy water is sprinkled out of a
bundle of Hysope. Then the Bishop with his whole Train returning to the
Church Porch prays again, and with his crosier staff knocks the door
thrice, saying these words: Lift up your heads O ye Gates, and be ye lift up ye
everlasting doors, Romanists their manner of dedicating of Churches.
and the King of glory shall come in. Of whom the Deacon within the Church
asks, Who is the King of glory? to whom the Bishop answers: The Lord strong
and mighty, the Lord mighty in Battle. Then the door is opened, the Bishop
with three of his servants enters, the rest remain without; after-the Bishop
has wished peace three times to that house, the door is shut again, and he on
his knees before the Altar prays, whilst the Clergy without sings the
Letanie, and the Priests carry on their shoulders a Chest, or Coffin,
containing the Relics of that Saint to whom the Church is dedicated. The
Altar with all belonging to it are sanctified, the walls with certain letters
are painted; Salt, Water, Ashes and Wine are exorcized, and mingled together,
into which he dipps his thumb, and makes the sign of the Cross on the Altar,
Walls and Pavement. Then he offers incense, and blesses the Church in the Name
of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; this being done, the Bishop before the
Church door preaches to the people concerning the anniversary dedication of
that Church, of honor due to the Clergy, of tenths also and obl^tions. After
Sermon all are admitted into the Church singing. The twelve Lights and twelve
Crosses, do signify the Doctrine of the twelve Apostles which shines in the
Church, by which they preached the Cross of Christ: The Bishop represents
Christ making intercession for his Church, and by the Staff of his word
knocking at the door of our hearts. His compassing the Church three times, and
his three times knocking at the door, signify his three fold power, in Heaven,
Earth; and Hell. And his threefold right or interest he has in us, to wit, by
Creation, by Redemption, and by the gift of life eternal promised to us. The
making of Greek and Latin Letters with a Cross on the Pavement with ashes,
show that the Gentiles are made partakers of the Cross of Christ, but not the
Jews; besides that the rudiments and alphabet of Christianity must be taught
to the weaker sort; the Oil, Salt, Water, Ashes, and Wine which are used in
the dedication, have mystical significations. The Water and Wine represent
the two Sacraments of Baptism and the Eucharist. Oil shows our spiritual
unction; Salt that wisdom which should be in us; Ashes our mortification;
Hysop our purity and sanctification; and the Incense our prayers.

Q. 12. What else is Observable in the dedication of Churches?

A. 1. They hold that no Church is to be dedicated till it be endowed; What
observable thereupon:
for he that builds a Church, is, or should be like a Husband that marries a
Maid, on whom he ought to bestow a joynter. 2. That the Feast of dedication
which from the Greek, they call Encaenia, ought to be kept every year; for so
it was kept among the Jews, which if it had been unlawful, Christ would not
have honored it with his presence. 3. They say that the dedication of Churches
is a terror to evil spirits, and incitment to devotion and reverence; a means
to move God to hear our prayers the sooner; a testimony of our zeal, that
Christians are not in this point inferior to Jews and Gentiles, who would not
presume to make use of their Temples for prayer, and sacrifice, till first by
their Priests they had consecrated and dedicated them to their Deities. 4. That
what is in the dedication of Churches visibly acted, ought to be in us
invisibly effected, namely, that if Churches be holy, we should not be profane;
shall they be consecrated to the service of God, and not we? shall their
Churches be filled with hallowed Images, and our souls defiled with unhallowed
imaginations? shall the Church be called the house of prayer, and our bodies
(which ought to be the Temples of the Holy Ghost) denns of Thieves? we are
lively stones, but those of Churches are dead; we are capable of grace and
holiness, so are not Churches; for it is confessed on all sides, that Temples
by consecration are not made capable of actual holiness, but only made more
fit for divine service. Is it not a great shame that in their Churches lights
continually shine: and in the Temples of the holy Ghost, there is nothing but
darkness? That they should burn incense on their Altars: and we be quite
destitute of Zeal and Devotion in our hearts? They make use of outward
unction, but we use neither the outward unction of the Church, not the inward
of the spirit? When we see them make use of Salt and Holy Water, we should be
careful to have salt within us, and that water of the spirit, without which we
cannot be regenerated. 5. They teach that Churches may be rededicated if they
are burned down or fallen down, But of this subject concerning dedication, read
Durandus and Durantus, Turrecremata, Hostiensis, Hugo de S. Victore de Sacram.
Hospinian, Raibanus, Ivo, etc.
and built again; or if it be doubtful whither they have been consecrated
heretofore; but if they be polluted by adultery, or such like uncleanness,
they are only to be purified with holy water. 6. That Churches must not be
consecrated without Mass, and the Relics of some Saint, and that only by
the Pope or a Bishop, not by a Priest or any inferior order; and that gifts or
presents which they call Anathemata, be given to the new Church; after the
example of Constantine the Great, who endowed with rich presents and ornaments
the Church which he built at Jerusalem to the honor of our Savior.

Q. 13. How do they Dedicate or Consecrate their Altars?

A. The Bishop having blessed the water, makes with the same four Crosses on
the four Horns of the Altar, Their consecration of Altars, etc.
to show that the Cross of Christ is preached in all the four corners of the
earth. Then he goes about the Altar seven times, and besprinkleth it seven
times with holy water and hysop; this is to signify the seven gifts of the
Holy Ghost, and the sevenfold shedding of Christ's Blood; to wit, 1. When he
was circumcised. 2. When he sweat blood in the Garden. 3. When he was scourged.
4. When he was crowned with thorns. 5. When his hands. 6. When his feet were
nailed to the Cross. and 7. When his side was lanced. The Bishop also makes a
Cross in the middle of the Altar, to show that Christ was crucified in the
midst of the earth; for so Jerusalem is seated. At this consecration is used
not only water, but salt also, wine, and ashes, to represent four things
necessary for Christianity; namely, Purity, Wisdom, Spiritual joy, and
Humility. The Altar must not be of wood, or any other material, but of stone;
to represent Christ the Rock on which the Church is built, the Corner Stone,
which the builders refused, the stone of offense at which the Jews stumbled,
and the little stone cut out of the mountain without hands; this stone Altar is
anointed with oil and chrisme, so was Christ with the graces of the spirit,
and the oil of gladness above his fellows. This anointing also of the stone
Altar, is in initation of Iacobi anointing the stone on which he sleept. So the
remainder of the holy water is poured out at the foot of the Altar, because the
Priests of old used to pour out the blood of the Sacrifice at the foot of their
Altar. The holy Relics are laid up in a Coffin with three grains of
incense, as the Manna of old was laid up in the Ark; our hearts should be the
Coffins in which the virtuous lives of the Saints with faith in the Trinity, or
with the three Cardinal virtues, Faith, Hope, and Charity, should be carefully
kept. These Relics are laid under the Altar; because Revel. 6. the souls of
these who suffered for Christ were seen by Saint John under the Altar. It is
also to be observed that as the Altar is besprinkled with water, so it is
anointed in five places with oil, and then with chrisme, to signify the five
wounds of Christ which did smell more fragrantly than any Balsame, and by which
we are healed; the five senses also are hereby signified, which ought to be
sanctified. After unction, incense is burned, to show that prayers and
supplication follow sanctification, At last after the Altar, and all that
belong to it are hallowed, the Altar is covered with white, Mass is said, and
Tapers lighted; to show that our holiness and devotion must be accompanied
with good works, See the former Authors.
which must shine before men here, if we would shine like stars in the
Firmament hereafter.

Q. 14. What else do they consecrate besides Temples and Altars.

A. Besides these they consecrate all the ornaments of the Altar; the Patinae,
for making the body of Christ; the Corporal for the covering thereof; the
Chalice for the blood; the Linen with which the Altar is covered; the
Eucharistial or Pix where Christ's body is kept, representing Christ's sepulcher;
the Censer, Incense, and Capsae, that is Chests or Coffins wherein the bones of
the Saints are kept. They consecrate also their Crosses and Images, and Easter
Tapers, their Fonts, First Fruits, holy Water, Salt, Churchyards, Bells, etc.
Every one of which have their peculiar prayers; besides, washing, crossing,
anointing incense, etc. They hold that Bells succeeded the Jewish Trumpets; by
which we are awaked, and admonished to put on the armor of God, to fortify
our selves with prayer against our spiritual enemies. Bells are more durable
then Trumptes, and their sound louder, by which is signified that the preaching
of the Gospel exceeds that of the Law, both in continuance and efficacy.
Bells have clappers, and Preacher^ have tongues; it is a shame that the one
should be vocal, and not the other; how is that congregation served, which has
sounding Bells, and dumb Preachers? or that which has sounding brass, and
tinckling cymbal for their Preachers; such as have clappers, but no hands; good
words, but no good works; which preach to others, and are cast away themselves;
like Bells, they call upon others to hear Sermons, but are not thereby bettered
or edified themselves. In the Roman Church they baptize their Bells and give
them names, for this alleging the example of Jacob, who gave the name of
Bethel to Luz, the place where he had the vision of the Ladder. Their Bells
seldom are heard in Lent, and three days before Easter are quite silent, to
show the sadness of that time. Church yards in Greek (...), that is,
Dormitories (because our bodies sleep there till the resurrection) are
consecrated with crosses, holy Water, fumigation and prayers, as the Churches
are; they be also as well as Churches, Sanctuaries, and places of refuge; none
must be buried here, but Christians who have been baptized; such as die without
baptism, or without repentance after murder, adultery, selfe-homicide, or any
other grievous sin, though baptized, must not be buried there. In the
Churchyard are set up five crosses, one whereof stands in the middle; before
each of them are placed three burning Tapers, fifteen in all; the Bishop
beginning at the middle cross, makes a speech, then prays, and puts the
three Tapers on the top of the cross: the like he does to all the rest, and in
the interim the Letany is sung, and each cross be sprinkled with holy Water
and fumed with incense.

Q. 15. What degrees of Ecclesiastical persons are there in the Church of Rome?

A. They divide their Church offices into dignities and orders; The degrees of
Ecclesiastical persons in the Church of Rome.
their dignities are these; the Pope, Patriarch, Primate, Archbishop or
Metropolitan; Bishop, Arch-Presbyter, Archdeacon and Provost or Praepositus.
For the Quire there are the Dean, Sub-Dean, Praecentor, Succentor, Treasurer,
etc. The Popes Senators or Counselors, are named Cardinals from Cardo the
hindge of a door, because on them, as the door on its hindges, all weighty
affairs of the Church are turned. Their orders be seven, to wit, Door-keepers,
Readers, Exorcists, Acolyths, or Taper-bearers, Subdeacons, Deacons, and
Priests. These three also are only sacred orders; the other four are not. The
doorkeeper is first instructed in his office by the Archdeacon, who presents
him to the Bishop, and he ordains him, delivering to him from the Altar the
keys of the Church, and saying, So^do and so live as tho^ were to give account
to God of the things locked up by these keys* The Lecturers or Readers office
is to pronounce and read clearly and distinctly the Lessons appointed to be
read in the Church; none must exercise this function, but he who is ordained by
the Bishop, who in the presence of the people delivers the book to him, in
which he (...) to read, saying, Take and read the word of God; if thou at
faithful in thine office, thou shall have a share with them who dispense the
same word. The Exo^cist is he ^ho calling on the name of Jesus, by that name
does ^djure the unclean spirit to depart out of the possessed, on whom he
lays his hands. When the Exorcist is ordained, he receives the book of
adjurations from the Bishop, saying, Take and learn these by heart, and receive
power to lay thy ^ands on the possessed; whether he be baptized or a
Catechumenus as yet. The Acolyths or Taper-bearers are they who carry the
lights whilst the Gospel is reading, or the sacrifice is offered, to represent
Christ the true light of the world; and to show the spiritual light of
knowledge, which should be in us. Their office also is to provide vessels for
the Eucharist. The Bishop does instruct them in their function when he ordaines
them, and then the Archdeacon delivers to them a candlestick with a wax
light in it, and an empty tankard, to show their office is to provide lights
and vessels for divine ser^ice. These be the lesser orders, which are not
sacred; and which they teach Christ himself did exer^ise; for he performed the
Porter or Door-keepers office, when he whipped the money changers out of the
Temple. The Readers-office, when he took up the book and read that passage in
Isaiah, The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, etc. The Exorcists office, when he
cast seven Devils out of Mary Magdalen. The Acoyths office when he said, I am
the light of the world; (...) that follows me walks not in darkness, etc.

Q. 16. Which be their sacred orders?

A. These are three; Their sacred orders.
the first is the Subdeacon whose ^ffice is to read the Epistle, to receive
the peoples oblations, and to bring them to the Deacon; to carry also the Patin
and Chalice to the Altar; to hold the Basin whilst the Bishop, Priest, or
Deacon washes their hands before the Altar, to wash also the Altar linen.
When the Bishop ordains him, he delivers into his hand the empty Patin and
Chalice, saying; See whose ministration this is, which is delivered to thee.
From the Archdeacon he receives then the Tankard with Wine and water, and the
Towell. He wears a Surplesse and Belt, as the four former orders do. His Coat
is girt to him, and he holds a handkerchef, or towel. They say that Christ
performed the Subdeacons office when he turned water into wine in Cana, and
when after Supper he poured water in to a Basin, and washed his Disciples feet.
Their second Sacred order is the Deacon, or Minister, whose office is to preach
to the people, and to serve o^ assist the Priest at the Sacraments; to cover
the Altar, to lay the oblations thereon, to read the Gospel, and the Epistle
also in the Subdeacons absence; in Processions to carry the Cross, to say the
Let^nies; to rehearse the names of those who are to be ordained and baptized,
and to name the holy days etc. They must not administer the Sacraments, but in
case of necessity, and by permission of the Bishop, or Priest; nor must they
without leave sit in the presence of a Priest. When the Deacon is ordained,
the Bishop alone lays his hands on him, and blesses him, and delivers (using
certain words) the Book of the Gospel and the Stola to him. When he reads the
Gospel the Acolyths hold two Tapers before him; not to illuminate the air, by
day, but to show what joy and Spiritual illumination we have by the Gospel. The
Censer also with the Incense is carried, not only to represent Christ, in the
sweet smell of whose Sacrifice the Father is well pleased; but also to she^
Preachers that their prayers must like Incense ascend before God, and that the
good fame of their life and Doctrine, must be like the fume of Incense smelling
sweetly among all men. The Deacon also reads the Gospel in a high place, that
it may be heard the better; and to show that it ought not to be preache^ in
corners, but as Christ says, on the house topps; this is also in imitation of
Christ, who when he would reach his Disciples went up into an high mountain.
The Gospel is read with the Deacons face against the North, that the frosen and
cold hearts of the Northern Nations, might be warmed and melted by the
comfortable heat of this bright Sun of the Gospel. When the Deacon salutes the
people, he signs himself with the ^rosse on the forehead, to show, he is not
ashamed of the Cross of Christ; and likeways on the breast, to put us in mind
that we should be ready to crucify our affections with Christ. At the reading
of the Gospel all stand up bare-headed, to show their reverence; Swords and
Staves are laid aside, to show their peacable minds, and the Book is kissed,
to declare by this their love and affection to the Gospel. They say that Christ
performed the Deacons part when he preached and prayed for his Apostles. Their
third and highest Sacred order is Priesthood; when the Priest is ordained, the
Bishop with some other Priests lay their hands on his head, and anoint his
hands with oil, to signify that not only must the Priest have his head
stuffed with knowledge, but his hands must be supple and ready to do good
works; the Bishop also delivers into his hand the Chalice with the Wine, and
the Patin with the hoaft saying, Receive power to say Mass for the quick and
dead, and to offer Sacrifice to God in the name of the Lord. Then the (...)
kisseth the Priest, to show he is his equal in respect of order; whereas, the
Deacon and Subdeacon kiss the Bishops hand, to show they are of an inferior
order. The Priest must not say Mass, till he first have washed, and confessed
if he be guilty of any deadly sin, and have put on first the Amictus, which
like a veil covers his head and shoulders, to show how Christ's Divinity was
veiled by his humanity: 2^ the Alba or Talaris, because it reaches to the
heels, in Greek (...), which by its whiteness signifies innocence, and by
its length perseverance, two virtues fit for Priests. 3. The Girdle or Belt
about their loins, to show the subduing of their concupiscence. 4. The Stola
or Orarium about the neck, Of these passages see Innocent. 3. l. I. Mist.
Missae, c. 58. Stephan. Eduensis de sacr. altari^. c. 10. Amalar. Fortunat. l.
6. de Eccles. offic. c. 19. l. 2. and l. 3. Rab. Maurus l. I. de instit.. cler.
c. 18. Alcuin de divin. offic. Alexand. de Ales Part 4. Quest. 26. Hugo de S.
Victore l. 2. de sacram. Part 4. Besides the Councils of Rhemes, of Lateran, of
Braccara, and diverse others.
and hanging crosse-way on the breast, signify that the Priest most undergo
the yoke of Christ, and still meditate on his Cross. 5. The Mappula or
Manipulus, which is a Towell or Handkerchief, for wiping away the sweat from
their faces, and moisture from their eyes, representing also the purity that
ought to be in the Priests lives. 6. The Casula over all the other garments,
signifying charity which is above all virtues. Christ exercised the Priests
office when he administered the Eucharist, when he offered the Propitiatory
Sacrifice of his body on the Altar of the Cross, and yet whilst he is making
intercession for us in heaven.

Q. 17. Wherein consists the office of the Bishop?

A. Under this name are comprehended Popes, Patriarchs, Primats, Metropolitans,
Archbishops and Bishops. Some will have the Bishop to be a particular order;
but indeed the order of Priest and Bishop is all one, in respect of
catechizing, baptising, preaching, administering the Eucharist, binding and
loosing. The Bishop then is an office of dignity, not of order; he has nine
privileges above the Priest, namely, of Ordination, Benediction of Nuns,
consecration of Bishops, and imposing hands on them, Dedication of Churches,
Degradation, holding of Synods, making of Chrisme, hallowing of Clothes and
Vessels. Because Bishops are Superintendents and Overseers, therefore they
have the highest Seat in the Church; they are consecrated on the Lords day
only, and at the third hour, because then the holy Ghost descended on the
Apostles, See also Guliel. Durand. l. 2. c. 10.
to whom Bishops have succeeded. At the Bishops consecation, there must be
present at least three, to wit two Bishops, and the Metropolitan; that the
gifts of the Spirit may not seem to be give^ by stealth and in corners; Office
of the Bishop.
in this they follow the example of Saint James; who was made Bishop of
Jerusalem by Peter, James and Iehn. In the Bishops consecration two hold the
Bible over his head, one pouring the benediction on him, and the rest laying
their hands on his head. By this Ceremony is signified not only the conferring
of the gifts of the spirit, but also the knowledge which the Bishop must have
of the Gospel, and the care he must undergo to support it. On the Saturday in
the evening he is examined concerning his former life, and the Trinity is three
times called upon for a blessing. The next morning he is examined concerning
his future conversation and faith; and then his head and hands are anointed,
and the Mytre is set on his head, the Staff also and Ring are given him. The
Priest is anointed with oil, but the Bishop with chrism, that is, Oil and
Balsome, to show that the higher he is in dignity, the more fragrant must his
fame and conversation be. He must excel in knowledge and good works,
represented by the anointing of his head and hands. Christ performed the
Bishops office, when he lifted up his hands, and blessed his Apostles; saying,
Receive the holy Ghost; whose sins you forgive, they are forgiven, etc.

Q. 18. What colors do they hold sacred in the Church of Rome?

A. Four; What colors held sacred.
namely White, Red, Black, and Green; White is worn in the festivities of
Saints, Confessors, and Virgins, if they be not Martyrs, to show their
integrity, and innocence; In festivities also of Angels, because of their
brightness, in the feast of the Virgin Mary, of All Saints, (yet some then
wear red) of John Baptists Nativity, of Saint Paul's Conversion, of Saint Peter's
Chair; also from the Vigil of Christ's Nativity, to the eighth day of Epiphany,
except there be some Martyrs days between. On Christ's Nativity, on the feast of
John the Evangelist, on the Epiphany, because of the Star tha^ appeared to the
wise men, on the day of the Lords supper, because then the chrisme is
consecrated; on the holy Sabbath till the eighth day of the Ascension; on the
Resurrection, because of the Angel that appeared in white; on the Ascension day
because of the bright cloud that carried up Christ to Heaven, and the two
Angels then in white; on the feast of dedication, because the Church is Christ's
Spouse, which ought to be innocent and immaculate. The Red color is used in
the Solemnities of the Apostles, Evangelists, and Martyrs, for they shed their
blood for Christ; in the Festivity of the Cross, also in Pentecost week,
because the holy Ghost appeared in fire: in some places white is worn on the
Festivities of the Martyrs, because it is said Cant. 5. My beloved is white and
red. White in his Confessors and Virgins, Red in his Martyrs; these are the
Roses and Lillies of the Valley. Black is worn upon Good Friday, on all fasting
days, on the Rogation days, in Masses for the dead from Advent till the
Nativity, and from Septuagesima till Easter Eve; on Innocents day some wear
black, because of the mourning in Rama; some red, because of the blood of those
young Martyrs. Green which is made up of the three former colors, white, See
Durands Rationale, L. 3. c. 18.
red and black, is used between the 8. of Epiphany and Septuagesima; likewise
between Pentecost and Advent; but in the City of Rome the violet color is worn
sometimes in stead of black and red.

Q. 19. Wherein consists the other parts of the Mass?

A. The second part begins with the offertory which is sung, The other parts of
the Mass.
and so called from the Priests offering of the Host to God the Father, and
the peoples offering of their gifts to the Priest. Then the Priest before he
offers the immaculate Host, washes his hands the second time; in the
interim the Deacon casts over the Altar a fair linen cloth, called
Corporale, because it covers Christ's body, and represents his Church the
mystical body; it is called also Palla, from palliating or covering the mystery
above named. There is also another Palla or Corporal, with which the Chalice is
covered. Then the Deacon presents the Patina with the round Host on it, to
the Priest or Bishop; the Deacon alone can offer the Chalice, but the Priest
consecrates it; who also mixeth the Wine and Water in the Chalice, which the
Deacon cannot do; the Priest pours out a little on the ground, to show that
out of Christ's side, water and blood issued out, and fell on the ground. The
water is blessed by the Priest when it is mixed, but not the wine, because the
wine represents Christ, who needs no blessing; the Host is so placed on the
Altar, that it stands between the Chalice and the Priest, to show that Christ
is the Mediator between God, (who is represented by the Priest) and the People,
which the water in the Chalice resembles. Then the Priest fumeth the Altar and
the Sacrifice three times over, in manner of a cross, to show Mary's
threefold devotion in anointing Christ's feet, then his head, and at last her
intention to anoint his whole body; then the Priest boweth himself, kisseth
the Altar and prays, but softly to himself; this prayer is called secreta,
and secretella; but though it be said in silence, yet the close of it is
uttered with a loud voice, per omnia saecula saeculorum: then follows the
Praefatio, which begins with thanksgiving, and ends with the confession of Gods
majesty; the minds of the people are prepared with these words, Lift up your
hearts; the answer whereof is, We lift them up unto the Lord: then is sung this
hymn, Holy, Holy, Holy, etc. Heaven and Earth is full of thy Glory, etc. then
follows Hosanna, and after this the Canon which contains the Regular making
up of that ineffable mystery of the Eucharist; it is also called Actio and
Secreta, because in it is giving of thanks, and the Canon is uttered with a low
voice. The Canon by some is divided into five parts, by others into more: in it
are diverse prayers for the Church, for the Pope, for Bishops, Kings, all
Orthodox Christians, for Gentiles, also Jews and Heretics; those in
particular are remembered for whom the sacrifice is to be offered, whose names
are rehearsed; for those also that be present at the Mass, and assistant, and
for himself likewise: then is mention made of the Virgin Mary, of the
Apostles, Evangelists and Martyrs; but the Confessors are not named, because
they shed not their blood for Christ: then follows the Consecration after many
crossings, these words being pronounced, For this is my body; the people answer
Amen; then the Host is elevated, that the people may adore it, and that by
this might be represented Christ's Resurrection and Ascension: when the Priest
mentions Christ* Passion, he stretches out his arms in manner of a cross;
the Host is crossed by the Priest five times, to show the five wounds that
Christ received; but indeed, in the Canon of the Mass, there are seven several
crossings of the Host and Chalice; in the first the sign of the cross is
made three times, in the second, five times; in the third, twice; in the
fourth, five times; in the fifth, twice; in the sixth, thrice; and in the
seventh, five times; so all makes up twenty five crossings: prayers are also
made for the dead. The Deacon washes his hands, to show how Pilate did wash
his hands, when he delivered Christ to be scourged. The third part of the Mass
begins with the Pater Noster, and some other prayers; the Subdeacon delivers
the Patina covered to the Deacon, who uncovereth it, and delivers it to the
Priest; kisseth his right hand, and the Priest kisseth the Patina, breaks the
Host over the Chalice, being now uncovered by the Deacon, and puts a piece of
it in the wine, to show that Christ's body is not without blood. The Host is
broken into three parts, to signify the Trinity: then the Bishop pronounces a
solemn blessing: then is sung Agnu^ Dei, etc, that is, O Lamb of God that
take away the sins of the world, etc. and then the kiss of peace is given
according to the Apostles command, Salute one another with a holy kiss. In the
fourth part of the Mass, the Priest communicates thus, he takes the one half
of the Host for himself, the other half he divides into two parts; the one for
the Deacon, the other for the Subdeacon: after these three, the Clergy and
Monks communicate, and after them, the people: the Priest holds the Chalice
with both hands, and drinks three times, to signify the Trinity; the Host
must not be chewed with the teeth, but held in the mouth till it dissolve; and
after the taking thereof he must not spit, but must wash his hands least any of
the Host should stick to his fingers. The three washings of the Priests hands
in the Mass do signify the threefold purity that ought to be in us, Of
these and other Ceremonies see the above named Authors, and Gabriel Biel
decanone Missae.
to wit, of our Thoughts, Words and Works: then follows the Post-communion,
which consists in thanksgiving and singing of Antiphones: this done, the
Priest kisseth the Altar, and removes again to the right side thereof, where
having uttered some prayers for the people, and blessed them, the Deacon with a
loud voice says, Ite. missa est; that is, Go in peace, the Host is sent to
God the Father to pacify ^is anger.

Q. 20. In what else does their outward Worship consist?

A. The fifth part of their Worship consists in their divine Service or
Office, Other parts of their worship.
as they call it, whereof be two sorts; one composed by S. Ambrose for the
Church of Millan; the other by Saint Gregory, which the Angel in the night by
scattering the leaves up and down the Church did signify, that it was to be
spread abroad through the world. In the sixth part, they place much religion in
the observation of their canonical hours of prayer, whereof at first were
eight; four for the night, and four for the day; the diurnal hours are, the
first, third, sixth, and ninth; the night hours are, the Vespers, Completory,
Nocturnals, and Mattins or morning praises: but now these eight are reduced to
seven, to signify the seven gifts of the holy Ghost, or the seven deadly
Sins, or the sevenfold passion of Christ; the Nocturnals are now said with
the Mattins, and not apart, as heretofore: every one of these canonical hours
begins and ends with a Pater noster: the Nocturnall Office is the first, and is
sung at midnight, in memory that about that time Christ was born, and
apprehended by Judas, and that about midnight he shall come to judgment: the
Mattins or Praises are said and sung in memory of Christ's Resurrection, and the
Creation of the world about that time; the first hour is kept in memory of
Christ's being delivered by Pilate to the Jews about that hour, and that then
the women who came to the Sepulcher were told by the Angel that Christ was
risen: the third hour is in memory of Christ's being at that time condemned by
the Jews, and scourged; at that time the holy Ghost was given to the Apostles,
who then spoke the great works of God: the sixth hour is in memory of Christ's
Crucifixion at that time, and of the Suns miraculous defection: the ninth hour
Christ gave up the Ghost, his side was then pierced, and then he descended into
hell, the Veil of the Temple was rent, and the graves opened: at that hour
also Peter and Paul went up into the Temple to pray; and so did Peter into an
upper chamber, where he fell into a trance: the Vespers are observed, because
in the evening Christ's body was taken down from the Cross, at that time he
instituted the Sacrament, and did accompany the two Disciples to Em^us; at this
time is sung the Magnificat, because the Virgin Mary who compiled this song, is
the bright evening Star of the world. Then also the Tapers are lighted, to show
we must have our Lamps ready with the wise Virgins. The Completory is so
called, because in it are completely ended all the diurnal services; it is
observed in memory of Christ's sweating of blood at that time; he was then also
put in the grave. The song of Simeon, Nunc dimittis, etc. is sung in the
Completory; because as he before his death sung it, so should Christians before
they sleep, which is a resemblance of death. In each one of these Canonical or
Regular hours are sung Gloria Patri, See Durandus and Durantus.
with Hymns, Psalms, and spiritual songs, peculiar lessons are read; and
prayers said.

Q. 21. Wherein consists the seventh part of their worship?

A. In observation of Festival days, Days Festival in the Church of Rome.
to every one of which are appropriated Divine Services or offices. They begin
their Feasts from the four Sundays in Advent; kept to put us in mind of
Christ's fourfold coming, to wit, in the flesh, in the minds of the faithful,
in death, and in judgment at the last day. In the third week of Advent begins
the first of the four Fasts called Iejunia quatuor Temporum: and this Fast is
for the Winter quarter; the Vernal Fast is in the first week of Lent. The
Aestival is the first week after Whitsuntide; and the Autumnal in the third
week of September. These four seasons of the year resemble the four ages of
man's life, to wit, his Childhood, Youth, Manhood, and Old Age; for the sins of
which we ought to fast. They observe also the Fasts of Lent, and of Fridays,
and on the Eves of the Apostles. Saint Laurence alone of all the Martyrs, and
Saint Martin of all the Confessors, have their Fasts. On the Eve or Vigil of
Christ's Nativity, a lesson is read out of Exodus 16. concerning the Manna that
fell in the Desert; Festival days of Christ.
to prepare the people, for the due receiving of the true Manna, Christ Jesus
the next day; in which are sung three Masses, to show that Christ was born to
save those that lived before, under, and after the Law: The first is sung at
midnight with the Angelical Hymn; the second at the breaking of the day, in
which mention is made of the Shepherds that came to see Christ; The third
Mass is at the third hour, in which are read Prophesies, Gospels, and
Epistles, showing Christ's Nativity. On the Sunday following, are lessons of the
same Nativity: The first of January being the eight day after the Nativity, is
observed in memory of Christ's Circumcision, who in this would be subject to the
Law; would teach us humility, and mortification, and would show himself to be
true Man, and the Messiah. The Epiphany is kept in memory of the Star that
appeared, and of the three wise men that offered him gifts; and because on the
same day Christ was baptized, when the whole Trinity appeared, it is called
Theophania; and because on the same day Christ turned water into wine at the
marriage in Cana, it is called Bethphania from the house where the miracle was
done. The eight day after the Epiphany, is kept in memory of Christ's baptism.
Every Sunday throughout the year has its peculiar Service or office; chiefly
Septuagesima, Sexagesima, Quinquagesima, and Quadragesima, Sundays. Their
Lent-Fast, which is kept in memory of Christ's forty days fast, begins on
Ash Wednesday, in which consecrated Ashes are put on their heads in sign of
humility, and mortification, and to show we are but dust and ashes. During the
Lent every day in the week, as well as the Sundays, have their proper service
and devotion; on the fifth Sunday in Lent, they begin the commemoration of
Christ's passion. Palm Sunday is kept in memory of the branches of trees cut
down by the people and born by them, when Christ was riding in triumph to
Jerusalem; therefore this day the Priest blesses and distributeth branches of
trees. The three days immediately going before Easter are kept with much
sadness and devotion; their Matti^s end in darkness, the Bells are silent,
all lights are put out, etc. Three sorts of Oil are blessed this day, to wit,
that of Baptism, that of the Sick, and that of the Catechumeni; the Bishop
breaths on the Oil three times, to signify the Trinity, whereof the Holy
Ghost represented by the Oil is one of the Persons. After evening service the
Altars are stripped naked, to show Christ's nakedness on the Cross. In some
places also they are washed with Wine and Water, and rubbed with Savin leaves,
to represent the blood and tears, with which Christ, our true Altar, was
washed, and the thorns he was crowned with. In the Parasceve is kept a strict
^ast and silence, no Mass is said this day: Christ's passion is read in the
Pulpit uncovered; the dividing of Christ's Garment is represented by the
Subdeacons, much adoration is given to the Cross. Christ's body is carried by
two Priests to the Altar, which body was consecrated the day before; for on
this day, and on the holy Sabbath, the Sacrament is not celebrated, because the
Apostles those two days were in great fear and sadness: And so there is no
divine office this Sabbath. On this day the Agni Dei, or Lambs of Wax are
consecrated, to defend those that carry them, from Thunder and Lightning. The
Paschal Taper is also consecrated, and the fire which was put out, is renewed
by new sparks out of a flint, to represent Christ the true Light of the world,
and that stone cut out of the mountain: on the Taper (being lighted) are
fastened five pieces of frankincense, to represent the spices brought by the
Women, and Christ's five wounds. The Taper has three things in it, representing
Christ. The cotton or week signifies his Soul: the wax his Body: and the
light, his Divinity. It also puts the people in mind of the fiery Pillar
which went before the Israelites to Canaan. The light of the Taper also
signifies both the light of the Gospel here, and the light of glory hereafter.
The Lessons are read without title or tone; the Fonts or Baptisteria are also
blessed this day, to show that by Baptism we are buried with Christ: the
Priest in consecrating the water touches it with his hand, dips the Taper in
it, blows on it, and mixeth the chrisme with it: Baptism is to be
administered but twice a year; to wit, at this time, and on the day of
Pentecost, except in case of necessity: besides diverse ceremonies used in
Baptism, the Priest blows three times on the Infant, gives him chrisme, and a
white garment. Four sorts are excluded from being witnesses in Baptism; namely,
religious Persons, Infidels, such as are not confirmed, a man and his wife
together; for becoming spiritual parents, they are not to know one another
carnally any more. They say diverse Letanies in Baptism; Confirmation is done by
the Bishop, who anoints the child with chrisme on the forehead, as the Priest
had done on the crown of his head in Baptism. The reason why the child is twice
anointed with chrisme, is, because the holy Ghost was given twice to the
Apostles; once here on earth before Christ's ascension, and once from heaven in
a fuller measure after Christ's ascension. By the first they received a new
birth or regeneration; by the second growth strength and perfection. Therefore
this Sacrament of confirmation is called by the Greek Fathers (...) perfection
or consummation. The chrisme wherewith they are anointed, is made and
consecrated on the day of the Lords Supper, because two days before Easter Mary
Magdalen anointed Christ's head and feet. The Priest must not confirm except by
delegation from the Pope; this belongs only to the Bishop, because it is an
Apostolical Function, and Bishops are the Apostles successors. Confirmation is
not to be given to those that are not baptized; because the character of this
Sacrament, presupposes the character of Baptism. Neither must children be
confirmed till they be able to give an account of their faith. Then the Bishop
strikes the child on the cheek with his hand, to show he must be content to
suffer for Christ. On the holy Sabbath, the Altars begin to be covered again,
Gloria in excelsis is sung, the Bells are rung, as preparatives for the
Resurrection; but before the Gospel incense is carried instead of light, to
show that the light of the world was supposed to be yet in the grave by the
women that went to embalme him. And the Post-Communion is not sung, to show how
the Apostles were silent, Of these and other Ceremonies, see the before named
Authors.
when Christ was apprehended.

Q. 22. What be their other holy days which they observe?

A. The chief is the Feast of Easter, in which their Churches, Altars, Crosses,
and Priests, are clothed in their best Ornaments; nothing this day must be eat
or drunk without the Priests benediction, and signed with the Cross. In Easter
week the custom was in Salutations, to say The Lord is risen, and to answer
thus: Thanks be to God, and then to kiss each other; which custom is yet
observed by the Pope to the Cardinals when he says Mass this day. The next
Sunday to Easter is called Dominica in albis, because they that are baptized on
the holy Sabbath, lay aside on this day their white Garments. The second Sunday
is called Expectationis, the day of expectation or looking for the coming of
the Holy Ghost. On Easter day before Mass, there is a solemn procession of the
Priests clothed in white, singing the Resu^rection; before whom are carried
Tapers burning, Crosses, and Banners. There are also Processions all the week
after to the Fonts singing, in imitation of the Israelites rejoicing for the
drowning of their enemies in the read sea: Baptism is the sea, and our sins are
our enemies; every day also this week the Neophytes are led to the Church by
their godfathers and godmothers, with wax Tapers before them, which on the
next Sunday, called in albis, they offer to the Priests. From the Octaves of
Easter till Whitsunday, are sung two Halellujahs every Sunday, and one every
working day, to show that the joys of heaven are represented, which the soul
only participates till the Resurrection, and after that, soul and body
together, which is a double Hallelujah: every day i^ Easter week has its
peculiar Epistle and Gospel, mentioning the Resurrection of Christ, and our
happiness in heaven: to this same purpose has every Sunday after Easter its
peculiar Mass and service. Rogation Sunday, which is the fifth after Easter,
is so called from praying or asking; for being Ascension day is near, and we
cannot follow Christ corporally into heaven, therefore we are taught to follow
him by our prayers: three days then before Ascension day, are Rogations,
Letanies, or prayers both for spiritual and temporal blessings; the Letany used
at this time, is called the Lesser, invented by Mamertus Bishop of Vienna, in a
time when Wolves and other wild Beasts had broke out of the woods, and killed
diverse people; the greater Letany was the invention of Gregory the first, when
Rome was afflicted with a great Plague, caused by the poysonable breath of
serpents; on these Rogation days there use to be processions, with Crosses,
Relics, and Banners carried before, singing also and praying for diverse
blessings; among the rest, for the fruits of the earth: the Vigil or Eve of
Ascension has its proper Mass; on Ascension day is a soleum procession; on the
Sunday after, promises are read concerning the coming of the holy Ghost: on
Whitsun Eve Baptism is celebrated as it was on Easter Eve; for as we are dead
with Christ i^ baptism, so we are baptized with the Holy Ghost, which was
accomplished when he came down on the Apostles: the Feast of Pentecost is kept
seven days, at which time, because of baptism, white is worn; this color
signifies that all who are baptized, are made Priests to God the Father; for
the Priests garment is white; it shows also the innocence and purity that
ought to be among Christians; and it puts them in mind of the resurrection, and
glory of the life to come. They pray standing, in sign of liberty obtained by
the Spirit; Hallelujah and Gloria in excelsis are sung often this week; from
Easter till this time, no man is bound to fast: this feast is observed seven
days* to show the seven gifts of the holy Ghost; and every day three Lessons
are read, because all the seven gifts are included in these three, Faith, Hope
and Charity. The next Sunday is kept to the honor of the Trinity; for as
Christmasse was ordained to be kept in honor of God the Father, who sent his
son into the world, and Easter to Christ the second Person, and Whitsunday to
the third Person; so this Sunday was instituted to the three persons together;
and from this day are named the other Sundaies till Adv^^t, whereof are twenty
six; to each of which is appropriated a peculiar Mass, See the authors above
named.
with Lessons and Psalms fit for each day.

Q. 23. What be their canonical hours of prayer?

A. Their set hours of prayer are called canonical, Their canonical hours of
prayer, and observati^ns thereupon.
because they are prescribed by the Canons of the Church, and regularly
observed by devout people. These hours they ground upon the practice of David
and Daniel, who prayed three times a day. These hours are seven, because David
speaks of calling upon God seven times a day, because the gifts of the holy
Ghost are seven; and the foul spirit brings seven spirits worse then himself;
there be seven deadly sins; the walls of Ierico fell down at the blowing of the
seven Ram horn Trumpers; there were seven Aspersions in the Levitical Law,
Levit. 14. and 16. We read also of seven Lamps, and seven golden Candlesticks.
These canonical hours are not only for the day, but also for the night, after
the example of David and Christ, who spent some part of the night in prayer;
and of the Church in the Canticles, which sought Christ in the night. The
Prince of darkness is most busy in the night to assault us, therefore we
ought to watch and pray, that we may not be slain with the Egyptian first born
in the night. The Nocturnals or night praises, are said at midnight, because at
that time Paul and Silas praised God: and so did David. About that time Christ
rose from the grave, as the Greek Church believes, but the Latin Church
holds that he arose in the morning. The first hour of the day is dedicate to
prayer; that whilst the Sun rises, we may call upon the Sun of righteousness
who brings health under his wings. About that hour he was mocked, spit upon,
and buffeted: and at that hour after his resurrection, he was seen by his
Disciples standing on the Sea shore. To whom the first fruits of the earth were
offered in old time; to him also should the first fruits of the day be offered.
The third hour is consecrated to prayer, because then Christ was crowned with
thorns, and condemned by Pilate. It was the third hour also that the holy Ghost
descended on the Apostles. The sixth hour is canonical because then Christ was
crucified; at that hour Peter went up to the top of the house to pray, acts
10. and then it was that Christ asked water from the woman of Sa^atia. The
ninth hour is for prayer, because then Christ gave up the ghost; so Peter and
John went up into the Temple at the ninth hour of prayer acts 3. The evening
also is a time for prayer; then they have their Vespers, because the Jews had
their evening Sacrifice: Of these hours Cassianus speaks, Rabanus Maurns,
Isidor, Amalarius, Fortunatus Rupertus Tuitiens. etc.
then it was that Christ instituted the Sacrament of the Eucharist at his last
Supper. And then was his body taken down from the Cross. The hour of the
Completory about the beginning of the night is Canonical also; in memory of
Christ's burial. And because David would not go up into his bed, nor suffer his
eyelids to slumber, till he had found out a place for the Temple. Then is sung
the song of old Simeon, Nunc dimittis.

Q. 24. What else may we observe about these Canonical hours?

A. That all Priests, Deacons, and Subdeacons, are bound to observe these
hours; so are also Monks and Nuns, if they be not Novices. But the inferior
orders of Clergy that are not beneficed, as they are not debarred from
Marriage, so they are not tied to these Canonical hours. They also that are
excommunicate and degraded, are to observe these hours, for the character is
indelible; but sick persons and such as have any natural impediment are
excused. Again, these Canonical prayers are not to be said everywhere, but in
the Church, because the multitude of petitioners makes prayers the more
efficacious; otherways, they acknowledge that private prayers may be said
anywhere. The times also, order, and reverence, must be observed in saying of
these prayers, and diligent attention must be used without wandering thoughts;
the attention must be ^ixed not only on the words and sense thereof, but
chiefly on God the object of our prayers; and devotion must be used both
outward in prostrating of the body, and inward in humility and submission of
the mind. But on Sundays and all the time between (...) and Pentecost they
pray standing, to show (...) readiness (being risen with Christ) in seeking
the things that are above. Beneficed men who neglect in six months time to say
the Canonical prayers, are to lose their benefices. In the first Canonical hour
the Kyrie Eleeson is said; so is the Lords Prayer, and the Creed, but with a
low voice, to show that prayer and faith consist rather is the heart then in
the tongue. In the third hour prayers are said for the dead, as well as for the
living. The six hour they say Adam fell, and was (...) out of Paradise,
therefore they hold it then a fi^ time, by prayer to enter into Gods favor
again. The ninth hour Christ's side was peirced, out of which flowed water and
blood, the two Sacraments of the Church, then the Veil of the Temple rent
asunder, the graves opened, and Christ descended into hell; all which do
furnish sufficient matter for prayers and praises that hour. In the end of the
day are said the Vespers or evening service, to signify that Christ came in
the end of the world. In the evening Christ washed his Disciples feet and was
known to the two Disciples in breaking of bread, as they were going to Emaus.
Five Psalms are then said, in reference to Christ's five wounds, and to expi^^e
the sins of our five senses. In the evening is sung the Magnificat, to show
that in the evening of the world the Virgin brought forth Christ, in whom is
our chiefest rejoicing. And then are Lamps lighted to put us in mind that with
the wise Virgins we should have our Lamps ready to meet the Bridgroome. The
Completory is a fit time for prayer, because then Christ prayed, and swear
Blood in the Garden. The song of (...) then sung; for as he immediately before
his death uttered these words, so should we before our sleep^ which is a
resemblance of death. Four Psalms (...) are then said, to expiate the sins of
our childhood, youth, manhood, and old age. The Creed is said the first hour
and (...), to show that all (...) works must begin and end i^ says. About
midnight are said the Nocturnals, because about that (...) the Egyptian first
borne were (...), then Christ was borne, then was he apprehended by the Jews;
(...) are we in greatest danger, then is the prince of darkness most busy in
his works of darkness. See Gabriel, Biel in can. missae. Navarr. de orat. et
hor. can. Durandus in rationali. Durantus de ritibus Ecclesiae etc.


Q. 25. What may we observe concerning their Processions?

A. They ground their Processions on the practice of David and Solomon, when
the o^e accompained the Ark in Triumph to the Tabernacle, the other to the
Temple. They have four solemn Processions. Namely on the Purification of the
Virgin, on Palm Sunday, on Easter day, and on Holy thursday, being the fortieth
day after Easter, and the day of Christ's Asension, kept in memory of that
Procession which Christ made with his Disciples, Their Processions and
observations thereon.
when they walked to the No^ne of Olives, from whence he ascended to Heaven; as
there is a Procession every Sunday in memory of Christ's Resurrection, so there
was wount to be another every Thursday in remembrance of his Ascension; but
because of the multitude of Festivals this is kept but once yearly solemnly,
yet every Sunday it is remembered in that days Procession. They hold also that
these Processions were typified by the Israelits coming out of Egypt. For as
Moses delivered them from the Tyranny of Phar^^h, so has Christ freed us from
the oppression of Satan. The Tables of the Law were received on Sinai, and
carried before the people, so the Gospel is taken down from the Altar, and
carried in their Procession. A fiery pillar went before the Israelites, and
burning Tapers are carried before the people in these solemnities: as every
Tribe had their arms and colors carried before them, so here are carried
Crosses and Banners. Their Levites hoar the Tabernacle, and our Deacons carry
the Coffer or Pix. Their Priests carried the Ark, and our Priests carry the
holy Relics. In their Procession Aaron followed in his Ornaments, and in
ours, the Bishop in his Pontificals. There was the sounding of Trumpets, here
the noise of Bells; there was sprinkling of Blood, here of holy water, etc.
They carry Banners and Crosses in memory of that Cross seen in the air by
Constantin, and which after he always wore in his Banners. Besides these
triumphant Processions, they have also in times of public calamity, m^urnfull
Processions which they call Rogatio^s, and the Greeks Litaniae, that is prayers
of supplications, of which there is the great Letanie kept on Saint Marks
Feast, and invented by Gregory the first in a great Plague at Rome. The lesser
Letanie is kept three days before the ascension, and was invented at Vienna by
Mamertus Bishop there, in a time when there were great Earthquakes and
Irruptions of Wolves which in France did great hurt: this is called the lesser
Rogation, because it was found out in a lesser City then Rome, and by a lesser
Bishop then Gregory. Yet the lesser is more ancient by 80. years, for it was
devised in the time of Zeno the Emperor of Constantinople; whereas the other
was found out in the time of Mauritius, who was contemporary with Gregory the
great. Of these things see the forenamed writers.
Pope Liberius appointed there should be Letanies, when Wars, Plague, or Famine
do threaten; which commonly fall out about that time of the year, wherein the
memory of Christ's Ascension is observed.

Q. 26. Wherein consists the Eighth part of their Worship?

A. In the Worship of the Saints, whom they honor with Temples, Chapels,
Altars, Images, Holy Days, mentioning of their names in the Mass, reserving
and worshipping of their Relics, praying to them, etc. They divide them into
four ranks; namely, Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, and Virgins. The Festival
days of the Saints, kept in memory of their martyrdom, are called Natales, that
is, birthdays; Festival days of the Saints.
for then they began truly to live, when they died for Christ. In the Calendar
these following Saints have their Holy Days; Fabian and Sebastian, Agnes, the
Conversion of S. Paul, Julian, Agatha, the Purification of Mary; this day is a
Procession in memory of that Procession which Joseph and Mary made to the
Temple: this Feast was instituted in the time of Iustin^an, upon a great
mortality which then happened, and candles this day are carried with great
solemnity, to show that our light should shine before men; that Christ who was
this day presented in the Temple, is the true light of the world; and that like
wise Virgins, whereof Mary was the chief, we should have our Lamps ready: the
Feast of S. Peter's chair is kept in memory of his advancement first to the
Bishopric of Antioch, then of Rome: the Feast of the Annunciation is kept in
memory of the tidings which the Angel brought to Mary of her conception: on the
first of May is the Feast of Philip and James the lesser, the son of Alpheus,
and Brother of our Lord, who was the first Bishop of Jerusalem, had seen
Christ's Transfiguration, and for preaching Christ, was thrown down from the
pinnacle of the Temple by the Jews: the other James called the greater, and of
Compostella, was the son of Zebedaeus, and brother to S. John the Evangelist:
on the third of May is the invention of finding of the Cross by Helena,
Constantines mother: the Feast of S. John Baptist is kept the 24. of June, in
which are fires made, and Torches carried, to show that he was a shining and a
burning Lamp: the Feast of Peter and Paul is kept the 29 of June, in memory
that they both suffered in one day under Nero: on the 25 of July is the Feast
of S. James, S. John's brother, who preached the Gospel in Spain, and returning
to Jerusalem, was beheaded by Herod: the Feast of the seven Sleepers is on the
27 of July; these flying from the persecution of Decius, hid themselves in a
Cave, where they slept about 300 years, and being awaked, thought they had
slept but one night: the Feast of S. Peter's Chains is kept August the first,
in memory of Peter's miraculous delivery from Herod's prison, when the Chains
fell from him of their own accord: the Feast of S. Laurence is kept August the
tenth, in memory of his martyrdom under Valerian; he was Arch-Decon of Rome,
after whom, none there have had that title: the Assumption of Mary is on the
fifteenth of August, this is her greatest Feast; for it is ushered in with a
fast, and has its Octave: on this day herbs and flowers are gathered and
blessed, because she is compared to the Rose and Lilly: S. Bartholomews* Feast
is on the 24 of August; he preached in India, and then in Albania of Armenia,
where he was first ^leaed, and then beheaded, therefore some keep the Feast of
his Excoriation, others of his Decollation: S. John Baptists Decollation is
kept the 29 of August; his head has been removed from diverse places: the
Nativity of S. Mary is celebrated the 8 of September; it was kept in heaven by
the Angels, (so goes the story) long before it was observed by men here on
earth; the Roman Church celebrates no Nativities, except that of Christ's, of
his Mother, and of his Forerunner: The Exaltation of the Cross is kept the 14
of September, in memory of the Cross recovered from Cosroes, King of Persia,
by the Emperor Heraclius, and by him carried in triumph into Jerusalem: the
Feast of S. Matthew the Apostle and Evangelist, is on the 21 of September, in
remembrance of his suffering for Christ in Ethiopia, where having planted the
Gospel, he was beheaded there: S. Lukes day is on the 18 of October; he was a
Painter, Physician, and Evangelist, and the Disciple of Saint Paul: the Feast
of Simon and Jude is kept on the 28 of October; these were brothers, and sons
to Mary Cleophas, who married to Alpheus; they had two brothers more, to wit,
James the lesser, and Joseph called Barsa^as, and surnamed Iustus: Simon was
called Zelotes, and Cananaeus, from Cana of Galilee: Jude was named (...) and
Lebeus; Simon preached in Egypt, afterward he succeeded James in the Sea of
Jerusalem, where he was crucified: Jude preached to the Medes and Persians, and
suffered at Persis: the first of November is dedicated to all the Saints,
because there be more then can have particular days assigned them. The old
Romans worshipped all their gods together in one Temple called Fantheon;
Christians held it fitter to worship all the Saints and Martyrs in the same
Temple, under the name of Saint Mary; this Feast is ushered in with fasting,
the day before, and backed with prayers for all souls in Purgatory the day
after Saint Martin Bishop and Confessor, is honored the eleventh of November,
for his charity to the poor, in parting with his own Garments to cloth them,
and for his humility, in that he would dye on no other bed but on a heap of
ashes; this Feast has its Vigil and Octave. They thought that he should be
thus honored by men, who had been honored by Angels: The thirtieth of
November is Saint Andrew^ day; he preached in Scythia, Achaia, and other places
thereabout, and suffered death on a cross; his bones, with those of Saint
Luke, were translated to Constantinople, in the time of Constantine the second.
The sixth of December is for Saint Nicholas, the Bishop, famous for his
charity, boldness, and constancy in the maintenance of Christianity. They
write that being an Infant he would never suck his Mothers breasts but once on
Wedensdays and Fridays. The 21 of December is for Saint Thomas, who preached to
the Indians, and by their Idolatrous Priests was first shot with arrows, and
then thrust through with a lance, as he was at his prayers. Saint Stephen is
celebrated the six and twentieth of December; as he was the first Martyr, so he
deserved to be the first in the Calendar: the first Martyr is placed next to
Christ's Nativity, to show Christ was born, that we might suffer; and Christ's
Nativity here on earth, was the cause of Stephens Nativity in Heaven. Saint
John the beloved Disciple, is honored on the seven and twentieth of December:
He escaped miraculously, first poison, and then burning oil. The eight and
twentieth of December, is for the Innocents, who suffered in their Infancy by
Herod, for the Infant King of the Jews Christ Jesus; there are multitudes of
Saints more, who are placed in the Calendar, as Ambrose, Bishop, on December 7.
Anselme, Bishop, April 21. Augustine, Bishop, August 21. Babylas, Bishop,
January 24. Barbara the Virgin, December 4. Barnabas the Apostle, June 11.
Basil, Bishop, April 26. Basil the Great, January 1. Bernard, Abbot, August 20.
Bonav^ntura the Cardinal, July 14. Three Bonifaces, and three Katharines on
several days. Christopher, Martyr, July 25. Clemens, Pope and Martyr, November
23. Saint Paul's conversion, April 25. Saint Austins conversion, May 5.
Cyprian, Martyr, September 26. Dionyflus the Areopagi^e, October 9. Epiphanius,
Bishop, May 12. George, Martyr, April 24. Gregory the Great Pope, March 12.
Gregory Nazianzen, Bishop, May 9. Gregorius Thaumaturgu^, November 17. William,
Confessor, February 10. Hierom, September 30. Ignatius, Bishop and Martyr,
Feburary 1. Ignafius Loyo^a, July 31. Johannes Chrysostom, Bishop, January 27.
John Damascen, May (...) Joseph Mary's husband, March 19. Irenaeus, Martyr,
August 26. Iulianus, Martyr, January 9. Justinius, Martyr, April 13.
Landfrancus, Bishop, July 3. Laurence, Martyr, August. 10. Lewis, King, August
25. Mary Magdalen, July 22. Matthias, Apostle, February 24, Michael,
Archangel, September 29. Narcissus, Bishop, October 29. Olaus, King, But of
these passages see the Roman Martyrology, Baronius, Surius, Durandus, Fasti
Mariae, Lippelous, etc.
July 29. Patrick, Bishop, March 17. Polycarpus, Bishop. January 26. Severinus
Boethius, October 23. Thomas, Bishop, December 29. Tomas Aquin^s, March 7.
Vigilius, Bishop, June 26. There are multitudes more in the Roman Ka^endar, but
these are the chief which I have culled out: They have also holy days for some
eminent Jews, as Daniel the Prophet, etc. For Angels also, and for dedication
of Churches, which the Greeks call E^coenia, a custom borrowed from the Jews.

Q. 27. What Ornaments and Vtensils do they use in their Churches dedicate to
Christ and the Saints?

A. They have in them their relics, pictures, Their ornaments and utensils
used in Churches dedicate to Christ and the Saints.
images; crosses also, and crucifixes, the images also of Angels, which they
paint with wings to signify their swiftness, and sublimity of their nature;
with white garments also to show their purity. The images of Christ and of the
Saints, are painted with the sun, beams about their heads, to represent the
glory they are in. God the Father is represented like an old man, because he is
described by Daniel like the ancient of days. The Holy Ghost is painted like a
Dove; because in that form he appeared on Christ. They have Chalices not of
Glass, because subject to breaking; not of wood, because that is porous and
drinks in the liquor; not of brass nor copper, because of the bad smell
thereof, and rust, or canker, but of silver or gold. They have also
candlesticks, tapers and lamps, which they burn to the Saints by day, to show
they are not in darkness, but in light. Their censers and incense represent
Christ, and the prayers of the Saints which like incense ascend before God;
these odors are burnt in their Churches, both to expel bad vapors, and to
refresh the senses. They have also their flaps or fans to drive away flies from
the Chalice, after the example of Abraham, who drove away the birds from his
sacrifice; and to teach us that we should drive away all wandering thoughts when
we pray. Their Patin^ and other vessels shining bright, put us in mind how we
should shine in out conversation. The Corporal is the linen cloth in which
the Eucharist is covered, signifying how Christ's body was wrapped up in fine
linen; for as linen is first washed, then wrung, and lastly dried; so must
our souls be first washed in tears, then wrung by repentance, and lastly dried
by the heat of the love of God. Organs are also used in Churches to excite the
mind, and to stir up devotion. Yet in the Popes Chapel there are none,
perhaps to show that he needs no such helps. Their Altars are enclosed with
railes, to keep off the people, for the Priests only have access to them; they
were anciently places of refuge, and are covered all the year, except in the
passion week; then they are stripped, to represent Christ's nakedness on the
cross. Ordinarily the Altar is placed toward the East, yet in the Church of
Antioch it was placed toward the West. On the Altar s^ands the Pixis or
Ciborium, which keeps the Host for strangers, sick persons and travelers;
but it must not be kept above seven days, least it mould; therefore the Priest
must eat it himself, and put in a fresh one. They have Fonts, called
Baptisteria, of stone, in which the water of Baptism is consecrated by the
Priest, who pours oil into it; he also by breathing* and by certain words
exorciseth the evil spirit. Salt is consecrated, and put into the child's month,
to show that he must have spiritual Salt within him: Then the Priest lays his
hand on the child's head, in sign he is reconciled and made a member of the
Church. Then he signeth his forehead with the sign of the cross, that
hereafter he may not be ashamed of Christ crucified. He puts his finger into
his ear and into his nostrils also with spittle; saying to his right ear
Epph^ra, that is, be thou opened; to show that by nature we are deaf in
spiritual things, as was that man whom Christ after this manner cured in the
Gospel* The touching of the Nostrils shows that the child must remember his
vow in baptism, so long as he has breath in him. Then he anoints the Child
two times, that he may renounce the devil and all his works, etc. The breast is
first anointed, then the shoulders, to show the strength of our love, and faith
in the Trinity, and that withal we must be wrestlers against all spiritual
wickedness. The child is three times dipe in the water, and in some places
only sprinkled; to show Christ's three days burial, and our faith in the
Trinity. After baptism the child is anointed by the Priest on the forehead
with chrisme, See Innocent 3. L. 2 de mist. missae. Rab. Maurus de instit.
eleric. Amalar. Fortunat. de eccles. officiis. Isidor de eccles. officiis.
Alcuin. de celeb. missae D^^antus etc.
and clothed in white, to signify he must cast off the old man, and be
clothed with innocence: Anciently those that were baptized at Easter, wore
white all that week, which they laid aside the Sunday following, called
therefore (...) in (...); this also signified the glory of the resurrection.
Then a wax candle burning is given him, to show the light of faith and
knowledge that should be in him, and with which he should be ready to meet the
bridegroom. Then the Godfathers are instructed concerning their duty to the
Child.

Q. 28. What other Vtensils have they in their Churches?

A. They have three viols or flaggons for oil, which the Priest carries on the
day of the Lords Supper; one holds the oil of the Catechumeni, the second is
for the Chris^me, and the third for the oil of the sick. With the Chrisme the
baptized are anointed on their crown; and they that are confirmed, on the
forehead, and so are they who be ordained. The Catechumeni and (...) are
anointed with single oil. They have also in their Churches holy water pots,
which by some are called (...), by others Situlae, and Aqu^nina^ia and (...),
and (...). This pot must be of Stone or Marble, at which is tied with a chain
the holy water sponge; with this salt water they are (...) that enter into the
Church, because anciently they wasted before they entered into the Temple, to
show that with pure and sancti^ied minds we must come before God. They have
also Bells which they (...) with water, and consecrate with certain prayers;
these have suceeded the Trumpets used by the Jews, to (...) together the
Assembly. They have also Altars which they anoint and consecrate; and holy
Relics, whereof many doubtless are supposititious and false; therefore no
new Relics are to be received without the Bishops approbation, nor to be
honored without the Popes authority. And because the Altar represents Christ,
therefore the Priest after Mass, in sign of reverence and subjection kisseth
the Altar; by which also he shows the great desire the Church has to enjoy
Christ when she says, Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth. The
Vestry is the place where the sacred Vestiments (of which we have already
spoken) are kept. Here the Priest before Mass puts on his holy garments; this
place they say represents the Virgins Womb, in which our great high Priest put
on the garment of our humane nature, that in it he might offer the true
propiatory sacrifi^e to God his Father, for the sins of the world. They make
also every part of their material Temple, to have a mystical signification; The
Quire represents the Church triumphant, the main body the Church militant; the
Porch or great Door is Christ, by whom only we have access to the Father; the
Windows are the Scriptures, which give light to the spiritual Church; the
Pillars are the Apostles by their Doctrine supporting the Church; the Pavement
is Humility and faith: Of these and many more See Durandus in his Rationale,
and the other writers above named.
the Cover is Gods protection; the Tower with the Bells are the Prelates, which
ought to be eminent in their conversation, and sounding in their preaching; the
Cock on the top thereof, is to put them in mind of their vigilance; the Lights
that shine continually in their Churches, are to signify our good works which
should shine before men.

Q. 29. What office do they perform to the dead?

A. They have a peculiar office or service for the dead in Purgatory, Their
office performed to the dead.
which some perform every third day, that they might be partakers of Christ's
resurrection, who overcame death that day; some again every seventh day, that
they may attain to the eternal Sabbath or rest in Heaven, whereof Gods resting
from the works of Creation on the se^enth day, was a type. Others perform this
office the thirtieth day, because the Israelites mourned for Moses and Aaron
thirty days. Others again the fortieth day, because Joseph and his brethren
bewailed Jacob forty days. Others the fiftieth day, because the fiftieth year
is the Jubilee, or year of liberty, which they wish these imprisoned souls may
partake eternally. Others perform this office yearly, and make it anniversary;
but if this day fall upon Sunday or any other solemn festivity, then it must
not be kept, nor put off till the next day, as the feasts of the Saints are,
but must be kept the day before, that the souls may the sooner partake the
fruits of our devotion. No Mass must be said on festival days for the dead,
except the body be present. And although in the Mass for the living incense is
burned, to show that their prayers like incense ascend before God; yet in the
Mass for the dead incense is not burned, because their prayers are of no
efficacy; for do the dead praise thee? says David. The corpse may not be
brought into the Church, whilst Mass is saying for the living, but must be
set in the Porch till Mass be done, and the Mass for the dead be begun, in
which Mass the kiss of peace must not be given, because there is no communion
between us and the dead, neither can they answer us; the dead corpse is washed
and anointed; then it is carried to the Church; but by the way the bearers rest
three times, to signify Christ's three days rest in the grave. Holy water and
Frankincense is put in the grave with the corpse, to keep off evil spirits
thence, and to show that the deceased party has offered to God the incense of
his prayers and good life whilst he lived. He is buried with green bays, to
show that his soul is alive, and that it does not ^ither with the body; and
with his face upward, and his feet toward the East, to show his expectation of
Heaven, and his readiness to meet Christ in the Resurrection, whose appearance
(is believed) shall be in the East. Every Christian that is buried out of the
Church, or Churchyard, has a Cross set at his head, to show he was a
Christian. C^ergy men that have taken orders, are buried in the habit of their
orders; all are wrapped in linen, because Christ was so; yet some are buried in
sackcloth to show their repentance. Anciently the names of holy men departed
were registered in scrolls or ^olding tables called (...), which word Diptycha
the Latin Church retained; these were kept by the Bishop, and the ^ames
publicly read, in time of divine service, to show that the just shall be had
in everlasting remembrance. The prayers that are made for the dead, are not for
the Saints in Heaven, for they need not our prayers, but our praises to God for
them; nor for the damned in Hell, seeing our prayers can avail them nothing,
but only for those who dying in venial sins unrepented, make satisfaction in
Purgatory; Lastly there is neither Gloria in exce^sis, nor Hallelujah, sung in
the office for the dead. Of these passages see Alcui^us de divin. offic.
Amalar. Fortunat. de Eccles. officiis, Stephanus Durantus de ritibus Eccles.
Cathol. Guliel. Durandus in rationali, etc.

The Contents of the Fourteenth Section.
Of the Eastern Religions, and first of the Greeks. 2. Of the Church dignities,
and discipline in the Greek Church at this day* 3. Of the other Nations,
professing the Greek Religion, chiefly the Moscovites, and Armenians. 4. Of the
Monks, Nun^, and Eremites of Moscovia. 5. Of the form of service in their Chu.
ches. 6. How they administer the Sacraments. 7. The Doctrine and Ceremonies of
the Russian Church at this day. 8. Of their Marriage and Funeral Ceremonies. 9.
Of the profession of the Armenians. 10. Of the other Greek Sects, namely the
Melchites, Georgians, and Mengrelians. 11. Of the Nestorians, Indians, and
Jacobites. 12. Of the Maronites Religions. 13. Of the Cophti. 14. Of the
Abyssin Christians. 15. Wherein the Protestants agree with, and dissent from
other Christian Churches.

SECT. XIIII.
Quest. 1. HAving taken a view of the differences in Religion among the
Romanists and Anti Romanists in the West, what Religion do the Christians in
the East profess?

A. In the East the Greek Religion prevails in many places, Gre^k Religion at
this day.
chiefly in those Countries of Europe; namely, Greece, Macedon, Epirus, (...),
Thr^ce, Servia, Basci^ Moldavia, Walachi^* Bosnia, Podolia, and Moscovia; In
the Islands also of the Aegean Sea, and in some parts of Poland, Dalmatia, and
Croatia; in some parts also of Asia, namely, in Natolia, Circassia, Mengrelia,
and Russia. The Greek^ place much of their devotion in the worship of the
Virgin Mary, and of painted, but not carved Images; in the interces^ion,
prayers, help, and merits of the Saints, which they invocate in their Temples.
They place justification not in faith, but in works; School Divinity, chiefly
the works of Thomas Aquin^s; which they have in Greek, are in great request
with them. The Sacrifice of the Mass, is used for the quick, and the dead; and
they use to buy Masses; they do not hold a Purgatory fire, yet they believe
there is a third place between that of the blessed and the damned, where they
remain who have deferred repentance till the end of their life; but if this
place be not Purgatory, I know not what it is, not what the souls do there.
Though they deny the Procession of the Holy Ghost from the Son, yet* they
baptize in the name of the Three Persons. Priests among them may marry once,
but not of^^er. That marriage is unlawful, which is contracted within the
seventh degree of Consanguinity and Affinity. They use leavened bread in the
Sacrament, and administer in both kinds; they have four L^^ts in the year; they
deny the Popes supremacy, abstain from blood and things strangled; observe the
Jewish Sabbath with the Lords day. They use neither confirmation, nor extreme
unction, and will not have either the blessed souls i^ Heaven to enjoy Gods
presence, or the wicked in Hell to be tormented ^ill the day of judgment;
preaching is little used amongst them, but Masses often; therefore one of their
Monks, whom they call Coloieri, for preaching, See the Council of Florence,
Boterus, Chytraeus, Brerewood, Jeremy, Patriarch of Constantinople in resp. ^d
German. Possevin. de reb. Mosc^v. etc.
sometimes in Lent, and at Christmasse, and Eastet, was accused and banished to
Mount Sinai by the Patriarch of Constantinople, as Chytraus witnesses. They
esteem equal with the Scriptures, the Acts of the seven Greek Synods, and the
writings of Basil, Chrysosto^e, (...), and their traditions. They believe that
the souls of the dead are bettered by the prayers of the living. They are no
less for the Churches authority and for Traditions, then the Roman Catholics
be; when the Sacrament is carried through the Templ^, the people by bowing
themselves adore it, and falling on their knees, kiss the (...).

Q. 2. What Ecclesiastical Dignities and Discipline is there in the Greek
Church at this day?

A. They have their Patriarch, Greeks, their Church dignities and discipline at
this day.
who resides at Constantinople, who is elected by his Metropolitans and
Archbishops, but is confirmed by the great Turks chief Bassa, who upon
promise of some thousand Ducats from the Patriarch, does ratify his
privileges. He has no more authority with the great Turk, then any Christian
Ambassador, who thinks it a great honor to be admitted to fall down at the
Seigniors feet, and to kiss his cloak. Next to the Patriarch are the
Metropolitans, who are placed according to their antiquity. Of these
Metropolitans are 74. under whom are Archbishops, and Bishops. The
Metropolitan of Thessalonica has ten Bishops under him; he of Athens has six;
Corinth has four Bishops, and one hundred Churches; Mitylena had five
Bishoprics, but now none; Chalcedon has a Metropolitan and sixty Churches,
but no Bishops; The Metropolis of Nicaea has fifty Churches, but no Bishop at
this time; Ephesus has fifty Churches, but no Bishop; Philippi, the Metropolis
of Macedonia, has one hundred and fifty Churches; Antiochia of Pi^idia, is
Metropolis of forty Churches; Smyr^a is Metropolis of eighty Churches; but
forty or fifty persons make a Church in Greece. Most of the Metropolies in
Asia are ^^ined. The Greeks at Constantinople are distributed into certain
Churches, where they meet on Sundays and holy days; their greatest
congregations scarce exceed three hundred persons. Their chief Feast is that
of Mary's assumption; every Lords day in Lent, the Patriarch says Mass,
sometimes in one Church, sometimes in another, where he collects the alms of
well disposed people. They have no music in their Churches: the Women are shut
up in their Churches within latises, that they may not be seen by the men. In
the Patriarchs own Church are to be seen the bodies of Mary Salome, of Saint
Euphemi^, and the Murble Pillar, to which Christ was bound, when he was
scourged. They have also in the Greek Church Hieromonachi and Priests whom they
call Popes; (...) may consecrate, and say Mass. They have the^? Lay-Monks,
Deacons, and Subdeacons, and their Anagnostes, who read the Dom^nical Epistle
and other things. The Monks who are all of Saint Basils order have their
Archimandrithes or Abbots. Their Monks are not idle, but work; they are called
Caloieri; the Patriarch, See the above named Authors, and the Letters of
Stephen Gerlochius to Crusius, An. 1575.
Metropolites, and Bishops are of this order, and abstain from flesh; but in
Lent, and other fasting times they forbear fish, milk and eggs; the Greeks
celebrate their Liturgies in the old Greek tongue, which they scarce
understand. On festival days, they use the Liturgy of Basil, on other days that
of Chrysost^me. They have no other tran^lation of the Bible, but that of the 70.

Q. 3, What other Nations profess the Greek Religion, besides those al^eady
named?

A. The Moscovites and Armenians; ^s for the Moscovites, Moscovites, their
Religion and discip^in.
they with the Russians were converted by the Greeks, and are with them of the
same communion and faith, saving that they differ from the Greeks, in receiving
children of seven years old to the Communion, in mingling the bread and wine in
the chalice with warm water, and distributing it together in a spoon: besides,
they permit neither Priest nor Deacon to officiate or take orders, except they
be married; and yet when they are actually in orders, will not allow them to
marry: they dissolve marriage upon every light occasion: the Archbishop of
Mosco, their chief Metropolitan, was wont to be confirmed by the Patriarch of
Constantinople, but is now nominated by the Prince or Great Duke, and
consecrated by three of his own Suffragans, whereof there be but eleven in all
that Dominion; but the Bishops of South Russia subject to the King of Poland,
have submitted themselves to the Pope; and whereas the Russian Clergy were wont
to send yearly gifts to the Patriarch of Constantinople, residing at Sio or
Chios; now the Great Duke himself sends him somewhat yearly toward his
maintenance: the Bishops of Moscovia, besides their Tithes, have large rents to
maintain them according to their Place and Dignity; and they have as large an
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, as any Clergy in Christendom: they do so highly
esteemthe Scriptures and four General Councels, that they touch them not
without crossing and bowing: Besides their Patriarch and two Metropolitans of
Novograd, and Rostove, they have 4 Archbishops, and six Bishops; besides
Priests, Arch-Priests, Deacons, Monks, Nuns, and Heremites. The Patriarch of
Mosco was invested in his jurisdiction by Hieronymo, the banished Patriarch of
Constantinople, or Sio; because in the Isle Chio or Sio, was the Patriarchs
seat, after he was banished by the Turk from B^zantium. The Bishops in their
Solemnities wear rich Mitres on their heads, embroydered copes with Gold and
Pearl on their backs, and a Crosiers staff in their hands; when they ride
abroad, they bless the people with their two forefingers. All Bishops, Arch
Bishops, and Metropolites are chosen by the Great Duke himself, out of their
Monasteries; so that first they must be Monks, before they can attain these
dignities; so they must be all unmarried men. The Ceremonies of the Bishops
inauguration are in a manner the same that are used in the Church of Rome.
Preaching is not used in this Church; only twice a year, to wit, the first of
September, which is their new years day, and on Saint John Baptists day, in the
Cathedral Church a short speech is made by the Metropolite, Archbishop, or
Bishop, tending to love with their neighbors, obedience and Loyalty to their
Prince, to the observation of their Fasts and Vows, and to perform their dnti^^
to the holy Church, etc. Clergy there keep out learning, to keep up Tyranny.
The Priests crowns are not shaven but shorn, and by the Bishop anointed with
oil; who in the Priests ordination puts his Surplise on him, and sets a white
cross on his breast, which he is not to wear above eight days; and so he is
authorized to say, sing, and administer the Sacraments in the Church. They
honor the Images of Saints; their Priests must marry but once; the (...)
people pray not themselves, but cause the Priests (...) pray for them, when
they go about any business or journey. Every year there is great meetings to
solemnise the Saints day that is Patron of their Church; and to have prayers
said to that Saint for themselves and friends, and so an offering is made to
the Priest for his pains; See the above named Authors, and withal the History
of Russia, by G. Fletcher, Possevin. de reb. Moscov. Sigism. de Moscovia,
Guaguin descrip. Moscov. etc.
for he lives on the peoples benevolence, and not on Tithes* once a quarter the
Priest blesses his Parishioners houses with persume, and holy water, for which
he is paid; but whatsoever benefit the Priest makes of his place, he must pay
the tenth thereof to the Bishop. The Priest wears long (...) of hair* hanging
down by his ears, a gown with a broad cape, and a walking staff in his hand.
He wears his surplise, and on solemn days his cope, when he reads the Liturgy.
They have their Regular Priests, who live in Covents. In Cathedral Churches are
Arch-Priests, and Archdeacons; every Priest has his Deacon or Sexton.

Q. 4. Are there any store of Monks, Nuns, and Ere^ites in Moscovia?

A. Every City abounds with Monks of St. Basils order; Monks and Nuns in
Muscovia.
for many out of displeasure, others out of fear in avoid punishment, and
others to avoid taxes and oppression, do embrace this life; besides the opinion
of ^^^rit they have thereby. When any is admitted, he is by the Abbot stripped of
his Secular Garments, and next to his skin, is clothed with a white Fl^nnel
shirt; over which is a long Garment, girded with a ^road leathern belt. The
upper Garment is of Say, of a ^ooty-colour; then his crown is shorn, to whom
the Abbot shows, that as his hairs are taken from his head, so must he be
taken from the world: this done he anoints his crown with Oil, puts on his
^wle, and so receives him into the Fraternity, having vowed abstinence from
flesh, and perpetual chastity. The Monks do not only live upon their rents,
but they trade also, and are great Merchants; as for scholarship they have
none. Sergius is a great Saint amongst them, to whom the Empress goes
sometimes in Pilgrimage. They have diverse Nunneries; some whereof are only for
Noble men's Widows and Daughters, whose stock the Emperor means to ex^i^guish.
They have E^emites also, who go stark naked, except about the middle, they wear
long hair, and an l^on collar about their neck or middle. The people esteem
them as Saints, and Prophets, and whatsoever they say is received as Oracles,
even by the great Duke himself. See the above named Authors.
He thinks himself in great favor with God, who is reproved, or robbed of any
part of his goods by them. But of these E^emites there be very few in that cold
country.

Q. 5. What form of Service have they in their Churches?

A. They have their Matti^s every morning; Moscovites, their Church service.
the Priest attended by his Deacon, in the middle of the Church, calls on
Christ for a blessing, in the name of the Trinity, and then repeats three
times, Lord have mercy upon us: this done, he marches into the chancel,
whither no man may enter but the Priest alone; and there at the Altar he says
the Lords prayer, and twelve times Lord have mercy upon us; Then Praised at the
Trinity: The Deacon and people answer Amen. Then he reads the Psalms for the
day, and with the people turns to the Images on the wall, to which they bow
three times knocking their heads to the ground. Then he reads the Decalogue,
and Athanasius his Creed. After this the Deacon standing without the Chancel
door, reads a part of their Legend of Saints lives, which is divided into so
many parts as there be days in the year; then he adds some collects or
prayers. This Service lasts about two hours, all which time many Wax Candles
burn before their Images, some as big as a man's wast; such are vowed and
enjoined by pe^nance. They have about nine of the morning another service, and
on Festival days they have solemn devotion. The evening service is begun like
the marnings; after the Psalms the Priest sings the (...) in their Language,
and then all with one voice, Lord have mercy upon us, thirty times together;
and the boys answer thirty times; then is read by the Priest, and on holy days
sung; the first Psalm, and (...) repented ten times. Then the Priest reads
some part of the Gospel, which he ends with three Hallelujahs; and withal that
evening service with a collect for the day; all this while the Priest stands
as, the high (...). The Deacon^ stand without the Chancel, whither they dare
not come during service time. See the (...) of Russia.
The people stand together in the body of the Church, for they have no Pews to
sit in.

Q. 6. How do they administer the Sacraments?

(...) Eight days after the Child is born, he is brought to the Church Porch,
Their Sacraments.
where the Priest receives him; and tells the witnesses their duties in the
child's education after baptism, namely to teach him how to know God and
Christ, and withal what Saints are the chief mediators; then he conjures the
Devil out of the water, and so after some prayers, he plungeth the child three
times over head and ears in a tub of warm water, holding it necessary that
every part of the child be dipped. They use the same words that we do; In the
name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: and not By the Holy Ghost, as some
Heretics have used. Then the Priest lay^th oil and salt mixed together on the
Childs forehead, on both sides of his face, and on his lips praying that God
would make him a good Christian, etc. This done, the child being now made a
Christian, is carried from the Porch into the Church: The Priest marching
before, who lays him on a cushion before the feet of the chief Image in the
Church, to which he is recommended as to his Mediator. After baptism the
child's hair is cut off, wrapped up in wax, and reserved as a relic in the
Church. The Russians use to re-bapbaptise their Proselyte Christians, and in
some Monastery to instruct them in their religion; first they cloth the new
convert with a fresh Russian Garment, then they crown him with a Garland,
anoint his head with oil, put a wax light into his hand, and for seven days
together pray over him four times a day; all which time he is to forbear flesh,
and white meats. After the seventh day he is washed, and, on the eighth day is
brought into the Church, and there instructed how to bow, knock his head, and
cross himself before their images. The Russians communicate but once a year,
in Lent after confession to the Priest; who calls them up to the Altar, asks
them if they be clean from sin; if they be, they are admitted; but never above
three at one time. Whilst the Priest prays, the communicants stand with
their ^rms folded one within another; then he delivers to them a spoonful of
bread and wine tempered together, saying, Eat this drink this, without any
pause. Then he delivers bread by it self, and wine mingled with warm water,
to represent the water and bloc^ that issued out of Christ side. Then the
Communicants follow the Priest thrice about the Altar, with their folded arms.
See the above named Histories.
At last after prayers the Priest charge them to make good cheer and be merry
for seven days together, and to fast the next seven days after.

Q. 7. What is the Doctrine and Ceremonies of the Russian Church at this day?

A, They hold that the Books of Moses (except Genesis) are not to be read in
Churches, Their Doctrine and Ceremonies.
and are of no use since Christ's coming; nor the Prophets, nor the Revelation.
2. They teach that their Church traditions are of equal authority with the word
of God. 3. That the Greek Church, chiefly the Patriarch and his Synod, have
full authority to interpret the Scriptures, and that their interpretation is
authentic. 4. That the Holy Ghost proceeds not from the Son. 5. They hold
Christ to be the only mediator of redemption, but not of intercession; this
honor they give to the Saints; chiefly to the Virgin Mary, and Saint Nichola^,
who they say is attended upon by three hundred of the chief Angels. 6. Their
doctrine and practice is to adore the Images or Pictures of the Saints, whereof
their Churches are full, and richly adorned. 7. They teach that in this life
there can be no assurance of salvation. 8. And that we are justified not by
faith only, but by works also; which consist in prayers by number on their
beads, in fasts, vows, alms, crossings, offerings to Saints, and such like. 9.
They ascribe great power to auricular confession in doing away sin. 10. They
hold al to be damned, that dye without baptism. 11. Extreme Unction is with
them a Sacrament, though not of such necessity as baptism, yet they hold it a
cursed thing to dye without it. 12. They re-baptise Christians converted to
their Church. 13. They esteem some meats more holy then others, and are very
strictly superstitious in their fasts. 14. They disallow marriage in their
Clergy; yet they permit their Priests to marry once. 15. They place such virtue
in the cross that they advance it in all their high ways, on the tops of their
Churches, on the doors of their Houses* and are upon all occasions signing
themselves with it on their foreheads and breasts: They adore it, they use the
sign thereof in stead of prayers and thanksgiving in the morning and evening,
when they sit down to meat and rise from table; when they swear, they swear by
the Cross, etc. 16. Such virtue they place in holy Water, that after the
Bishops have consecrated the Rivers on the Ep^pbany, as their custom is then
every year, people strive who shall first plunge their children, and themselves
therein, and think their meat is blessed that is boiled in that water; and that
the sick shall either recover, or be made more fit and holy for God, if they
drink thereof. 17. They have their solemn Processions on the Epip^any, in which
go two Deacons bearing banners in their hands, the one of our Lady, the other
of Saint Michael fighting with the Dragon; after them follow the other Deacons
and Priests two and two in a rank, with copes on their backs, and images
hanging on their breasts. After these march the Bishops in their robes, then
the Monks and their Abbots: and after them the Patriarch in rich attire, with a
ball on the top of his Mytre, as if his head supported the world; at last comes
the great Duke with his Nobility; when they are come to the River, a hole is
made in the Ice; then the Patriarch prays, and conjureth the Devil out of the
water; which done, he casts salt, and censeth the water with incense, and so
it becomes holy. This is the Procession at Mosco; where the people are
provident, least the Devil (bring conjured out of the water) should enter into
their houses, they make crosses with chalk over their doors. In their
Processions also they carry the image of Christ within a Pix upon a high pole,
which they adore, and think this image was made without hands. 18. Such
holiness they place in their Priests benediction, that when they brew, they
bring a dish of wo^t to the Priest within the Church, which he consecrates, and
this makes the whole brewing holy. In harvest they do the like, by bringing the
first fruits of their corn to the Priest to be hallowed. 19. On Palm Sunday,
when the Patriarch rides through the Mosco, the Great Duke holds his horse
bridle, and the people cry Hosa^^a, spreading their upper garments under his
horse seet. The Duke has for his service that day a pension from the Patriarch
of 200. Rubbels. 20. Besides their Wednesdays and Fridays fasts, they have four
Lents in the year: The first and great Lent is as ours, before Easter, the
second about Midsummer, the third in Harvest time, the fourth about
All-Hollow-tide; the first week of their great Lent they feed upon bread and
salt only, and drink nothing but water; in this Lent they have three Vigils,
in the last whereof which is on good Friday, the whole Parish watches in the
Church from nine a clock in the evening, till six in the morning; all which
time they stand, except when they fall down and knock their heads against their
Images, which must be 1^0. times in that night. 21. They have a Saint for every
day of the year, which is held the Patron of that day. The Image whereof is
brought every morning with the cross into the Great Dukes Chamber, by the
Priest his Chaplain; before which Image the Great Duke prays, See Fletcher,
Boterus, Les Estats du Monde, and other relations of Moscovia.
crosses himself, and knocks his head to the ground: then is he with his
Images be sprinkled by the Priest with holy water. On his Chair where he
sits, he has always the picture of Christ, and of his Mother* as often as
he, or his Nobles, drink or change their dishes at table, they cross
themselves.

Q. 8 What Ceremonies use they in their (...) ari^ges and funerals?

A. Their Marriages are performed with such words of contract as are used among
us, Their Marriages.
with a Ring also, and delivery of the Brides hand into the Bride-groomes by
the Priest, who stand both at the Altar, opposite to each other. The
Matrimonial knot being tied, the Bride comes to the Bride Groom, and falls
down at his feet, knocking her head upon his shoe, in sign of her subjection;
and he casts the lap of his upper garment over her, in token of cherishing
and protection: then the Brides friends bow low to the Bridegroom, and his
friends likewise to hers, in sign of affinity and love: and withal the
Bride-Groomes Father offers to the Priest a loaf of bread, who delivers it to
the Brides Father, with attestation before God and their pictures, that he
deliver the Dowry wholly at the appointed day, and keep love with one another;
hereupon they break the loaf and eat it. This done, the married couple walk
hand in hand to the Church porch, where the Bridegroom drinks to the Bride,
who pledgeth him; then he goes to his Fathers house, and she to hers, where
either entertain their friends apart. In token of plenty and fruitfulness,
corn is flung out of the windows upon the Bride and Brid-groom, at their
entering into the house. In the evening the Bride is brought to the
Bride-Groomes Fathers house; there she lodges that night in silence and
obscurity; she must not be seen by the Bridegroom, till the next day; for
three days she must say little or nothing; then they depart to their own house,
and Feast their friends. Upon any small dislike the man may enter into a
Monastery, and so forsake his wife. Their funerals.
At their Funerals they hire women to mourn, who howl over the body in a
barbarous manner, asking him what he wanted, and why he would dye? They use to
put into the dead parties hand a letter to Saint Nicholas their chief mediator,
to intercede for him. They use both anniversary and monthly commemorations of
their dead friends, over whose graves the Priest prays, and has a penny for
his pains. They that dye in the winter, because the ground then cannot be
dug, have their bodies piled up together in a place, which they call Gods
house, till the spring; what time the bodies and the earth being resolved and
softened, See the above named writers.
every one takes his dead friend and burieth him in the same apparel he used
to wear when he lived.

Q. 9. What is the profession of the Armenians?

A. They were altogether of the Greek Religion, Armenians, their Religion.
and subject to the Patriarch of Constantinople, but now are fallen off in most
Tenets, and have two Patriarchs of their own; the one resideth in (...) the
greater, called (...); the other in Armenia the lesser; but now the one sits in
Persia; the other, to wi^, the lesser, in Cilici^. They are in some sort (...),
holding a coalition of Christ's two natures, into one compounded nature; but by
their late confession* it seems they have renounced this opinion. Their
Patriarch* they call Catholics: they administer the Sacrament with unleavened
bread; and will not have Christ's body to be really in the Sacrament under the
species of bread and wine; nor do they mingle water with wine. With the Greeks
they deny the procession of the Holy Ghost from the Son. They give the
Eucharist to Infants presently after Baptism; they pray for the dead, yet deny
Purgatory; they re-baptise converts from the Latin Church. They fast the 25.
of December, and keep Christmasse day on the Epiphany, or rather Christ's
baptism. They keep the feast of Annunciation the sixth day of April, the
Purification the fourteenth of February. They eat flesh on Fridays, between
Easter and Ascension day. In Lent they feed only on Herbs, Roots, Fruits, and
Pulse; they abstain from such beasts they account unclean* they hold that the
souls of good men obtain not felicity till the Resurrection: See Baronius,
Borerus, Chytraeus, Boemus, Vitriacus his Oriental History; the Armenian
Confession, etc.
They admit none to be secular Priests till they are married; but must not
marry the second time. They will not have the Sacraments to confer grace. They
administer the cup to all, and celebrate no Mass, without distributing the
Sacrament. They invocate Saints, and insert diverse words into the Creed which
are neither Greek nor Latin.

Q. 10. What other Sects are there of the Greek Religion?

A. The Melchites, Melchites.
so called from Melech, a King, because they have always followed the faith of
the Emperors of Constantinople, according as it was established by the Council
of Chalcedon, against Eutyches and Dioscorus. They are also called Syrians,
from the country where they inhabit. These are altogether of the Greek Religion
and Communion, but not of the jurisdiction of the Patriarch of Constantinople,
but of the Archbishop of Damascus, under the title of Patriarch of Antiochia;
for this City, where Christianity had its first residence and name, and where
Peter sat seven years Bishop, being wasted and forsaken, the Patriarchs seat
was translated to Damascus, where it remains. 2. The Georgians are also of
the Greek Religion, Georgians.
but are not subject to the Patriarch of Constantinople, having a Metropolitan
of their own, whose residence is in the Monastery of Saint Katharine, in Mount
Sin^i, a great way from Iberia, lying between the Euxin and Caspian Seas, where
the (...) inhabit; who are so called from Saint George, as some think, who
converted them to Christianity, and whose picture they carry yet in (...); but
doubtless they were called (...) before Saint George was born; for Mela speak
of them in the first Book of his Geography, who lived in the time of Claudius
the Emperor; and Vadianus on that place, thinks they were called Georgians from
their Husbandry, to which they were much addicted. 3. The Georgians next
Neighbors, Mengrelians.
to wit, the Mengrelians, called of old Colchi, and the ancient Zychi, now
called Circassians, Circassians.
whence the Sultan had his (...), are also of the Greek Communion, and subject
to the Patriarch of Constantinople; See Bellonius his observations, Boterus,
Chytraeus de stat. Eccles. Thomas ^ Jesus. Brerewood, Prateolus de Sectis, etc.
but they baptize not their Children till they be eight years old. In other
points they are of the Greek Religion, being converted to Christianity by
Cyrillus and Methedius the Apostles or Ministers of the Patriarch of
Constantinople.

Q. 11. What is the Religion of the Nestorians, Christians of Saint Thomas, and
Jacobites?

A. 1. The Nestorians, so called from Nestorius the Heretic, whose opinion
concerning two Persons in Christ they held a long time, and spread themselves
through a great part of Asia, Nestorians.
by reason of Cosroes the Persian King, who in hatred to Hera^^ius the Emperor,
caused all Christians within his Dominions to become Nestorians; these were
subject to the Patriarch of Musal, which some think to be Bagded or Babylon,
others Seleucia, and others a part of old (...); but at this day most of them
are subject to the Pope, both in jurisdiction, and partly in Religion, and have
renounced their old errors concerning the two (...) in Christ, that Mary should
not be called the (...) of God; that the Council of Ephesus, and all other
Councels after it, are to be rejected; these errors I say, they have renounced,
but they administer the (...) with leavened bread, and in both kinds, (...)
permit their Priests to marry the third or fourth (...) they have Crosses but
not (...), nor Crucifixes, nor (...)* confession 2. The Christians (...) or of
Saint (...), so called, because converted by him. They were heretofore
Nestorians, and subject to the (...) of Masal, Indians, their Religion at this
day.
but now are subordinate to the Pope, both in profession, and jurisdiction.
They did use to give the Eucharist in both kinds; to season the bread with
salt; instead of Wine to drink the ^oyce of Raisons; to baptize their children
when forty days old; to reject all Images except the cross, the Popes
supremacy, extreme ^uction, and second marriages of their Priests, and* but now
they are of the Roman Religion. Iacobites.
3. The Iacobites* so called from Iacobus, the Syrian, a great Eucychian, are
spread through many Kingdoms in the East. They are named also Dioscorians from
Dioscorus, Patriarch of Alexandria, a great Patron of Eutyches. They belonged
anciently, before the Council of Chalcedon, to the jurisdiction of Antiochia;
but since, they yield obedience to a Patriarch of their own, whose residence is
in Caramit the Old Metropolis of Mesopotamia, but yet retains the name of
Patriarch of Antiochia. They held there was in Christ but one nature, will, and
operation, and therefore in signing with the Cross they used but one singer,
whereas the other Eastern Christians used two. Before baptism they imprinted
on their children the sign of the Cross with a hot Iron. They deny Purgatory,
and prayers for the dead, and say that the Angels are made of fire and light.
They hold that just men's souls remain in the earth till the Resurrection; their
Priests are married, they deny (...) confession, give the Eucharist in both
kinds, and the bread (...). They circumcise both Sexes, In Bibliotheca Fatrum,
Baronius, etc. See the above named Authors.
they condemn Eutyches as an Heretic, and yet honor Dioscorus, and Jacob the
Syr^an as Saints; but now they have utterly rejected the Heresy of one nature
in Christ, and with the Latin Church acknowledge two distinct natures, with
their distinct properties, as may be seen by the Iacobites confessions.

Q. 12. What is the Religion of the Maronites?

A. The Maronites are so called from Maron a holy man, Maronites, their
Religion.
their chief residence is in Mount Libanus, though some inhabit Aleppo,
Damascus, Tripoli of Syria and Cyprus. Their Patriarch is a Monk of Saint
Anthony, having nine Bishops under him; he is always called Peter, and will be
styled Patriarch of Antiochia, which title is claimed by the Iacobite
Patriarch, who is always named Ignatius. The Maronites were Monothelites, and
with the Greeks denied the Procession of the holy Ghost from the Son; abstained
from blood and strangled things, observed the Sabbath with the Lords day,
condemned the fourth marriage as utterly unlawful; rejected confirmation;
administered the Sacrament in leavened bread, and in both kinds; and excluded
the blessed souls from heaven, till the Resurrection: they did besides hold
that all men's souls were created together in the beginning: that Heretics are
to be rebaptized; that the child is not to be baptized till the mother be
purified, which is forty days after a Male child, and eighty after a Female;
that children should receive the Eucharist, as soon as baptized; that the
Father may dissolve the Matrimony of his child, if he dislike it; that the
Eucharist is not to be reserved, nor to be carried to sick persons, See the
above named Authors, and withal Possevin* apparat. sacr. Thomas a Jesus. de
conver. Gent. Vitriacus Histor. Orient. Tyrius de bello sa^ra. etc.
in danger of death; that Priests and Deacons must be married; that children of
five or six years old may be made Subdeacons; that women during their monthly
purgations are not to be admitted into the Church, nor to the Eucharist. But
these opinions the Maronites renounced, when the Christians had the command of
Syria and Palestine; but when Saladine recovered those (...)* the (...) fell
off from the Roman Church, and embraced their former Teners; but in the (...)
of Gregory the (...) and Clement the eighth they reconciled themselves again to
the Roman Church.

Q. 13. What are the Cophti?

A. The (...) are the Iacobites of Egypt, Cophti of Egypt.
for the Egyptians were anciently named (...); we call them Cophti, that is,
Egyptian Christians, as the Iacob^res of Syria are named Syrians, and in no
country were these Eu^ychians more patronised then in Syria and Egypt; yet
these Iacobites differ from Eutyches in this, that He taught the two natures in
Christ to be one by confusion or commixtion; whereas They say, that they are
one by co-adunation, but so, that the properties oh each nature remain
distinct, so that in effect they (...) but dare not say to, for fear of (...)
persons; not being able to (...) the Nature and the Person. These (...) to the
Patriarch of Alexandria, whose (...) is now in the City of Caire. They used
heretofore to be circumcised; but by the Popes persuasion have left it. They
baptize not children till the (...) day: to whom they give the Euceharist
immediately after baptism, and then also confer on them all sacred orders under
Priesthood; their parents promising for them (and performing what they promise)
till they be sixteen years old, chastity, fasting on Wednesdayes* Fridays, and
in the four Lents. They administer the Eucharist in leavened bread, and in both
kinds. With the Greeks they leave out the words of the (...) creed, and from
the Son; they deny the Sacrament and extreme Unction to the sick, See the above
named Authors, with Bar^nius, and Thevets Cosmography of the Levant. c. 48.
reject Purgatory, and prayer for the dead, and all General Councils (chiehly
Chalcedon) after that of Ephesus. They keep no Lords day, nor Feasts except in
Cities. They marry, within the second degree of consanguinity without
dispensation, they account the Roman Church heretical, and in their Liturgies
use to read the Gospel of Nicode^^^.

Q. 14. What are the Abyssin Christians?

A. These be they which in habit the Mid-land (...), Abyssins, their Religion.
under Presbyter or Pre^ious (...), they have a (...) of their own, whom they
call Abunna, whose (...) is white, his upper Vestime^t is like a Cardinals
cloak (...) before. When he rides abroad on his Mule, he is attended on with a
great train; three crosses or sta^es are carried about him, and holds a
cross in his own hand. They have many (...) Priests or Bishops, and great
store of Monasteri^s. All their Patriarchs and Bishops are of S. Anthonies
order, as are the Patriarcks of Alexandria, to whose jurisdiction anciently
Aethiopia did belong; and yet at this day they are tied to choose their Abunna
(whom they call Catholic) of the juri^diction of (...), by the (...) of which
place he is confirmed, consecrated and invested in his Ecclesiastical Rights.
In their Liturgy also they pray particularly for the Patriarch of Alexandria.
The (...) Religion consists in circumcising Male and Female; whether out of
Religion, or the ancient custom of their Nation (as being descended from the
ancient Aethiopians or Arabians, Ismaels posterity, who used to be circumcised)
is uncertain: But most likely they are circumcised in memory and imitation of
Christ, who was also circumcised. They use also every year to baptize
themselves in Lakes and Rivers (...) Epiphany day, in remembrance of Christ's
baptism, who was baptized on that day in Jordan. The other points of their
Religion be these: they abstain from such beasts as the old Law accounts
unclean; they keep the Sabbath and Sunday together: The Thursday before Easter
they administer the Sacrament is unlearened bread; but ordinarily in leavened
bread* all communicate (standing) in both kinds. The Wine they receive from
the De^con in a sp^on; and that in the Church only* The day they receive in*
they must not spit till (...). After sorty days the Males are baptized, the
(...) after eighty, except in case of necessity; and then also they give them
the Eucharist; they think their Children dying without baptism shall be saved
by the ^aith of their parents. They confess after every sin committed, and
then receive (...). They are Iacobites in acknowledging (...) and will in
Christ; therefore they (...) of Chalcedan, for condemning Dioscorus the (...).
So they deny Confirmation Extreme and (...). They hold trad^ction of souls,
admit of pain^ed, not (...) Images; they usually excommunicate are none but
(...) and this only belongs to the (...). Priests and (...) have neither
Tithes, nor Alms by begging, but live by their labor. They permit not their
Bishops and Priests to marry twice. Flesh is eat every Friday betwixt Easter
and Whitsunday. The King conferreth all Ecclesiastic promotions, except the
Patriarchship. Of these passages see the above named Authors, and (...) the
Ethiopian Liturgy in Bibli^th^ca (...). tom. 6. Alvares the King of Portugals
Chaplain, who lived in Aethiopia 6 years, and wrote the Ethiopian History.
Zega Zabo an Ethiopian Bishop sent into Portugal by King David the Abyssin;
who set out the confession of the Ethiopian faith, translated by Damianus a
Goes, etc.

Q. 15, Wherein does the Protestant Church agree with, (...) dissent from other
Christian Churches?

A. They agree with the Greek Church, in giving the Sacrament in both kinds,
Protestant Church, its agreement with, and dissent from other Christian
Churches.
in admitting Priests to marry, in rejecting images, purgatory and extreme
unction, and in denying the Popes supremacy; in the same points also they agree
with the Melchites or Syrians, with the Georgians, Mengrelians and Gircassians,
and with the Moscovites or Russians, who are all of the Greek profession,
though in some things they differ. The Protestants agree with the Nestorians in
rejecting au^^cular confession, in permitting Priests to marry, in
communicating in both kinds, and in rejecting Crucifixes. With the Christians
of Saint Thomas, they agree in administering the Sacrament in both kinds, in
rejecting images and extreme Unction, and permitting Priests to marry, and
denying the Pope supremacy. They agree with the Iacobites, in confessing their
sins only to God, in rejecting purgatory, and prayers for the dead, in giving
the Sacrament in both kinds, and in unleavened bread, and in tolerating
Priests marriages; in the same points also they agree with the (...) or
Christians of Egypt, with the Abyssins, Armenians and Maronites. But the
Protestants difher from the above named Churches in these subsequent points 1.
They believe that the holy Ghost proceeds from the Son. 2. They use
unleavened bread in the Sacrament. 3. The English Protestants allow
Confirmation. 4. They hold that the blessed souls enjoy Gods presence, and that
the wicked are tormented in Hell, immediately after their departure hence. 5.
They permit Priests after ordination to marry. 6. They reject pictures as well
as Massie-images. 7. They observe not the Saturday (...) Sabbath. 8. They have
but one Lent in the year. 9. They make no scruple in (...) of blood; in these
points the Protestants dissent both from the Greek^, Melch^tes; Georgians,
(...)* Circassiani, Moscovites and other Sects above named. They defer not
baptism till the eighth year with the Circassians; they pray not for the dead,
nor give the Sacrament in a spoon, nor divorce their Wives upon every light
occasion, with the M^scovites; they affirm not two persons in Christ, nor deny
Mary to be the Mother of God, nor reject the Council of Ephesus, and all other
Councels after it, with the Nestorians. They defer not baptism till the
fortieth day, nor exclude Priests from second marriage, with the Christians of
Saint Thomas. They do not ascribe one nature only, one will, and one operation
to Christ, nor do they use circumcision, and a hot Iron in baptism, nor do
they reach that Angels are composed of fire and light, with the Iaoobites. They
give not the Eucharist to Insants, they marry not in the second degree of
consanguinity, nor do they read the Gospel of Nicodemus, with the Cop^ti. They
do not hold traduction of souls by seminal propagation, nor baptize themselves
every year, nor suffer they their Ministers to live by mechanical labors, with
the Abyssins. They use nor rebapti^ation, nor fasting on Christmasse day, nor
abstain from eating of unclean beasts prohibited by the old Law, with the
Armenians; they do not hold that all souls were created together, nor that
parents ought to dissolve their childrens marriages when they please, nor that
Children should be made Subdeacons, nor that Menstr^ous Women should be
excluded from the Sacrament, with the Maro^ites. The Protestants do not
celebvate their Liturgy in an unknown tongue, as the (...), Iacobites, Indians
and Nestorians do, who make use of the (...) or Syriack language in their
divine service, which few understand; nor with the Greeks, Melchi^es,
Georgians, Circassians and others, do they use the ancient Greek tongue in
their liturgies, which these above named know not, and yet make use of it in
their Churches; nor with the Boman Catholics do they read and pray in Latin,
but in their own vulgar languages, which are intelligible by all; in which
point they agree with the Abyssins, A^menians, Moscovites, Russians* (...),
anciently called Illyrians. Lastly, Protestants differ from the Roman
Catholics in these points. 1. Of the number of Canonical Books of Scripture,
of their sufficiency, authority and interpreter. 2. Of Christ's descent into hell
3. Of the head of the Church, and of the Popes supremacy. 4. Of the true
Catholic Church, 5. Of their Clergy, their orders, immunities and (...). 6. Of
^he Monastical life, vows, and Evangelical Counsels. 7. Of the power of the
Civil Magistrate. 8. Of Purgatory. 9. Of invocation of Saints. 10. Adoration of
Images and Relics. 11. Sacraments their number, efficacy and ceremonies. 12.
Baptism its necessity; effects and ceremonies. 13. Transubstantiation, and the
consequences thereof. 14. Of administering in both kinds. 15. The sacrifice of
the Mass. 16. Auricular confession. 17. Satisfaction. 18. Indulgences. 19.
Extreme Unction. 20. Original sin. 21. Free will, Predestination, and Grace.
22. Justification, Faith, and good wo^k^. 23. The Latin Service. 24.
Traditions. Some other small differences there are, and fewer there might be,
if men would be moderate on either side; but the spirit of contention and
contradiction, has hitherto hindered, and will yet hinder the peace of the
Church, till the Prince of Pea^e, our true Solomon, who built this mystical
Temple, without noise of Axes or Hammers, put an end to all j^rrs and discords,
till he whom both the Winds and Seas do obey, awake, who now seems to be
asleep; till he, I say, awake and rebuke the stormy winds, and proud billows on
which his ship is tossed to and fro; that at last she may e^joy a calm time,
and some Halcyonian days, and may cast Anchor in the safe harbor of
tranquillity, where we may find our Savior, not in the Earthquakes,
Whirlewinds, and fire of contention; but in the (...) and quiet voice of peace,
concord and unity, which he left to us as a Legacy, but we have lost it by our
pride, sacrilege, ^nvy, (...), covetousness, profaneness, and vainglory.

The Contents of the Fifteenth Section.
Religion is the ground of all government and greatness. 2. By diverse reasons
it is proved that Religion of all Common wealths, and humane societies, is the
foundation. 3. That Princes and Magistrates ought to have a special care, in
settling and preserving of Religion. 4. That one Religion only is to be allowed
in a Common wealth publicly. 5. In what respects different Religions they be
tolerated in private. 6. A Christian Prince may not dissemble his Religion. 7.
Why God blesses the professors of false Religions, and punishes the
contemners thereof. 8. False Religions are grounded upon policy, and what use
there is of Ceremonies in Religion. 9. The mixture and division of religions,
and of Idolatry. 10. How the Gentile Religion in worshipping of the Sun, seems
to be most consonant to natural reason; with diverse observations concerning
Sun-worship, and the knowledge the Gentiles had of a Deity, and the Unity
thereof, with some glimmering of the Trinity. 11. That the honor, maintenance,
and advancement of a Priest hood, is the main supporter of Religion. 12. That
the Christian Religion is of all others the must excellent, and to be preferred
for diverse reasons, being considered in it self, and compared with others;
with an exhortation to the practice of religious duties, which is true
Christianity.

SECT. XV.
Quest. I. HAving now passed through all Religions known in the World, it
remains that we make some use of what we have viewed: let us know then, to what
end and purpose has this View been taken?

A. First to let us see, that there is no nation so barbarous, or brutish
(except some particular fools, who have said in their heart, there is no God)
which has not made profession of some Religion, by which they are taught to
acknowledge and worship a Deity: For Religion is the pillar on which every
Common^wealth is built* Religion, the ground of government and greatness.
so long as the pillar is stable and firm, which is the foundation, so long
will the house stand immovable; Though the rain descend, and the winds flow,
and the hloods come, and beat upon that house, yet it shall not fall, because
it is founded upon a Rock, M^t. 7. But if blind Sampson, if people void of
understanding* trusting to their strength, shake once this pillar of Religion,
down falls the whole Fabric of Government, Law and Discipline. Of this,
examples in all ages may be brought, to show, how States and Religion, like
Hippocrates Twins do live and die together; so long as Religion flourished in
Iude^, so long did that State flourish; but when the one failed, the other
fell. Judah and Israel were not carried away into Captivity, till they had
Captivated Religion: As Sampsons strength consisted in his Hair, so does the
strength of a Common^wealth in Religion; if this be cut off, the Philistions
will insult over the strongest State that ever was; and bring it to
destruction: This is the ^alladiu^^, which if once removed, will expose the
strongest City in the world to the enemy. The Greek Empire had not fallen from
the Pal^^^gi to the Turk, had the Christian Religion stood firm in
Constantinople. The Poet could acknowledge that so long as Rome stood
religious, so long the continued Victorious; Diis de (...). And Tullie
confesses that the instruments by which the Romans subdued the world, were not
strength and policy, but Religion and Piety: Non calliditate and r^bore* sed
pietate ac Religione omnes gentes nationsque super astis. Orat. de (...). resp.
For this cause the Senate and people of Rome were careful to send their prime
youth to (...),* (the University then of the (...) Religion) to be instructed
in the grounds of all their sacr^d and mysterious learning. Therefore, (...) in
Dion Cassius ^. 3. advises Augustus, (...), by all means and at all times, to
advance the worship of God, and to cause others to do the same, and not (...)
innovations in Religion, whence proceed (...), conspiracies, sediti^^^, and
conventicles, or combinations. Religion is the Bulwark, as plato faith, of Laws
and Authority; it is the band of all humane society; the fountain of justice
and fidelity; beat down this Bulwark, break this band, stop this fountain, and
bid Adieu to all Laws, Authority, Unity, Justice, and Fidelity.

Q. 2. How does it appear that Religion is the foundation of Common-we^li^e^
human societies?

A. 1. Because Religion teaches the fear of God, The Foundation of all
Commonwealths.
without which, men should live more securely among Lions and Bears, then
among men; therefore Abraham Genesis 20. knew that at Ger^^ he should both lose
his Wife and his life too, because he thought, surely the fear of God was not
in that (...); it is not the fear of temporal punishment, or of corporal death
that keeps men in awe, but of eternal torments and spiritual death; therefore
when men will not fear th^se that can destroy the body, they will stand in awe
of him who can cast body and soul into Hell fire, Mat. 10. It was this fear
that begot Religion in the world, Primus in (...) Deos fecit timor, and it is
Religion that cherishes, increases and quickneth this fear; the end then of
Commonwealths and of all societies, is, that men may live more comfortably
and securely then they can do alone; but without Religion there can be no
security nor comfort, no more then there can be for Lambs among Wolves, for
(...). 2. There can be no durable Commonwealth where the people do not obey
the Magistrate; but there can be no obedience or submission of Inferiors to
their Superiors without Religion, which teaches that Princes and Magistrates
are Gods Vice-(...) here on Earth; whom if we do not (...) and obey, we cannot
fear and obey God; who commands Romans 13. That every soul be subject to the
higher Powers, for there is no power but of God. 3. There is in all men
naturally a desire of happiness and immortality; which cannot be attained
without the knowledge and worship of God; whom we can neither know nor worship
without Religion, which prescribes the rules and way of worshipping him; and
likewise shows us that there is a God, that he is one, invisible, eternal,
omnipotent, the maker of all things, etc. 4. The Essence and life of a
Commonwealth consists in Love, Unity, and Concord; but it is by Religion
that these are obtained; for there is no band or tie so strict and durable, as
that of Religion, by which all the living stones of the great buildings of
Kingdoms and States are cemented, and like the planks of N^ahs Ark, are pitched
and glewed together. 5. As each particular man is subject to death, and
corruption, so are whole States, Corporations, and K^ngdoms; but the means to
retard and keep off destruction, and ruin from them is Religion; hence those
States continue longest where Religion is most esteemed and advanced; whereas
on the contrary, the contempt of Religion is the forerunner of destruction;
this we see that when the whole world was united into one corporation and
society, for slighting Religion, were all overthrown in the General Cataclysme,
except eight religious persons, saved in the Ark. The Poet acknowledges that
all the miseries which befell Italy, proceeded from the neglecting of Religion;
Dii multa neglecti dede^unt Hesperiae mala luctuosae, Horat. 6. As all
Commonwealths and States know and are assured that they cannot subsist without
the protection of Almighty God, who is the Author of all humane societies, so
likewise they know, that God will not own and protect them who either cannot
or will not serve, worship, and honor him, which without Religion is
impossible to be done by man; for as all Nations know, even by the comely order
and harmony, the strange operations of Nature, and the beauty of the world,
that there is a Divinity, which is also plain by the actions of Providence; so
likewise they know that this Divine power must be honored and obeyed* except
they will show ingratitude in the highest degree, to him, whence they have
their living, moving, being, and all they enjoy; but without Religion they can
neither know how nor where, nor when to worship him. 7. Every man knows he has
a spiritual, reasonable, and heavenly soul, which naturally delights in the
knowledge and contemplation of heavenly things, which show that he cannot
reject all Religion, except he will shake off nature and humanity. 8. The
veriest Atheists in the world, who denied God, (at least in his providence,
though they could not in his essence) yet affirmed that Religion was necessary
in all societies, without which they cannot subsist, as is already said. 9. As
subjects will not obey their Princes, but fall into rebellions, so Princes will
not protect their Subjects, but become Wolves and Tyrants, if it were not for
Religion that keeps them in awe, and assures them that there is over them a
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, to whom they must give an account of their
actions* Regum timendorum in pr^prios greges, Reges in ips^s imperium est
I^vis. Horat. 10. If it were not for the force of Religion, few Commonwealths*
could defend themselves; what soldier would fight with that courage, or expose
his life to danger, if he did not expect a greater reward, a more durable
garland hereafter, then any they could expect here? This made the Jews so
resolute against their neighbor Gentiles; this animated the Romans against
their enemies; they fought Pro Aris for their Altars in the first place; this
animateth the Turks against Christians, and these against the Turks.

Q. 3. Ought not then Princes and Magistrates to have, a special care in the
settling and preservation of Religion?

A. Yes: Religion, most requisite in Princes and Governers, they should be
careful of it.
for no means is so powerful to establish and perpetuate their thrones and
authority as Religion; no Guard so strong as this, no Castle so impregnable* no
Spur so sharp to stir and extimulate peoples affections toward the defense,
obedience, reverence, and maintenance of their Governors, as Religion;
therefore the wise Roman Emperors took more pride and delight in the titles of
Pius and Sanctus; of Pious, Holy, Religious, then to be styled, wife.
Fortunate, Stout, or Valorous; and to let the people know what care they had of
Religion, they alone would be called Pontifices Maximi; or chief Bishops. There
is no Epithet that the wise Poet gives to Aenaeas so often, as that of Piety;
Pius Aenaeas, pietate insignis and armis, insignem pietate virum, etc. Qun
justior alter, ^ec pietate fuit. etc. Virgil. That good Emperor Antoninus, who
succeeded Hadrian, preferred the title of Pius to all his other honorable
titles; and as wise Princes have been chiefly careful of Religion, to preserve
it pure, and uncontaminate, so have they bin diligent in suppressing Atheists,
the chief enemies thereof: for they saw that Atheism did introduce Anarchy;
for he who is an enemy to God, cannot be a friend to Gods Vicegerents;
therefore in all well governed States they have been either put to death or
banished, as being enemies to government and humane society. Wise Princes find
that as religion uniteth peoples affections to them, so it makes them fortunate
and successful in all their actions and undertakings; never was there a more
religious Prince then King David, and never a King more successful against his
enemies; the like we may see in Constantine, Theodosius, Charles the Great, and
many others no less famous for their Religion, than for their Victories; and
because wise Lawgivers are not ignorant how much religion is prevalent with the
people, therefore they delivered them no Laws, but what either they received,
or said they received from some Deity; so Lyc^rgus gave out that his Laws were
delivered to him by Apollo: Minos received his Laws from Jupiter, with whom he
was familiar nine years together. Zaleucus makes Minerva the Author of his
Laws. Numa ascribes his Laws to the Nymph Aegeria, with whom he had familiar
conferences in the night. And Mahomet will have his Laws backed by the
authority of the Angel Gabriel; such is the force of Religion; that without
this, men would neither receive nor obey Laws: for this cause God himself
appeared often to the Patriarchs, and came down in lightning and thunder upon
Mo^nt Sinai, when he gave the Law. Neither has there been any more forcible
way to appease tumults and popular seditions, then the conceit of Religion.
When the C^ty of Florence in a civil dissension was washed with her own blood,
Francis Sodorinus the Bishop, in his Pontificals, having the cross carried
before him, and accompanied with his Priests, struck such an awe of Religion
into the hearts of the Citizens, with his very presence, that they flung down
their arms; the like religious Stratagem was used by Iaddus the High Priest of
the Jews, to obtain the favor of Alexander, as he was marching against
Jerusalem with his Army, who was so struck with the Priests majestical presence
and Vestiments, that he both adored the Priest, spared the City, and conferred
on it diverse benefits. The like respect and success had Pope Urban from Attila
when he besieged Aquileia; and many more examples may be alleged.

Q. 4. Are Pluralities of Religions tolerable in a State?

A. 1. Publicly one Religion only is to be allowed, But one Religion to be
allowed publicly*
because there is but one God, who is the Object of Religion; therefore as his
Essence is most simple and indivisible, so should his worship be, because
diversities of Religion breed diversities of opinions concerning God. 2. As
there is but one truth, so there ought to be but one Religion; for false
Religions either teach to worship false Gods, or else in a false manner to
worship the true God; therefore God himself prescribed to the Jews the rule
and manner of his worship, strictly commanding them not to alter any thing
therein; and Saint Paul shows, That the Gospel which he taught, was the only
true Gospel, so that if an Angel from Heaven should preach any other Gospel,
let him be accursed, Galat. ^3. As there is but one Church which is the ground
and pillar of truth, and one faith to lay hold on that truth, and one spirit to
lead the Church into the way of truth, so there should be but one Religion,
which is the Doctrine of that truth. 4. There is but one way to Heaven and life
^^ernal; but the ways to destruction are many; therefore there ought to be but
one Religion to conduct us in that way to eternal happiness. 5. Religion (as
is said) is the Foundation of all States and Kingdoms; therefore in one State
or Kingdom there ought to be but one Religion, because there can be but one
foundation; for one Building cannot have many Foundations* 6. ^eligion is the
band and cord by which the unity of the State is preserved; if this band be
broken into many pieces, how can it bind the affections of people, and
preserve their unity, either amongst themselves, or with their Princes and
Governors: As therefore a City divided against it self cannot stand; neither
can that State subsist, which is divided into different Religions, which
occasioneth diversity of affections, and withal many jars and contentions. 7.
As in bodies natural, contrary qualities cause destruction; so in bodies
Politic, contrary Religions; for if there be but one true Religion, the rest
must needs be false; and what can be more contrary then truth and falsehood? so
that the belly of Rebecca must needs be tormented, where such opposite twins do
struggle: Hence proceed heart-burnings, emulations, strifes, proscriptions,
excommunications, and such like distempers, by which the seamlesse coat of
Christ is torn in pieces. 8. Diversity of Religions beget envy, malice,
seditions, factions, rebellions, contempt of Superiors, treacheries,
innovations, disobedience, and many more mischiefs, which pull down the heavy
judgments of God upon that State or Kingdom where contrary Religions are
allowed, because whilst every one strives to advance his own Religion above
the other, all these distempers now mentioned must needs follow. We could
instance the condition of the Jews, how they flourished whilst they adhered
to the Religion prescribed them by God: But when they admitted the Gentile
Religions also among them, they fell into all the mischiefs mentioned, and God
cast them off as a prey to their Enemies. But we have sufficient and
experimental proof of this in our neighboring Countries of France and Germany;
what distempers and civil wars not many years ago have ensued upon the
differences of Religion, to the desolution and ruin of many Towns and Cities?
Tantum Relligio potuit suadere malorum*

Q. 5. May a State tolerate different Religions in private?

A. 1. Different Religions how and when to be tolerated.
If they be such Religions as do not overthrow the fundamentals of truth. 2.
Nor such as impugn or disturb the government established in that State or
Kingdom. 3. If the professors thereof be such as are not factious, ambitious,
or pertinacious; but honest, simple, tractable, obedient to Superiors, having
no other end in holding their opinions of Religion, but Gods glory, and
satisfaction of their own conscience, so far as they can conceive, and withal
are willing to submit to better judgments, and to renounce their opinions when
they are convinced to be erroneous* in these regards I say a State may, and
wise States do tolerate diversities of opinions in Religion, upon good grounds;
because (as Solomon says) There is a time for all things under the Sun: There
will come a time when the tares shall be separated from the corn, though the
wise Husbandman suffers them to grow together a while. The wise Physician will
not presently fall to purging out the noxious humors of a Cacochymicall Body;
for in some diseases nothing is more dangerous then precipitate and untimely
Physic; Chronical d^seases are not cured by Physic and motion, but by time
and rest. The nature of man is such (says Seneca) that he will be sooner led
then drawn, facilius ducitur, quam trabitur. Stubborn and violent courses in
reformation, beget stubborn and violent opposition. The warm Sun will prevail
more with the traveller, then the cold and boisterous wind; the Goats blood
will break the Adamant, which the hardest hammers cannot do. God also has his
times for calling of men to the knowledge of his truth; some he calls at the
nineth hour, and some not till the eleventh. Christ sends abroad his Disciples
to preach and work miracles among the Jews: but into the way of the Gentiles
they must not yet go till his ascension. It falls out many times that the
remedy is worse then the disease; and while we go about to cure the State, we
kill it; and instead of purging out the peccant humors of the body Politic,
we cast it into a Calenture or burning Fever. This was not unknown to that
wise and good Emperor Theodesius, who could not be persuaded by the Catholics
to extirpate, or use violent courses against the Arrians, but permitted them to
enjoy their Churches and opinions, knowing how dangerous it would prove to the
State, if the quietness thereof should be disturbed; this had been to kindle
the fire which was lately extinguished, and to raise a con^^^gration in the
Empire, which could not be quenched without an inundation of blood; this had
been Camerinam movere, or to awake a sleeping Dog. For this cause though the
Turk is zealous in his Religion, yet he permits Christians, Jews, Persians,
Aethiopians, and others to enjoy their several Religions. The like liberty is
permitted in Germany, France, and other places, for avoiding further mischief;
For this purpose that there may not be a breach of peace, and disturbance in
the government of the State. The Turks and Moscovites inhibit all disputations
in points of Religion upon pain of death. The like inhibition was made by the
Emperor and Princes of Germany, after their Civil Wars, that there should be no
dispute or contention between the Catholics and Protestants; for indeed by
such disputes, Religion it self is weakened, and the State endangered; for if it
be not tolerable to question Laws once established, how can it be safe either
for State or Church to call in question Religion once settled and confirmed by
authority? By questions and disp^tes the Majesty of Religion is slighted; and
that made dubious, which ought to be most certain; The objects and high
mysteries of our faith, are not to be measured by our shallow reason. The many
disputes about Religion, commonly overthrow the practice of Religion, which
consists not in talking, but in doing; the one indeed is more easy then the
other, as Seneca says, Omnes disputare malunt quam vivere; We had rather
dispute of salvation, then work it out with fear and trembling. If Heaven could
be obtained with wrangling and disputing, a profane Sophister should sooner
have it then a Holy Christian, who knows that life eternal is not obtained by
talking of, but by walking in the ways of Gods Commandments. But to return to
our former discourse, and to end this question, as we began; diversity of
Religious, with the limitations aforesaid, may be connived at; especially when
it cannot be avoided without the danger and ruin of the State; and the rather,
because the Conscience cannot be compelled, nor faith forced. There never was a
wiser State than the Romans, and more zealous in the worship of their gods,
(...), according to the custom and laws of their Nation; yet they admitted the
worship of Isis and Aesculapius, foreign Deities; and a Pantheon, or Temple for
all gods. And though they abhorred the Jews above all other people, yet
Augustus, that wise and happy Emperor, permitted them to exercise their own
Religion. Princes and Magistrates must, like wise Ship-Masters, rather strike
Sail, and cast Anchor, then make Shipwreck in a storm, and rather sail back
with safety, then venture upon the Rocks in the Harbor with danger: Praestat
recurrere quam male currere. As Constans the Emperor, and The^dosius the Great,
though Catholic Princes, yet for quietness sake tolerated the Arrians. So did
Leo make an Edict of Union, called (...), that all the different religions
within his dominions might live peaceably and friendly together. For the same
cause Anastasius made a Law of Amnesty, and accounted those the best preachers
that were moderate.

Q. 6. May a Christian Prince dissemble his Religion?

A. 1. He may not; Princes must not dissemble in Religion.
because God abhors Hypocrisy, condemns a double heart, and rejects
such as draw near to him with their lips, when their hearts are far from him.
Christ denounces more woes against Hypocrisy then any other sin: of those who
are Wolves in Sheeps clothing, he will have us take heed, and threatens to
deny those before his heavenly Father, who deny him before men. We are
commanded to love God with all our heart, with all our strength, etc, which we
do not, if we dissemble. He requires faithfulness, truth, and sincerity in the
inward parts, he abhors lia^s, and deceitful men. Dissimulation in Religion
rejected.
Shall we think it lawful to dissemble with God, and are offended if our
neighbors dissemble with us? God will not have us wear a Li^sie-Woolsie
Garment; nor plow with an Ox and an Ass: nor sow different seeds in the same
ground. Simulata sanctitas duplex impietas; The Devil is never more dangerous,
then when he transformes himself into an Angel of light; Malus, ubi se bonum
simulat, pessimus est, says Seneca. 2. God is the chief good, in whom is no
impurity nor guile; therefore he requires of us pure and sincere love; he is
omniscient, there is nothing hid from him, he knows the hearts, and searches
the reins, and knows our thoughts long before: all things are naked and open
to his eyes; Therefore though we can delude men, we cannot deceive God; he
knows what is within painted sepulchers, and in those platters that have washed
outsides. God is truth it self, therefore is an enemy to falsehood. He is
zealous of his glory; but there is nothing wherein he is more dishonored, then
by dissimulation and Hypocrisy. 3. Never was there any good Prince a
dissembler, nor did ever any dissembler prove a good Prince; but cruel,
tyrannical and impious; as we see by the examples of Herod, Tiberius, Nero, and
many more, who at first made great show of Religion and Virtue; but when the
Visard was taken off, they proved monsters and not men, and Wolves in Sheeps
clothing; nay there is more hope of him that in the beginning professes his
own infirmities, then in him that concealeth them; for the one is more
corrigible then the other: as Bodin instanceth in King John of France, who
could not hide his weakness, yet never committed any wicked act. And indeed
dissembling Princes fall into this inconvenience and mischief, that they
cannot-be long hid under the visard of Religion and virtue; but their nature
will break out, and then will become more odious to their people, than if they
had at first detected their natures. Dienysius the younger, so long as Plato
was with him, played the counterfeit egregiously, making show of sobriety,
temperance, and all other Princely virtues; but as soon as Plato was gone, his
wicked nature brake out, like a running stream that has been dammed up. And
how can a people put confidence in that Prince, who dissembleth with God? he
that is not true to his maker, but plays fast and loose with him, can never
be true to his people. And indeed for a Prince or State to dissemble with God,
who had raised them out of the dust, to make them rulers over his people is
ingratitude in the highest degree; and much worse than of any private man, by
how much the higher he is advanced above others. To be brief, among all the
wicked qualities of Catilin, there was none that was more exaggerated by the
Historian, then his dissimulation, and counterfeiting; Cujuslibet rei simulator
ac dissimulator; aliud in lingua ^rempt^^m, aliud, in pect^re clausum habebat.

Q. 7. Seeing there is but one true Religion, why does God bless the
professors of false Religions, and punishes the contemners thereof?

A. 1. Because in false Religions there is the acknowledgement of a Divinity,
False religions why blessed, and the contemners punished.
though the conceptions men have of this Deity be erroneous, and the worship
they give be superstitious. 2. Because by false religions men are kept in awe
and obedience to their Superiors, and in love and concord among themselves;
therefore God, who is the author of all goodness, and tender of the welfare of
mankind, will rather have a false Religion then none, and Superstition rather
then Atheism; for even in false Religions both Prince and people are taught
their duties to each other. The Romans stood so much in awe of their heathenish
superstitions, that they would rather lose their lives, then falsify the oaths
they took in presence of their gods; and were more moved to the performance of
their duties, by the hope of rewards, and fear of punishments hereafter, then
of any they could expect or endure here. Humane society, fidelity, justice,
temperance, fortitude, and other virtues, are upheld even by false religions:
therefore the defenders of such have been outwardly rewarded by God, and the
enemies thereof punished. Philip of Macedon, for defending Apollo's Temple
against the Phocenses, who came to rob it, obtained a glo^ious Victory, and
they an ignominious overthrow, to the loss of the whole Army. The soldiers of
Cambyses, who went to pillage the Temple of Jupiter Hammon, were overthrown by
the Sands, and he, for his many Sacriledges committed in Egypt, was slain by
his own sword in the midst of his age, glory, and army. God punished the
Sacrilege of Xerxes the son of Darius, for robbing the Delphick Temple, with
the loss of his innumerable army, by a handful of Grecians, and the overthrow
of his 4000. sacrilegious soldiers, with lightning, hail, and storms, so that
not one was left to bring tidings of the destruction of those wretches who were
sent to ^rob Apollo. Brennus, Captain of the Gauls, had the like judgment fell
upon him, for the like sacrilege upon the same Delphick Temple; his Army was
overthrown by storms and an earthquake; Brennus himself, out of impatience,
was his own executioner. Sextus Pompeius, for robbing Juno's Temple, was
exercised ever after with miseries and calamities, so that never any action he
undertook prospered; and at length lost both his Army and himself miserably. I
could speak of the wretched end of Antiochus, who robbed the Temple of Jupiter
Dodon^^s, and of those who stole the gold of Toulouse* but these examples are
sufficient, to let us see, what severity God has used against sacrilege, even
among the Gentiles: What then shall they expect, that with sacrilegious hands
have spoiled the Temples of Christians? if he be such a favourer to
Superstition, will he not much ^ore patronize the true Religion, and persecute
with his plagues sacrilegious Christians, who has not spared sacrilegious
Gentiles? God prospers false Religions, when conscientiously practiced, and
curses wicked professors of the true Religion; for he pre^^ns Practice to
Knowledge, and honest Gentiles to wicked Israelites.

Q. 8. What other observations may be made of this View of all Religions?

A. That all false religions are gounded upon Policy; for what else were the
variety of Oracles, Soothsayers, or Divinations by Stars, by Flying and
Chattering of Birds, by feeding of Poultry, by Inspection into the e^^rals of
Beasts, etc. What were their multitudes of Sacrifices, Priests, Deities,
Festivals, Ceremonies, Lights, Songs, Altars, Temples, Odor^, and such like,
used among the Gentiles, but so many devices of humane Policy, to keep people
in obedience and awe of their Superiors? whereas the true Christian Religion
is, of it self, so powerful to captivate and subdue all humane wisdom, and
exorbitant affections, to the obedience of Christ, that it needs not such weak
helps of man's wisdom or earthly policy. Yet I do not condemn such policy as is
cond^tible toward the advancing of knowledge in divine Mysteries, or of
Concord, Justice and Obedience; for God himself prescribed multitudes of
ceremonies to the Jews: And since the first establishing of the Christian
Church, she has always made use of some decent Ceremonies; which do not argue
any defect or want in Religion, but the weakness only of those that are
children in Religion, who must sometimes be fed with such milk. R^ligious
Ceremonies, are like the Priests ornaments, which are not parts of his essence,
Ceremonies in Religion.
and yet procure him reverence, which Iaddus knew, when in his robes, he
presented himself to Alexander; who, doubtless, had he appeared without them,
had gone without either reverence or benevolence; so that Jerusalem did own
her safety and deliverance to the high Priests vestments. Religion without
Ceremonies, is like solid meat without sauce. Though in the Church of God some
are so strong, that they need no sauce of Ceremonies to the solid meat of
Religion, yet most stomachs are so weak, that they cannot digest the one
without the other. Christ deals not so niggardly with his Church, as to afford
her clothes only to cover her naked^esse, he is content to see her in rings,
brac^lets, jewels, and other ornaments. Thus he dealt with his first spouse of
the Jewish Church; I clothed thee (says he) with beoydered work, and shod
thee with badgers skin, etc. I girded thee about with fine linen, and I
covered thee with silk: I decked thee also with ornaments, and put bracelets
upon thine ^ands, and a chain on thy neck, and a frontlet upon thy face, and
earrings in thine ears, and a beautiful crown upon thine head, Ezekiel. 16. 10.
etc. If God was so bountiful to his first Wife why should he be so sparing to
his second, as to afford her no outward Ornaments at all? Is she so rich, that
she needs not any? I wish it were so, but I find it otherwise; for* she
stands in as much need of some outward decent and significant Ceremonies, to
help her knowledge and devotion, as the Jews did, though not of so many, not of
the like nature. I observe, that where are no Ceremonies, there is small
reverence and devotion, and where some cost is bestowed, even on the outside of
Religion, there some love is manifested: as our Savior proves that Mary
Magdle^^^ had more love to him than Peter had; because she had washed his feet,
wiped them with her hairs, kissed them, and anointed his head with precious
ointment, which Peter had not done. This cost was not pleasing to Judas, yet
Christ commends her for it. I know the Kings daughter is glorious within, yet
he^ clothing is of wrought gold, and her raiment is of needle work. Thi^ I
write not to commend either superfluous, needless, or too costly and frivolous
Rites, but to show how requisite it is to have some decent, significant, and
such as may further knowledge and devotion.

Q. 9. What else may we observe in the view of all these Religion^?

A. That some of them are merely Heathenish, some Jewish; some merely
Christian; some mixed, either of all, or some of these; Mahumetanisme is mixed
of Iudaisme, Mixed Religions.
Genti^isme and Arrianisme; the Moscovite Religion is, partly Christian, partly
Heathenish: In the East are many Sects, partly Christian, partly Jewish,
observing Circumcision with Baptism, and the Sabbath with the Lords day. Among
the Corinthians some professed Christianity, and yet with the Gentiles denied
the Resurrection; but God always abhorred such mixed Religions, as join with
Micah, the Ephod and Teraphim, and halt between God and Baal; who are Hebrews,
and yet with the Gentiles round the corners of their heads, and cut their
flesh, etc. Levit. 19. 27. God will not have any mixture in the ointment,
flour, mirrhe, or incense, that is offered to him, but will have all pure; he
would not have the Ox and Ass yoaked together; therefore the Apostle
reproves sharply the Galathians, for using their Jewish Ceremonies with
Christianity: The Samaritans are condemned for worshipping the Lord and Idols;
Christ ha^ed the works of the Nicolaitans, who were partly Christians, and
partly Gentiles, and punished the Gergasites, by drowning their Swine in the
Sea; For being Jews, they rejected Circumcision, and eat swines flesh with the
Gentiles. For this cause, That the Jews might not learn the Religion of the
Gentiles, God would have them dwell apart by themselves, and not mix with other
Nations, nor dwell near the Seaside; and yet we see how prone they were to
Idolatry, by the Golden Calf, the B^azen Serpent, the Ephod, Teraphim, and
Graven Image, taken out of the house of Micah, and set up in Dan. Judges ^^20.
The Chariot and horses of the (...) set up* in the Temple, as we may read in
Eze^hiel: The Golden Calves set up by Jeroboam: The Idolatry of Solomon,
Manasse, and other Kings, and the falling away of the Ten Tribes from God. The
reason of this pronenesse in them to Idols, was their education in ^gypt, the
mother of strange Religions, where they had been seasoned with idolatry; and so
pleasing is idolatry to flesh and blood, that they will spare no cost nor time,
nor pains, nor their own lives and childrens, to please their Idols: thus the
Hebrews could rise early in the morning, and part with their golden-Ear-rings
to make a Calf: The Baalites could cut their flesh with knives and lance^s,
till the blood gushed out, and could cry from morning till evening: Yea, many
Idolaters did not spare to offer their children to M^loch: Idolatry condemned.
but there is no sin more hateful to God than Idolatry, which the Scripture
calls abomination, and Idols; lying vanities, and sorrows. And Idolaters are
named Fornicators and Adulterers; and God will have the very places of Idolatry
to be destroyed, Deuteronomy. 12. 2, 3. The Jews must not eat of things offered to
Idols, nor marry with the Heathen, who having forsaken the true God, made gods
of their Forefathers and Benefactors, by setting up their images at first in
memorial only, and then fell to adoration of them; and because they could not
see God, who is invisible; they would have his visible presence in some outward
Image or representation, thinking they could not but b^ in safety, so long as
they had his image with them. This made the Trojans so careful of their
Palladium; the Tyrians of their Apollo, and other places of their tutelar gods.

Q. 10. Which of all the Religions we have viewed seems to be most consonant to
natural Reason?

A. The barbarous and butcherly Religions of the Gentiles, in sacrificing men,
in worshipping stocks and stones, etc. Diverse Tenets also in Mahumetanisme,
Iudaisme, and many opinions in heretical sects among Christians are against
reason. The doctrine of the true Orthodox Christian is above natural ^eason:
for the natural man says the Apostle, understands not the things of the
Spirit: Gentiles, worshipped the Sun, under diverse names and shapes.
But the Religion of those Gentiles, who worshipped the Sun, seemed to be most
consonant to their natural reason; because they could not conceive what God
was, being a Spirit incomprehensible; for all knowledge comes by the senses,
and finding that no sensible entity was comparable to the Sun in glory, Their
Religion most consonant to natural reason.
light, motion, power, beauty, operation, etc. but that all things in a m^nner
had dependence from him, in respect of life, motion, comfort, and being, they
concluded that the Sun was the only Deity of the world: Sun, the Gentiles
chief and only God.
and however the Gentiles might seem to worship diverse chief gods, because they
expressed them by diverse names, and effects, or Offices; yet indeed the wiser
sort understood but one supreme Deity, which they worshipped under diverse
Names, Apollo, the Sun.
Epithets, and Operations. Now that this Deity was none other but the Sun, whom
they called by the name of Apollo, Jupiter, Mercury, Mars, Hercules, etc. is
apparent by the Gentiles own writings; for in Nonnus, l. 40. Diony. we see with
how many name: the Sun is called; namely, (...), King of the fire, (...)* guide
of the world. Belus of Euphrates, the Lybian Ammon, Apis of Ni^us, the Arabian
Saturn, the Assyrian Jupiter, the Egyptian Serapis, Phaeton, with many names,
Mithris, the Babylonian Sun, the Grecian Delphick Apollo, Poean, Ether, or the
Heaven, etc. So Orpheus in Hymno under the name of Vulcan understands the Sun,
when he calls him (...) a perpetual fire, (...) shining in the flaming Air or
Sky. Mars, the Sun
So by Mars they meant the Sun, as appears by that image of Mars adorned with
the Sun beams, and worshipped anciently in Spain, thus adorned. They made him
the god of War, because all strife and contention^ arise from the heat of the
blood, caused by the Suns influence. They meant also the Sun by Apollo, so
called from (...), that is, darting or casting of his beams; or because (...),
he shines alone, and not others with him; therefore in Latin he is named, Sol
quasi solus: Other reasons and derivations of this name may be seen in
Macrobius L. 1. Saturn. Some call him Apollo, (...), from killing or destroying
of the creatures, with his excessive heat; whereas with his temperate warmness
he cures and drives away diseases; (...): and in this respect he was called
Apollo, and the god of Physic; and was painted with the Graces in his right
hand, and in his left holding his bow and arrows, to show that he is ready and
nimble to help and cure, but slow to hurt, and kill, he was called also Phaeton
and Phoebus; from his brightness and light* Delius, from manifesting or
revealing all things, therefore was held the god of divination. He was named
Loxias, to show his oblique motion in the ^^liptick. He is called by
Callimachus (...)* abounding in Gold, because Gold is generated by his
influence, and his beams represent Gold in their color, for this cause, his
Garments, his Harp, his Quiver, Ar^ows, and Shoes, are by the Poets said to be
all of Gold. The Sun was also called Adonis, Adonis, the sun.
which in the Ph^nician tongue signifies a Lord, for he is the Lord of this
inferior world, and of the Stars too, by imparting light to them. This Adonis
was said to be killed by a Boar* and to converse six months with Proserpina,
i^ being dead under the Earth, for which he was bewailed by the Women: but the
other six months he revived again, and conversed above with Venus; which
turned the Women's sorrow into joy. By this was meant, that the Sun in the six
Southern signs seems to dye, and to be killed by the wild Boar, that is, by
the Winter; for that beast delights most in cold Countries, and proves best in
the Winter. By Proserpina is meant the inferior Hemispere; and by Venus the
superior, with whom Adonis or the Sun converseth, whilst he is in the six
Northerly signs. This Adonis, is that Thammuz, Ezech. 8. 14. (as S. Hierom
thinks) for whom the Women did mourn. But at his return the Alexandrians, sent
by Sea to the mourning Women at Byblu^, letters shut up within a vessel of
Bull-rushes, to signify that Adonis or Thammuz was returned, and that
therefore they should rejoice: of this custom speaks Procopius, Gazaeus,
Cyril, in Esaiam c. 18. 2. as some think, and so Orpheus in Hy^. by Adonis,
understands the Sun, ^s may be seen in this verse.

(...).

That is, Th^^ who art sometimes extinct, and shi^^^ again in the beautfull
cir^li^g hou^. The Sun also is the same with (...), Atys, the sun.
a fair boy beloved of Cy^ele, by which they meant the earth, which is in love
with the Sun, with whose beautiful beams she is comforted. Hi^ they painted
with a Scepter and a Pipe, by that representing his power, by this the harmony
of his motion, or else the whistling of the Winds raised by his heat. His
fest^vals also they celebrated with joy, therefore called (...), about the 22.
of March; because then they perceive, the day to exceed the night in length. By
Osir i^ also the (...) was meant, whose genital^ being cast by Typhon his
brother into the River, were notwithstanding honored by Isis, Priapius, the
sun.
and after by the Greeks, under the name of Phallus, I^biph^llus, and Priapus,
because all se^in^ll virtue proceed^ from the Sun. Saint Hierom, Ruffinus,
(...), and others think, that this was the same Idol, which the M^abiles,
Edomites, and other Gentiles worshipped under the name of Baal-Pe^r. Liber, the
sun.
The Sun also is called Liber by Virgil Ge^^. 1. Because by his light he freeth
men from the fears and dangers of (...) night; so he is called Dion^sius by
Orpheus in H^mnis, (...). He is called Dionysius, because (...) is rolled about
the immense and long Heaven. He was worshipped by the Egyptians, Apis, the sun.
under the name of Api^, and M^evi^, and shape of a Bull or Calf, to show his
strength, and benefits we receive by the Sun, especially in the fruit of our
grounds; therefore the Golden Calf, which the Hebrews did worship in the
Desert, and afterward Jeroboam set up, signified nothing else but the Sun, who
was also worshipped under the name of Serapis, a^ his Image shows; which was
made of Gold and Silver, with beams, and painted over with blew, to show that
the Sun at his rising and falling looks like Gold, but in his Meridian blew,
and like Silver, and so he is called (...); the glittering light of the Sun. So
in Hebrew he is called Acha^, that is, One; as being the sole light and beauty
of the world. And so may that place of Esaias, c. 66. 17. be understood* They
purify and sanctify themselves in Gardens behind (...), that is, behind the
Image of the Sun, which there is called Ach^d, One. Of this opinion is Joseph
Scaliger, in (...) ad fragment. Grec. Veter* de Di^s Germ. c. 4. and Eli^^
Schedius; save only that they speak of the Temple behind which they purified
themselves, but I think rather, it was the Image of the Sun, which they had in
their Gardens; for it is unlikely that the Temples of the Sun were built in
Gardens. Moloch, the sun
Moloch also was the Sun; for he is Melech, that is, King of the world, to
whose fight and power all things are obvious; therefore the Egyptians
represented him by a Scepter, with an eye on it: now this Moloch had on his
forehead a precious stone shining like Lucifer, or the Sun, (...), says
Theophylact. in Act^ c. 7. and Cyril upon Am^s. The Valentinian Heretics,
Abraxas, the sun.
by the word Abraxas, meant the Sun, as I have showed; for in this word are
contained 365. which is the number of days the Sun makes in the Zodiac: And
it is derived from Abr^ch. Ab in Hebrew signifies Father; and Rech, King, in
the (...) tongue. So they made the Sun, Father and ^ing of the Universe, he was
also called Mithres, which signifies Lord, as Joseph Scaliger de ^mend. temp.
l. 6. shows, and ^l^ndian in tha^ verse l. 1. de ^^ilic.

Et vagae testatur volventem ^idera Mithram.

For they thought that Mithra, Mithra, the sun
or the Sun did regulate, and govern the other stars; and in the word (...)
is found the number of 365. days. The Sun also was expressed by the name of
Jupiter, Jupiter, the sun
or juvans pater, the Father that helps and supports all things: therefore he
was painted with Jupiters Thunder in his hand. I know Jupiter is most commonly
taken for the Heaven or Air; but I rather think that by this name was meant
the Sun. So when Virgil, Ecl. 7. speaks thus:

Jupiter and largo de scendit pl^rimus imbre.

He means not that the Heaven comes down in rain, but the Sun rather, who by
his heat elevated the vapors, and by resolving them into rain, may be said to
come down in a shower. So in another place, F^cundis imbribus ether conj^gis
in laetae gremium descendit, Geor. 2. There is also meant the Sun, who is named
Ether, from (...) shining, or from (...) his constant race or motion. Mercury,
the sun.
By Mercury also was meant the Sun; for he is Mercurius, quasi ^edius curre^s,
keeping his Court in the midst of the Planets. And Hermes from (...)
interpreting* for by his light he expounds all da^k places. He was painted
with wings, to show the Suns swift motion. He killed many-eyed Argus, that is,
he puts out the light of the Stars, which are as it were, the eyes of Heaven.
Mercury is still painted young, to show that the Sun never grows old or
feeble: he was pictured with three heads upon a four corner stone, to show the
Suns three virtues, of heat, light and influence upon the four parts of the
world, or four seasons of the year. He was held the god of Merchants, because
without light there can be no trading. The Sun also was worshipped by the
Eastern Nations, under the name of Bell, Bell, etc. the sun.
Baal, Belus, and Baal Samen, or Baal-Shammajim, that is, Lord of the heavens;
and by the old Cel^es and No^icks, under the name of Belenus; now Belus, as
Macrobius Sat. l. 1. ^. 19. shows us is the same that Jupiter, and Jupiter is
the same that Sol, as I have said, and which Orpheus in Him. ad Iovem
confirms, (...), etc. that is, ^eautifull Jupiter the Sun, generator of all
things; therefore the Sun is called by Plato in Phaedro, (...), etc. Jupiter
the great Commander^^ heaven driving his swift Chariot, whom the Army of gods
follow divided into twelve parts, and Vesta alone stands immovable in the
Court of the gods: he means the motion of the Sun and Stars, through the 12.
signs of the Zodiac, and the Earth standing in the middle. That under the
name of Belenus was meant the Sun, Belenus, the sun
is apparent by the number of 365. which is found in the letters thereof,
answering the 365. days, which the Sun finisheth in his annual motion.
Hercules, the same with the sun.
By Hercules also* was meant the Sun, as his name shows, being (...), the
glory of the air; his twelve labors are the twelve signs of the Zodiac,
through which he labors every year; he is called Alcides, from (...),
strength; for like a strong giant, he rejoices to run his cou^^e: Juno
endeavored to obscure the glory of Hercules, so does the Air, which the Poets
called Juno, oftentimes obscure by clouds, mists and vapors, the glory of the
Sun. Hebe, the Goddess of Youth, was Hercules his best beloved; so is the
Springtime, wherein in the youth of the earth is renewed, the Suns lovely
wife. Hercules overthrew Geryon, and rescued his Cattle; so does the Sun by
destroying Winter, preserve the beasts. The Tenths of the Earths increase were
offered to Hercules, to show their gratitude to the Sun for his heat and
influence, by which the earth ^ructifieth. Hercules is noted for his fecundity;
for in one night he begot 80 sons: this was to show that generation and
fruitfulness is from the Sun: he was called (...), the driver away of all
evils and diseases, by which was meant, that grief of mind is driven away by
the Suns light, and infirmities of body by the Suns heat: he is also much
noted for his voracity in eating and drinking; by which was signified the rapid
heat of the Sun, consuming the moisture of the earth, and exhaling the Lakes,
and Brooks. In the name also (...) is contained the number of 365; he was
expressed also by Antaeus the giant, whose strength increased as he touched the
ground, but being lifted up from thence, he grew weak; so does the sun begin to
gather force when he is in his lowest declination, and near the earth; but when
he is in his Apogaeum or highest elevation, his strength begins to decay. Pan,
the sun.
Pan also signified the Sun, whom they painted with a red face, horns, and a
long beard, to show the color and beams of the Sun. Pan was covered with a
spotted skin; so is the Sun covered in the dark, with the sported or starry
mantle of the night; his wings and crooked staff was to signify the Suns
swiftness, and oblique motion in the Zodiac: he was the god of shepherds, and
driver away of wolves; therefore called Lycaeus, and so was Jupiter; the Sun by
his heat and light is a friend to shepherds and their flocks, who by his
presence drives wolves, and other wild beasts into their dens: the perpetual
fire kept by the Arcadians in the Temple of Pan, was to show that the Sun was
the fountain of heat, which stirs up Venery; therefore Pan is described by his
salacious nature: the suns monthly conjunction with the Moon was expressed
by Pan, being in love with the Moon. They meant also the sun by Bellerephon;
who by the help of winged Pegasus overcame Chimaera; for the sun by the help of
the winds overcomes the pestilentiall and infectious vapors of the air. By
Polyphemus also, Polyphemus, the sun.
they meant the sun; which (...) that great giant with one eye, put out
sometimes by mists and vapors arising out of the earth. Endymion, the sun.
Endymion was the sun, with whom the Moon is in love, visiting him once every
month. Ianus, the sun.
Ianus also was the Sun, who is keeper of the four doors of Heaven (to wit
East, West, North, and South;) he has two faces, seeing as well backward, as
forward; in one hand he has a Scepter, in the other a Key, to show that he
rules the day: and that he opens it to us in the morning, and shuts it in the
Evening. Ianus was the first that taugh^ men Religion, and, doubtless, men
became Religious, and did acknowledge a Deity, by beholding the Beauty, Motion,
Power and Influence of the Sun. By Ianus was placed a Serpent biting his
tail, intimating, that the suns annual motion is circular, beginning where
it ends, atque in se sua per vestigia labitur annus. By Minerva also was meant
the sun, Minerva, the sun.
as appears by the golden Lamp dedicated to her at Athens, in which burned a
perpetual light maintained with oil; which not only shows the suns golden
beams, and inextinguishible light, but also that oil, as all other fruits, are
begot by his hea^; for the same cause she was the inventer of Arts and
sciences, and held the Goddess of Wisdom and Learning; for by the moderate
heat of the sun, the organs of the brain are so tempered, and the spirits
refined, that all Arts by men of such temper have been found, and wise actions
performed: she had a golden Helmet, and a round Target, the one signifying the
color, the other the orb of the Sun, the Dragon dedicated to her, signified
the suns piercing eye, as the Cock, was dedicated to Minerva, so he was to
the sun, to show, that by these two names, one Deity was meant: no man could
look upon her Target, having Gorg^ns head in it, without danger; nor may any
without danger of his eyes, look upon the sun. The Athenians preferred
Minerva to Nept^^e, because the benefits men have by the Sun, are greater
than those they have by the Sea, and that hot and dry Constitutions are fitter
to make Scholars, than cold and moist: for the fire, which Prometheus stole
from the sun, brought Arts to perfection. The Image of Pallas was kept in
Vesta's Temple, Pallas, the sun.
where the sacred fire burned perpetually, to show, that the sun, the
^ou^tain of heat and light, is the same that Minerva, who was called Pallas
from (...), to signify the shaking and brandishing of the Sun beams, expressed
also by the brandishing of the spear. She had power to use Jupiters thunder,
and to raise storms, to show that thunder and storms are caused by the Suns
heat* she and Vulcan, Vulcan, the sun
the god of Fire, were worshipped on the same Altar, to show, these two were
but one Deity, to wit, the Sun, who is the god of Fire, which Homer also
expressed, by giving her a fiery Chariot, and a golden Lamp, holding out a
beautiful light, she made her self invisible, by putting on the dark helmet of
Orcus; so is the Sun to us, when he is covered with mists, clouds, and
vapors, which arise from Orcus, or the lowe^ parts of the earth; and so he is
invisible to us, when he goes under Orcus, or our h^misphere. Nemesis, the sun.
By Nemesis, the Goddess of Revenge, was also meant the Sun; for he punishes
the sins of men, by pestilence, famine, and the sword; for he, by his heat
either raises infectious vapors, or inflameth the blood, burns up the fruits
of the earth, and stirs up the spirits of men to strife and Wa^^es: as
Nemesis raised the humble, and humbled the proud, so does the Sun obscure lucid
bodies, and illustrate obscure things. The A^gyptians to show, that the Sun and
Nemesis were the same, they placed her above the Moon. Tithonus, the sun,
By beautiful Tithonus also they meant the Sun, who is the beauty of the
world; Aurora was in love with him, and rejoiced at his presence; it is the
approach of the Sun, that gives beauty, lovelynesse, and cheerfulness to the
morning. Tithonus in Aurora's Chariot, was carried to Ethiopia, where he
begets black Memno^ of her; to show that the Sun in the morning, having mounted
above our Hemisphere, moves toward the South parts of the world, where by his
excessive heat in the Meridian, he ^awns or blacks the Ethiopians, Tithonus, in
his old age became a weak grasshopper, so, in the Evening, the light and heat of
the Sun weakneth and decays to us. By Castor and Pollu^, they signified the
Sun and Moon; the one, that is, the Sun, being a Champi^^, subdueth all things
with his heat; the other, to wit the Moon, is a rider, if we consider the
swiftness of its motion: they may be said to divide immortality between them;
because when the one lives, that is, shines, the other is obscured, and, in a
manner dead to us: they ride on white horses, to show their light and motion.
They that will see more of the Sun, let them read what we have written
elsewhere in Mystagog. P^e^ico. But besides what we have written there, we now
make it appear, that the Sun was in a manner the only Deity they worshipped:
for the hono^r they gave the Moon, Fire, Stars, Air, Earth, and Sea, was all in
relation to the Sun, as they are subservient to him; and the many names they
gave to the Moon, as Minerva, Vesta, Urania, Luna, Juno, Diana, Isis, Lucina,
Hecate, Cybele, Astarte, Erthus, were only to signify the different
operations of the Sun by the Moon; so that as Aristotle de mundo says, (...)
God being One, has many names, from his many effects, which he produces in
the world.

The Sun then in regard of the seminall virtue, generative faculty, and desire
of procreation, which he gives to sublunary creatures, for eternizing of their
several species, Venus, the sun.
is called Venus a venis from the veins and arteries, (for these also were
anciently called veins) in which are the blood and vital spirits, the proper
vehicles of Venus, or the seminal virtue, and of which the seed of generation
is begot; which the Prince of Poets knew, when he said of Dido's Venereal love:
Vulnus alit venis. Every Spring when the sun returns to us, he brings this
venereal faculty with him; therefore, he may be called Venus, a veniendo, from
coming; for he comes accompanied every year in the spring with this generative
desire, which he infuseth in the creatures; which the same learned Poet, Geor.
l. 2. acknowledges in these divine Verses:

Ver adeo ^r^ndi nemorum, ver utile silvis.
Ve^e tument terrae, and genitalia semina poscunt,
Tum Pater omnipotens foe^undis imbribus ^ther
Conjugis in gremium laetae descendit, and omnes
Magnus alit magno commistus corpore foetus.
Avia tum resonant avibus virgulta canoris,
Et Venerem certis repet unt ^rmenta diebus.
Parturit omnis ager, etc. --
And in another place Geor. 3. he shows the reason why in the spring, living
creatures are more prone to venery, because the Sun infuseth then a moderate
heat into the body. Vere magis, quia vere calor ^edit ossibus, etc. This
venereal desire is by the Poets called Urania, and Olympia, because it proceeds
from heaven, namely from the Sun, the chief ruler in heaven. And to show that
by Venus, they meant the Sun, as he is the God of love, they speak of her in
the Masculine Gender, so does Virgil Aen. 2. descendo, ac ducente Deo flammam
inter and hosts. They paint her with a beard, hence Venns barbata, to show the
sunne-beams. They gave her the Epithets of the Sun, in calling her golden
Venus, so does Virgil Aen. 10. Venus aurea, and by the Greek Poets (...), and
by the Eastern people she was called Baa^eth Shammajim, the ruler of Heaven,
and (...), Phosphorus or Lucifer from the light of the sun; which Venus or
the Moon borrows. So what Orpheus in Hymnis speaks of Venus, is to be
understood of the sun: (...), that is, thou procreates all things in Heaven,
in the fruitful earth, and in the sea or depth. She is called (...), fair
haired, to show the beauty of the sunne-beams: And Euripides in Phoeniss. gives
her (...), a golden circled light. by Cupid also was meant the sun, who was
painted young, with wings, crowned with Roses, and naked, to show the eternity,
swiftnes, color, and native beauty of that great Luminary; who may be called
the god of love, in that by his heat he excites love in all living creatures,
Moon, the same Luminary with the sun
as is already said. By Luna or the Moon, they understood the sun; for though
these be two different Planets, yet in effect they are but one Luminary; for
the Moon has her light from the sun; therefore she is called sometimes the
sister, sometimes the daughter of Phoebus; she is painted with a Torch, and
Arrows, and with Wings, to signify her motion, and that her light and
operations are originally from the sun. As the Hawk was dedicated to the sun,
because of her high flying and quick fight, so the Moon was represented by a
white skinned man with an Hawks head; for her whiteness is not from her self*
but from the Hawks head, that is, the sun. Moon, her properties.
They held her to be both male and female* to show, that she is the sun in
acting, the Moon in suffering; she receives her light and power from the sun,
in this she is passive: she imparts this light and power to the inferior world,
in this she is active: she is called Lucina also from this borrowed light, and
Diana from the divine qualities thereof; for which cause Diana was held to be
the sister of Phoebus: and Juno from helping; she was painted with beams about
her face, sitting upon Lions with a scepter in her hand, by which was meant the
Dominion she has received from the sun; and whereas they made the rain bow to
attend upon Juno, they meant hereby that the sun makes the rainbow; therefore
by Juno they meant the sun. So when they make Vulcan the son of Juno, they
understand the sun, for he by his heat causes fire, and not the Moon. And so
Mars the god of fire, is said to be Juno's son, that is, the sun, for it is he
that inflameth men's bloods, and not the Moon. They expressed the power of the
sun over the sea and other waters by the names of Neptune, N^r^us, Glaucus,
Triton, and other sea Deities. When they would express his operations on the
earth, they gave him the names of Vesta, ^ybele, Bona dea, etc: when they would
show his power under the Earth, then they used the names of Orcus, Pluto,
Pluto, the sun.
Proserpina, Charon, Cerberus, etc. Orcus is from (...) an oath, because they
used to swear by the sun: E^to mi sol testis ad haec, and conscia Juno, Aen.
12. and in another place, Aen. 4. Sol qui terrarum flammis opera omnia lustras:
Pluto is from (...) wealth, for all wealth, both upon and within the earth, is
begot of the suns heat and influence. When he is under our Hemisphere, he is
called the god of hell, he is said to ravish Proserpina, Prosepina, the sun.
that is, the seminal virtue of vegetables, which in the Winter and the sun's
absence, lies hid in the bowels of the Earth, his influence upon the corn, and
other seeds cast into the Earrh, and causing them proserpere to creep out,
thence is called Proserpina. Charon is from (...) joy; Charon, the sun
the sun is joyful to us by his presence, and as he is Phoebus or light of the
world; he is also joyful to us by his absence, and as he is Charon under the
earth, for then he permits the air to receive refrigeration, by which all
things are refreshed. Cerberus is as much as (...) a flesh eater, Cerberus, the
sun.
for a^ all flesh is generated by the Sun, so is all flesh consumed by the
same. Cerberus had three heads, to show that time which devoureth all things
has three heads, one present, the other past, and the third to come, now the
Sun by his motion is the measurer of time, in which respect he is called
Cerberus: and so he was represented by Saturn, cutting down all things with his
^ickle; for all things are consumed by time. Tempus ^dax rerum, tuque invidiosa
vetustas omnia dellruitis.

By what we have said, Gentiles, acknowledge but one Deity.
appears that the wise Gentiles did acknowledge but one Deity, giving him
diverse names, from his diverse effects and operations. This Deity was nothing
else but the Sun, as we have showed; whose power is diffused every where, and
nothing, as David says, is hid from the heat thereof: Iovis omnia plena says
Virgil, Ecl. 3, all things are filled with Iup^ter: and elsewhere he sing^
G^or. 4. that God runs through all the parts of the earth, of the sea, and of
the heaven: Deum namque ire per omnes terrasque, tractusque maris, coelumque
profundum, Aen. 6. And in his Divine Poem he sings that this spirit, (for so he
calls the Sun, and so did Solomon before him in the first of Ecclesiastes)
cherishes Heaven, Earth, Sea, Moon, and Stars, and that he diffuseth himself
through all parts of the world, and produces Men, Beasts, Birds, Fishes, which
he animates and foments.

Principio coelum, at terram camposque liquentes
Lu^entemque glo^um L^nae, Titaniaque astra
Spiritus intus alit, totamque infusa per artus
Men's agitat molem, and magno so corpore ^iscet;
Inde hominum, pecudumque genus vit^que (...),
Et quae mar^^reo ^ert monstra sub aequ^re P^ntus
Igneu^ est ollis vigor and ^oelest^ origo, etc.
But here it may be objected, that seeing the Gentiles acknowledged the power
and virtue of the Sun to be every where, why did they devise so many petty
Deities? I answer, this multiplication of Deities was for the satisfaction and
content of the rude people, which could not comprehend, how one and the same
Deity could be diffused through all parts of the Universe; therefore the wiser
sort were forced to devise as many god^, as there were species of things in the
world: And because the ignorant people would worship no Deity, but what they
saw, therefore their Priests were fain to represent those invisible powers by
pictures and images, without which the people thought they could not be safe or
secure, Gentiles, their superstitious fear.
if these gods were not still present with them. They were affected with fear
and joy, according to the absence or presence of their gods: this Virgi^ Ecl.
1. intimates when he says, Nec tam praesentes alibi cognoscere divos. and
elsewhere, Geor. 1. and vos praesentia Numina Fauni: so they held nothing
propitious if their gods had not been present; this made Aenaeas Aen. 3. so
careful to carry his gods about with him, wherever he went; Feror exul in
altum, cum soci^s, natoque, Penatibus, and magnis Di^s. Therefore he foretells
the ruin of Troy, by the departure of her tutelar gods* Excesserg omnes
adytis, arisque relictis Dii, quibus imperium hoc steterat, Aen. 2. Hence such
care was taken by the Grecians^ to steal away the Palladium; the presence of
which made Troy impregnable, as they thought: And the Romans had a custom,
that before they besieged any City, they would first by conjuration or
exorcisme, call out their tutelar gods. Therefore when Carthage was in any
danger of the enemy, the Priests used to bind Apollo their tutelar god to a
pillar, left he should be gone from them. Hence it appears that they were
forced to have Deities in every place: at home they had their Lares and
Penates, Gentiles, their Deities under diverse names.
in the fields they had their Ceres, Pales, Bacchus, Pan Sylvanus, Fauni, etc,
At sea they had their Neptune, Trit^n, Glaueus: in their Harbors they had
Portunus, besides that, every ship had its tutelar god set in the stern
thereof: Aurato praefulget Apolline puppis Aen. 10. The Woods had their
Dryades: the Trees Hamadryades; the Flowers, Napa^: the Hills, Orcades: The
Rivers, Naiades: the Lakes, Li^^eades: the Fountains, E^hydriades: and the Sea,
Nereides. But notwithstanding this multiplicity, the wiser sort acknowledged
but one Dei^y, as may be seen in Orpheus, who thus sings.

(...).

That is, He is only one, begot of himself, and of hi^ alone are all things
begot. So elsewhere:

(...)

That is, Jupiter was the first, and Jupiter is the last thunderer, Gentiles
acknowledged one God.
Jupiter is the head, Jupiter is the middle, from Jupiter alone are all things.
There is but one power, one God the great Lord of all things. Trismegistus
confesses there is but one divine nature, (...). In defense of this truth,
Socrates died, when he was forced to drink poison for affirming there was but
one God. And D^agoras laughed at the multiplicity of gods, and at the
simplicity of those who held the wooden Image of Hercules a god, therefore in
derision he flung it in the fire, saying, thou have served Euristheus in 12.
labors, thou must serve me in this thirteenth. The S^bils in their verses
prove the same, that there is but one God, (...): that is, There is one God*
who alone (...) ^^mense and ingenerable. And again: (...): I alone am God, and
besides me there is no other God. So H^race, Divosque mortalesque turmas
imperio regit ^eus aequo: He alone rules ^a just^ce all things. I could
allege many testimonies out of the Greek and Latin Poets: out of the
Philosophers also, to prove that the Gentiles did acknowledge but one Deity,
howsoever they gave him many names, besides their practice in uniting all the
gods in one, by dedicating the Pantheon to them; intimating, that as all the
gods were united in one Temple, so they were indeed but one in essence: the
Altar also at Athens, erected to the unknown God, does confirm the same. But
this task has been already performed by S. Austin, Lac^antius, Eusebius^, and
other an^ient Doctors of the Church, besides what has been written of later
years, by Philip Morney, ^lias Sch^dius, and others, who also allege many
testimonies, that the Gentiles were not ignorant of the Trinity of Persons,
Gentiles acknowledged^ Trinity.
as well as of the Unity of Essence, which was the Pythagorean Quaternity,
wherein they held all perfection consisted. Hence they used to swear by (...),
that is, Quaternity, which they called (...), The fountain of perpe^ual nature,
and this doubtless was the same with (...), the Hebrew name of God (...) which
connsteth of 4. letters; and so does the Greek (...)* the Latin Deus* the
Italians, French, and Spaniards express the same name in four letters, so did
the ancient Germans in their word Diet, the S^lav^nian Buch, the Panonian Is^u,
the Polonian Buog, and the Arabian Alla, are all of four letters; and so is the
name Jesus, which was given to Christ by the Angel. The Egyptians expressed God
by the word Te^^. The Persians by Sire, and the Magi by Orsi: all intimating
this Quaternity, or T^ini^^ in Unity. So the Greeks expressed their chief God
foreign, and the Egyptians their I^is, and the Romans their Mars, and the
ancient Celtes their Thau* and the Egyptians their Orus, by which they meant
the sun in four letters: and perhaps they meant this Quaternity, when they gave
the sun four horses, and four ears, and placed four pitchers at his feet. And
it may be that the Queen of Cities, and Lady of the World, understanding the
mystery of this Quaternity, would not have her own name Roma, to exceed or come
short of four letters. So Adon and Bael signified the sun.

Now having showed that the sun was the only Deity the Gentiles worshipped
under diverse names; in whom likewise they acknowledged a Trinity, though not of
persons, yet of Powers, or virtues; to wit of light, hear, and influence; so
the o^b* beams, and light, are the same sun in substance. Superstitious
Sun-worship.
I should now show how superstitious they were in their sun-worship; some
offering Horses, and Charriots to him, which the Jews also sometimes did;
others used to kneel to him at his rising; the Ma^^age^s were wont to sacrifice
Horses to him; the Chinois and other Indians honor him with ^inging of Verses,
calling him the Father of the Stars, and the Moon their Mother; the Americans
of Peru and Mexico adored the sun by holding up their hand, and making a sound
with their mouth, as if they had kissed: of this custom^ we read in Ioh 31. 26.
If I have kissed my hand beh^lding the sun, etc. the Rhodians honored him with
their great Colossus; and many Barbarous Nations did sacrifice men and children
to him; such were the sacrifices offered to Moloch, by whom they meant the sun;
the Gentiles also to show their devotion to the sun, used to wear his colors,
and to prefer the red or purple, the golden or deep yellow, to all other
colors, hence the Germans, as Diodor Sic^. l. 5. Biblio. shows; caesariem
non modo fifta^t (...), sed art quoque nativam coloris proprietatem angere
student; they used to make their hairs red by art, if they were not red enough
by nature: of this custom of painting or dying the hairs red, Martial speaks,
showing that they used some hot medicaments; C^^stica Tcutonicos accendit spuma
capiltos.

This red color says Clemens Alexandrinus l 3. Paedag. c. 3. was used to make
them the more terrible to their enemy, for it resembles blood (...): I deny
not this reason, out I believe they had a tu^ther aim* for they thought
themselves safe, and under the suns protection, if they wore his colors; and
because the sunne-beams look sometimes yellow and like Gold, colors of the Sun
worn.
therefore hair of this color was of greatest account; hence Virgil Aer. 4.
gives yellow hairs to Queen Dido, as Flaventesque abscissac^mas, and again,
Nec-dum ill^ flavum Proserpi^a vertice erinem

Abstulerat: Ibid. So likewise he gives yellow hairs to Mercury, by whom as we
have said, was meant the sun; Omnia Mercurio similis, vocemque, coloremque,
Et crines flavos and membra decora j^ventae.
Ibid. Tertullian shows, that the women of his time used to dye their hairs
with ^affron, Capillos croco vertunt, to make them look like the flame, or
Sunnebeams; and so the Bride always wore a vail called Flammeum, of a red or
fir^-colour; and so Flamminica the wife of the Priest called Flamen, wore
always such a vail, as resembling the color of the Sun, whereof her husband
was Priest, but S. Hierom forbids Christian women to dye their hair of this
color, as resembling the fire of hell, Ne capillos i^ruses, and ei aliquid de
gehenne ignilus aspergas: the Athenia^s, to show how much they honored Apollo,
by whom they meant the Sun, used to wear in their hairs golden pictures of
grasshoppers; for these creatures were dedicated to the Sun:(...) (...), as the
Scholiast of Aristophanes witnesses, and so does Thucydides. Julius
Capitolinus in Ver^, affirms of Verus, that to make his hairs look the
yellower, and that it might glitter like the Sun, he used to besprinkle them
with gold dust; Tantam habuit curam capillorum flavorum, ut and capiti aur^
ramenta ^^s^ergeret, quo magis coma illuminata slavesceret: and because these
two colors of yellow and red were sacred to the sun, hence Kings and Priests
were wont to be adorned with these two colors; for Kings and Priests have been
held the great Luminaries within their Do^^inions; therefore they shined with
artificial ornaments, as the sun does with his native: hence Q. Did^ by the
Poet, Aen. 4. is painted with gold and scarlet; Cui pharetra ex auro, cri^es
nodantur in aurum;
Aurea purpuream subnectit fibula ves^em:
so elsewhere Aen. 11. he describes the ornaments of Chlorus the Priest, of
gold and scarlet also;
Ipse peregrina ferugine clarus and ostro
Spicula torquebat Tyrio Cortynia cornu.
Aureus ex b^^meris sonat arcus, and aurea vati
Cassida: tum croceam ^blamydemque sin^sque crepante^
Carbaseos fulv^ in nodum collegerat (...).
The Priest is commanded to cover himself with scarlet whilst he is
sacrificing;

Purpureo velare comas adopertus amictu, Aen. 3. it was also a part of
sun-worship to erect high Altars, and to sacrifice to him under the name of
Jupiter upon the highest hills, because they thought it fit, that he, who was
the chief God, should be worshipped on the chief places, and the highest in
dignity, should be honored on the highest places of situation, hence he was
named (...), Jupiter on the mountains; of these high places, we read in
Scripture; they used also to the honor of the sun, to build their Temples and
erect their Altars toward the East. Illi ad surgentem conversi ^umina solemn:
and elsewhere, Aen. 12.
-- aetherei spectans orientia solis
Lumina, vite cavis undam de flumine palmis


sustul^t -- and to show the suns inextinguishible light and heat, they used to
maintain a perpetual fire upon their Altars; whence they were called are, ab
arde^do: for the same cause both the Persian Kings and Roman Emperous used to
have the sacred fire carried in great solemnity before them, by this,
intimating how careful they were to maintain the worship of the sun, and so
supersitious were the Gentiles in advancing of this sun-worship, that they
spared not to sacrifice their children to Meloch, which was nothing else but
the sun: this was a preposterous zeal; for that glorious Lamp required no such
Sacrifice at their hands, though he be the cause of generation; he gave life to
their children by his influence, but they had no warrant from him to use
violence, or to destroy that nature by Elementary fire, which he by celestial
fire did animate. The milder sort of them were content to let their sons and
daughters pass through the fire, or between two fires, as some will have it,
which was their Purgatory, though some were so bold as to run through the fire,
and tread with their naked feet upon the burning coals without hurt, which
might be done without miracle, as we have showed elsewhere, Arcan* Microcos, of
this custom the Poet Aentid. 11. speaks; Sum Deum, sancti custos Soractis
Apollo,
Quem primi colimus, cui pineus ardor acerv^
Nascitur, and medium freti pictate per ignem
Cultores multa premimus vestigia pruna.
Lastly, as the sun by the Asians, and Africans was described under diverse
shapes, according to his diverse effects and operations, so was he also
expressed in the Northern part of the Europaean world, Sun, how painted and
worshipped by the Northern Nations.
as he is the measurer of time, and cause of different seasons; namely of
summer and winter, of seed-time and harvest: they described him like an old man
standing on a fish, wearing a coat girt to his body with a liunen girdle, but
bareheaded and barefooted, holding a wheel, and a basket full of corn, fruit,
and roses; by his old age and coat girt to him, was signified winter; by his
naked head and feet, summer; by the corn and fruits, Harvest; and by the roses,
the spring; his standing on a Fish, which is slipperie and swift in its motion,
and silent withal, showed the slipperinesse and swiftness of time, which
passes (...) without noise, -- ^ulloque s^n^ co^vertitur (...). and old age
comes tacito pede, with a silent foot: the wheel signified the roundnesse of
the Sun, and the running about of the year* and the linen girdle might
signify the Zodiac or Ecliptic line, within which the Sun contains
himself* I think this may be the genuine meaning of that Saxon Idol, which by
them was called Crodo, which Schedius de D^^s Germanis* thinks to be Saturn,
and does otherwise interpret it: when they did express the Sun as King of the
Planers, and chief Ruler of the world, they painted him sitting on a throne,
holding a scepter in his left hand, and a sword in the right; out of the right
side of his mouth came out thunder; out of the left, lightning: on his head
^ate an Eagle; under his feet was a Dragon; and round about him sat 12 gods;
the Throne, Scepter and Sword may signify the Majesty and power of the Sun,
who by his heat causes thunder and lightning; the Eagle shows the swiftness
of his motion, and his piercing eye, as discovering all things by his light,
his treading on the Dragon may show, that he by his heat, subdueth the
f^rercest creatures, and most pestiferous vapors; the 12. gods may signify
the 12. signs in the Zodiac, or 12. months of the year: when they did
express the heat, light and motion of the Sun, they painted him like a man,
holding with both his hands a flaming wheel: when they did represent the
martial courage, and military heat of soldiers, excited in their hearts by
the heat of the Sun, they set him out like an armed man, holding a banner in
one hand with a rose in it, in the other a pair of scales; on his breast was
the picture of a bear, on his target a lion; the field about him full of
flowers, by which they signified valor and eloquence, both requisite in a
Commander; the arms, bear and lion were to show the fierceness, courage and
defense, that is, or ought to be in military men; the rose and flowery field,
did represent the sweetness and delight of eloquence; the scales were to show,
how words should be weighed in the balance of discretion, before they be
uttered: when they expressed how the sun by his heat and influence, stirs up
Venereal love in living creatures, they painted him like a woman, for that
passion is most impotent in that sex; on her head she wore a myrtle garland, to
show she is a Queen, and that love should be always green, sweet and pleasant
as the Myrtle; in one hand she holds the world* in the other three golden
Apples, to show that the world is upheld by love, and so is the riches thereof;
the three golden apples also signified the threefold beauty of the Sun, to wit
the Morning, Meridian and Evening; in her breast she had a burning torch, to
show both the heat and light of the Sun, and the fire of love which burns in
the breast; Ardet in ossibus ignis; caco carpitur igne.
Vul^us alit venis, est m^llis ^lamma medullas.
Ardet amans Did^, trax^tque per ossa furorem, Virg. when they did express the
Suns operation upon the Moon, they painted him like a man with long ears,
holding the Moon in his hands, to show that she receives her light and power
from him; his long ears I think did signify his readiness to hear the
supplications of all men, though never so far distant. These interpreatations,
I suppose are most likely to be consonant to the meaning of those, who first
devised those Images or Idols, though the Saxon Chroniclers, Albertus,
Crantzius, Saxo-Grammaticus, Munster, Sch^di^s, and others, do think these
Images were erected to the memory of some German Princes or Commanders: but it
is unlikely, that the Germans, who were as Tacitus says, such great adorers of
the Sun and Stars, would give that worship to dead men's statues, Caesar lib. 6.
de bell. Gal. tells us, that the Germans only worshipped for gods those which
they saw, and received help from, as the sun, Moon, and fire, other gods they
never heard of: but of the Europaean Idolatries, we have spoken more fully
before.

Q. 11. what has been the chief supporter of all Religions at all times?

A. The honor, Religion how supported.
maintenance, and advancement of the Priesthood; for so long as this is in
esteem, so long is Religion in request; if they be slighted, Religion also
becomes contemptible. Priests their dignity and necessity.
Whereupon follows Atheism, and Anarchy; which wise States considering, have
been careful in all ages to maintain, reverence, and advance the Ministers of
Religion; for if there be not power, maintenance, and respect given to the
public Ministers of Stat^, all government and obedience must needs fail; the
like will fall out in the ^ Church, if the Priesthood be neglected. Therefore
among the Jews, we read what large maintenance was allowed to the Priests and
Levites; how they were honored and reverenced by the people; and how the high
Priest had no less, or rather more honor than the Prince, the one being
honored with a Mitre, as the other with a Crown, and both anointed with
precious oil. Dignity of Priests among the Greeks.
Among the Gentiles, we find that the Priesthood was in such esteem, that the
Prince would be honored both by the Priests office and name; as we read of
Metc^ised^^h King of Sal^m, and Priest of the most High God: Numa was both King
and Priest: so was Anius in the Poet* Rex Anius, Rex idem hominum Phoebique
sacerdos. Augustus and the other Roman Emperors held it no less honor to be
styled Ponti^^ces Max^mi, H^gh Priests, than to be called Emperors: For this
cause Priests wore Crowns or Garlands, as well as the Emperors. Some were
crowned with Bays, as the Priests of Apollo; some with Poplar leaves, as the
Priests of Hercules; some with Myrtle; some with Ivy; some with Oaken leaves,
etc. All Priests among the Romans, Dignity of Priests among the Romans, etc.
were exempted from Taxes, Wars and secular employments. The High Priest at
Rome, as Dionysius witnesses l. 2. had in some respects more Privilege than
the Emperor, and was not to give any ac^ount of his actions to people and
senate. And Cicero in orat. pr^ domo ad Po^tif^^s*. does acknowledge that the
whole dignity of the State, the safety, life and liberty of all men: and the
Religion of the gods depended from the High Priests. The great King of the
Abyssins, at this day will he called Prester, or Priest John* though I know
some deny this. Among the Mahume^ans none of the Musalmans, or true believers,
as they call themselves, must take upon him the title of Lord, but the Calipha,
or High Priest only: and to offer the least wrong to the meanest Priest, is
there a heinous and punishable crime. The Priests of Mars, called Salii, among
the Romans, were in such honor, that none was admitted to this dignity, but he
that was Patricius, or Nobly born. In Ty^us the Priests of Hercules were
attired in Purple; and had the next place to the King. In old time among the
Germans, none had power to punish offe^ders, but the Priests. The T^allii
honored none with the Privilege of a Palace, but the King and Chief Priest.
Among the Egyptians none were Priests but Philosophers; and none chosen King,
but out of the Priesthood. Mercury was called Trismegistus because he bore
three great Offices, to wit, of a Philosopher, of a Priest, and of a King.
Among the Phoenicians the Priests of the S^n had the honor to wear a long robe
of Gold and Purple; and on his head a Crown of Gold beset with Jewels. The
ancient Greeks also privileged their Priests to wear Crowns, whence they were
called (...); in Rome the Flamen Dialis or Jupiters Priest, had this honor,
that his bare word had the force of an Oath; and his presence was in stead of a
Sanctuary, if any guilty person had fled to him, he was free that day from any
punishment. He had power to exercise Consular authority, and to wear Consular
garments; and whereas none had the Honor to ascend the Capitol in a Sedan or
Litter, save only the Pontise^ and Priests, we see in what reverend esteem
they were in old Rome* and no less honor, but rather more, the Priests and
Bishops of modern Rome have received from Christian Princes. Among the Jews we
find that Eli and Samuel were both Priests and Judges: the Levites were as
Justices, and by their word used to end all strife, Deuteronomy. 21. in David's time
6000 of the Levites were Judges: and after the captivity some of the Priests
were Kings of Iud^, 1. Chrom, 23. in the Christian Church, we see how at all
times the Clergy has been honored; in Scripture they are called Fathers,
Ambassadors, Friends of God, Men of God, Prophets, Angels, etc. Tertullian L.
de poeniten. shows, that in the Primitive Church Penitents used to fall down at
the feer of their Priests; and some write, that they used to kiss their feet.
In what esteem the Bishops of Italy, France. Germany, and Spain are now in, and
in England have been in; is known to all that read the Histories of these
Places. In Moscovia, the Bishops not only are endowed with rich Revenues, but
also with great honors and privileges, and use to ride in rich apparel, and
in great state and magnificence. What respect the Great Turk gives to his
Mufti, or High Priest, and in what esteem he has the Christian Patriarch of
Constantinople, is not unknown to those that have lived there* or read the
History. In a word Religion flourishes and fades with the Priests and
Ministers thereof; it rises and falls, flows and ebbeth as they do; and
with Hippocrates Twins, they live and die together; so long as the G^ntile
Priests had any maintenance and respect left them, so long their superstition
continued in the Empire, even under Christian Emperors; but as soon as
Theodosius took away their maintenance, Gentilisme presently vanished, and went
out like the snuff of a Candle, the tallow or oil being spent.

Q. 12. What Religion is most excellent and to be preferred above all others?

A. The Christian Religion; which may be proved: first from the excellent
doctrines it teaches, Religion which is best.
as that there is a God, that he is but one, most perfect, infinite, eternal,
omniscient, omnipotent, absolutely good, the author of all things, except sin,
which in a manner is nothing; Christianity, its excellency.
the Governor of the world, and of every particular thing in it; that Jesus
Christ the son of God died for our sins, and rose again for our justification,
etc. 2. From the reward it promises, which is not temporal happiness promised
by Moses to the Jews in this life; not sensual and beastly pleasures, promised
by the Gentile-Priests to their people, in their Elysium; and by Mahomet to his
followers in his fools Paradise; but eternal, spiritual, immaculate, and
Heavenly felicity, in the full and perpetual fruition of God, in whose presence
is the fullness of joy, and at his right hand are pleasures for evermore; such
as the eye has not seen, nor the ear heard, and cannot enter into the mind of
man. 3. From teaching the faith of the Resurrection, which none of the Gentiles
did believe, and not many among the Jews, for the Saduces denied it; only
Christianity believes it, being assured, that he, who by his power made the
great world of nothing, is able to remake the little world of something;
neither can that which is possible to nature, prove impossible to the a^thour
of nature: for if the one can produce out of a small seed a great tree, with
leaves, bark, and boug^s: or a butterfly out of a worm, or the beautiful
feathered Peacock out of a misshapen egg: cannot the Almighty out of dust
raise our bodies, who first out of dust made them? 4. No Religion does teach
how God should be worshipped sincerely and purely, but Christianity, for other*
Religions consist most in sacrifices, not of beasts and birds only, but of men
also: likewise in multitudes of unnecessary ceremonies, whereas the Christian
Religion th^weth, that God is a spirit, and will be worshipped in spirit and
truth: That outward Ceremonies are but beggarly rudiments: That he will have
mercy and no^ sacrifice: That the sacrifice of God is a broken and contrite
heart: That he is better pleased with the circumcision of our fleshly lusts,
than of our flesh, with the mortification of the body of sin, than of the body
of nature. He ca^eth not the flesh of Bulls, nor drinks the blood of Goats, but
we must offer to him thanksgiving, and must pay (...) vows. The best keeping of
his Sabbath, is rather to forbear the work^ of sin, than the works of of our
hands: and to wash our hearts in innocence, rather than our hands in water. The
service he expects from us, is the presenting of our bodies ^living sacrifice
and holy, which is our reasonable service. No Religion like this does teach us
the true object of our faith and hope, which is God: of our charity, which is
our neighbor: of temperance, which is our selves: of obedience, which is the
Law: of prayer, which is the Kingdom of Heaven, and the righteousness thereof
in the first place; and then things concerning our worldly affairs in the
second place: no Religion but this, teaches us to deny our selves, to forgive
our enemies, to pray for our persecutors, to do good to those who hurt us, to
forget and forgive all injuries, and to leave vengeance to God, who will repay:
no Religion like this, teaches the conjugal chastity that ought to be between
one man and one wife; for other religions permit either plurality of wives, or
divorces upon light occasions, or fornication amongst young people unmarried;
Creed mihi, non est flagitium adolescentem scortari, Terent* or that which is
worse, and not to be named: but Christianity forbids unchaste talk, immodest
looks, and even unclean thoughts. Other Religions forbid perjury, this swearing
at all, except before a Judge to vindicate the truth. No Religion does so much
urge the mutual justice or duties, that ought to be between masters and
servants, parents and children, Princes and people, and between man and man;
all these, oppression, extortion, usury, bribes, sacrilege, etc. are forbid
even all kind of covetousness and immoderate care, but to cast ou^ care upon
God, to depend on his providence, to use this world, as if we used it not, to
cast ou^ bread upon the Waters, to make us friends of our unrighteous M^nmon,
to be content with food and raiment, to have our conversation in heaven, and to
seek the things that are above to lay up our treasures in heaven; where neither
^oth can spoil, nor thi^ves break through and steal. 5. The excellency of
Christianity may be proved from the multitude of witnesses, or martyrs, and
Confessors, who have not only forsaken father and mother, lands and
possessions, and whatsoever else was dear to them, but likewise their lives,
(and that with all cheerfulness) for the name of Christ: and which is most
strange, in the midst of flames and other torments, they did sing and rejoice,
and account it no small (...) and happiness, to suffer for Christ, being fully
persuaded that the afflictions of this l^fe were not worthy of the glory that
should be revealed; and that after they had fought the good fight, and finished
their course, a Crown of righteousness was laid up for them. 6. The excellency
of the author commends Christianity above all other religions, which have been
delivered by men only, and those sinful men too; as Moses, ^ycurgus, Minos,
Solon, Numa, and Mahomet, etc. But the author of Christianity was both God and
man, whose humane nature was without spot or sin original, and actual; for
though he became sin for us, yet he knew no sin, there was no guile sound in
his mouth; he had done no violence, he was oppressed and afflicted, yet opened
he not his mogth, but was brought as a lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep
before his shiarers was dumb, etc. Isa. 53. his very enemies could not accuse
him of sin* he prayed for those that crucified him, and died for his enemies,
he was obedient to his father, even to the death of the Cross; he did not lay
heavy burdens upon other men's shoulders, which he did not touch himself; but
as well by practice, as by precept, he has gone before us in all holy duties;
and as he died for sinners, so he rose again for them the third day, ascended
into Heaven where he now sits at the right hand of his father, and will come
again to judge the quick and the dead. He is the true Messiah, who in the
fullness of time came, upon the accomplishing of Daniels seventy weeks, not
long before the destruction of Jerusalem, as was foretold by the Prophets; by
whose presence the glory of the second Temple far exceeded the glory of the
first, though in all things else inferior to it. He is the true Shil^, at
whose coming the Scepter departed from Judah; and as it was foretold, that he
should come of David, be born in Bethlehem? have a Virgin for his mother,
preach in Gali^ce, and heal all manner of infirmities, and should reign over
the Gentiles, so these things came to pass. 7. Never was there any Religion
propagated through the world, in that wonderful manner, as this was, if we
consider either the authors that spread it, who were illiterate f^sher-men,
and yet could on a sudden speak all languages, or the manner how it was spread,
without either violence, or eloquence; whereas Mahumetanisme, and other
religions have been forced upon men by the Sword, Christianity was propagated
by weakness, sufferings, humility, patience, plainness, and working of
miracles; the suddenness also of its propagation, the great opposition it had,
by the Potentates of the world; whom notwithstanding these fishermen
conquered: the largeness of this religions extent, as being spread over the
four parts of the habitable earth: I say, all these being considered mus^ needs
show us what pre-eminence this religion has above all others, the course
whereof could not be retarded either by the force, policy, or cruelty of
Tyrants, who exposed Christians to a thousand sorts of torments, yet in spite
of all opposition, it went like a mighty torrent through the world, and like
the Palm, the more it was suppressed, the more it flourished^ Per tela, per
ignes, ab ipso ducit opes, animumque ferr^: What religion could ever name such
Martyrs, either (...) number or constancy, as the Christian can? To be brief,
how far truth exceeds error, one God, multiplicity of Gods; his sincere and
pure worship, the idolatry of worshipping evil Spirits, Stars, dead Men,
bru^^ beasts, yea, mere accidents and phansies; and ho^ far divine power
exceeds all humane power, so far does Christianity exceed Gentilisme. Again,
how much Christ exceeds Moses; and the Gospel the Law; and how far the
precept of patience and meekness taught by Christ, exceeds the precept of
revenge delivered by Moses; how far Baptism excels Circumcision, and the
Lords Supper, the Jewish Passover, the true propitiatory sacrifice of Christ's
body, all the sacrifices of beasts and birds, how far the easy yoke of Christ
is lighter than the heavy burdens of Moses: and the true Messiah already come,
exceeds the Jews supposed Messiah yet expected: so far does the Christian
religion excel the Jewish superstition, Lastly, how far Jesus in respect of
his humane nature exceeds Mahomet; the one being conceived of the holy Ghost,
and born of a Virgin; the other b^ing conceived and born, after the manner of
other men; the one being without sin, the other a thief and robber: the one
teaching love, peace and patience; the other hatred, war and revenge: the one
cur^ing men's lust, by Monogamy; the other letting loose the reins to uncleannes
by Poligamy: The one planting Religion in the soul, the other in outward
Ceremonies of the body: The one permitting the moderate use of all Gods
creatures, the other prohibiting Wine, and Swines-flesh: The one commanding all
men to search the Scriptures; the ^ther prohibiting the vulgar to read the
Alcoran, or to translate it into other tongues out of the Arabic: the one
working by miracles; the other only by cheating tricks: The one propagating
Religion by suffering, patience, and humility; the other by cruelty,
oppression, and tyranny: The one choosing for his followers, innocent and holy
men, such as followed their trade of fishing; the other wicked and profane
persons, whose trade consisted in thieving, robbing, and murdering: The one
teaching sound and wholesome Doctrine; the other ridiculo^s and favourlesse
fables in his Alcoran: I say, how far in all these things the man Christ Jesus
(not to speak of his Divinity) did exceed Mahomet: so far does Christianity
excel Mahumetanism. And thus have I with as much brevity as I could, taken and
given a view of all known Religions, and have set down what use is to be made
thereof; and withal have showed the excellency of Christianity above all other
professions in the world: Christian (...) urged.
God grant that as it is the best of all Religions, so we of this Land may
prove the best of all the professors thereof, learning to deny our selves, to
take up the Cross of Christ, and follow him in meekness, patience, humility,
justice, sobriety, holiness, love, and all other virtues, wherein the life of
Religion consists; laying aside self-interest, idle quarrels, needless
debates, unprofitable questions in points of Religion, but let us maintain the
Unity of the Spirit in the bond of love, and know that Religion is not in
words, but in works; not in opinions, but in assurance: not in speculation, but
in practice. Pure Religion and undefiled before God is, to visit (...)
Fatherless and widows etc. to do good and to communicate; for with such
Sacrifice God is well pleased, that not the bearers of the Law, but the doers
shall be justified; that not they that cry Lord, Lord, shall enter into heaven,
but they who do the will of our Father; that without peace and holiness no man
shall see the Lord, that they who seed the hung^y, and cloth the naked, etc.
shall inherit the Kingdom prepared for them from the beginning of the world:
And God grant that we may run the ways of Gods Commandments, walk in love,
tread in the paths of righteousness, ^ight the good fight, run the race set
before us, with patience, looking unto Jesus the Author and Finisher of our
faith; that having finished our course, and wrought out our salvation with
(...) and trembling, may at last receive the Crown of righteousness. In the
mean while, let us not forget our Saviors Legacy; which is, Love one another,
and my peace I leave with you; Are we not all the members of one body, the
sheep of one fold, the children of one Father? Do we not all eat of the same
bread, drink of the same cup, live by the same Spirit, hope for the same
inheritance? are we not all washed with the same Baptism, and redeemed by the
same savior? why then should we not be of the same heart, and mind with the
Apostles? why is there such struggling in the womb of Rebecca, such a noise of
hammers in building Christ's mystical Temple; such clashing of arms under the
Prince of peace; is this Christianity? Alas, we are Mahu^etanes or Gentiles in
practice, and Christians in name. Now the God of peace, that brought again our
Lord Jesus from the dead, give us the peace of God that passes all
understanding; that we may all think and do the same thing. That as there is
but one shepherd, so the^e may be but one sheepfold. The Church of God is a
little flock, beset with many Wolves; of Jews, Turks, Pagans, Atheists; why
then should we not be careful to preserve peace, love, and unity among our
selves, the only thing to make us formidable to our enemies? Concordia res
parvae crescunt. A bundle of Arrows cannot be broken, except they be separated
and disjoined; nor could the horse tail be plucked off (as Sertorius showed his
Romans) so long as the hairs were twisted together* as hard a matter it will be
to overcome us, so long as we are united in love, but let this band be broken,
and we are a prey to every enemy: imbelles damae quid nisi praeda sumus. If we
will needs fight* let us buckle with our professed and common enemies, with the
Devil, the world and the Flesh, with Principalites, and Powers; with spiritual
darkness, and chiefly with our selves: Nec tongue scilicet hosts quaerendi
nobis, circumstant undique muros. We have a Trojan horse, full of armed enemies
in the Citadel of our hearts; we have Iebusites within us, which we may
subjugate, but can never exterminate; and such is our condition, that we are
pestered with enemies, whom we can neither fly from, nor put to flight; Nec
fugere possumus nec sugare. If we did exercise our selves oftener in this
spiritual Militia, we should not quarrel so much as we do, nor raise such
tragedies every where in the Church of Christ, about controversies and opinions
quarrelling about the shell of Religion, being careless what become of the
kernel. With Martha we busy our selves about many things, but neglect that
Vnum necessarium: playing Philosophers in our disputes, but Epicures in our
lives. I will end in the words of Lactantius, Instit. 6. c. 1. and 2.
Innecentiam s^lam (...) quis obtulerit Deo, satis pie, religioseque litavit, He
is the most religious man, who offers to God the best gi^t, which is innocence.
For Christian Religion consists not in words, but in gifts and sacrifices;
our gifts are perpetual, our sacrifices but temporary; our gifts are sincere
hearts, our sacrifices are praises and thanksgivings. No Religion can be true,
but what is grounded on goodness and justice.

FINIS.
The Alphabetical TABLE of the chief things contained in the several Sections
of The View of all Religions, etc.
A.
ABbots, how elected, 275. etc. how consecrated, 343. etc. Abraxas, the Sun,
519. etc. Abyssins, their religion, 494. etc. Adamites, 366. Adonis, the Sun,
517. Africa, the religion thereof, 94. etc. African Islands their religions,
102. Albati, 318. etc. Albigenses, and their opinions, 223 etc. America, the
religion thereof, 102 etc. Southern America, the religion thereof, 112. etc.
Americans, their superstitious fear, and tyranny thereof, 116 etc. Anabaptists,
229 etc. of Moravia, 230 etc. their opinions and names, 361 etc. Angola, its
religion, 100 etc. Antinomians, 366. Apis, the Sun, 518 etc. Apollo, the Sun,
516. Apostles, and their office, 396. Arabians, their religion and discipline,
67 etc. Armenians, their religion, 489 etc. Arminians, their tenets 367 etc.
Asia, the religions thereof, 1.2 etc. Atys, the Sun, 518. S* Austins girdle;
257 etc.
B.
Babylonians, their ancient religion. 58 etc. Bell and Belenus, the Sun, 520.
Bengala, its religion, 83. Bishops, 399. 405. etc. Bisnagar, its religion, 87
etc. Brasil, its religion, 113 etc. S. Bridgets Order, 313 etc. Brownists,
their kinds and tenets, 363 etc. Buildings first erected for divine service, 4.
Burial of the dead, an Act of justice and mercy. 131 etc.
C.
Calvin's doctrine. 236 etc. Camaldulenses, 283. Cambaia, its religion, 84.
Canons of S. Savior, 318. of S. George, 319 etc. of Lateran, 320. Carmelites.
300 etc. Carthusians, 284 etc. Cerberus, the Sun, 527. Ceremonies in religion,
513 etc. Charom, the Sun, 526 etc. Chinois, their religion, 79 etc.
Christianity, its beginning, 181, etc. It yields to Mahumetanisme, 182 etc. Its
excellency* 538 etc. Christian duties urged* 542 etc. Churches from the
beginning^ 1, 2. etc* 1, 2. etc. set Day, Sacrifices, and Church Government
from the beginning, 5 etc. Under Moses, 6. After Moses, 7. Under David and
Solomon, 8 etc. After Solomon, 9 etc. Among the ten Tribes, 11. In, and after
the Captivity of Babylon, 28 etc. Among the Jews at this day, 29 etc. Church
Offices sold among the Jews, 49 etc. Church how to be governed, 409.
Church Governors, ibid. etc. Alterable, 410. Church of Arnhem, vide
Millenaries. Church of England deplored, and Remedy against her growing
errors. 427. Of Protestant Churches, 496 etc. Church of Rome, wherein
different from other Churches, 429 etc. Cluniacenses, 282. Colors of the Sun
worn, 531 etc. Cong^ its religion, 101. The religions of its Northern
neighbors. Ibid etc. Cophti of Egypt, 493 etc. Creation, the knowledge the
Pagans had thereof, 71 etc. of it, and Noah's flood, what knowledge the
Americans had, 109 etc.
D.
Days festival in the Church of Rome, 458 etc. D^acons, and their office, 397.
and 399. Dead, vide Burial. Death, how worshipped, 143 etc. Domin^cans, 30^
etc.
E.
Earth, etc. how worshipped, 142 etc. Egyptians, their ancient religion, 90
etc. Their idolatrous worship, 91 etc. and continuance thereof, 92 etc. Their
modern Religions, 93 etc. Elders, 403 etc. Endymion, the Sun, 522 Episcopacy,
what among the Presbyterians, 408 etc. How diffeferent from Presbytery, 410.
etc. Eremites, or Anchorites, 243 etc. Their first manner of living, 244 etc.
Their too great rigor, 245 etc. Of S. Austin, 2^8 etc. Of S. Paul in Hungary,
312. Of S. Hierom, 318. Ethiopians of Africa, their ancient religion, 98 etc.
Their religion at this day, 99 etc. The religion of the lower Ethiopians, 100.
Europe, the religions thereof, 121 etc. Excommunicate persons their condition,
415. Prophets, Pharisees, etc. could not excommunicate, ihid. etc. Why Christ
did not excommunicate Iud^s, 416. Excommunication and excommunicate persons
considered, ibid. etc.
F.
FAmilists, their Heresies, 364. Superstitious Fear, its cruelty, 116. Festival
days of Christ, 458 etc. Of the Saints, 468 etc. Fez, the religion and
Churchdiscipline thereof, 95 etc. Their times of prayer, 96 etc. Fire, etc. how
worshipped, 142 etc. Florida, its religion, 104. Franciscans, 304 etc.
subdivided into diverse Orders, 341 etc. Fraternities, 279 etc. Fratricelli,
319. Friars Mendicants, 298. Predicants, 302 etc. Minorites, 306 etc.
G.
GEntiles, their Gods, vid. Gods. worshipped the Sun under diverse names and
shapes, 516 etc. acknoweldged but one deity, 527 etc. under diverse names, 528
etc. Their superstitious fear ibid. acknowledge a Trinity, 529 etc. Georgians,
490 etc. Goa, the religion thereof, 84 etc. God, acknowledged by the Americans,
109. but one God acknowledged by the wiser sort of Gentiles. 126 etc. and 529.
Gods of the Gentiles, 134 etc. 155. etc. How ranked and armed. 156. Their
chariots how drawn, 157. In what peculiar places worshipped. ibid etc. One God
acknowledged by them, 529. Greeks, their religion and Gods* 134 etc. their
worship, and how painted, 137 etc. The Greeks sacrifices, 144 etc. Their
Priests and Temples, 146. their chief festivals, 158 etc. Greek religion at
this day, 478 etc. their Church dignities and discipline, 480 etc. ^roves and
high places condemned in Scripture. ^3 etc. Guinea, its religion, 97 etc.
H.
HErcules, the same with the Sun, 520 etc. Heresy an enemy to christianity, 183
Heretics and Heresies, namely Simon Magus, 184. Menander, 186 etc. Saturninus
187. Basilides, ibid. Nicolaitans, Gnostics 188. etc. Carpocrates, Cerinthus,
189. Ebion, Nazarites, 190. Valentinians, ib. etc. Secundians, P^ol^means, 191
etc. Marcites, ib. etc. Colarbasii, 192* Heracleonites, 192. Ophites, ibid.
etc. Cainites, and Sethites, 193. Archonticks, and Asco^^yprae, Cerdon, 194.
Marcion, ibid. etc. Apelles 195. Severus, ib. etc. Tatianus, 196.
Cataphryglans, ib. etc. Pepuzians, Quintilians, 197. Ar^otyrites, ibid. etc.
Quartodecimani, Alogiani, 198. Adamians, ibid. etc. Elcesians, and Theodotians,
199. Melchisedecians, ibid. etc. Bardesanists. Noetians, Valesians, 200.
Cathari, ibid. etc. Angelici, Apostolici, 201. Sabellians, Originians,
Originists, ibid. etc. Samosatenians, 202. Photinians, ibid. etc. Manichees,
^03* etc. Hierachites, 204. Melitians, ibid. etc. Arrians, Audians,
Semi-Arrians, 205. Macedonians, ibid. etc. Aerians, Aetians, 206. Eunomians,
ibid. etc. Apollinarists, Antidicomari^nites, 207. Messalians, ibid. etc.
Metangismonites, Hermians, Procli^^ites, Patricians, Ascitae, ibid. etc.
Pattalorinchitae, Aquarii, Coluthiani, Floriani, Aeternales, 209. Nudipedales,
ibid. etc. Donatists, 210. Priscillianists, ibid. etc. Rhetorians, Feri.
Theopaschitae, Tritheitae, Aquei, Meli^onii, Ophei, 211. Tertullii, ibid. etc.
Liberatores, Nativitarii, Luciferians, Iovinianists, and Arabicks, 212.
Collyridians, Paterniani, Tertullianists 213. Abellonitae, ibid. etc.
Pelagians, Praedestinati, 214. Timotheans, ibid. etc. Nestorians, 215.
Eutychians, and their spawn, ibid. etc. Heretics of the seventh Century, 218.
etc. of the eighth Century, 220. of the ninth and tenth Centuries, ibid. etc.
of the eleventh and twelfth Centuries, 221. etc. of the thirteenth Century, 224
etc. of the fourteenth Century* 225 etc. of the fifteenth Century, 227 etc. of
the sixteenth Century, 229. and 2^8 etc. Hierapolis, the religion thereof, 62
etc. High places, vid. Groves, etc. Hispaniola, its religion, 118. Hussites,
their tenets* 227 etc.
I.
IAcobites, 492. Ianus, the Sun, 522. Iapon, its religion, 88 etc. Idola^ers
their cruelty and cost in their barbarous sacrifices* 106. etc. The making,
worshipping of Images, and bringing in Idolatry. 19 etc. Idolatry of the
Gentiles, and of all kinds condemned. 63 etc. Idolatry further condemned. 118.
etc. and 515. The Gentile Idols were dead men, 60 etc. Jesuits, 325. etc.
their rules, 326. etc. their constitutions and rules for Provincials, 328.
Provosts, 330 etc. Rectors, 331. Masters, ibid. etc. Counselors, 333.
Travelers, ibid. etc. Rules for the Admonitor, 334 etc. Overseer of the
Church, 335. for the Priests, ibid. etc. Preachers, 336. for the Generals
Proctor, ibid. etc. for the Readers, Infirmarii, 337. Librarii, and under
Officers, ibid. etc. Their privileges granted by diverse Popes. 339. etc. Jews,
their Church discipline from the beginning* till their last destruction, 6 etc.
The difference of the High Priest^ from other Priests. 7. Solomon's Temple, and
the outward splendour of the Jews religion. 11 etc. what represented by
Solomon's Temple, and utensils thereof. 15. office of the Levites. 16. Prophets,
Scribes, ibid. Pharisees. 17. Nazarites, ibid. etc. Rechabites. 18. Essenes,
Sadduces, ibid. S^maritans. 19 Jews, their ancient observation of the Sabbath.
19 etc. how they observed their passover. 20 etc. their feast of pentecost. 21.
their feast of tabernacles, ibid. etc. their new Moons, 22. and 45. their feast
of trumpets, 22. etc. their feast of expiation, 23. their Sabbatical year,
ibid. etc. their Jubilee, 24 etc. their excommunications of old, 25 etc. how
instructed by God of old, 26 etc. their maintenance or allowance to their
Priests and Levites, 27 etc. their Church government at this day, 29 etc. their
manner and times of prayer, 30 etc. they hear the law three times a week, 31
etc. their ceremonies about the book of the Law, 32 etc. their manner of
observing the Sabbath, 33 etc. how they keep their passover, 35 etc. their
manner of eating the paschal lamb, 36 etc. their modern ceremonies are
Rabbinical, 37. observations concerning the Jews at this day, ibid. etc.
whether to be permitted (amongst Christians) to live, and exercise their own
religion, 39 etc. wherein christians are no^ to communicate with Jews, 41 etc.
they spend eight days in their Easter solemnities, 43. their pentecost, ibid.
etc. their feast of tabernacles, 44 etc. they fast in August, 45. their
solemnities in beginning the new year, ibid. etc. their preparation for morning
prayer, 46 etc. their feast of reconciliation, and ceremonies therein, 48.
their rites after the law is read over, 49. their Church offices sold, ibid.
etc. their feast of Dedication, 50. of Purim, ibid. etc. their fasts, 51 etc.
their marriages, 52. etc. their bills of divorce, 53 etc. the separating of the
Wife from the dec^^sed husbands brother, 54. their circumcision, and rites
thereof, ibid. etc. how they redeem their first born, 56. their duty to the
sick, ibid. their ceremonies about the dead, ibid. etc. Ignatius Loyola, 325
etc. Independents, and their tenets, 389 etc. Independents of New England their
tenets, 39^ etc. The grounds whereupon the Independents forsake our Churches.
391 etc. the grounds whereupon they and the Anabaptists allow Laymen* to
preach, without call or ordination. 392 etc. Indians, their ancient religion.
81. and at this day, 492. John Tany, vide Theaurau John. Iucatan, its religion,
111 etc. Jupiter, the Sun, 519
K.
KAtharine of Sena, 317 etc. Knights-hospitlers of S. John, 290 etc. of Rhodes,
292 etc. of ^alta, 293. Templars, ibid. etc. the Teutonicks or Marians, and
their instalment, 294. etc. of S. Lazarus, 297. of Calatrava, ibid. etc. of S.
James, 298. Diverse other Orders of Knighthood, ibid. etc. Knights of the holy
Sepulcher, 309 etc. Gladiators, 310 etc. Knights of S. Mary of redemption, 311.
of Montesia, ibid. of the Annunciation, of S. Ma^rice, of the the Golden
Fleece, of the Moon, of S. Michael, 3^1. of S. Stephen, ib. etc. of the holy
Spirit, etc. 322 and 347 etc. Knights of the Gennet, 345 etc. of the Crown
Royal, of the Stir, of the Broom flower, of the Ship, 346. of S. Michael, ibid.
etc. of Christian charity, of S. Lazarus, of the Virgin Mary in mount Carmel,
348. of Orleance, or Porcupine, ibid. etc. of the golden Shield, of the
Thistle, of Aniou, 349. of S. Magdalen, ibid. etc. of Britaigne or Ermin, 350.
of the Golden Fleece, of the Garter, 351. of the Bath, ibid. etc. of S. Andrew,
or the Thistle, of Navarre, or the Lilly, 352. of S. James of the Sword, ibid.
etc. of S. Julian, or the Peartree, or Alcantara, 353. of Calatrava, ibid. etc.
of the band or red scarffe, of the Dove, of S. Savior of Montreal, of our Lady
in Montesia, 354. of the Looking. glass, ibid. etc of Jesus Christ, of D.
Avis, In Germany, of the Dragon; in Austria, of S. George; in Poland, of the
white Eagle; 355. in Denmark, of the Elephant; ibid. etc. in Sweden, of the
S^raphims; in Cleve, of the Swan; in Livonia, of the Swordbearers; in
Switzerland, of S. Ga^^; 356. Diverse Orders of Knights at Rome, ibid. etc.
Knights of Venice, Genoa, Savoy, 358. Florence, ibid. etc. of Mantua, 359. of
Knight-ho^d in the East, ibid. etc.
L.
LIber, the Sun, 518 Life, vide sociable. Luther his opinions, 229. and sects
sprung out of Lutheranisme. 231 etc.
M
MAgistrates Office, 403, and 411 Magor, its religion, 83 etc. Mahomet not that
great Antichrist spoken of by S. Paul and S. John, 165 etc. Mahumetans their
Law, 163 etc their opinions, 164 etc. their Sects, 166. etc. their religious
Orders, 167 etc. secular Priests, 170. their devotion, ibid. etc. their
pilgrimage to Mecca, 172 etc. their circumcision, 173 etc. their rites about
the sick and dead, 174 etc. Mahumetanisme its extent, 175 etc. and of what
continuance, 177 etc. Malabar, its religion, 85 Maronites, 492 etc. Mars, the
Sun, 516 Melancholy its danger, 79 Melchites, 490 Mendicants of S. Hierom, 320
Mengrelians, 491 Mercury, the Sun, 519 etc. Mexico, its Priests and Sacrifices,
108 etc. Millenaries their opinions, 370 etc. the grounds upon which they build
Christ's temporal kingdom here on earth for a thousand years, ibid. the vanity
of their opinion, 373 etc. Minerva, the same that the Sun, 522 etc. Ministerial
calling, 400 Ministers called Presbyters, 412 etc. How to be elected, 413. etc.
three ways whereby Satan dedeludes men by false miracles, 74 etc. the fear of
Satan's stratagems (though illusions) whence it proceeds. 76. etc. Our duty
respecting the many stratagems and illusions of Satan. 77 etc. Mithra, the Sun,
519 Moloch, the Sun, ibid. Monasteries and their laws, 277 etc. Monks, who
were the first, 248 Monks of S. Basil and their rules, 249 etc. of S. Hierom,
254. of S. Austin, ibid. etc. and 300. they are not to beg, 256 etc. the Monks
first institutions and exercises, 258 etc. why they cut their hair and beard,
260 etc. whence came this custom, ^61 etc. In what account Monks are in Rome,
265 etc. how consecrated anciently, 266 Benedictin Monks, 267 etc. Authors of
other Orders, 269 their rules, ibid. etc. their habit and diet, 272. Rules
prescribed to the Monks by the Council of Aix, ibid. etc. Monks of Cassinum,
274 etc. Cluniacenses, 282 etc. Camaldulenses, 283. of the shadowy Valley,
ibid. etc. Silvestrini, and Grandimontenses, 284. of S. Anthony of Vienna, 286.
Cistertians, ibid. etc. Bernardines, Humiliati. 287. Praemonstratenses, 288.
Gilbertins, ibid. etc. Cruciferi, Hospitalarii, 289 Trinitarians, ibid, etc.
Bethlemites, 290 Augustinians, ^98 Carmelites, 300 etc. Dominicans, 302.
Franciscans, 304 etc. their Habits, Schisms, Families, Rules, and Privileges,
306 etc. of Vallis Scholarium, S. Marks Canons regular, 311 Boni homines, 312.
of S. Mary's servants, ibid. etc. Coelestini, Iesuati, 313. of S. Briget, ibid.
etc. of S. Iustina, 318 of mount Olivet, 319. of the Holy Ghost, of S. Ambrose
ad Nemus, Minimi of Jesus Maria, 320 Monks in Moscovia, 483 etc. Moon, how
worshipped, 141 the same luminary with the Sun, 525 etc. her properties, 526
Morocco, its religion, 97 Moscovites religion and discipline, 481 etc. their
Monks and Nuns, 483. etc. their Church service, 484. their Sacraments, 485
etc. their doctrine and ceremonies, 486 etc. their marriages 488 etc. their
Fune^^ls, 489 Muggleton* vide Reeve.
N.
NArsinga, its religion, 87 etc. Nemesis, the Sun, 523 Nestorians,, 491 etc.
New Spain its religion, 105 etc. Festival days there, 110 etc. Nuns in the
Primitive times, 263 etc. how consecrated. 266 etc. Nuns of S. Bennets Order,
276 etc. of S. Clara, 312. of S. Briget, 313 etc. of S. Katharin, 317 etc.
O.
Diverse erroneous Opinions which have bin lately revived or hatched since the
fall of our Church Government, 422 etc. Orders of Pilgrims, 323 etc. of
Indians, of divine love or Theatini, 324. of Paulini, ibid. etc. of Jesuits,
325 etc. Observantes, Cellarii, Ambrosiani, Capellani, Clavigeri, Cruciferi,
341. Hospitalarii, 342 etc. See Monks. Ordination in the beginning of the
world, 2.
P.
PAllas, the Sun, 523 Pan, the Sun, 521 Pegu, its religion, 82 Persecution an
enemy to Christistianity, 183 Persians, their ancient religion, 68 etc. Persius
his notable saying, 107 Peru, its religion, 114 etc. Festival days, 115 etc.
the Peruvians belief of the departed souls, 116 Philippinae, their religions,
89 etc. Phoenicians, their religion and discipline, 67 Poor Pilgrims, 323 etc.
Pilgrims vide Orders. Pluto, the Sun, 526 Polyphemus the Sun, 522 Poverty,
threefold, 309 Presbytery, the doctrine and tenets thereof, 394 etc. the office
of Presbyters, 395. and 398 among the Jews 412. their power to excommunicate,
414 Priapus, the Sun, 518 Priests and Levites among the Jews, 6. among the
Mexicans, 108 etc. the dignity of Priests and their necessity, 535 etc. among
the Greeks, Romans, and elsewhere, 536 etc. Princes should be careful of
Religion, 503 etc they must not dissemble in Religion, 509 etc. Proserpinae,
the Sun, 526 Protestants, 236 etc. wherein they agree with, and ^^ssent from
other christian Churches. 496 etc.
Q.
QVakers their opinions, 381 etc. other opinions of theirs, 383 etc. wherein
the absurdities and impieties of their opinions consist. 384.
R.
RAnters characterized, and their opinions, 387 etc. John Reeve and Lodowick
Muggleton their opinions, 379 etc. Religions of the Northern countries near the
pole, 73 etc. Of the nations by West Virginia and Florida, 104 etc. of the
Northern neighbors of Congo, 101 of the African Islands, 101. of new Spain,
105 etc. of the parts adjoining to Iucatan, 111 etc. of the Southern Americans,
112 etc. of Paria, Guiana, and Debaiba, 113. of Asia, 1, 2, 3, 4, etc. of
Africa 94 etc. of America, 102 etc. of Europe, 121 of Greeks and Romans, ibid
etc. of Germans, Gauls, and Britains, 148 etc. of Danes, Swedes, Moscovites,
and their neighbors, 151 etc. of the Scythians Getes, Thracians, Cymbrians,
Goths, etc. 153 etc. of the Lithuanians, Polonians, Hungarians, etc. 154 etc.
of the Mahumetans, 162 etc. of Christians, 181 etc. by what engines battered,
183. pestered with diversity of opinions, 239 etc. of the Greeks Religion at
this day, 478 etc. of Moscovia, 481 etc. of Armenia, 489. of the Melchites,
490. of the Georgians, ibid. etc. of the Circassians, 491. of the Nestorians,
ibid. etc. of the Indians, and Iacobites, 492. of the Maronites, ibid. etc. of
the Cophti, 493. etc. Abyssins, 494. etc. Religion the ground of government and
greatness, 500 etc. the foundation of all Commonwealths, 501 etc. most
re^quisite in Princes and Governors, 503 etc. one Religion to be taught
publicly, 505 etc. different Religions how and when to be tolerated, 506 etc.
dissimulation in Religion rejected, 509 etc* false Religions why blessed, and
the contem^ers punished, 5^1 etc. religious policy and ceremonies, 512 etc.
mixed Religions, 514 etc. what Religion most consonant to natural reason, 516
etc. Religion how supported, 535 etc. Religion, which is best, 538 etc. Romans,
their old Religion, 122 etc. their chief Festivals, 123 etc. their chief gods,
125 etc. their Priests, 128 etc. Sacrifices, 129 etc. their Marriage rites, 130
etc. their Funeral rites, 131. Roman Church different from others about the
Scriptures, 429. about Predestination, Gods image, and sin, ibid. etc. about
the law of God, Christ, Faith, Justification, and good Works, 430 etc. about
Penance, Fasting, Prayer, and Alms, 432 etc, about the Sacraments, 433 etc.
and their ceremonies in those controverted, 434 etc. about the Saints in
heaven, 435 etc. about the Church 436. etc. about Councils, Monks, Magistrates,
and Purgatory, 438. etc. the outward worship of the Roman Church, and first
part of their Mass, 439 etc. Roman Acolyths their offices, 440 Romanists their
manner of dedicating Churches, 443 etc. and what observable thereupon. 444 etc.
their consecration of Altars, etc. 446 etc. the degrees of Ecclesiastical
persons in the Church of Rome, 448 etc. their sacred Orders, 449 etc. office of
the Bishop, 452 etc. and what colors held sacred, 453 etc. the other parts of
the Mass, 454 etc. other parts of their worship, 457 etc. their Festival
days, 458 etc. their Canonical hours of prayer and observations thereon, 464.
etc. their processions and observations thereon. 467* their Ornaments and
Utensils used in Churches, dedicated to Christ and the Saints. 472 etc. their
office performed to the dead, 475 etc. Russians, see Moscovites.
S.
Satan's stratagems, vide miracles. Old Saxons worshipped their gods under
diverse shapes and forms, 149 etc. Scythians, their old Religion, 69. Sea, how
worshipped, 143. Sects sprung out of Lutheranisme 231 etc. Sects of this age,
376 etc. Shakers, vide Quakers. Siam, its Religion, 81 etc. Simon Magus and his
scholars, vide Heretics. Sociable life preferred to the solitary, 247, etc.
Socinians, their tenets, 366 etc. Solomon's Temple, vide Jews, etc. Soul, its
immortality believed by the idolatrous Pagans, 86 etc. its immortality and life
after this believed by the Americans, 109. by the Brasilians also, 113 etc.
Spain, vide New Spain. Sumatra, its Religion, 90 etc. Sun, how worshipped; 139
etc. the Gentiles chief and only God, 516 etc. his diverse names and worship,
ibid. etc. superstitious Sun worship, 530 etc. how painted and worshipped by
the Northern Nations, 533 etc. Syrians their gods, 65 etc.
T.
John Tany, vide Theaurau John. Tartars, their old Religion, 69. etc. their
diversities of Religions, 72. etc. Thesurau John, his opinions, 377. etc.
Titbonus, the Sun, 523. Trinity, acknowledged by the Americans, 109. denied by
Simon Magus and his scholars, with others, besides Jews and Mahumetans, and
why* 185. etc. Turlupini, 319.
V.
VEnus, all one with the Sun, 524 etc. Virginia, its Religion, 103 etc. Vulcan,
the Sun, 523.
W.
VVIckliffe's opinions, 226. etc.
Z.
ZEeilan, its Religion, 90.
FINIS.
APOCALYPSIS: OR, THE REVELATION Of certain notorious Advancers OF HERESY:
Wherein their Visions and private Revelations by Dreams, are discovered to be
most incredible blasphemies, and enthusiastical dotages: Together with an
account of their Lives, Actions, and Ends.

Whereunto are added the effigies of seventeen (who excelled the rest in
rashness, impudence and lying,) done in Copper Plates.

Faithfully and impartially translated out of the Latin by I. D.

IS
printer's or publisher's device

London, Printed by E. Tyler, for John Saywell, and are to be sold at his shop,
at the sign of the Greyhound in Little-Britain without Aldersgate, 1655.

TO THE Excellently Learned, EDWARD BENLOVVES OF Brenthall in Essex Esquire,
etc.
Worthy Sir,
I Have here presumed to present you with a strange and bloody Tragedy of
Heretics and Enthusiasts, written in Latin by a most elegant pen, by one who
has concealed his name, as I conceive out of this reason, that, living near
the times and places of this representation, it might have proved dangerous to
him to have published it. Here you have Religion brought upon the stage in very
strange disguises, nay they make her act parts the most contrary to her nature,
imbruing her white and innocent hands in blood, and Massacres. But as she has
met with Wolves to destroy and tear in pieces, so has she also met with
Shepherds to heal and protect, and among those the most laborious Author of
(...) ANZEBEIA has not bin the least considerable. His severe and most
indefatigable labors in most parts of Learning, are consummated in this piece
of Religion, wherein like an experienced Anatomist, he has left no vein un-cut
up. To fall into excessive commendations of him, were to commit a moral
absurdity, by praising one whom the general Trumpet of Fame has blazed abroad
for so great an advancer of Virtue and Learning; But to trouble you with them,
were yet to be so much the more importunate, whose conversation with him was so
great, that whatsoever I may say of him, I shall not acquaint you with so much
as your self know. Nor did the influence of your Patronage raise and animate
only him, but there are so many other monuments of your great encouragements to
learning, that it will be thought modesty in me not to mention all. But your
excessive Benefactorship to the Library of S. John's College at Cambridge
(whereof I have sometimes had the honor to be an unworthy member) I cannot
pass over, as a thing, which will stand upon the file of memory, as long as
learning shall find professors or children. And that which increases the glory
of your munificence, is, that that Library may host that it is furnished with
the works of its own sons, which, being the greatest act of retribution and
gratitude that may be, must be accordingly acknowledged by all that shall come
after. But that which has the most engaged and satisfied the English world,
is, that your endeavors have displayed themselves in their clearest light, in
that one thing that is necessary, that is to say, Religion, not only by being a
constant assertor of her purity here in England, but in that, after more then
Ulyssean Travels throughout most parts of Europe, you have returned to your
former enjoyments of that chaste Penelope, when others either out of weakness
or surprise, are ensnared and besotted with the Tenets of other Countries,
whereby they are both ungrateful and injurious to their own, by preferring the
prudence and policy of another before hers. Religion certainly, if well
improved, is the Talent, that felicifies the improver, if not, condemns him.
It is that universal Patrimony, which entitles us to be the sons of God, and
by which we are adopted into the assured hope of eternal happiness. It is the
Loadstone wherewith when our souls are once touched, they are directed to the
right pole of the eternally beatifical vision; and without which, we must
infallibly expect to split against the rocks and shelves of perdition. It is
the consummation of heavens indulgence to Mankind, that which does familiarize
us, and makes good our Interest in the great being and cause of all things. It
is the perfection of nature, since that whatsoever we know of the divinity by
her comes only by the assistance and mediation of our senses, but the other
furnishes us with a more evident assurance, (and that, in things, which can be
neither seen, heard, nor conceived,) by the more particular providence of Grace
and Faith, whereby he is pleased to bow down the heavens, and descend unto a
familiar conversation with our very spirits.

But that which ought further to endear all men to Religion, is, that she only
next to God may pretend Ubiquity, as being a thing written in such indelible
characters in the hearts of all men, that even the most barbarous nations, and
the greatest strangers to civility and policy have acknowledged some divine
worship, though their pravity or want of instruction, may have blinded them
from the true, but yet that eclipse of the true God has not been total,
insomuch, as they have still retained a sense and veneration of Religion, so
that to the best of their imaginations, they have created something like God to
themselves. To make this yet more evident, we are to note, that most people,
though they had not so clear apprehensions of the immortality of the soul, as
we have; yet were they not only persuaded of the impossibility of its
annihilation, but have also acknowledged rewards and punishments to be expected
after this life.

To ascend yet a little higher; the divinity and pre-eminence of Religion is
demonstrated, in that it exercises that Empire and Sovereignty over the mind
of man, that no blandishments of the flesh, no temptations, no torments have
been able to dispossess it. It has triumphed in the midst of its
persecutions, and by her sufferings has conquered her persecutors. Her
pleasing Ravishments can stifle for a time all sense of humanity, elude flames,
and racks, and so arm the delicacy and tenderness of virgin-purity, as to
overcome the hardiest Tyrants. It is she that raises our souls to a holy
boldness and intimacy in our addresses to heaven, being indeed rapt into the
heavens of divine contemplation, by her ecstasies and illuminations. It was her
inspiring communication, that elevated your pious soul, when you described the
divine perfections of the incomparable THEOPHILA. These things can she do and
greater, when there is but one grain of true Faith; but when she is defiled and
adulterated with humane ceremonies and inventions, she is deformed, and looses
all her grace and beauty. And among these has she met with two most
importunate pretenders, Atheism and Superstition; the one strips her stark
naked, the other meretriciously prostitutes her in the disguises of humane
Inventions. And that she has been thus evil entreated, in all places and
times, this book gives but too great testimony, whether you look on the (...)
or this small appendix, treating for the most, of what happened in High and Low
Germany. I would not draw any excuse for our own gyrations of Religion here,
from their madness; but rather condem^ them as things that would have out-vy'd
the extravagance of the former. But to draw any argument against Religion from
either were impious; for if we did, we must in consequence, deny all, both
particular and universal providence of Almighty God; we must deny the
Scriptures, the heavenly Legacy of eternal salvation; we must deny Heaven,
Hell, Eternity, nay take away the Cement of all humane society, and expect to
see the order and beauty of the universe hurried into darkness and confusion,
since it ought not to out-last man, for whom it was created. Nay* but let us
rather profess humanity, and make this use of the failings and extravagance of
others in matters of Religion; To humble our selves to a relyance on that
immense Being, who has thought fit to plant Religion in the heart of man, to
direct him in his voyage to eternal happiness, wherein that every man might
take the right way, is the earnest prayer of

Worthy SIR, Your most devoted, and most humble servant, Jo. DAVIES.

These Books are to be sold by John Saywel at his shop, at the Sign of the
Greyhound in Litttle-Britain, London. viz.
THe History of the World, the second part, being a continuation of the famous
History of Sir Walter Raleigh Knight, together with a Chronology, etc. by A. R.
The true Copy whereof is distinguished by the Greyhound in the Frontispice,
from any other whatsoever, though colored by a pretended representation of the
Author in the Title page.

An exact collection of the choicest secrets in Physic and Chyrurgery (both
Chymick and Galenick) by Leonard Phioravant Knight, Doctor Edwards, and others.

Speedy help for Rich and Poor, as to the Griping of the Guts, Cure of the
Gout; etc. by Herma^nus Vanderheyden an experienced Physician.

Mr. Charles Hoole's Grammar in Latin, and English the shortest, orderliest,
and plainest both for Master and Scholar, of any yet extant.

Also his Terminationes and exempla declinationum and conjugationum, and
Propria quae maribus, Quae Genus, and As in praesenti, englished and explained,
for the use of young Grammarians.

And there is now lately printed a new Primer, entitled, Mr. Hoole's Primer;
more easy and delightsome for the learner then any yet extant, having 24.
several representations of Persons, Beasts, Birds, etc. answering the several
letters of the Alphabet in a copper plate, laying also the surest foundation
for true spelling; the defect whereof (in the ordinary teaching) is so much
complained of.

The practice of Quietness, by Bishop Web.

The View of all Religions and Church-Governments, with a discovery of
Heresies, in all Ages and Places; etc. whereunto this Apocalypsis is usually
adjoined.

The Authors Preface, TO THE READER
THE doctrine of the ANABAPTISTS, Courteous Reader, to give it thee in a single
expression, is nothing but lying and deceit. Thou happily think them a sort of
people divinely inspired, and Prophets: Thou art deceived. They are false
Prophets and false Teachers, as being a contagion, than which hell it self has
not vomited up a more dangerous since the beginning of the world. For I do not
think it can be easily demonstrated, what other mischief could have reduced not
only the Netherlands, but almost all Germany, into so great calamity and
devastation. When I more narrowly look into the Heresy of these men, I confess
I am puzzel'd to find a name for the Monster, but what its aims are, I may
happily guess.

Its first part speaks a Lion, its last ^ Dragon, the middle a pure chim^ra.

I call it a Monster, and I may add the most monstrous that ever was, as
having in it the Ingredients of all formerly condemned Sects. Which when I
consider, me thinks all the ancient Heretics, such as Nicholas Antiochenus,
the Gnostics, the Valentinians, Noetians, Sabellians, Patropassians,
Parmenians, present themselves anew out of Hell to me. So that I can make no
other judgment of THOMAS MUNTZER, that Author and Raiser of a most pernicious
Sect, then that he has r^-trected the Standards of all former heresies. But
that it may not be said, as in the Proverb, that Afric always furnishes us
with Novelties, he also with his desperate disciples, has sacrilegiously
attempted to advance some altogether new and unheard of opinions, whereof who
shall say that what is MADE is GOOD, must be very extravagant. Out of these,
have they resolved and decreed, that children till they come to age, are only
Catech^^meni, and ought not to be clad with the robe of holy Baptism. Out of
these, have they declared a community of all things. Out of these, teach to
dishonor and discard Magistrates, who are the living ectypes of God, while in
the mean time they themselves aspire to Sovereignty, and would be accounted
Potentates, when they are indeed the wickedst among men; Dissemblers, Cheats,
Hypocrites, Novators, or Advancers of Novelties, and the subtle generation of
the old Viper Novatus. Which said Novatus, if I display in the colors wherein
the holy Father and Martyr Cyprian sets him forth, discreet men shall be my
Judges, whether I have not hit the mark, and the same description most fitly
suites the greatest part of the Proselytes of Muntzer. As concerning Novatus
(says that Ornament of his Carthage, lib. 11. Epist. 8. to Cornelius then
Bishop of Rome) We needed not any relations to be sent to us of him, since that
from us you were to expect a more particular account of Novatus, a man that is
a constant Advancer of novelties, of an insatiable avarice, furious in his
rapines, blown up with arrogancy and pride, even to astonishment; a man not
admitting any good understanding with the Bishops: the end of his curiosity is
to betray, of his flattery to surprise, his love is dogged by his infidelity,
he is the fuel and firebrand that heightens the combustions of sedition, and
the hurrican and tempest which causes the shipwreck of Faith, an opposer of
Tranquillity, and an enemy to peace. These were his thoughts of Novatus, which
what wise man but will allow us to attribute to our Novators? Certainly, if
John that Botcher of Leiden, the ulcer and deformity of that gallant City, were
to be drawn in his own colors, we need borrow them no where else. You
therefore, Orthodox Doctors, reduce those erroneous and miserably seduced men,
which yet are so, into the way of Truth, Deliver them, I beseech you out of
this phrensy, and omit no opportunities which may help to recover them out of
this imaginary disease to which they are so accustomed. This shall be your
reward, this is the prize you shall obtain. Him that overcomes, will I make a
Pillar in the Temple of my God, and I will write upon him the name of my God,
etc. Revel 3. 12.

1. THOMAS MUNTZER.
His OPINIONS, ACTIONS, and END.
THE CONTENTS.
MUntzers Doctrine spreads, his aims high, his affirmations destructive; He
asserts Anabaptisme, rests ut there, but grows worse and worse in his opinions
and pra^tises; his large promises to his party and the common people: (...)
endeavors to set up himself, pretending to restore the Kingdom of Christ;
being opposed by the Landgrave, his delusive Animation of his followers; their
overthrow; his escape; he is found, but dissembles himself; is taken, but yet
obstinate; the Landgrave convinces him by Scripture, when being ^acked, he
laugheth, afterward relenteth; his last words; is deservedly beheaded, and made
an example.

2. JOHN MATHIAS.
The Contents.
John Mathias repaires to Munster, his severe edicts, he becomes a malicious
executioner of Hubert Trutiling, for contumelions expressions touching him; his
own desperate end.

3. JOHN BUCKHOLD, or JOHN of LEYDEN.
The Contents.
John Buckhold his character, his disputing and contention with the
Ecclesiastics concerning Paedobaptisme; he succeeds John Mathias, he comforts
the people with a pretended revelation; he makes Bernard Knipperdoling of a
Consul, to become common executioner, Buckhold feigneth himself dumb, be
assumes the Magistracy, he allows Polygamy, he takes to himself three wives;
he is made King, and appoints Officers under him; his sumptuous apparel; his
Titles were King of Justice, King of the new Jerusalem; his throne, his Coin
and motto thereon; The King, Queen, and Courtiers wait on the people at a
Feast: with other digressio^s. The King endeavors to raise commotions abroad,
is happily prevented. He suspects his own safety; his large pr^mises to his
Captains, himself executes one of his wives, he feignes himself sick, and
deludes the people with an expectation of deliverance; in the time of famine,
forgets community; he is betrayed by his Confident, is brought prisoner before
the Bishop, who checks him; his jesting answer and proposal; he is put to a
Nonplus, is convinced of his offenses; his deserved and severe execution.

4. HERMANNUS SUITOR.
The Contents.
HErman the Cobbler professes himself a Prophet, etc. he is noted for
drunkenness; The ceremonies he used i^ Anabaptisme, Eppo his Host discovers
him and his followers to be cheats; Hermans wicked blasphemies, and his
inconstancy in his opinions, his mothers temerity; his Sect convinced, and fall
off from him; by one Drewjis of his Sect he is handled roughly; Herman is taken
by Charles Lord of Gelderland, etc. and is brought prisoner to Groeninghen;
when questioned in his torments, he hardened himself, and died miserably.

5. THEODORUS SARTOR.
The Contents.
THeodor the Botcher turns Adamite, he affirms strange things, his blasphemy
in forgiving of sins he burn^ his clothes, etc. and causes his companions to
do the lik^. He and his rabble go naked through Amsterdam, in the dead of
^ight, denouncing their woes, etc. and terrify the people. They are taken and
imprisoned by the Burghers, but continue (...). May 5. 1535. they are put to
death; some of their last words.

6. DAVID GEORGE.
The Contents.
DAvid George, the miracle of the Anabaptists. At Basil he pretend^ to have
been banished his Country for the Gospels-sake; with his specious pretenses he
gains the freedom of the City for him and his. His Character. His Riches. He
with his Sect enact three things. His Son in Law, doubting his new Religion,
is by him questioned; and upon his answer excommunicated. His wifes death. He
had formerly voted himself immortal, yet Aug. 2. 1556 he died, etc. His death
troubled his disciples. His doctrine questioned by the Magistrates, eleven of
the Sectaries secured. XI. Articles extracted out of the writings of David
George, Some of the imprisoned Sectaries acknowledged David George to have been
the cause of the tumults in the lower parts of Germany, but dis^owned his
doctrine.

Conditions whereupon the imprisoned are set at liberty:

The Senate vote the doctrine of D. G. impious, and declare him unworthy of
Christian burial, and that his body and (...) should be burned, which was
accordingly effected.

7. MICHAEL SERVETUS.
The Contents.
SErvetus his converse with Mahumetans and Jews. He disguiseth his monstrous
opinions with the Name of Christian Reformation. The place of his birth. At the
24. year of his age, he boasted himself the only Teacher and Seer of the
world, He enveighed against the Deity of Christ. Oecolampadius confutes his
blasphemies, and causes him to be thrust out of the Church of Basil. Servetus
held but one person in the Godhead to be worshipped, etc. He held the holy
Ghost to be Nature. His horrid blasphemy. He would reconcile the Turkish
Alcoran to Christian Religion. He declares himse^f Prince of the Anabaptists.
At Geneva, Calvin faithfully reproves Servetus, but he continues obstinate.
Anno 1553. by the decrees of several Senates, He was burned.

8. ARRIUS.
THE CONTENTS.
Arrianisme its increase, Anno 323.

THe General Council at Nice, Anno 325. called as a Remedy against it, but
without success. The Arrians misinterpret that place, John 10. 30. concerning
the Father and the Son. They acknowledged one only God in a Iudaical sense.
They deny the Trinity. Arrius his wretched death. Anno 336.

9. MAHOMET.
The Contents.
MAhomet characterised. He made a laughing stock of the Trinity. He agreed with
Carpocrates, and other heretics. He renewed Circumcision, and to indulge his
disciples, he allowed them Polygamy, etc. His Iron Tomb at Mecca.

10. BALTHAZAR HUBMOR.
The Contents.
HUbmor a Patron of Anabaptisme. He damned usury. He brought in a worship to
the Virgin Mary, etc. The Senate of Suring by a Council reduced him. He
renounced the heads of his former doctrine. Himself or Sect still active. He is
taken and imprisoned at Vienna in Austria. He and his wife both burned.

11. JOHN HUT.
The Contents.
John Hut the prop and pillar of Anabaptisme. His credulity in dreams and
visions. He is accounted a true Prophet by his Proselytes. At Merhern, his
Fraternity became as it were a Monastery.

12. LODOWICK HETZER.
The Contents.
LOdowick Hetzer a famous Heretic. He gains Proselytes in Austria and
Switzerland. Anno 1527, at a public disputation Oecolampadius puts Hetzers
emissaries to their shifts. Hetzer denied Christ to be co-essentiall with the
Father. His farewell to his Disciples. He is put to death for Adultery.

13. MELCHIOR HOFMAN.
The Contents.
HOfman a Skinner, an Anabaptist; Anno 1528, seduced 300. men and women at
Embda in West-Friesland. His followers accounted him a Prophet. At Strasburg,
he challenged the Ministers to dispute, which was agreed upon Jan. 11. 1532.
where being mildely dealt with, he is nevertheless obstinate. Other Prophets
and Prophetesses deluded him. He deluded himself, and voluntarily pined himself
to death.

14. MELCHIOR RINCK.
The Contents.
MElchior Rinck, an Anabaptist. He is accounted a notable interpreter of dreams
and visions. His disciple Thomas Scucker in a waking-dream cut off his brother
Leonards head; pretending for his murder obedience to the decree of God.

15. ADAM PASTOR.
The Contents.
ADam Pastor a derider of Paedobaptisme. He revived the Arrian heresy. His
foolish interpretation of that place, Genesis 2. 17. so often confuted.

16. HENRY NICHOLAS.
The Contents.
HEnry Nicholas, Father of the Family of Love. He is against Infant Baptism.
His divellish Logic.

The End of the Contents.
THOMAS MUNTZER.


Hei mihi quot sacras iterans Baptismatis undas
Muntzerus Stygijs Millia tinxit aquis!
His OPINIONS, ACTIONS, And END.
THE CONTENTS.
MUntzers Doctrine spreads, his aims high, (...) affirmations destractive;
Asserts Anabaptisme, rests not there, but grows worse and worse in his
opinions and practices; his large pro^ises to his party and the common people:
he endeavors to set up himself, pretending to restore the Kingdom of Christ;
being opposed by the Landgrave, his delusive animation of his followers; their
overthrow; his escape; he is found, but dissembles himself; is taken, but yet
obstinate; the Landgrave convinces him by Scripture, when being racked, he
laugheth, afterward relenteth; his last words; is deservedly beheaded, and made
an example.

ABout the year of our Redemption, M.D.XXI. and M.D.XXII. there rise up in
Sawny near the River Sales, ANNO 1521. 1522.
a most insolent Sect of certain Enthusiasts, among whom Nicholas Storkius was
no ordinary person. These presumptuously boasting that their Dreams, Heretics
their usual pretense.
Visions, and Revelations, were inspired into them from heaven, had slily
scattered it among other seditious persons of the same kidney; That the world
was to be reformed by their means, which done, and the wicked utterly cut off
from the face of the earth, it should be governed ^y Justice it self. All that
gave not up their names, and embraced their Sect, they branded with the name of
ungodly. Out of this Sodomitical lake sprung THOMAS MVNTZER, Muntzer a quick
Scholar in a bad ^chool.
one that boasted that he had had communication with God. This man's doctrine
incredibly spread, as being in the first place levelled at the holy. Doctors of
the reformed Religion; His doctrine spreads.
And from thence discharged at the Magistrates themseves; for the Christian
flock being once deprived of these two constitutions of men, His aims high.
there were nothing to hinder the greedy wolves to break out into all rapine
and oppression. The end that hereti^ks propound to themselves, in opposing the
Ministry and Magistracy.
And this is the reason why the wolves, that is to say, the false Teachers,
have ever most violently opposed the Ministry and the Magistracy, in hopes, if
possible, to draw these from the care and charge of their flocks, or at least
to bring them into contempt with their sheep, which by that means should stray
into their parties. This Muntzer did both by his teachings and writings
publicly affirm; that the Preachers of that time that contributed their
endeavors to the advancement of the Gospel, His affirmations destructive.
were not sent by God, but were mere Scribes, and impertinent Interpreters of
the Scriptures; That the Scriptures and the written word, were not the pure
word of God, but only a bare Testimony of the true word; that the true real
word was something that were intrinse call and heavenly, and immediately
proceeding out of the mouth of God, and consequently to be learned
intrinsecally, and not out of the Scriptures, or by any humane suggestion. With
the same breath he brought Baptism into contempt, Anabaptists their leading
principle.
most inconvincibly affirming that there was no warrant from God for
Paedobaptisme, or baptism of children, and that they ought to be baptized
after a spiritual and more excellent dispensation. Seldom rest there, but grow
worse and worse.
He further endeavored to teach that Christ's satisfa^ction for us was
unnecessary, whatever honest and weak understanding men could urge to the
contrary; That matrimony in the unfaithful and incontinent, was a pollution,
meretricious and diabolical; That God discovered his will by dreams (whence it
was that he was mightily infatuated with them) holding that those were (as it
were) communicated by the holy Ghost. Hereupon was he acknowledged by his
followers for some heavenly and spiritual Prophet, Sectaries like tinder, are
soon on fire.
and it was believed that he was thus taught by the spirit of God, without any
humane assistance. This doctrine did he disperse throughout all Germany by
printed books and Epistles, which the tinder-brain'd disciples of his seditious
sect were soon fired with, read, approved, and propagated. The same man in the
years M.D.XXIII. ANNO 1523; 1524.
and M.D.XXIV. taught at Alsted which is a City in Saxony, near Thuringia; and
when not only the Ministers, but also the Magistrates lay under the lash of his
calumny, insomuch that his Sermons were stuffed with most seditious and bitter
invectives against them, and pretending to groan for the return of lost
liberty, An usual pretense to raise sedition.
and for the insufferable pressures of the people under Tyranny, he complained
of it as a great grievance, that their wealth and estates were the prey of the
Magistrate, and therefore would persuade them that a remedy was timely to be
applied to these things. Being for this doctrine dispatched out of Alsted,
Heretics rest^lesse.
he comes to Norimberg, and thence without discontinuing his journey into
Basil, and thence into Switzerland* from whence at length he came to Cracovia,
where at a certain ^own called Griessen, he continued some weeks. In the mean
time he was no less idle then ever, and that especially in the County of
S^u^ing, where he sowed so much of his contagious seed among his factious
disciples, as afterward thrived in^o an extraordinary harvest. At the same
time he publicly scattered abroad his doctrine of Baptism, and the word of
God, in such sort as we have touched before. Departing out of this country,
and wandering up and down Mulhusium in the country of During, he writ letters
to some of the most confident to his Religion; by whose conn^enance and
assistance factious spirits were sometimes more and more exasperated against
the Magistrate. Some small time before the country people took up arms, he
sent up and and down certain Briefes by Messengers, wherein were diverse things,
and among the rest was represented the greatness of those warlike instruments
which were cast at (...) upon occasion of this sedition, so to encourage and
inflame the fiery followers of his faction. For having stayed two months at
Griessen, and that he thought he could not so much advance his designs if he
^eturned into Saxony, because his affairs prospered not according to his
desires in these places, he returns back to the people of During and Mulhusium.
But before he was arrived thither, Luther advises the Senate to beware of
Muntzer, and his opinions.
LVTHER had by letters forewarned the reverend (...) of Mulhusium concerning
him, that they should beware of him as of a destroying wolf, and fitter to be
(...) then Serpents, or whatever Mankind bears any antipathy to, for that both
at Swickaw, and not long before at Alsted, he was accounted a tree sufficiently
evil and corrupt, which bo^e no other fruit but (...) and inevitable
destruction; and one, who, no more then his Com^^ades, could ever be brought to
make any defense of their opinions, among which was, That they (...) were Gods
elect, and that all the children of their Religion were to be called the
children of God; and that all others were ungodly, and designed to damnation.
And diverse other things to the same purpose were contained in the aforesaid
letter, which was dated from Weimaria, on Sunday, being the day of the
Assumption of Mary, in the year M.D.XXIV. Muntzer in the mean time with words
plausibly sweetened, Muntzers large promises to his party, and the common people.
drew away the minds of all he could to favor his party, and by promising
mountains of gold to the common people, to the end they should cry him up with
the general acclamations of being a true Prophet, it came to pass that a very
great conflux of the dregs of the people repaired to him from Mulhusium and
other places; nay, by his subtilty and the authority he had gotten, he
perverted the very Magistrate of Mulhusium, Magistrates seduced, most ominous.
and made him a new abe^tor of his opinion. And this was the first original of
the mischief; and thence diverse other Hydra's of seditions like so many
excrescencies took a sudden growth from this. For all men's goods became
common, and he taught that no man had any propriety in what he enjoyed. To
which he added, that it was revealed to him from God, Muntzer endeavors to set
up himself, pretending to restore the Kingdom of Christ.
that the Empire and Principalities of this world were to be extirpated, and
that the sword of Gideon was put into his hands to be employed against all
Tyrants, for the assertion of true liberty, and the restoration of the Kingdom
of Christ: and at this time he gave orders for the preparing of certain warlike
engines. While he was wholly taken up about these things, that is, in the
following year M.D.XXV. the country people throughout Swedland and Franconia,
An ill president soon followed.
and diverse other places, rise up against their Magistrates, forced away a
great part of the Nobility, plundered Towns and Castles, to be short, made an
absolute devastation by fire and sword. The Landgrave raises a war, and
fights Muntzer and his party.
The Landgrave Henry being moved at these things raises a war, and fought the
country people, the first time near Franken^usium, the fourteenth day of May,
which done, he prepared himself for a second fight to be fought the next day,
which Muntzer having intelligence of, Muntzers delusive animation of his
followers.
said by way of animation to his followers, What are those Cannon-bullets? I
will receive them in my gloves, and they shall not hurt me, whereby the
country people being encouraged, were the next day beaten by the Landgrave,
five thousand slain, Their overthrow.
and three hundred taken, who had all their heads cut off; so that, while they
were ambitious of Liberty, they lost even the liberty of life it self. And
herein was the ancient Proverb verified, War is most delightful to those that
had never experienced it. The discreeter part of the country people, having
laid down their arms, put their hands to the golden plough, to hold which they
had been designed, rather than to manage Lances and Pole-axes. Muntzers escape.
Muntzer escapes to Frankenhusium, and hid himself in a house near the Gate,
where a certain Nobleman had taken up his quarters. This man's servant going up
into the upper rooms of the house to see how they were accommodated, finds
one lying upon a bed, of whom he enquired, whether he were of those who had
escaped the fight, Is found out, but dissembles himself.
which he denied, averring that he had lain some time sick of a fever:
whereupon looking about, he perceives a little bag lying carelessely near the
bed side; he opens it and finds letters from Albert Count of Mansfield, wherein
he dehorted Muntzer from his wicked purpose, and from promoting the tumult
already raised. Having read them, he asked him whether they were directed to
him, who denying, he threatens to kill him; whereupon he cried quarter, and
confessed himself to be Muntzer. Muntzer taken, yet obstinate.
He is taken, and brought before George Duke of Saxony and the Landgrave,
whereupon they having made him confess that he was the cause of the popular
insurrection, and sedition; he answered that he had done but his duty, and that
the Magistrates who were opposers of his Evangelical doctrine, were by such
means to be chastised. To which the Landgrave made answer, The Landgrave
convinces him by Scripture.
and proved it by several testimonies of Scripture, that all honor is to be
given to the Magistrate; and that all tumult raised in order to a man's
particular revenge, was by God forbidden Christians. Here Muntzer being
convinced, held his peace. Being laid upon the rack, while he cried out aloud
and wept, the Duke of Saxony spoke to him to this purpose; Now thou art
punished, Muntzer, consider with thy self by what unspeakable ways thou have
seduced and brought so many to destruction! whereat Muntzer broke out into a
great laughter, Muntzer when racked, laugheth, but afterward relenteth.
saying, This is the judgment of the country people. But when being brought to
his death, he was thrust into a close prison, it is wonderful how faint-hearted
he was, and stood extremely troubled in mind, not being able to give any
account of his Faith, but as the Duke of Saxony pronounced before him, and
which he told him, he was to make a confession of before God: Being surrounded
with soldiers, he openly acknowledged his wickedness, and withal addressed
these words to the Princes that were present; show mercy and compassion, His
last words.
ye Princes, lest hereafter, you incur by my example the punishment I now
suffer; Read and attentively consider the holy Books of the Kings. Having said
this, his head was struck off, and fastened to a stake, Is deservedly beheaded.
for a monument and example to others.

JOHN MATHIAS.


Primus hie e Batavis Muntzeri dogma sequutus
Turbavit mitis Westphala regna modis.
THE CONTENTS.
JOHN MATHIAS repaires to Munster, his severe edicts, he becomes a malicious
executioner of Hubert Trutiling, for contumelious expressions touching him; his
own desperate end.

IN the year of our Lord God. ANNO 1532.
M.D.XXXII. at M^^ster (which is the Metropolis of Westphali^) a certain Priest
called (...) undertook to preach the Gospel of Christ; which being done with
great success, certain messengers were (...) to Marpyrgum, a place in Has^ia,
whose business was to bring along with them some men of learning and good
conversation, who should be helpful in the propagation of the Gospel* From
(...) were their (...) dispatched, who arriving at M^nster, reduced the
principal heads of Christian Religion into thirty nine Articles, which they
proposed to the Magistrate, being ready, (as they pretended) to make good and
prove the said heads, Pretenders to Religion, prove usually the disturbers
thereof.
by places of the holy Scriptures; which was effected. The Religious, and (as
they are called) the spiritual who were possessed of the chiefest Church, could
by no means digest this, so that departing the City, they caused much trouble
to the Citizens. Upon this weighty business, the Magistrates and Citizens sat
in long and prudent consultations. At length there was a certain agreement,
upon these terms, viz. that all injuries committed in those Tumults should be
p^^doned, and that the Gospel should be freely preached in six Parish Churches,
and that the Church of our Lord only should be absolutely reserved to them.
These conditions were readily subscribed to by both sides, and thereupon all
things laid asleep in peace. But this peace was not long undisturbed by the
Devil, The devil an enemy of peace.
(that irreconcilable enemy of peace and virtue) and therefore by doing at
M^nster what he had done at other places, that is, by raising up out of the
jaws of Hell, the seditious and pesti^erous Anabaptists, those importunate
disturbers and turn-pikes of the Gospel, his design was not only to discourage
the good and godly, but withal, shamefully to destroy the Gospel it self. For
in the same year there rise up at Harlem a Baker called John Mathias, John
Mathias a Baker at Harlem.
a man utterly unlearned, yet cr^fty and boldly eloquen^. This man being
e^cessively lecherous, neglected and ^lighted his own wi^e, who being somewhat
well ^trit^en in years, His lechery notrrious.
(...) so much the less fit for the exercises of (...)* Being therefore over
head and ^ars (...) love with a certain Virago who was an Alehousekeepers
daughter, he could not resolve of any way more advantageous to seduce, then by
an Angelical carriage, and a counterfeit sanctity. He made frequent visits to
her, and entertaining her with his visions and revelations, he thereby drew her
to his opinion, and conveyed her into a secret place in Amsterdam, At
Amsterdam he professes himself a Doctor and a Preacher*
where he professed himself a Doctor and a Preacher, affirming that God had
revealed certain secrets unto him, not yet revealed to others, and that he was
Enoch the second high Priest of God* Upon some he laid hands, and sent them two
by two as Apostles and messengers of Christ, dispatching to Munster one Gerard
a Bookseller, and John Buckhold the botcher of Leyden, others into other
places. These emissary messengers of Christ, or rather of Satan, boiled over
with their various opinions, held marriages of no account, and dreamed diverse
other things. Some taught by parables, and their own illusive dreams; others,
acknowledged not him a Brother who defiled his Baptism with sins; others
preferred the Baptism of John before that of Christ; A murtherous opinion.
others taught that all Magistrates, and whoever were unsatisfied with their
Religion, ought to be destroyed root and branch; some would acknowledge nothing
but their own visions and prophecies; others that all the Prophets and Teachers
that were departed this life, should shortly rise again, and should reign with
Christ upon earth a thousand years, and should receive a hundred fold for what
ever they had left behind them. Some of these men affirmed that they had
communication with God, some with Angels; but the more discreet and wiser sort
of men conceived that their conferences had been with the devil. Hereupon the
great Prophet John Mathias (upon whose account his most vain Apostles already
proclaimed a Peace) perceiving an occasion by this means of domineering in this
world, consecrated in his stead his disciple James Campensis, a Sawyer, Bishop
at Amsterdam, committing unto his charge the people, John Mathias repaires to
Munster.
to be seduced with the same zeal, as he had begun. These things being thus
fairly carried, he repaired to Munster to his Apostle and Ambassador John
Buckhold, whom he made Governor of the City, who presently published these
severe edicts. His severe edicts.
That every man should bring his gold and silver, and whatever were of greater
importance, into the common heap, and that no man should detain any thing at
his house; for the receiving of which things so collected, a place was
appointed. Though the people were not a little astonished at the rigor and
severity of the edict, yet did they submit thereto. Moreover he forbad the
reading of all books but the Bible, all which that they ought to be burnt, the
divine authority had by him, its witness, commanded.

At this very time a certain Tradesman, whose name was Hubert Trutiling, had
scattered some contu^^elious expressions concerning this great Prophet; whereat
he being immeasur^bly incenled, even to the loss of all compassion, caused the
foresaid Trutiling to be brought into the Market place, where he is accused and
sentenced. Whereupon he himself laying his violent hands upon this innocent
man, lays him along upon the ground; He becomes a malicious executioner of
Hubert Trutiling, for not siding with him.
in that posture he runs him through with a spear; but finding by the
palpitation, that there was some remainder of life, he made him be conveyed
thence, and, taking a musket from one that stood by, which was charged, killed
him, intimating that he was commanded by God, that is to say, his own, (who was
a murderer from the beginning) to do what he had done. This noble exploit
performed, he took a long lance in his hand, and hastily ran about the City,
crying out that he was commanded by God the Father to put to flight the enemy,
which at that time had closely besieged Munster. Having taken the said weapon,
and running like a mad man upon the enemy, His desperate end.
he himself was run through by a soldier of Misna.

JOHN BuCKHOLD, or JOHN of LEYDEN.


Agressusque nefas magnum et memorabile, Regem
Somniat, abjecta forfice sceptra gerens.
THE CONTENTS.
JOHN BUCKHOLD his character, his disputing and contention with the
Ecclesiastics concerning Paedobaptisme; he succeeds John Mathias, he comforts
the people with a pretended revelation; he makes Bernard Knipperdoling of a
Consul, to become common executioner. Buckhold feigneth himself ^umb he
ass^^^es the Magistracy, he allows Polygamy, he takes to himself three wives;
he is made King, and appoints Officers under him; his sumptuous apparel; his
Titles were King of Justice, King of the new Jerusalem; his throne, his Coi^
and motto therein; The King, Queen, and Courtiers wa^e on the people at a
Feast, with other ligressions. The King endea^ours to raise ^^^^^tions abroad,
is happily prevented. He suspects his own safety* his large promises to his
Captains, himself (...) one of his wives, he feignes himself sick, and deludes
the people with an expectation of deliverance, in the time of famine, forgets
community; he is betrayed by his confident, it brought prisoner before the
Bishop, who checks him; his jesting answer and proposal; ^e is put to a (...)
place, is convinced of his offenses; his deserved and severe execution.

JOHN BUCKHOLD was a ^^^cher of Leyden* John Buckhold his character,
a (...) fellow eloquent, very perfect in the (...) confident, more ^^^geable
then proteus, a serious student of (...), briefly, a most ferrent Anabaptist.
This man being sent by John Mathia^ to Munster was a perpetual thorn in the
sides of the Ecclesiastics, craftily ^i^ting them about the b^sinesse of
P^^^^baptisme, His disputing and contention with the Ecclesiastics concerning
P^dobaptisme*
in which employment he spent nine whole months, and most (...) making his
party good with them, both as disputationand litigious contention, while in the
mean time he secretly spawned and scattered the doctrine of Anabaptisme, as
much as lay in his power. About that time a certain unknown Preacher of the
word of God, (...) Stapreda of Meurs came to Munster, who supplying the place
of Ro^man^^s in preaching, seduced him, and tea^ened him with Anabaptisme, and
he also publicly anat^^matized P^dobaptisme. This gave occasion of raising
(...) among the people* they who before were only secretly instructed by John
Buckhold, Conventicles usually the nurseries of Tumults.
discover themselves openly to the world, and lay aside all disguises of their
intentions; City, they have their in most parts of the frequentmeetings,
indivers (...), but all in the night time, whereat the Magistrates being (...)
and offended, prohibited their Conventicles, and some they banished; But they
weigh not this any thing, and being sent out at one gate, they came in at
another, and lay concealed among those that were the favorers of their Sect.
Hereupon the Senate caused all the Ecclesiastics to assemble at the Palace, to
dispute the business of Paedobaptisme. In this Assembly, Rotmannus stood tooth
and nail for the Anabaptists; but those of the Reformation fully refuted their
errors, as the public acts concerning that business do abundantly testify.
At this very time the Ministers of the Church of Argentoratum signed and set
out an account of their Faith in a printed Book. Hereupon the Senate of Munster
by a public edict banished the Anabaptists out of the City; which edict, they,
persisting in contention, opposed, being now arrived to that rashness and
impudence, that they thrust a reformed Preacher, one Peter Werthemius out of
the Church. Yea, some of them rioting about the City, (whereof the Ringleader
was Henry Rollius) cried out as they went, Repent and be rebaptized, otherwise
will the heavy wrath of God fall upon you! These things happened about the end of
the year M.D.XXXIII. and the beginning of M.D.XXXIV. ANNO 1533. etc.
Some honest-hearted and harmless men, partly out of an apprehension of divine
wrath (as they made them believe) partly for fear of men, suffered themselves
to be washed in the l^ver of Anabaptisme. Anabaptists their bold attempt.
For, the Anabaptists leaving their dens, broke into the City without any
control, and with an unanimous violence assaulting the Market place, they soon
possessed themselves of the Palace and the Magazine, sentencing with loud
conclamations and such as required a greater voice then that of Stentor, that
all were to be destroyed as so many Heathens and Reprobates, that did not
embrace Anabaptisme. In this tumult, a certain young man of Burchstenford was
killed. This gave occasion both to the Papists, and to those of the Reformation
to provide for their safety. The chiefest Patrons of the Anabaptistical Heresy
were, Bernard Rotman, John Buckhold, Bernard Knipperdoling, Gerard
Knippenburch; Bernard Krachting, etc. These two parties having skirmished with
as great eagerness and animostly as greater armies exasperated one against
another, for some days, there followed a Truce, whereby it was agreed that
every one should quietly enjoy, and persever in his own Religion. However the
surges of Anabaptisme were not yet laid, till they had entered into a
conspiracy to drive those of the Reformation out of the City. The most eminent
of the Conclave writ to the Anabaptists of the Cities adjoining, viz. to these
of D^^men, Coesvelt, Soyst, Warendorp, and Osenburg, that leaving all things
behind them, they should repair with all speed to Munster, promising they
should have ten-fold what ever they left. Being enticed by these prop^^^^ns*
husbands and wives leaving all behind them, (...) in swarms to Munster. A
great number of the more religious ^nhabitants looking on that strange rabble
as an insufferable grievance to their City, left it to the disposal of the
Anabaptists, who being by this means increased in number, became also more
extravagant, degraded the Senate, and chose another out of themselves, wherein
were Consuls, Gerard Knippenburg, and Bernard Kniperdeling, whose Effigies is
the ensuing.

BERNARD KNIPPERDOLING.


Quo non fastus abit? quid non Rex impius audet?
Carnificem fecit, qui modo Consulerat.
BEing now become Lords and Masters, they in the first place seized on Maurice
Church, Anabaptists where Masters, most insolent.
and burnt it, and the houses all about it; thence falling forcibly upon other
holy places and Monasteries, they carried away Gold, Silver, Ornaments and
Utensils, and whatsoever else was of any consequence. Upon the fourth day after
those rapines, trudging up and down the streets and highways, they with a
horrible howling, uttered, Repent, Repent! to which they added, Depart, depart,
be gone ye wicked, otherwise woe be to you! This done, they immediately went
armed in multitudes, and with unspeakable barbarism and cruelty, turned out
their miserable fellow-citizens, as enemies to their Religion* out of their
houses and possessions, and thrust them out of the City without any
consideration of age or sex, so that many women with child had this misfortune
seconded with that of dangerous abortions. The Anabaptists presently by what
right they please, seize to themselves the possessions of the banished: so that
the honest and godly party being cast out of the City, fell into the hands of
the soldiers, who had blocked up the City and all the avenues, as among
enemies, by whom some were taken, others unadvisedly killed; at which entreaty
the other honester part of citizens being discouraged, and seeing, that guilty
and not guilty fared alike, would not stir a foot out of the City; which
being closely besieged by the Bishops Army, all places were filled with blood,
^igh^, ^eares. Now do the mad men of Munster, and such as no Hellebo^e can have
any effect on, grow insufferably insolent, and above all, that great Prophet
John Mathias, of whom we have spoken before: But that sally of his out of the
City, those of Munster looked on as a great Omen of their destruction, and
thought that the unexpected death of that most holy man did signify, that some
great calamity did hang over their heads. John Buckhold successor of John
Mathias*
But John Buckhold must be his successor, a lid fit for the other pot; who
addressing himself to the people, comforted them, persuading them that they
ought not to mourn for that unlooked for miscarriage of the Prophet, for that
it had long before been revealed to him, He comforts the people with a
pretended to* vel^tion*
and withal, that he should marry his widow. Upon Easter Eve they fell upon
all the Churches and places of devotion about the City, and pulled down all the
brass works. Some few days after, Bernard Knipperdoling prophesied that all
the chiefest men ought to be disqualified and degraded, and that the poor and
the humble were to be exalted. He also declared, that it was the command of the
divine Oracle* that all Churches should be demolished, which indeed was
sufficiently performed. The very same day John Buckhold putting into the hands
of Bernard Knipperdoling, He makes Knipperdoling common executioner.
the Executioners sword, conferred on him withal his employment, and that
according to Gods command; so that he who had discharged the office of a
Consul, was now to execute that most dishonorable employment of a common
executioner. This most excellent condition he cheerfully accepted. By this time
had the City been besieged some months by the Bishops forces when resolving to
(...) it, they lost both Gentlemen, Commission Officers and others, About 4000.
men lost at the siege of Munster.
to the number of about four thousand, upon which they quitted all hope of
taking it by force. Some few days after Whitsuntide, the City being
notwithstanding the dis-execution of that assault still besieged, was wholly
taken up to rest and imaginary dreams, wherein there were spent three whole
days; which done, THE ANABAPTIST being awaken, acted the part of Zacharias,
John Baptist's father; for, pretending to be dumb, Buckhold feigneth himself
dumb.
he desired to have a Table Book; wherein he wrote down the names of twelve
men, who should be as it were the twelve Elders of Israel, and should
administer all things at Munster, as if it were the New Jerusalem, and this he
affirmed that he was commanded to do from heaven* By this brokery did this
crafty knave chalk out his way to that sovereign dignity whereof he was so
ambitious. But in the mean time, consider by what a strange Stitch this
excellently wicked Botcher did utterly dis-repute that Magistrate whom God had
ordained, and by the assistance of most illusive dreams and his own excellency
of playing the impostor, He assumes the Magistracy.
he possessed himself of that dignity. A while after our Prophet advanced
certain conclusions tending to the allowance of Polygamy, He allows Polygamy.
whereat the Ecclesiastics made some opposition, but afterward were content
to sit still. So that, not long after the Prophet at one bou^ took to him three
wives, He takes to himself three wives.
whereof the most eminent was the widow of the deceased Prophet Io. Mathias,
and whom he afterward dignified with the title of Queen* This example of
Kingship, some other knaves like himself did without any difficulty admit; A
bad example soon followed.
but diverse of the more godly citizens, looking on this thing with the greatest
indignation that might be, Godly and loyal citizens hate usurpation.
repairing to the Market place laid hands on the Prophet Knipperdoling, which
occasioning the people to take up arms, they set upon those citizens in the
palace, Loyalty not always successful.
and having taken them, they delivered the Prophet and the Ecclesiastics out
of their hands. Nine and forty of the said citizens were after a most barbarous
manner put to death. Hereupon the Prophet cried out, Heretics, their cruelty.
that all those who should do any violence to those enemies of God, should do
God a very high piece of service, whence it came to pass, that some were torn
in pieces with Hooks, and not a few killed by Knipperdoling himself. Upon the
four and twentieth of June, ANNO 1534.
which is the day of the Nativity of John Baptist, in the year one thousand
five hundred thirty four, at Munster or rather Monster, (for so may that place
be called from the monstrous and portentous pullulation of Anabaptists) there
sprung from Hell another new Prophet, John Tuysentschreuer an upstart, and a
bettor of John Buckhold.
one John Tuysentschreuer, a Goldsmith of Warendorp. The people being generally
summoned to the Market place, this man acquainted them, that the most holy
Prophet John Buckhold of Leiden was to be exalted to Kingly Dignity, and that
he should inherit the eternal seat of his Father David, and should possess it
with far greater Majesty. Having prophesied these things, John Buckhold
confirms his delusive prophecies.
Buckhold kneeling down confirmed all, saying, that so much had been revealed
to him from God the Father ten days before; though it was against his
inclination to undertake the difficulties of Government. The common people
being astonished at this extravagant piece of villainy, tore their hair as they
went; yet however some might smell out the cheat, fear was able to stifle all
murtering. For, this Beast fatten'd for destruction, having been very
successeful in some encounters, had now assumed what Authority he pleased*
Behold, he that at Leiden was but a Botcher, He is made King.
is made King at Munster, John Buckhold is invested with all the Regalia of
supreme Authority. Having hereupon immediately degraded the twelve Counselors
of State, He appoints officers under him.
according to the wonted manner, he constitutes a Viceroy, a Controller of his
household, four Huissers or common Cryers, a Noble man, a Chancellor,
Cup-bearers, Carvers, and Tasters, and Master Builders, and disposed of all
other offices; as Princes use to do. The Kingly robes were some made of waterd
stuffes, His sumptuous apparel.
some made of silk, some of pure silk, some scarlet, some made more sumptuous
with the Gold of the Ornaments which the sacrilege had furnished him with, so
that it can hardly be expressed, how artificially, how gallantly, how indeed
Emperor-like they were interwoven, being embroidered with gold, edged,
scollop'd, and disposed into diverse colors. His spurs were gilt with gold, and
he had two Crowns of solid gold, and a golden scabbard. The King walking in
these ornaments, two young men in a Courtly and magnificent habit, one of each
side of him accompanied him, whereof one carried a naked sword, the handle
whereof glister'd with gold and precious stones; the other held up the holy
Bible, together with a golden Crown shining with most excellent pearls. A
certain jewel dazeling the beholders with the bright sparkling of a Diamond,
and whereat was hanged a golden apple (to represent as it were the world)
wounded through with two swords a cross, hanged at his neck. His Scepter was
set forth with three golden incirculations. His Nobles, who were eight and
twenty in number, clad in green and ashie colored garments, and having on
white Turbants, His Titles were King of Justice, King of the new Jerusalem.
accompanied him. The Kings title was, THE KING OF JUSTICE, THE KING OF THE NEW
IERVS ALEM* In the Market place there was erected a Throne for him of three
steps high, which, when the King sat in it, was adorned with ornaments of more
then Attalick sumptuousness* His T^rone.
Some money he caused to be coined, His Coin and Mot^o thereon.
whereon was this Latin Inscription, VERBVM CARO FACTVM QVOD HABITAT IN NOBIS,
that is, The word made flesh, which dwells in us. The City being all this
while besieged, the Prophets and the Doctors published the book called THE
RESTITVTIONS, wherein they endeavored to defend that monstrous (I would say
Munstrous) and seditious tumult, and all those almost infinite inconveniences
that were cons^quent to it: but to prevent that poisonous Hydra, a Gospel
antidote was prescribed. In the month of August, about S. Bartholomew's day,
John Tuysentschreuer went sounding a ^rumpet through all the streets, thereby
inviting all to the Lords Palace, where there being a sumptuous feast prepared,
he magnificently entertained all that came. The King himself, the Queen, and
all the Courtiers waited on them* At the last course he gave to every one a
loaf of unleavened bread, The King, Queen, and Courtiers wait on the people at
a Feast.
saying, Take, eat, and celebrate the Lords death; which done, the Queen in
like manner carried about the Cup, by which ceremony, the Supper of the Lord,
or rather that Scean of pleasure, wantonness, and temerity, was certainly very
frolickly celebrated. Hunger being banished far enough by this feast, the
Prophet Tuysentschreuer goes up to preach, requiring of them obedience and
compliance with the word of God, A m^ck Sacrament.
whereunto, (with one head and as with one eye) they unanimously consented.
This obtained; A seditious Sermon.
he acquaints them, that it was revealed from the heavenly Father, that eight
and twenty Ecclesiastics should depart out of this City, that should preach
our doctrine throughout the world, whose names he recommended, and designed the
w^y they were to take their journey, that is to say, six for Osenburg, as many
for Warendorp, eight for Soyst, (for which quarter he himself was one) and the
rest for Coesveld. These exercises performed, the King went to Supper, and at
the second watch of the night caused the forementioned Apostles to take their
journey, giving unto each of them a piece of gold, with this charge, that
neglecting their own safety, they should deposit it for a note and testimony of
consequent condemnation wherever they bestowed it. They went their Ways,
Sedition goes not always unpunished.
and never returned again, all having (except one who escaped the Gallows) met
with punishments corespondent to their sedition. For, being entered the
fore-recommended Cities, they in a direful manner howled out their, Repent,
repent, the axe is laid to the root of the Tree; if you repent not and be
rebaptized, woe be to you, ye are undone. But the several Senates of the said
Cities caused them to be apprehended, and brought before them to give an
account of themselves; who answered, That they were divine Preachers of the
Gospel, called and sent by God, and that all those who would receive their
doctrine must be baptized, and that all things were to be made common;
Anabaptists of a levelling principle.
but to those that should neglect these things, they were to leave the golden
coin of eternal damnation. Nay further, That the Gospel had not been preached
as it should have been, since the times of Christ and the Apostles, but that
there were two Prophets, the Progeny of truth it self, slipped down as it were
from Heaven, viz. John of Leyden, and David George born at Delph in the
Low Countries; that there were many false Prophets, that is to say, the Pope of
Rome, and Martin Luther of Wittemberg, who was worse then the Pope. Being taken
and cast into Irons, they were asked, by what Right or privilege they had
thrust out of the City so many godly people, together with their wives and
children, not granting them any toleration for their Religion, and had
disinherited them of all they had? To which they replied, Anabaptists as the
Devil, pretend Scripture for their base actions.
That the time was now drawing nigh, wherein the meek and the humble should
inherit the earth, and that they followed the example of the Israelites, who
with Gods approbation took away from the Egyptians their jewels and ear^rings.
Moreover, they boasted that Munster was well furnished with provisions,
ammunition, and all things requisite to war, and that the King did daily
expect great recruits out of Holland, Zealand and other places, They aim at
universal Monarchy.
by the means and assistance whereof, he should bring the whole world under
subjection; and all wicked and refractory Princes being subdued, should
establish the peaceful reign of Justice. About the same time another Prophet
fell down from heaven, one Henry Hilverse, a notable ^nave. This man acquainted
the King that it was revealed to him from heaven, that God was pleased to
bestow on him three most rich Cities, Amsterdam, Daventry, and Wesell, near
Lippa. Upon this Divine message, he advises with his Counselors, whom he were
best to send thither to baptize them with his baptism. In the first place he
sends John Campensis to Amsterdam* to be the chiefest man in that City, to whom
he assigned for companion and co-Apostle John Mathias of Metellburg. These
being sent into Holland, issuing out of their holes, kept themselves among
those of their own tribe, and infected most Cities with the mortal infection of
their doctrines. For at Leyden, about January in the year following, ANNO 1535.
viz. one thousand five hundred thirty and five, very many by the persuasion of
Anabaptisme, and by the means of its contagious Conventicles, were baptized
into the baptism of death. About the end of the year one thousand five hundred
thirty and five* this Kingly Botcher sent into Frisland a most subtle fellow,
Kingly Botcher endeavors to raise commotions abroad*
and one very well experienced in warlike affairs, whom he furnished with very
great sums of money which had been raised out of the sacriledges, wherewith
he should raise soldiers in Zeland, and should raise the close siege which was
then before the City. He being departed, managed his affairs very secretly
with the assistance of those of his way, and at length, upon the last of March
one thousand five hundred thirty and five, having gotten together some hundreds
of soldiers he set upon the Monastery, which also was called old Munster,
drove away the Monks, and having plundered all, he there pitched his tents, out
of hopes thereby to strengthen his party by the accession of any that should
come in. He is happily prevented.
But G^orge Sckenck the then Governor of Friesland, having with as much
expedition as could be got together certain expeditionary forces, besieges
these tumul^uary Rioters, and gave an assault to the place, which though they
avoided as much as might be by a gallant defense, yet had they their bellyfull
of murder, blood, and dry blows, so that they were all destroyed, save
threescore and two, who being brought to Leoward were paid for their audacious
folly with the wages of death* The Ringleader of this business, who was also
the Camp-master, John Geel escaping at this sight, flies to Amsterdam, to prove
the occasion of a greater slaughter. For many Anabaptists being found in that
place, whom John Campensis had strangely fascinated, to engage them the more,
they made promises to them of golden mountains, and talked highly of the
Magnificence and Liberty of the Anabaptists of Munster, and cried up the new
kingdom of Justice upon earth; for the report of the siege and defense of
Munster had smitten, and raised up the minds of a many; in regard the City
being closely besieged by a potent Army, yet performed religious duties without
any disturbance. Hence come it to pass* that the Liberty and Liberality of the
City was celebrated beyond all truth and belief, and there wanted not a many
who desired to be embarked in the same Fortune* There was therefore at
Amsterdam a Burgher called Henry Gotbelit, a strong man and warlikely given,
who being bathed in the waters of Anabaptisme, joined his endeavors with those
of John Goel. For by diverse pretenses and crafty shifts (which it is not worth
our labor to repeat in this place) they drew together six hundred Anabaptists,
Anabaptists, their design upon Amsterdam.
with whose assistance their intention was to have possessed themselves of
Amsterdam, to enrich themselves, and to introduce the Religion of those of
Munster. Whereupon, upon the tenth day of May, the chiefest that were engaged
in this conspiracy, having their Rendezvous at the house of Peter Gael, They
break out in the night time.
broke out in the night time to the Market place, wherein being more and more
seconded by some of their own, they killed some of the Watch, and some they
kept prisoners. But the Burghers making head, discharged some Muskets at the
Anabaptists, who most unworthily, when their Consuls were cruelly killed,
entrusted their safety to their heels; so that the others courages being
heightened by this, they violently ran upon the Deuterobaptists, They are
worsted.
and after a most bloody engagement put them to the worst, wherein John Geel
and Gotbelit were slain, James Campensis was taken and put to death. Now other
Tumults had already forced others from those places, the prevention whereof
could not be possibly without the infinite inconveniences which fell upon the
honester sort. There wanted not also some clandestine vipers, who disguisedly
waited for the restoration of the kingdom of Israel (as they called it)
whereof one being apprehended at Leyden, and upon examination put to the
question, confessed, That the King of the Anabaptists who was a Hollander,
sojourned then at Vtricht, and had not yet began his reign, but that according
to the good hope they had conceived of him, and the confidence placed in him,
they doubted not but he would undertake it* Having with what is above, gotten
out of this fellow, that some gold and silver vessels and other ornaments had
by a most wicked surprise, been taken out of their Churches by the means of
their King, and who with his followers had attempted some most detestable
villainies, it was discovered that there could no other be meant there David
George. I crave thy pardon, courteous Reader if I acquaint thee, that it is not
any thing the less for thy advantage, if, in the description of these rotten
an^ contemptible rags and menstruous clouts of humanity, I have woven a longer
web of discourse then thou did expect. Although John Buckhold, and the other
Prophets had entertained the ignorant greedy vulgar with hopes of more then
Arabian wealth; yet the citizens being daily more and more straightened by the
siege, were accordingly brought into greater perplexities, and being brought
low by the famine, which is the consummation of all misery, Famine the
consummation of all misery.
began, as it for the most part happens, upon the barking of the stomach, to
snatle at one another, to grumble and complain, and to hold private
consultations about the taking of their King, and by delivering him to the
enemies, to better the terms of their composition. But the King, the stitcher
and botcher of all deceit, The King suspects his own safety.
being afraid of himself, chose out of all the people twelve men in whom he
could place most confidence, and these he called his Captains, assigning to
them their several guards and posts in the City, which they were to make good.
This done, he promised the citizens that the close siege should be raised
before Easter; for he was confident that a certain emissary, whom he had sent
into Zeland, Holland and Friezland should return with such supplies, as by a
furious and desperate assault made upon the besiegers should deliver the City:
But hope it self was to him become hopeless, nor could safety it self save
him. His large promises to his Captains, both of moneys and preferments, the
usual baits of sedition.
To his Captains as he called them, it is incredible what wealth he promised,
such as the fabulous riches of Pactolus and the treasures of Midas should not
make good, with oceans of goods (which happily must be paid them out of his
dreams) and that after the City were relieved, they should be Dukes and
Governors of Provinces, and particularly that John Denker should be Elector of
Saxony? But behold, in the mon^th of February, a sad face of things appeared,
many being merely starved to death, which occasioned, that one of his Queens
(for he had gotten a many) Elza or Elisabeth, who was distinguished by the name
of the Glove maker, had bin often heard to say, that the most cruel sword of
Famine came not from God, which though he had not heard himself, He becomes
executioner to one of his wives
having caused her to be brought with his other wives into the Market place, he
struck off her head, kneeling in the midst of them, which done; insulting over
her, he affirmed that she had carried her self as a common prostituted whore,
and had been disobedient to him, while in the mean time her fellow Queens sung
this hymn, Glory be to God on high, etc. Easter day being now dawning; and no
hope of deliverance shining on them, the common people with just reason were
extremely astonished; nor, considering how things were carried, could they have
any longer patience. In this conjuncture of affairs, to elude the people,
according to his wonted insinuations, He feigns himself sick, and deludes the
people with an expectation of deliverance.
he seignes himself to be sick, and that after six days, he would appear
publicly in the Market place, but that as to the deliverance which they were
to expect according to his intimation, it was to be understood after a
spiritual manner, and so it should certainly come to pass. For he affirmed for
a most certain truth, that in a divine dream he saw himself riding on an Ass,
and bearing the unspeakable weight of sin, and that all that had followed him
were freed from their sins. But indeed they may be fitly said to be like Asses
that rub one another; or to the Blind leading about the Blind. It is a great
affliction, it is a penance to repeat the miseries and the woeful consequences
of Famine and want. Famine, its character, and miseries.
There were a many who being impatient of so long hunger, revolted to the
enemy, not so much out of hope of compassion, as to accelerate their own
deaths; not a few creeping upon all four, endeavored to get away; for being
weak and strengthlesse, they could hardly fasten their feet on the ground; some
falling down were content to give up the ghost in the place where they lay.
There you might see a sad spectacle of foreheads and cheeks pale as ashes,
temples fallen, eyes sunk into hollownesse, sharp no^es, ears shrivel'd, lips
black and blew, throats slender as those of spiders; to be short, Hippocratical
faces, living carcases, and excellent shadows of men. They had sown certain
kinds of seeds and pulses in the City, which for a time served for high
delicacies to the grumbling stomach; but these being soon devoured by the
hungry belly, Cats, Dormice, and Rats, which themselves were almost starved to
anatomies, became (doubtful) entertainments. Some were reduced to that inhumane
necessity, that they fed on the flesh of the buried carcasses; some dressed the
feet of sweaty woollen socks, some cut to p^^ces the parings of tanned leather,
and mincing them with some other things, baked them and made them serve for
bread. To this we may add, that the most wickedly obstinate citizens were not
yet convinced, that by crafty insinuations and specious suggestions they were
brought into the noose, whom therefore he still entertained with considerations
of Magnanimity, and the deliverance they were yet constantly to expect from
God; but as for those who admitted any thoughts of running away, and
endeavored to avoid their miseries, he peremptorily sends for, and like a
public Robber taking away all that their industry had furnished them with,
depart, says he, and be gone to the Heretics, and bid farewell to this place.
He forgets community.
The King, though he had gotten at his house sufficient provision for two
months, yet was he willing to embrace all occasions whereby he might keep up
the heart of the City which now continually barked for sustenance. To which
end, behold a certain man named John Longstrat, John Longstrat his confident
betrays him by strat^gem.
being a Nobleman and privy Counselor to the King, and one of whom he was very
confident, bo^sted that he would within fourteen days relieve this
hunger-stav^'d City, both with provisions and supplies of men, to the number of
three hundred. By this pretense he flies to the enemy, and betrays the City to
the Bishop, for a certain sum of money with his life included. The Eve of S.
John was appointed for the execution of this design, about ten of the clock,
at which time he had obliged himself by oath to cause the gate called the
Crosse-gate to be opened. This Commissary for provisions returning at length to
the City, assured the King upon his faith and reputation, that the said
recruits of provision and forces, should be ready within the time appointed.
The day assigned being come, he acquaints the Guards that the promised forces,
were to come in in the night (which would be starre-light enough) that so they
might receive them as friends. The gates are hereupon set open, and the enemies
being admitted into the City as into another Troy, upon the Watchword given,
soon dispatched the Guards and others that were near. Now could be nothing
heard for the cry of Arms* Arms. The King and his Courtiers being gotten into
a body, drove back the enemy to the Gates, which the citizens had by that time
shut again: whereupon the rest of them that were without, were forced to set
Engines to force open the Gates, which being once broken open, they flourished
and set up their Colors. The citizens stiffely resisted the first assault, and
made a strong body in the Market place, where the fight became very hot and
bloody. The King himself, Knipperdoling and Krachting fell into the enemies
hands; but Rotman seeing there was no possibility of safety, rushing where the
enemy was thickest, was trod to pieces; he it seems placing all hopes of life
in death. The Anabaptists upon the taking of their King being quite cast down
and discouraged, went and hid themselves in Larders, Kitchins, The City of
Munster unmercifully plundered*
and other lurking holes. The City was most unmercifully plundered; and to make
a full search of of it, there were ten days allotted. There was found by those
of the Kings Guard at the Royal Palace as much provision as would maintain two
hundred for two months. O Goodman King, where is now the community of goods and
provisions which your Religion holds forth! This sad fate did that City suffer
in the year one thousand five hundred thirty and five. The third day after this
sacking of the City, the King was carried to the Castle of Dulmen three miles
off. The King is brought prisoner before the Bishop.
The Bishop having caused the King to be brought with all speed before him,
said to him, O thou castaway of Mankind, by what deplorable means have thou
corrupted and destroyed my people! Who (deservedly) checks him.
To which the King, with an undisturbed and proud deportment made answer thus;
O thou Pope, have we done thee any injury, His jesting answer and proposal.
by delivering into thy hands a most well-fortified and invincible City? But if
thou think thy self any way injured or endammag'd by us, if thou will but
hearken to our advice, thou shall be easily enriched. The Bishop hardly
abstaining from laughing, desired him to discover that secret, to which he
replied. Cause an Iron Cage or Basket to be made, and cover it with leather,
and carry me into all parts of thy Country to be seen for a show, and if thou
take but a penny of every one for the fight, assure thy self it will amount to
more then all the charges of the warr^. The more eminent Anabaptists wore about
their necks a certain medall wherein was the effigies of their King, to which
were added these letters, D. W. F. whereby was signified, that the word was
made flesh. But the King being carried up and down as a captive with his two
associates, was shown to diverse Captains and Eccles^asticks of the Landgrave,
which gave occasion of disputation between them about some things, as of the
Kingdom of Christ, and of Magistracy, of Justification, and of Baptism, of the
Lords Supper, and of the (...) of Christ, as also of Matrimony: in which
disputation, they prevailed so far by the divine testimonies of hol^ writ,
King of the Anabaptists put (...) a Nonplus.
that they brought the King of the Anabaptist, (though not acknowledging the
least satisfaction to a Nonplus, who to obtain another disputation out of
hopes of life (as was said) promised, that he would reduce the A^abaptists
which swarmed in Holland, Braband, England and Frizland; and that he would do
all honor to the Magistrate. Upon the twentieth of January one thousand five
hundred thirty and six, ANNO 1536.
he is brought with (...) companions to Munster, where they were secured
inseveral prisons; two days were (...) in weeding and rooting up their (...).
He is convinced of his offenses.
The (...) confessed his offenses, and cas^ himself w^^^^upon Christ; but his
companions discovered a vain (...) in the defense of their cause. H^^ deserved,
and severe (...)
The next (...) King is brought to the place of execution, fastened to a (...)
and is pulled piece meal by two execution (...) pincers red hot out of the
fire. The first (...), he suppressed, at the second he implored Gods mercy. For
a whole hour was he pulled and with those instruments, and at length, to hasten
somewhat his death, run through with a sword. His companions were dipped with
the baptism of the same punishment, which they suffered courageously; all
whose carcasses put into Iron, baskets; as anathema's of eternal example, hang
out of the tower of S. Lambert. And this was the re^iring room of the Tragedy
of Munster.

HERMANNuS Suitor.


Hic qui se Christum, et qui se Jactarat IESUM,
SERVASSE haud potuit seque suisque fidem.
THE CONTENTS.
HERMAN the Cobbler professes himself a Prophet, etc. he is noted for
drunkenness; The ceremonies he used in Anabaptisme, Eppo his Host discovers
(...) and his followers to be cheats; Hermans wicked blasphemies, and his
inconstancy in his opinions, his mothers temerity; his Sect convinced, and fall
off from him; by one Drewis of his Sect he is handled roughly; Herman is taken
by Charles Lord of Gelderland, etc. and is brought prisoner to Groeninghen;
when questioned in his torments, he (...) himself, and died miserably.

THat there were diverse Emissaries and Ambassadors sent by the King of the
(...) into Holland, Frizland, and other places to raise soldiers, you have
understood out of the History of Munster; which soldiers having raised a
Tumult, caused the Bishop to (...) from before Munster; and of this Heard was
there (...) Nicholas (...), a worthy disciple of John M^thias, who being
dispatched into Frizland for the foresaid negotiation, got together a
promiscuo^^s crew of Anabaptists for the relief of Munster* but that it might
appear how real and effectual he was in the business, they sent two of their
fellow soldiers, Antony Cistarius, (...) tradesman whose name was James, to
Munster. These two with some others having compassed (...) at a Town called
Opt'^ant, having stuffled together from all parts into a kind of a Troop, made
their (...) at the house of one Epp^, about the twilight, out of a pretense
that they there should meet with some (...) intelligence, Success in bad
enterprises, causes evil men to rejoice.
which they receiving from their Ambassadors, out of very joy for those good
tidings, also l^tely broke forth into Tumults. The Bell-weather of these, was
one Herman [an excellent vamper of all ^^^mination] a Cobbler of Opt'zan^,
Herman the Cobbler professed himself a Prophet, etc.
who professed himself a true Prophet, and that he was the true Messiah, the
Redeemer and Savior of the world, nay, (which causes horror to me in the
relation) that he was God the Father. This fellow lay naked in his bed from the
privy parts downward, and caused to be laid near him a hogs-head of strong
beer, which he desired to drink in Healths, which required no small draughts;
for he had gotten an excessive thirst, greater than that of any dog; or that
which the Serpent Dipsas causes in those that are stung by it; and all through
his extraordinary bellowing and bawling. For, having for some days led a life
like one of Epicuru^'s heard; He is noted for drunkenness.
that is to say, being drunk even to extravagance, he with a Stentors voice,
and a horrid howling* among other things often repeated this; Kill, cut the
throats without any quarter, of all these Monks, all these Popes, and all,
especially our own Magistrate; Repent, Repent, for your deliverance is at hand,
etc. In the mean time, His design to inveigle others.
he, with the assistance of his fellow soldiers, denounced to certain
Proselytes of another Religion, that Peace was not to be rejected without
incurring the dreadful effects of the last judgment, which was no^ at hand^,
and these were such as both by sollicitation^ and promises, his main design was
to inv^^gle into his deceit. Moreover he sent to redeem some of his followers
out of a prison belonging to a certain Nobleman called John of Holten, with
this charge, that they should kill with swords or pistols, whosoever should
either by words or blows any ways oppose them. When they returned with their
delivered captives; they had dispatched a man (it is thought he was a Priest)
looking out at his door, with a Masquet, had he not turned his bac^ and shut
the door against them. The very same night, which was to be the last, or
wherein the world being to be turned to deceitful ashes, they expected it
should by the means of this Mediator and Intercessor (as was thought) presently
be restored to liberty, there were a great many that embraced him where ever
they could, with those complements which they should use to one, as without the
earnest of whose Baptism, they were to expect the reward of disobedience, and
eternal destruction to be treasured up for them. The Sacrament of Anabaptisme
being according to these ceremonies celebra^ed, The ceremonies he used in
Anabaptisme.
the fore-commended Parent exhorted his children to prayer in these words;
Pray, pray, pray, pray, mouthing it out with an agitation of his lips, like
that of our Sto^ks; which done, falling on their knees, they disgorged, a
strange vicissitude of prayers and songs. The owner of that house, who was an
Innekeeper, Eppo his Host, discovered him and his followers to be cheats.
and withal lame, sat near this great Father, toward whom the Father
turning, said unto him* Arise and walk. But Eppo being still lame, and seeing
that they were all deceived, and that by a sort of chea^^ wickedly stitched
together, withdrew from them, and hi^ himself for fear in another man's house
far: from thence. These things being this past, there rises up another; one
Cornelius Supposed to be a digger of graves.
Coemeteriensis, who ran about after a most strange manner; and when the Father
[of all execrable teme^ity] lay sick in his bed, tormented with an imaginary,
or at least such a disease as puzzelled the Physicians to find any name for;
this man for an hour together uttered these and such expressions: O FATHER,
look upon thy people; have mercy upon thy people! O let thy Bowels, O Father,
be moved to compassion! etc. At which addresses the Father being moved, he
commanded a tankard of beer to be drawn out of the hogs-head, which was now
almost at the bottom, which he drinking to his son, drank till it came to the
Lees, which presenting to his son, Hermans wicked blasphemy.
he said to him, Drink ^p the holy Ghost. The son like his father, and
following his example having taken it off, he flings out of bed, and falls upon
those that stood by, and ^ossing the tankard from one hand to the other, ran up
and down like a drunken man, and at length joined (...) the Father [who was
sick of an imaginary extra^agance, wherein he was much given to laugh] in
^oaring out these words; Mortify the flesh, mortify the flesh; The flesh is a
Devil, the flesh is a Devil, mortify the flesh; etc. Upon this there
immediately starts up another, Heresy, a catching, or mad disease.
pursued (as he thought) by an extraordinary vision, and after their example,
roared it out most furiously, which fellow (as was reported) was really
advanced to some degrees (if not the supreme) of madness. A certain woman
better than middle aged, being frighted almost out of her wits, by the bawling
and howling of this son, entreated that they would keep in the lunatic and
possessed person, and that he might be carried to ^edlam. The common people
being astonished at this impious, hellish crew, were forced to pin their
faith upon their sleeves, as a truth confirmed by the lying of those
prophetical mouths. These (...) of fury and madness, having their intervalls
of calmnesse and serenity, he admonished them, that (...) arms and weapons
were to be laid aside, and that they should put off their guarded, edged and
scolloped garments, and their wrought smocks and petticoats, ^ay that women
ought to abstain wearing their neck-laces, and all things that were burdensome,
intimating the manner wherein God that needs no arms, would fight their
battles for them, and should discomfit all their enemies. The cowardly and
inconstant vulgar being moved at the madness of this Doctrine, disburthened
their bodies of all manner of clothing. A certain harmless man having cast
away his knife, takes it up again, which his daughter looking asquint upon,
rebuked her father, to which he answered, be patient, be patient, daughter, we
shall have employment hereafter for this to cut bread withal. O how was this
girl once a child, but how was the old man twice! When the student of Bedlam,
the Son, wit his yelling, was exhorting the bewitched people to singing and
prayer, and to resist the Devil, the Father presently, with his own son, in
whom he was well pleased, Heretics inconstant in their opinions.
taught them, that the time of prayer being done, and that the time of war
coming on, they must take up the instruments of war; whereupon he gets up
into a Pulpit, and declared himself to the people who stood all about him,
with a loud voice, that he was the Son of God, Herman blasphemes again.
and cried out that he was born a true Mediator unto them, etc. His mother
being there present, His mothers temerity.
they asked her whether she was the mother of the Son of God? to which between
force and fear, she at length answered, though innocently, that she was. This
gave occasion to many to be diffident, and to waver in the ^aith received;
insomuch that a certain man discovering his dissatisfaction, and speaking ill
of the son, the said son taking hold of him, flings him into a common
shore, saying unto him, now art thou deservedly cast into Hell: from whence the
said man coming out all dirt, diverse others unanimously acknowledged that they
were defiled and bespattered with the same filthiness and abomination. And
hence rise up that impious report of the Sonn^ of God, that he was thrust out
of doors, which that Ambassador Antony, being returned from Munster, having
heard, took it in mighty indignation, and by force breaking into the house,
would have vindicated those holy expressions. The Father and Son, were much
against it that any should come in; yet he, though the people flocking about
him made some opposition, bitterly rebuking that blasphemous wretch, The
Proverb verified, vice corrects sin.
broke forth into these words, Thou villainous and contagious burden of the
earth; What madness, what extravagance has besotted thee without fear of
divine judgment, to assume to thy self the title of the son of God? which
spoken, swelling up with the leaven of wrath, he casts himself upon the ground,
whereupon the people ran violently upon him, knocking, beating, and kicking him
like a football; at last being well laden with blows he rises, and breaking
through the press of the people, he got away and escaped. In his way he comes
to a hole in the ice broken for the cattle to drink; twenty foot over, which he
made a shift to get over, as is said, with the help of the devil; Hermans party
are convinced, and fall off from him.
for many that would have found him out, lost their labor. All being now
convinced that they were abused, for fear of the most noble Charles Lord of
Gelderland, the Viceroy of Groeningen (called also King of Gelderland) who was
sent to appease that tumult, got secretly away. But before they were all
departed, one of them called Drewjis (whom they called Doctor Nucius) out of
p^re spite, One Drewjis of his party handles him rough^y.
laying hold of the Father, being sick in his bed, thundered to him in these
words; Thou villain, thou fruit and groanings of the Gallows, where, where is
now your governing, and authority? now the time of prayers is past, etc. Having
dragged him out of bed by head and shoulders, they with some assistance, bound
him with cords, and delivered him to the custody of the Mistress of the house
to be safely kept till night. Charles Lord of Gelderland, etc. with his men
surrounds the house where Herman i^.
In the mean time the valiant Charles surrounds the house with his men, and
besieged it, which the woman seeing, cut the cords. Being loose, he takes a
trident fork wherewith assaulting them as with a sword; he put to flight forty
men through other houses; whom he hastily pursuing, was unawares surprised by
others; and brought to Groeninghen. But behold the miracle! Herman is taken and
brought prisoner to Groeninghe^^.
to that very place, where this naked [of all truth] Messiah with his forky
Scepter, and this Shoemaker or Cobbler beyond his Last, had with his Trident put
so many to flight, did the water-dreading Anabaptists resort, and render unto
God infinite thanks for the religious privileges thereof. Of this lewd
Messiah, who was now well acquainted with the fetters of Groeninghen, it was
asked in his torments, whether those routs (of whom he was ringleader) were
out of pretense of sa^ctity raised to rob the public treasuries, He is
questioned in his torments.
(as many thought) which yet (as some say) was denied. He is hardened.
For, he hardening himself against even the most cruel torments could be
inflicted on him, still cried out; Destroy, destroy, destroy Monks, Popes,
kill all Magistrates* and particularly our own. In the midst of these bawlings
being miserably worried out, He dies miserably.
he gave up the Ghost.

THEODORuS SARTOR.


Quis quaeso hic Sartor (...)erit ille
Qui rogo Ceruentis domine dignus erat?
THE CONTENTS.
THEODOR the Botcher turns Adamite, he affirms strange things, his blasphemy
in forgiving of sins, he burns his clothes, etc. and causes his companions to
do the like. He and his rabble go naked through Amsterdam, in the dead of
night, denouncing their woes, etc. and terrify the people. They are taken and
imprisoned by the Burghe^s, but continue shameless. May 5. 1535. they are put
to death; some of their last words.

IN the year of our Lord one thousand five hundred thirty and five, ANNO 1535.
upon the third of February at Amsterdam, in a street called Salar street, at
the house of John Si^rid a cloth-worker, who at that time was gone into Austria
about some business, there (...) ^even (...), and five women of the same
persuasion; Theodorus Sartor an Ad^mite.
of which flock, the Bell-weather was Theodoru^ Sartor, who rapt into a strange
enthusiasme and (...), stretching himself upon the ground stark-naked upon his
back before his brethren and sisters, seemed to pray unto God with a certain
religious dread and horror. Having ended his prayers, he affirmed that he had
beheld God with his eyes in the excessive and inef^^ble (...) of his glory, He
affirms strange things.
and that he had had communication with him, both in heaven and in hell, and
that the day of his judgment was at hand. After which he said to one of his
companions, Thou art decreed to eternal (...), and shall be cast into the
bottomless pit; at (...) the other cried out, The Lord God of Mercy (...)
passion on me; the Prophet said to him, be of good (...), His blasphemy in
forgiving of sins.
now art thou the son of God, thy sins are forgiven thee. Upon the eleventh
day of February, the foresaid year, the persons aforementioned, unknown to
their husbands, repaired to the same Augias's stable. This Prophet, or Seer,
having entertained them with a Sermon of three or four hours long, casts a
helmet, a breast plate, a sword, and other arms, together with all his clothes
into the fire. He burns his clothes, etc. and causes his companions to do the
like.
Being thus stark naked, and his companions who yet had their clothes, being
uncovered, he peremptorily commanded them to do the like, as being such as must
be as safe as himself. He further affirmed, that the children of God ought to
look upon all things of this world with contempt and indignation. And since
Truth, which is most glorious in her nakedness, will not admit the deformity
of any earthly disguise whatsoever, he affirmed that they ought in all things
to conform themselves to that example of Truth and Justice. A great many
hearing these things, having quite cashiered all (...), offered up their
shirts, smocks, and petticoats, and whatsoever (...) of earth, as a
burnt-offering unto God. The Mistress of the house being awaken by the stink
which these cloath^ made in burning, and going up into the upper chambers, she
finds this deplorable (...) of immodesty and impudence; but the (...)
influence of prophetical integrity (...) to that pass, that she was drawn in
(...) in the same ^ire of (...) he advised to continue always a constant (...)
to the unblameable truth. He and his rabble go^naked through Amsterdam in the
dead of night, denouncing their woes, etc. and terrify the people.
Going out of the house in this posture, about three of the clock; the (...)
and women marched barefoot after him, crying (...) with a horrid voice, Woe,
woe, woe, the heavy wrath of (...) the heavy wrath of God, etc. In this
fanatic error (...) hypocondriack rabble run about the streets, (...) such a
horrid nois^, that all Amsterdam seeme^ (...) and tremble at it, as if it had
been assaulted (...) enemy. The Burghers not having the least (...) of such a
strange and unlooked for Accident, (for this (...) action happened in the dead
of nig^t) (...); and getting these people (lost to all (...) and modesty) up to
the Palace, They are taken and imprisoned by the Burghers, but continue
shameless.
clap^ them into prison. Being so disposed of, they would own no thoughts of
shame or chastity, but would justify their most (...) and naked Truth. In the
mean time, the fire being (...), they broke into the house where it was, and
wondering (...) their casting off their clothes into the fire, which had since
reached the bed, they made a shift to quench it. But the other distracted and
mad people, such as deserved to be sent to their kindred, the Savages and
Heathens, inconvincibly persisted in their pestiferous opinion, and so upon the
fifth of May the same year, May the fifth 1535. they are put to death.
they expiated their wicked impieties by their death. Ones farewell saying,
was, Praise the Lord incessantly! Another was, Some of their last words.
O God revenge thou these our sufferings! Others cried out, Woe, woe, shut
thine eyes!

DAVID GEORGE.


Heretici plures visi hic, cui visus ego, illi
Pluribus in (...)sque Haeresiarcha fui.
THE CONTENTS.
DAVID GEORGE, the miracle of the Anabaptists. At Basil he pretends to have
been banished his Country for the Gospels sake; with his specious pretenses he
gains the freedom of the City for him and his* His Character* His Riches. He
with his Sect enact three things. His Son in Law, doubting his new Religion,
is by him questioned; and upon his answer excommunicated. His wifes death. He
had formerly voted himself immortal; yet Aug. 2. 1556. he died etc. His death
troubled his disciples. His doctrine questioned by the Magistrates, eleven of
the Sectaries secured. XI. Articles extract^^ out of the writings of David
George, Some of the imprisoned Sectaries acknowledged David George to have been
the cause of the tumults in the lower parts of Germany, but disowned his
doctrine.

Conditions whereupon the imprisoned are set at liberty.

The Senate vote the doctrine of D. G. impious, and declare him unworthy of
Christian burial, and that his body and books should be burned, which was
accordingly effected.

DAVID GEORGE, David George the miracle of the Anabaptists. ANNO 1544.
a man born at Delph in Holland, the miracle of the Anabaptistical Religion,
having lived in the lower Provinces forty years, did in the year one thousand
five hundred forty and four, with some of his kindred and companions, in the
beginning of April, begin his journey for Basil, into the state and condition
of which place, he had before very diligently enquired. Whereof having
sufficiently informed himself, he pretended that he had been driven out of his
Country for the Gospels sake, At Basil he pretends to have been banished his
Country for the Gospels sake.
and that he had been hitherto tossed both on the land and sea of the miseries of
this world; and therefore he humbly entreated, that now at length he might be
received into some place of Rest. Some being by the representation of his
misfortunes and his tears, melted into compassion toward him, he presumed to
entreat the Magistrate, that in tenderness to Christ and his holy Gospel, he
might be made capable of the privileges of the City, which if it were granted,
he bid them be confident of Gods most particular protection toward their City,
and that for the preservation of it, he engaged for him and his, that they
should be ready to lay down their lives. The Magistrate being moved with these
just remonstrances and desires received the viper as a Citizen, With his
specious pretenses he gains the freedom of the City for him and his.
gave him the right hand of welcome and fellowship, and made him and his free of
the City. What should the Magistrate do? Behold, he has to do with a man of a
grave countenance, free in his behavior, having a very long beard and that
yellowish, sky-colored and sparkling eyes, His Character.
mild and affable in the midst of his gravity, nea^ in his apparel; Finally
one that seemed to have in him all the ingredients of honesty, modesty and
truth; to be short, one, if you examine his countenance, carriage, discourse,
and the cause he is embarked in, all things without him are within the limits
of mediocrity and modesty; if you look within him, he is nothing but deceit,
fraud, and dissimulation; in a word, an ingenouous Anabaptist. Having already
felt the pulses of the Senate and diverse of the Citizens, coming with his whole
family to Basil, he and his are entertained by a certain Citizen. Having nested
a while in Basil, he purchased certain houses in the City, as also a Farm in
the country and some other things thereto appertenant, married his children,
and by his good offices procured to himself many friends. For, as long as he
remained at Basil, he so much studied Religion, was so great an Alms-giver, and
gave himself so much to other exercises of devotion, that suspicion it self had
not what to say against him. By these cunning insinuations (this is beyond a
young fox, and smells more of the Lybian wild beast) many being surprised,
came easily over to his party, so that he arrived to that esteem and reputation
in matters of Religion, he pleased himself: This persuasion thus craftily
gotten, was heightened by his great wealth (and his riches in jewels, His
riches*
whereof he brought some with him, some were daily brought from other places in
the Low countries) and was yet further increased, by his sumptuous and rich
plate and housholdstuffe, which though they were gorgeous and majestical, yet
were they not made to look beyond sobriety, clean, linesse and inediocrity.
These people sojourning thus in common houses, desiring as yet to suppress the
pernic^ous in^ection of their sect, He, with his Sect, enact three things.
very religiously enacted three things: First, that no man should profane or
speak idly of the name of David George. Secondly, that no man should rashly or
unadvisedly divulge any thing concerning his country, or manner of life; whence
it was that some thought him to be a person of some quality; some, that he was
some very rich Factor or Merchant, whence it came that he was so excessively
rich; others had other imaginary opinions and conceits of him, for as much as
they themselves being strangers, lived in a country where they could not be
ascertained of any thing: Thirdly, he was very cautious that none of the
Basileans should be car^lesly admitted into his requaintance, society or
correspondence, imitating therein the policy of the Ferrets and Weesels, which
(as is reported) never assault any bird of supremacy, in the place where they
frequent. And th^s did he by letters, writings and emissaries, plant and water
the venomous seed of his sect through the lower Provi^ces, yet kept the ways
by which he wrought unsuspected and undiscovered. For, although he had lived
two years among them, there was not so much as one man infected, or had
privately caught the itch of his Religion. What transcendent Mysteries are
these! This man, though he feared neither deceit nor treachery from strangers,
yet the fire kindled out of the deceitful embers of his own household. For, His
son in Law doubting his new Religion, is by him questioned, and upon his
answer excommunicated.
behold; one of his is own R^tinue doubting of the certainty of the new
Religion, he caused him to be brought before him, and asked him whether he did
not acknowledge him to be the true David sent from heaven upon earth, and to be
the Horn, Redeemer, and Builder up of the Tabernacle of Israel; to which the
other answered roundly and peremptorily, that the restoration of the kingdom
of Israel and other things foretold by the Prophets were fulfilled in Christ,
the true Messiah, and that consequently there was no other to be expected.
Which he hearing, not without great astonishment, did with much commotion of
mind and bitter ^menaces thrust him, though his son in Law, out of doors, and
[which is heavy to think on] excommunicated him. These things being thus
managed, David's wife fell sick of a disease (which afterward visited him and
many more) th^e dispatched her into the other world. His wifes death*
What a miracle is this! He that declared himself to be greater than Christ,
and (...) himself immortal (upon the second of August, He had formerly voted
himself immortal, yet Aug. 2. 1556. he died, etc.
one thousand five hundred fifty and six) did die the death, and was honorably
huried according to the ceremonies of the Parish Church, and his funerals were
celebrated in the sight of his sons and daughters; sonne^ in law and
daughters in law, servant-men and maids, and a great conflux of Citizens. This
sad calamity of his death extremely troubled and tormented the minds of his
disciples, His death troubled his disciples.
as a thing that very much thwarted their hopes of his promised immortality,
although he had (...) told that he would rise again in three years, and would
bring all those things to pass which he had promised while he was alive. Upon
the death of this (...) great many with resolute minds made it their business
not only to bring his doctrine into suspicion, but into utter disesteem,
unanimously resolving to embrace (...) was good, sound, and consonant to
Christian doctrine; A good resolution.
and reject* the rest as heretical. In the mean time, the report beat up and
down, both among the people, and the more learned, that this man of ingenuity,
and author of private doctrines, this very David George, was a contagion and a
destructive pestilence, a devoted incendiary of a most dangerous Sect, that
(though most falsely) he was born a King, and that he accounted himself the
true Messiah. The Magistrate being extremely moved at these things, not
deferring his zeal any longer when the glory of God and his Son Jesus Christ
was so much concerned, A pattern for good Magistrates.
caused all those who were conceived to be infected with the pestilence of that
Religion to be brought to the Palace, to whom he rubbed over what things had
been transacted some years before; that is to say, acquainted them, how that
they had been banished their Country upon the account of the Gospel, and upon
their humble addresses received into the protection, and made capable of the
privileges of the City, etc. But that it had appeared since, that they had
fled for refuge to Basil, not for the propagation of the Gospel, but for that
of the leaven of the sacrilegious David, though by all outward appearance, they
had hitherto been accounted favorers and professors of the true Religion. In
the first place therefore the Senate being desirous to know the truth, The
Senates enquiry.
required to have his true proper name; for, some have thought, (as some
authors deliver) that his name was John Br^^es. Secondly, whether he had
privately or publicly dispersed his Religion, and what Tenets he held. To
which some made answer unanimously, that they had left their country for the
true Religions sake, nor did they acknowledge themselves any other than the
professors and practisers of the lawful Religion. That for his name, he had
not called himselfs by any other than his own proper name; and for his
doctrine, they had acknowledged none either privately or publicly, save what
he had privately sometimes suggested, which was not disconsonant to the
public. The Magistrate perceiving this obstinacy of mind caused eleven of
them, Eleven of the Sectaries secured.
the better to discover the real truth, to be secured, and more narowly looked
to. In the mean time, the Senate leaving no stone unmored in this business,
appointed some to bring forth into public view some books and writings of
David, which should give no small light in the business, In such cases the
learned to be consulted with.
and these the Magistrate recommended to men of the greatest learning to be
read over and examined with the greatest care possible, that so whatsoever they
should meet with rep^gnant to the Truth, they should extract, and give him an
account thereof. Those who had this charge put upon them, presented the Senate
with this extract of Articles out of his writings.

1. THat all the Doctrine delivered by Moses, the Prophets, Articles extracted
out of the writings of David George.
or by Jesus Christ himself and his Apostles, was not sufficient to salvation,
but ^ress'd up and set forth for young men, and children, to keep them within
decency and duty; but that the doctrine of David George was perfect, entire,
and most sufficient for the obtaining of salvation.

2. He affirmed that he was Christ and the Messiah, the well beloved Son of
the Father in whom he was well ^leased, not born of blood, nor of the flesh,
nor of the lust of man, but of the holy Ghost and the spirit of Christ who
vanishing hencelong since according to the flesh, (...) deposited hitherto in
some place unknown to the Saints was now at length reinfused from heaven into
David George.

3. He held that he only was to be worshipped, as wh^ should bring out the
house of Israel, and the true (tha^ is, the professors of his doctrine) tribe
of Levi, and the Tabernacle of the Lords not through miseries* sufferings,
crosses, as the Messiah of the Jews did, but with (...) meekness, love, and
mercy in the spirit of Christ granted unto him from the Father which is in
heaven.

4. He approved himself to be invested with the auth^rity of Saving, or
condemning, binding and loosing, and that at the last day he should judge the
twelve tribes of Israel.

5. He further maintained, that Jesus Christ was sent from the Father to take
flesh upon him, for this reason at least, that by his doctrine and the use of
his Sacraments, men, being as it were no better then children, (...) incapable
of receiving the true doctrine, might be kept within duty till the coming of
David George, who should advance a Doctrine that should be most perfect and
(...) effectual, should smooth out mankind, and should consummate the
knowledge of God and of his son, and what^ever has been said of him.

6. But he further affirmed, That these things should not come to pass
according to humane ceremonies, but after a spiritual dispensation, and after
such a manner as ha^ not been heard of, which yet none should be able to
discern or comprehend, but such as were worthy disciples of David George.

7. To make good and prove all these things, he wrested and misinterpreted many
places of the holy Scripture, as if Christ and the Apostles, whom he commends,
had inti^^ted not themselves, nor any other Ecclesiastical (...)* save only
the coming of David George.

8. And thence it was that he argued thus. If the Doctrine of Christ and his
Apostles be most true and (...) effectual for the obtaining of salvation; the
Church which they had by their doctrine built up and confirmed could not
possibly have been broken to pieces, for (as Christ himself testifies) against
the true Church, the gates of Hell shall not be able to prevail: But that
building of Christ and his Apostles is overturned and pulled down to the very
foundation by Antichrist, as may be evidently seen in the Papacy, according to
the Testimony of the same Christ; It therefore necessarily follows, that the
Doctrine of the Apostles is imperfect and interrupted: whence he concluded his
own doctrine and faith to be the only solid and sufficient doctrine.

9. Moreover he maintained himself to be greater than John Baptist, yea than
all the Saints that had gone before him, for that the least in the Kingdom of
God (according to the suffrage of Truth it self) is greater than John: But he
said David George was one whose kingdom was heavenly and most perfect; whence
he makes himself not only greater than John, but also sets himself above
Christ, since that he was born of flesh, and that himself was born of the
spirit according to a heavenly manner.

10. He further allowed with Christ, that all sins committed against God the
Father, and against the Son may be forgiven, but those that are committed
against the Holy Ghost, that is to say against David George, shall be forgiven
neither in this world, nor in the world to come; by which means it is apparent
that he conceived himself greater and higher than Christ, admitting Christ's own
Testimony.

11. He declared Polygamy to be free and lawful for all, even for those that
are regenerated by the spirit of David George.

These heads [without any brains] did the Magistrate deliver to be carried to
some that were in the prison, Some of the imprisoned Sectaries acknowledged
David George to have been the cause of the tumults in the lower parts of
Germany, but disowned his doctrine.
to fish out what confession they would make, who besides these, being provoked
and challenged by a number of Questions, answered at last, That this (Da^us) I
would say David George, was the same who had embroyled the lower parts of
Germany with so many tumults and sedition, but that as to that doctrine and the
fore-recited Articles, they unanimously affirmed that they had never heard not
read of any such thing. Nevertheless they were to acknowledge the doctrine
expressed in those Articles, to be pestiferous, execrable, and derived not from
heaven, but from Hell, and that it was heretical, and to be banished with an
eternal Anathema; and withal, as men miserably seduced, yet desiring for the
time to come, to be reduced into the right way, they were, with good reason, to
implore forgivenes* Among those that were in close prison, there was one
formerly of David's greatest confidents, An ingenuous confession and resolution.
who confessed, that indeed he had been infected with that Religion, but that
since by the illumination of the grace of God, he discovered and detested the
errors springing from it, and avoided them as he would do a cockatrice. But
there were others who were civilly acquainted with this man, who denied that
they had known any such thing by him, and cried out against the forementioned
Articles as impious and blasphemous. These passages, the Judges appointed by
the Magistrate, gave him an account of, who perceiving that some that were in
custody were not so extravagant, but that they had some remainders of
discretion left, he sent to them some learned and able preachers of the word,
who, having diligently weeded out the tares of their errors, A pious act.
should sow into their hearts the saving seed of true faith. Those who were
sent, sifting them with all the humanity, mildness, meekness and charity
possible, could scrue nothing out of them, more than what the Judges who had
been employed before, had done. In the mean time a report was spread about the
City, A lying report raised.
that it was no^ David George, nor any eminent person of any other name that
had been buried, but that a mere swine, calfe, hee-goat (happily an Ass) had
been carried out and buried, and that the dead carcass embalmed with the
strongest spices, was worshipped and adored with great devotion and religion.
But this was but a report, and was not true. Those that were in custody
abhorring that doctrine, as unheard of, and such as deserved to be
anathematized, and desiring to renew their acquaintance with discretion and
their senses, are delivered out of those habitations of Iron which they had
kept possession of for two months, upon these conditions, Conditions whereupon
the imprisoned are set at liberty.
That none should make any purchases either within or near the City, without
the knowledge and consent of the Magistrate; That they shall not entertain any
coming out of the lower Provinces, though of their kindred; but at public
houses or Innes. That the printed books and writings that were tran^ated into
the Dutch language, shall be brought into the Palace. That there should be
nothing published that were disconsonant to Christian Doctrine. That children
should be educated according to incorrupt manners. That they should not make
such promiscuous marriages among themselves as they did. That they should take
no Dutch into their families. That they should submit to amercements and
pecuniary mulcts [if any were inflicted on them] as Citizens ought to do. That
upon a day assigned they should in the Parish Church, in the presence of the
whole congregation, make a public abjuration of the said Religion, and condemn
and anathematize the whole sect of it. That they should hold no friendship or
correspondence with any that shall persist in that Religion. To these
conditions did they promise to subscribe, with all the reverence and gratitude
they could possibly express. These things being thus managed, the most
renouned Senate, returning afresh to the business of the Arch Heretic, passed
these votes. The votes of the renowned Senate.
viz. That the doctrine of David George, upon nature examination thereof, was
found impious and derogatory to the divine Majesty; That the printed books, The
doctrine of D. G. declared impious.
and whatsoever may have seen the light, should have the second light of the
fire; That he as the most infamous promoter of that execrable Sect, and a most
horrid-blasphemer against God and Christ, should not be accounted worthy
Christian Burial. He is declared unworthy of Christian Burial.
That he should be taken up out of his grave by the common Hangman, and
together with his books and all his writings, and his manuscripts should,
according to the Ecclesiastical Canons, And that his body and books should be
burned*
be burnt in a solemn place. According to the said judgment, the carcass
being dug up, was, with all his writings, whereof the greatest part was that
(truly) miraculous book, together with his effigies brought by the Hangman to
the place of execution, where having opened the direful Coffin, he being found
not much disfigured, nay so little* that he was known by diverse (he being
covered with a watered garment, having about him a most white sheet, a very
clean pillow under his head; his yellowish Beard rendering him yet graceful;
(...) short, having a silk cap^ on, under which was piece of red cloth, A fit
punishment for perverse Heretics.
and adorned with (...) of Rosemary) was set up publicly to be seen, and (...)
the third year after his death, was with his writings consecrated to Vulcan,
that is to say, burned.

MICHAEL SERVETuS.


Omnia quum portenta voces hominem que Deumque
Infundi SERVES nominis opprobium!
THE CONTENTS.
SERVETUS his converse with Mahumetans and Jews. He disguiseth his monstrous
opinions with the Name of Christian Reformation. The place of his birth. At the
24. year of his age, he boasted himself the only Teacher and Sec^ of the
world, He enveighed against the Deity of Christ. Oecolampadius confute his
blasphemies, and causes him to be thrust out of the Church of Basil. Serve^us
held but one person in the Godhead to be worshipped, etc. He held the holy
Ghost to be Nature. His horrid blasphemy. He would reconcile the Turkish
Alcaron to Christian Religion. He declares himself Prince of the Anabaptists.
At Geneva, Cal^in faithfully reproves Servetus, but he continues obstinate.
Anno 1553. by the decrees of several Senates, He was burned.

MICHAEL SERVETUS, like another* Servetus his converse with Mahumetans and
Jews.
Simon Magus, having conversed long among the Mahumetans and the Jews, and
being excellently well furnished with their imaginous opinions, begat both out
of Divinity, and the general treasury of Christian Religion, He disguiseth his
monstrous opinions, with the name of Christian Reformation.
amonstrous issue of opinions, with the co^tion of what he had received from
the extravagant Mahumetans, and Thalmudists, upon which brat, this instrument
of Satan, must needs bestow the disguised name of Christian Reformation. From
this cocks egg were bred these Cocka^^ices, Gonesus, Gribaldus, Blandrata,
Gentilis, Alciatus, Simanus, Casanovius, Menno* and diverse other Anabaptistical
Vipers, who extremely increased the restless waves of sects and opinions. We,
recommending the rest to their proper place, Hell, will take a more particular
survey of one Religion, The place of his birth.
and by the horridness of that guess at the others. This Servetus was a
Spaniard, born in the kingdom of Arragon, most unworthy both of his Name and
Nation. His arrogant Boast.
Being rapt into a most incredible enthusiasme, he boldly laye^ his unwash'd
hands upon holy divinity; He enveighes against the Deity of Christ.
and at (...) four and twentieth year of his age, boasted himself (...) be the
only Teacher and Seer of the world, making (...) main design, Oecolampadius
confutes his blasphemies, and causes him to be thrust out of the Church of
Basil.
and that by his impious and worthless ^^^^tings, to inveigh against the Deity
of the Son of God;(...) which writings being sufficiently furnished, and with
enflamed with hopes of raising no ordinary tumults, (...) bestirres himself
wind and tide, for Basil; but Oec^lampadius, an Ecclesiastical Doctor,
learnedly before a full Senate confuted the blasphemies of this man, and by the
public Authority he had, caused him as a poisonous blasphemer to be thrust out
of the Church of Basil. From thence he went to Venice, where, in regard the
Venetians had been timely forewarned of him by the wise and learned Melancthon,
he made no harvest of his incredible blasphemies, nor indeed was he permitted
^eed-time for them. Religion is nowhere safe! But having consulted with the
Arch-hereticks his Predecessors, Servetus held but one person in the Godhead to
be worshipped, etc.
and being bird-lim'd, he held that there was but one person in the Godhead to
be worshipped and acknowledged, which was revealed to mankind sometimes under
one notion, sometimes under another, and that it was thus, that those notions
of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, were to be understood in the Scriptures. Nay,
with the same line of his blasphemous mouth, he affirmed that our Savior Jesus
Christ according to his humane nature, was not the Son of God; nor coeternal
with the Father. He held the holy Ghost to be Nature.
The Holy Ghost he granted to be nothing but that influence by which all things
are moved, which is called nature. He, most impiously Ironical, affirmed that
to understand the word Person, we must refer our sesves to Comedies. His
horrid blasphemy.
But the most horrid blasphemy of all, was, when by the suggestion of Satan, he
imagined, that the most glorious and ever to be worshipped and adored Trinity
(who does not tremble at it?) was most fitly-compared to Cerberus the Porter of
Hell-gate. But he stayed not here; no, he thought it should be accounted
nothing but a diabolical phantasme, the laughing stock of Satan, and the
monstrous Geryon, whom the Poets by some strange mystery of Philosophy feigned
to have three bodies. O incredible, and unheard of subtily of blasphemy! The
most glorious name of the most blessed Trinity is grown so odious to this man,
that he would personate (being the greatest that ever was) all the Atheists
that have quarrelled with that name. Moreover he maintained, that taking but
away the only Article of the Trinity, the Turkish Alcoran might be easily
reconciled to the Christian Religion; He would reconcile the Alcoran to
Christian Religion.
and that by the joining together of these two, a great impediment would be
removed; yea, that the pertin^cious asserting of that Article had enraged to
madness whole Countries and Provinces. This abomination of God and men held
that the Prophet Moses, that great servant of God, and faithful steward of the
Lords house, that Prince and Captain General of the people of Israel, one so
much in favor with God, that he was admitted to speak to him face to face, was
to be accounted no other than an Impostor. He accounted the Patriarch Abraham
and his seed, too much given to Revenge, and that he was most unjust and most
malicious to his enemy. The most glorious Church of Israel ('it is the swine that
loves the mi^e) he esteemed no better than a Hogge-S^y; He declares himself
Prince of the Anabaptists.
and declared himself a sworn Prince of the Anabaptistical generation. But;
keep off, and approach not, O all ye other Heresies and Hydra's of opinions of
this one man, furies not capable of expiation! Being arrived at Geneva, and
being forbidden to spue out and spatter his pestiferous blasphemies, he
continued in hostility against all sharp, At Geneva, Calvin reproves Servetus.
but wholesome admonitions: which Calvin, that famous Minister of the Church
perceiving, being desirous to discharge the duty of a soul-saving Pastor, went
friendly to Servetus, in hopes to deliver him out of his most impious errors
and horrible Heresy, and so to redeem him out of the jaws of Hell, and
faithfully reproved him. But he being dazzled with the brightness of Truth, and
overcome, returned nothing to Calvin (so well deserving of him) but an
intolerable obstinacy, Servetus his obstinacy.
and inconvincible recapitulation of his blasphemies, whence it came to pass,
that by the just and prudent Decree of the Senates of Bernen, Zuring, Basil,
and Scaffuse, and by the righteous condemnation of the eternal God, ANNO 1553.
By the Decree of several Senates he was burned.
in the month of December in the year one thousand five hundred fifty and
three, (or as Sleidan has it, in October,) he was (How great is the obstinacy
of blasphemy!) being at that time ecstatically hardened and intoxicated,
consecrated to the avenging flames.

ARRIuS.


Divisit Trini qui formam numinis ecce!.
Dividitur membris, Visceribusque suis.
THE CONTENTS.
Arrianisme it is increase, ANNO 323.

THe General Council at Nice, Anno 325. called as a Remedy against it, but
without success. The Arrians misinterpret that place, John 10. 30. concerning
the Father and the Sun. They acknowledged one only God in a Iudaical sense.
They deny the Trinity Arrius his wretched death* Anno 336.

ABout the year of the Incarnation of the Son of God, Arrianisme, its increase.
ANNO 323.
three hundred twenty and three, Hell was delivered of a certain Priest at
Alexandria named Arrius, a man subtle beyond expression, the trumpet of
eloquence, one thee (...) have been cut out for all honesty and elegance, (...)
with the poison of his Heresy, and the (...) of his destructive doctrine, did
in the time of Silvester Bishop of Rome, and the Emperor consta^^^ draw in a
manner all Christendom to his opinion, and so corrupted some, even great
nations in the East^ that except a few Bishops who stood to the true doctrine
none appeared against him. To remedy this disease, at Nice in Bithynia, The
General Council at Nice.
in the year three hundred twenty (...) a general Council was called; but to
(...) the contagious stocks of Arrianisme were deeply (...), ANNO 325: called
as a remedy against Arrianisme, but without success.
so that they were become such ravening wolves among the flock of Christ, that
all that would not embrace their belief, were to expect banishment or death.
These imagined that the Son was not of an equal nature and coeternall with
the Father, but that he was only agreeing and concurring with his Father; to
confirm which, they alleged that place of John 10. 30 which says, The Arrians
misinterpret that place, Joh. 10. 30 concerning t^he Father and the Son.
I and the Father are one; and though they called the Son a great God, yet
they denied, that he was a living and true God, and coessential with the
Father: They boasted that they were ready to answer all objections, and
acknowledged one only God, in a Iudaical sense. To that, I and the Father are
one, they were used to retort thus, Does the unity in this place denote
co-essency? They acknowledged one only God in a Judicial sense.
It must therefore follow, that it is as much, where the Apostle says, 1 Cor.
3. 8. He that planteth and he that waters, are one. They accounted the word
Trinity a laughing stock and a Fiction; that the Son of God was a Creature,
and that the Holy Ghost, was both born of Christ, They deny the Trinity.
and conceaved and begotten of the Virgin Mary. All that were baptized in the
name of the blessed Trinity, they baptized again. They denied that Christ was
the son of God according to the Spirit and the Godhead; they denied God his
own Son.

While Arrius was disburthening himself of the necessities of Nature, Arrius
his wretched death, ANNO 336.
his bowels came forth, and with them his life. And so he who was the successor
of those Arch-Hereticks, Artemon (who lived about the year of our Lord two
hundred) and Paulus Samosatenus (who lived about two hundred forty one) came to
a miserable death, in the year three hundred thirty six. See Athanasius,
Epiphanius, Hilarious, Hiero^, Augustine, Ambrose, Basil, Theodoret, Eusebius,
Socrates, Nicephorus, Sozomen, and other Ecclesiastical writers, who have
treated of these things more at large.

MAHOMET.


Adsum Ingens, Mahometes ego, lachrymabile mundi.
Prodigium, omnigeni dux, et origo mali.
THE CONTENTS.
MAHOMET characterized. He made a laughing stock of the Trinity. He agreed with
C^rpoc^ates, and other heretics. He renewed Circumcision, and to indulge his
disciples, he allowed them Polygamy, etc. His Iron Tomb at Mecca.

IN the year six hundred twenty two, ANNO 622.
Honorius the fifth being Bishop of Rome, and Meraclius Caesar Emperor of the
East, a transcendent Arch-heretick called Mahomet, Mahomet characterized.
exchanged Hell for earth; a Prophet, by Nation an Arabian, but most depraved
and corrupt. He had sometimes been a Merchant extremely rich, and withal very
subtle; to be short, he was a serious professor of diabolical Arts, a most
ungodly instrument of Satan, the Viceroy of Antichrist, or his sworn
forerunner. This man endeavored to extol his brother Arrius, with such
praises as are correspondent to his Heaven. He made a laughing stock of the
Trinity.
He also with Sabelli^ ^^aewed the laughing stock of the Trinity. He with
Arrius and (...), most fervently and contumeliously held that Christ, was only
a M^n, and that he was only called God, (...) dici, that is to say, He agreed
with Carpocrates, and other heretics.
according to a certain manner of speaking. He agrees with Carsocrates who
denied that Christ was a God and a Prophet. This is also he that shakes hands
with Cerdon^^ who utterly abjured the Godhead of the Son, or that he was
co-substantial with the Father. He imagined with the Manichees, (...) it was
not Christ, but some other that was fastented to the Cross. With the
Donatists, he contemned the rurest Sacraments of the Church. With the most
impure Origin he affirms that the devils shall be eternally saved according to
an humine, yet an invisible manner. He with Cerinthus placed eternal Felicity
in the lust of the flesh. Circumcision, He renewed circumcision, and to indulge
his disciples, he allowed them Polygamy, etc.
that was long since abolished and antiquated, he renewed. Upon his disciples
he bestowed the privileges, of Polygamy, Concubines and Divorce, as Moses had
done; and with such dreams and an imaginary Phrensy was the miserable wretch
ever troubled. This man when he died was put into an iron Tomb at Mecca, His
Iron Tomb at Mecca.
which by the strength of Loadstones, being as it were in the middle and center
of an arched edifice, hangs up to the astonishment of the beholders, by which
means the miraculous sanctity of this Prophet is greatly celebrated. All the
dominions of the Great Turk, profess this man's faith, whom they acquiesse in
as a miracle.

BALTHAZAR HuBMOR.


Ille ego qui vndarum mysteria sacra negavi
Igne cremar; fato disce cavere meo.
THE CONTENTS.
HUBMOR a Patron of Anabaptisme. He damned usury. He brought in a worship to
the Virgin MARY, etc. The Senate of Suring by a Council reduced him. He
renounced the heads of his former doctrine. Himself or Sect still active. He is
taken and imprisoned at Vienna in Austria. He and his wife both burned.

DOctor Balthaz^ Hubmor of Friburg, a man excellently well learned, Hubmor
Paetron of Anabaptisme.
another Roscius in his affairs, a Clergy man at Ingolstade, was the third
eminent Patron of Anabaptisme, and asworne promoter of that worthy Sect. This
man in his Sermons at Regenburgh, He damned usury.
inveighed so bitterly and so implacably against the usury of the Jews, that
he banished it even to eternal damnation; he brought in a certain religious
worship to be done to the Virgin Mary, He brought in a worship to the Virgin
Mary, etc.
and some superstitious vows, and was the cause of great tumults and
insurrections, and had built up his doctrine upon very firm and solid
foundations, until the most wise Senate of Suring applied the universal
medicine of a Council to these things, The Senate of Suring by a Council
reduced him.
and assigned a day to reduce and root out that sect, which was the seventeenth
of January, in the year one thousand five hundred twenty five, wherein the
Senate being present, and a great presence of people, the most learned Zwinlius
and other sons of learning, opposed this our Doctor, by whom, and the
strength of truth after most hot and serious debating on both sides, he
ingenuously confessed himself to be overcome. He renounced the heads of his
former doctrine.
The heads of the Doctrine, which he before defended, and whereof he afterward
made his abren^nciation, were these: That he detested the cheat, and humane
invention of Anabaptisme; He affirmed that the spirit both before the fall and
after was incorrupt and unblamable, and that it never dies in sin; whence it
should follow, that not it, but the flesh, is deprived of liberty; he also
acknowledged that the spirit overcomes and triumphs over the flesh. Himself, or
Sect, still active.
Though his Recantation was made, and diverse rebaptized into their better
senses, yet the Torrents of this sect neither stood still, nor were dried up,
but increased in Switzerland into a deluge, which overturned almost all. This
man escaping the endeavors of spies, He is taken and imprisoned at Vienna in
Austria.
and shunning the Halter, was at length taken with the figtree leaf of divine
vengeance, and cast into prison at Vienna in Austria. Being afterward put much
to the question, it being the design of vengeance, the r^venging fire soon
turned him to ashes. His wife being also baptized into the same whirle-pool of
Baptism, He and his wife both burned.
they both, with minds hardened to their own persuasions, were not disengaged
of that faith, but with the departure of their lives.

JOHN HuT.


Huttus ab Hubmoro excrescit; cervice resecta
Sic vna in g^minum pullulat Hydra caput.
THE CONTENTS.
JOHN HUT the prop and pillar of Anabapt sme. His credulity in dreams and
visions. He is accounted a true Prophet by his Proselytes. At Merhern, his
Fraternity became as it were a Monastery.

IN the times of the forementioned B^lthazar ^ise up John Hut, John Hut the
prop and pillar of Anabaptisme.
a learned man, the prop and pillar of Anabaptisme, an eminent despiser of
P^dobaptisme, which kind of baptism be accounted the execrable fiction of the
schoolmen; whence it came* that he persuaded men that if they were not baptized
by him and his, they must necessarily incur great danger (...) their souls.
To which he added, that, those who (...) with the p^crogative of his Baptism;
Anabaptists aim at the advancement of themselves, but destruction of others.
should be the restored people of Israel, and that the wicked Cananites should
be destroyed by their swords, and the God himself should r^^eale from heaven
the times wherein these things should be fulfilled. To visions and horrible
dreams, (which he thought proc^eded to him from God) he gave great credit and
he affirmed that he saw the preparations of the last day, Hut his credulity in
dreams and visions.
and the Angel going to blow the Trumpet, by an indispurable revel (...) God^
Upon the account of which dreams, his (...), as ^redulous as their Master,
spe^r and destroyed all they had; fearing the difficulties of the times,
wherein they should spend them; all which being scattered and consumed before
the day came, they suffered a punishment, and inconveniences befitting their
folly, having the lash of poverty perpetually at their backs. However they, a
generation on whom the greatest quantity of black Hellebore would not be much
effectual, Hut, accounted a true Prophet by his Proselytes.
did still adore this miraculous piece of (...) as ^ true Prophet, even to
admiration; of which men, some not worthy the face or name of mankind, do at
this day in great numbers live at Merhern in Palaces and Covents upon their
accidental contributions, At Merhern the Hu^sian Fraternity ^became as it were
a Monastery.
and where they get their livelihood with their hands, and apply themselves to
any handy-craft, whereof they are the Masters and Governors, who by the
commodities gained by them increase the common stock: They have at home with
them their Cooks, their skullions, their errand-boyes, and their Butlers, who
have a care and dispose all things as they do in Monasteries and Hospitals;
They study to maintain mutual peace and concord, being all equal. These even to
this day are commonly known by the name of the Hutsian Fraternity.

LODOWICK HETZER.


Polluit ut mentem Sectis deformibus error,
Corpore sic Hetzer foedus adulter erat.
THE CONTENTS.
LOdowick Hetzer a famous Heretic. He gains Proselytes in Austria and
Switzerland, Anno 1527. at a public disputation Oecolampadius puts Hetzers
Emissaries to their shifts. Hetzer denied christ to be co-essentiall with the
Father. His farewell to his Disciples. He is put to death (...) Adultrery.

LOdowick Hetzer famous for his Heresy, Lodowick Hetzer a famous beretick.
and Learning, was first very in^imately acquainted with Nicholos Stork, and
then with Thom^ Muntzer, yet he agreed not with these in some things, as in
that opinion of theirs of the overturning and destroying of all the powers of
this world, which opinion he looking on as Anitem to the Hot-spu^s of our times.
malicious and barbarous, forlook them, and joining with John De^^, they by
their mutual endeavors, sent some Prophets into Germany. But dissenting also
from him in some things, Hetzer gains Proselytes in Austria, and Switzerland.
be propagated his own sect in Austria, and made many Proselytes at Ber^ in
Switzerland. Which gave occasion that the Reverend Senate appointed a public
disputation at Soning, and caused letters of safe conduct to be sent to Hetzer
and his followers, for which bickering was set apart the first day of February,
ANNO 1527. At a public disputation, Oecolampadius puts Hetzers Emissaries to
their shifts.
in the year one thousand five hundred twenty seven, where he appeared not
himself, but his emissaries came, who were by the most learned (but withal,
stinging,) Oecolampadius driven unto their shifts; and enforced to acknowledge
conviction. Hetzer was a considerable part, and the fire brand of the
Anabaptistical sect, but he stiffely denied Christ to be co-essential with the
Father, which the verses made by him upon the carrying of the Cross, Hetzer
denied Christ to be co-essentiall with the Father.
do more than hint.

Ipse ego qui propria cuncta haec virtute creabam
Quaris quot simus? Frustra, ego solus eram.
Hic non tres numero, verum sum solus, at isti
Haud numero tres sunt, nam qui ego, solus eram.
Nescio Personam. solus sum rivus ego, and fons,
Qui me nescit, eum nescio, solus ero.
I who at first did make all things alone,
Am vainly asked my number; as being one.
These three did not the work, but only I
That in these three made this great Syzygie.
I know no Person, I Am the only Maine,
And, though they know me not will one remain.
He was excellent at three tongues, he undertook to translate the book of
Ecclesiasticus out of the Hebrew into High Dutch. Plauterus has testified for
him in writing, that he very honestly and unblameably bid farewell to his
Disciples, His farewell to his disciples.
and with most devout prayers commended himself to God, even to the
astonishment of the beholders. He having been kept long in dose prison, was on
the fourth day of February, in the year one thousand five hundred twenty nine,
sen^^nced to die: and thinking himself unworthy of the City, was led without
the walls, He is put to death for Adultery.
where he was put to death, not for sedition or baptism (as Plauterus say^^
but for Adultery, which act be endeavored to (...) by some arguments fetched
from the holy Scriptures.

MELCHIOR HOFMAN.


Pellibus a teneris suetus, doctissime, nosti
Hofmanni teneras excoriare Greges.
THE CONTENTS.
HOFMAN a Skinner, and Anabaptist, Anno 1528. seduced 300 men and women as
Embda in West-Friesland. His followers accounted him a Prophet. At Strasburg,
he challenged the Ministers to dispute, which was agreed upon Jan. 18. 1532.
where being mildely dealt with, he is nevertheless obstinate. Other Prophets
and Prophetesses deluded him. He deluded himself, and voluntarily pined himself
to death.

IN the year one thousand five hundred twenty eight, ANNO 1528.
Melchior Hosman a Skinner of Strasburg, Hosman a Skinner, and Anabaptist,
seduced 300. men and women at Embda in West-Friesland.
a most eloquent and most crafty man, at Embda in West Friezland, ensnared 300.
men and women into his doctrine, where he conjured up Anabaptisme out of hell
upon pain of damnation, whereupon being returned to the lower Provinces, who
ever addressed themselves to him, he entertained them with water, baptizing all
promiscuously. This man upon the prophecy of a certain decrepid old man went to
Strasburg, it having been foretold him, A delusive prophecy.
that he should be cast into prison, and remain there six months, ^t which
time being set at liberty, he should, with his fellow laborers, disperse the
harvest of the Gospel through all the world. He was by his followers
acknowledged and honored as a great Prophet. His followers accounted him a
great Prophet.
This was the great prop and pillar of the reign of Munster. Having therefore
made what haste he could possible to Strasburg in order to the fulfilling of
the prophecy, he there challenges the Ministers of the word to dispute, At
Strasbing he challenged the Ministers to dispute, which was agreed upon, Jan.
11. 1532.
which offerture the Senate engaged with, upon the eleventh of January one
thousand five hundred thirty and two; at which time, the mists and clouds of
errors and blindness, were quite dispersed by the sun of the Gospel.
However, Hosman stiffely adhered to the foresaid prophecy, as also to his own
dreams and visions; nor would he acknowledge himself overcome; but, their
mildness having somewhat appeased him, he was thence dismissed, as one judged
worthy of such a place where Lepers are shut up, left others be inf^cted. Being
mildely dealt with, he is nevertheless obstinate.
But it is incredible how joyful he was at that news, out of an excessive
thanksgiving to God, putting off his shoes, and casting his hat into the ay^e,
is and calling the living God to witness, that he would live upon bread and
water, before he would discover and brand the author of that opinion. In the
mean time some Prophets began to rise and keep a stir* Other Prophets delude
him.
hinting, that he should be secured for that half year, and that afterward he
should go abroad with one hundred forty and four thousand Prophets, who should,
without any resistance, Yet it is like, to back their prophecies, they pretended
liberty of conscience.
reduce and bring the whole world under the subjection of their doctrine? There
was also^ certain Prophetess who should prophecy, that, this Hosman was Eli^^,
that Cornelius Polterman was Enoc^ and that Strasburg was the new Jerusalem,
and she (...) also dreamed, A Prophetess deludes him.
that she had been in a great spacious Hal^, wherein were many brethren and
^^sters fitting together, whereinto a certain young man in shining appare^
should enter, having in his hand a golden Bow^e of rich Nect^^, which he going
about should taste to e^^^y one; to whom having drunk it to the dregs, there
was none pretended to compare with him, but only Polterman. Alas poor
Melchior: He deluded himself.
He having nothing, yet made Master of a strong Tower, did after the example of
Esdras, signify by letters that his Baptism should be put off for two years
longer, until Africa should b^ing forth another monster, that should carry ha^
in its horns. There were many other dreams* and some nocturnal pollutions,
which they attributed to heaven, and thought such as should have been wri^^en
in Cedar. But it was Melchior's pleasure to think it a miserably happy kind of
death, He voluntarily pined himself to death.
to die voluntarily, by pining and consuming away with hunger, thirst, and cold.

MELCHIOR RINCK.


Discipulos sic Rincke doo^ Baptisma negare,
Sanguine carnifices et scelerare Manus!
THE CONTENTS.
MElchior Rinck an Anabaptist. He is accounted a notable interpreter of dream^s
and visions. His disciple Thomas S^^cker in a waking dream cut off his brother
Leonard's head; pretending for his murder obedience to the decree of God.

MELCHIOR RINCK a most wonderful (...), Melchior Rinck an Anabaptist*
was also a most extraordinary promoter of Anabaptisme, and among his followers
celebrated the festivals of it. He made it (...) business to extol
Anabaptisme above all others, with those commendations (which certainly i^
wanted not) Besides he was accounted no ordinary promoter and interpreter of
dreams and visions, He is accounted a notable Interpreter of dreams and
visions.
which it was thought, he could not perform without the special indulgence of
God the Father; nay, he arrived to that esteem among the chiefest of his
opinion* and became so absolute^y possessed of their minds, that his followers
interpreted whatever was scattered abroad concerning dreams and visions, to
have proceeded from heavenly inspirations from God the Father. Accordingly in
Switzerland (to omit other particulars) at Sangall, even at a full Concill, his
disciple Thomas Scucker, His disciple Thomas Scucker, in a waking dream cut off
his Brother Leonards head.
being rapt into an Enthusiasme, (his Father and Mother then present, and his
Brother Leonard, having by his command, cast himself at his knees before him)
calls for a sword, whereupon the parents and diverse others running to know what
was the cause and meaning of such an extravagant action, he bid them not be
troubled at all* for that there should happen nothing but what should be
according to the will of God; Of this waking dream did they all un^nimously
expect the interpretation. The for (...) Thomas [guilty alas of too much (...)]
did, in the presence of all those sleeping-waking ^pectators (...) off his own
Brothers head, and having forgotten the use of water, baptized him with his
own blood. But what followed? The Magistrate having sudden notice of it, and
the offense b^ing fresh and horrid, He pretend^ (for his mu^ther) obedience to
the decree of God.
the Malefactor is dragged to prison by head and shoulders, where he, having
long con^idered his action with himself, professed he had therein obeyed the
decrees of the Divine power. These things, ANNO 1527.
did the unfortunate year one thousand five hundred twenty and seven see. Here
men may perceive, in a most wicked and unjustifiable ^ction, the eminent tracts
of an implacable fury and madness; which God of his infinite goodness and
mercy avert from these times.

ADAM PASTOR.


Nomine qui Pastor tu Impostor moribus audis,
Qui a recto teneras Tramite ducis oues.
THE CONTENTS.
ADam Pastor a derider of Paedobaptisme. He revived the Arrian heresy. His
foolish interpretation of that place, Genesis 2. 17. so often confuted.

ADAM PASTOR, a man born at a Village in Westphal^^, Adam Pastor a derider of
Paedobaptisme.
was one of those who with the middle finger pointed at (...), that is to say,
looked upon it with indignation, as a thing ridic^lous, being of the same
opinion in that business, as Menno and Theodorus Philip, but as to the
incarnation of God, he was of a quite contrary judgment. For Menno held, that
Christ was something more worthy and more divine then the seed of a woman, but
(our) Adam stood upon it, that he was less worthy then that of God, He revived
the Arrian heresy.
so that he rowsed up the Arrian heresy, which had lai^ so long asleep, as
having been but too famous in the year three hundred twenty five. For in a
certain book of his whose title was, OF GODS MERCY, he writ thus, The most
divine word, which is the main considerable in our business, is written in the
second of Genesis v. 17. The day that ye shall eat of the fruit, ye shall die the
death, This is that word, which is made flesh. His foolish interpretation of
that place, Genesis 2. 17.
John 1. Tea that God which is incapable of suffering and impassible, is made
passible, and he that was immortal, is made mortal* for he was crucified, and
died for our advantage. To be brief, he held, that Christ was not to be
accounted any thing but the hand, the finger, or the voice of God. But although
the opinion or Religion of this [third, but most unfaithful] Pastor Adam wander
out of the limits of divinity, and that it seem to be an ancient heresy,
containing nothing in it but what is childish, trif^ing, and mere foppery, and
has bin confuted and brought ^o nothing by the most religious preachers of the
word of God, His opinion has been sufficiently refuted.
notwithstanding the barking of the viperous progeny of Arrius and Servetus;
yet he has this in particular, that he would have us look narrowly to his
^^^lication of the second of Genesis, which he so commends, where he foolishly
and vainly endeavors to prove that the prohibition there, is the word m^de
flesh. This monster did not only beget this sect, but nursed it; here are
baits, allu^ements, and all the poisonable charms imaginable that may
cunningly seduce the best and most innocent of men. But alas! where is the free
and indulgent promise of God of the seed of the woman, which cuts the very
throat of the Devil, and ties him in the strictest chains? where are his
often promise^ to Abraham? to Isaac? to Israel and to his old people, confirmed
by a League so solemnly made? In thy seed all the earth shall be blessed. And
thou shall be a blessing unto me. This seed, witness the Apostle, is none
other than Christ himself, whom God without question meant. The desperate
contagion of this man's Religion did Servetus and his adherents profess,
embrace, and celebrate.

HENRY NICHOLAS.


Vestra Domus Nicholas cadat, qui^ ex rud^re versae
Futile fundamen Religionis habet.
THE CONTENTS.
HENRY NICHOLAS Father of the Family of Love. He is against Infant Baptism.
His divellish Logic.

THere was also one Henry Nicholas the Father of the family of Love, Henry
Nicholas Father of the family of Love.
(as he called himself) and not the meanest man of all his Gang; one who by
many means endeavored to cripple the Baptism of children, He is against
Infant Baptism.
as is too known and apparent out of his writings, which at a third hand, he
with all fredome, earnestness and kindness; endeavored to communicate to
David George and the other of his fellow laborers, and his new Jerusalem
friends. This man in ^ Pamphlet of his, wherein he notably described himself,
and which he ^^^icated to an intimate friend of his under the name of L. W.
maintaining that the As to that minute (if he confine not God) we may believe
him.
minute of the last T^^mpet was coming, that should unfold all the Books of
unquiet consciences, hell* and eternal Judgment* which should be found to have
been only things grounded (...) mee^ lie^, and as all wicked and high misdeeds
were hateful and detestable to God, so also were glorio^^ and plausible lies no
less odious to him. The same man endeavored to persuade people, that he was a
partake of God, and the humanity of his (...). His blasphemy.
He ^^rther affirmed, that at the last day, God should bring all men, nay, the
Devils themselves into perfect happiness. Doubtless he hugged himself in this
opinion.
All the things that were (...), of Hell (...) Angels, and eternal Judgment,
(...) the pains of ^^^nation; he said, were only told by the Scrip^^re to
(...) fear of civil punishments, and to establish right Policy. His divellish
Logic.
The conclusion.

These few things we have brought to light, were not invented by us, but were
extorted out of their own Disciples, with abundance of discourse, not without
the presence of many men of godliness and excellent understanding, Heretics
allow not of the Scriptures.
they admitting not the universal rule of the Scriptures. But alas! take these
away* where is Faith? fear of God? eternal happiness? But let us believe
them, let us believe them, and we shall be ^aved.

Oh! that to Heresies I could say

FINIS.
An Alphabetical TABLE to the revelation of Heretics.
A.
A Pio^s Act. 48. Adam Pastor, a derider of P^^^baptisme, 74. etc. An^baptists
their leading principle, 3. usually they grow worse (...) worse, ibid. their
bold attempt, 14. etc. where Masters most insolent, 16. of a levelling
principle, 21. they, as the devil, pret^nd Scripture for their base (...), 22
they aim at universal Monarchy, ibid. their design upon Amsterdam, 24. they
aim at the advancement of themselves, but destruction of others. 64. they would
enforce others to their opinions, yet pretend liberty of conscience as to
themselves. 70. Arrius, his character, and wretched death. (...), etc.
Arrianisme, it^ increase. 56.
B.
John Bu^khold, or John of Leyden, His actions and end. 12, etc.
C.
CAlvin's reproof of Servetus. 54. Godly and loyal Citizens hate usurpation.
18. Conventicles usually the nurseries of Tumults. 13*
D.
THe Devil an enemy of peace. 9.
E.
A Bad Example soon followed. 18.
F.
FAmine the co^su^^^tion of all misery. 25. its character, etc. 26.
G.
DAvid George, an Anabaptist, his character, doctrine, actions, and death. 40,
etc.
H.
HEeresie, a c^^ching, or mad disease. ^3. Heretics their usual pretense, 2.
the end that they propose to themselves in opposing the Ministry and
Magistracy, 2. they are restless, 3. their cruelty, 19. they are inconstant in
their opinions, 34. they allow not of the Scriptures. 78. Herma^nus Suitor, or
Herman the Cobbler, his blasphemies, opinions and and. (...), etc. Lo^owick
H^tzer a famous ^eretick, 65, etc. his end. 67. Melchior Hofman, an Anabaptist,
6^. pined himself to death. 69. Balthazar Hubmor an Anabaptist; ^0, etc. he and
his wife burned, 62. John Hut an Anabaptist, 63, etc.
I.
John of Leyden, vide Buckhold. An Item to the Hot: spurs of our times. 66.
K.
BBernard Knipperdoling, 16.
L.
THe learned to be consulted with, in detection of Sectaries and Heretics. 45.
Loyalty not always successeful. 19. Luther's advice to the Senate concerning
M^ntzer. 4.
M.
MAgistrates seduced, most umincus. 5 A pattern for good Magistrates. 44.
Mahomet characterized, 58, etc. his Iron Tomb, 59. John Mathio^ a Baker at
Harlem, his actions and end* 8, etc. Moneys and preferments, the usual baits of
sedition. 25. Thomas Muntzer, His Opinions, Actions, and end: 1, etc.
N.
HEnry Nicholas Father of the Family of Love, he i^ against Infant B^^tisme,
his blasphemy, an^ divellish Logic. 77, etc.
O.
OECOLAMPADIVS puts Hetzers Emissaries to their shifts. 66.
P.
AN ill President soon followed. 5. Pretenders to Religion, prove usually the
distu^bers thereof. 9.
R.
A Good Resolution. 44. 48 Melchior Rinck, an Anabaptist. 71, etc. his disciple
Thomas Sc^cker cut off his brothers head. 72.
S.
SEctaries like tinder, are soon on fire, 3. their usual pretense to raise
sedition. ibid. Sedition goes not always unpunished. 21. Michael Servetus an
Anabaptist, his blasphemous opinions and end. 51, etc. Snc^esse in bad
enterprises, causes evil men to rejoice. 31.
T.
THeodorus Sartor, or Theodor the Botcher, an Adamite, his blasphemy Actions,
and End. 37. etc. John Tuysentschreuer, an abertor of John Bu^^hold, 19, etc.
his seditious Sermon. 21.
V.
VIce corrects sin. 35.
FINIS.

